 

2. Require principal operations inspectors to periodically review air carrier flight operations policies and practices
concerning pilot tasks between flights to ensure that carriers provide pilots with adequate resources (such as time
and personnel) to accomplish those tasks.
3. Revise the Federal Aviation Regulations contained in 14 CFR Part 135 to require that pilot flight time accumulated
in all company flying conducted after revenue operations *** such as training and check flights,
ferry flights and repositioning flights *** be included in the crewmember's total flight time accrued
during revenue operations.
4. Revise within 1 year the pilot training requirements for scheduled Part 135 operators such that:
&bull;All pilot training for aircraft with 10 or more passenger seats be conducted in accordance with Subparts N and
O of 14 CFR Part 121.
&bull;All pilots are provided mandatory crew resource management training that incorporates the principal components
of effective CRM training, as outlined in Advisory Circular AC 12051A, ``Crew Resource Management Training.''
&bull;All flightcrew members complete the initial operating experience currently required only of pilots-in-command
under Part 135.244.
5. Issue within 6 months a final rule of 14 CFR Part 142 concerning the certification and operation of training centers.
6. Revise the certification standards for Part 25 and for Part 23 (commuter category) aircraft to require that a flight
simulator, suitable for flightcrew training under Appendix H of Part 121, be available concurrent with the certification
of any new aircraft type.
7. Revise the Federal Aviation Regulations to require all flight attendants to participate, during recurrent training,
in emergency drills that allow them the opportunity to use emergency equipment and to practice procedures under simulated
emergency conditions.
8. Revise the Federal Aviation Regulations to require that all air carriers operating under Parts 121 and 135 establish
a safety function, such as outlined in Advisory Circular AC 12059, ``Air Carrier Internal Evaluation Programs.''
9. Establish a joint industry/government task force, such as an Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC),
comprising representatives from the FAA, air carriers, aircraft manufacturers, and the academic community to review
the qualification standards and training curriculum of air carrier inspectors. The intent of the task force should
be revisions to the qualifying and training standards for air carrier inspectors that will (a) increase their familiarity
with air carrier operations and maintenance in general, as well as the specific operations of the air carriers they
inspect; and (b) enhance their knowledge of the Federal Aviation Regulations and provide for more standardized interpretation
and enforcement of the regulations.
10. Enhance the level of safety at airports served by commuter airlines by:
&bull;Seeking legislative action within 6 months to include in the Airport Certification Program all airports served
by air carriers that provide scheduled passenger service.
&bull;Revising and expanding 14 CFR 135, following enactment of the legislative action described in Safety Recommendation
A94203, to permit scheduled passenger operation only in airports certificated under the standards
contained in Part 139, ``Certification and Operations: Land Airports Serving Certain Air Carriers.''
The FAA requests that commenters be as specific as possible and provide as much detail in comments as necessary to facilitate
regulatory decisionmaking. The format that would be most useful to the FAA is a subpart by subpart analysis of the impact
of possible rulemaking. Cost information is also particularly useful.
Because of the timeframe recommended by the NTSB, the FAA requests that commenters be timely in their response to this
notice. The agency does not anticipate an extension of the comment period, so that regulatory changes may be proposed
in a responsive timeframe.
The FAA anticipates that comments provided in response to this notice will assist the agency in adopting or modifying
the NTSB recommendations to establish a regulatory framework that will enhance safety in the commuter airline industry
while not being overly burdensome on that industry.



Issued in Washington, DC on November 30, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Anthony J. Broderick,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9430005 Filed 12194; 3:05 pm]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491013M
</BILLING>


