 

Under the new Credit-Back program, advertising and promotion activities to trade, industrial or end users are specifically
eligible for Credit-Back, with no requirement for a brand name. In addition, the Board's generic program contains
consumer advertising designed to communicate the message that almonds enhance any product to which they are added.
Research has found such consumer advertising is successful in promoting consumption of products used as ingredients.
Increased consumption of almonds benefits the entire industry. 

The Department disagrees with the SBA's assertion that this action fails to meet the requirements for the Regulatory
Flexibility Act. The SBA's concerns regarding the program's impact on small businesses have been properly addressed
in this document and the interim final rule. 

Finally, a comment was received from Rodger Wasson, CEO of the Almond Board, which supported the new Credit-Back program
and supplied documentation to substantiate the Board's position. Mr. Wasson discussed the history of the almond
industry and beneficial changes that have taken place since the implementation of the creditable advertising program.
He stated that the program has provided a variety of services designed to increase the demand for California almonds.
In addition, it has continually been revised to meet the needs of the industry. Mr. Wasson stated that the Credit-Back
provisions were recommended in order to more fully address the needs of the changing industry. 

He stated there are major differences between the previous creditable advertising program and the new Credit-Back
program. Some examples are as follows: (1) The previous program allowed handler credit for paid media 
advertisements only. There were separate systems for ``generic packs'' and ``150 percent credit''. The new Credit-Back
program adds 13 advertising, promotion and public relations categories (only travel is excluded across-the-board);
(2) The previous program contained many reporting periods, carryovers, and recordkeeping on different systems.
Credit-Back is simplified with one system, no carryovers, and a basic report-as-you-go reporting system; (3) The
previous program did not allow credit for almonds used as an ingredient if the product contained less than 50 percent
of almonds by weight. Credit-Back allows credit for the weight represented by almonds as an ingredient; (4) The previous
program did not allow credit for advertisements directing consumers to one or more named retail outlets, other than
handler-operated outlets. Credit-Back allows such advertisements if they include mention of almonds; (5) The previous
program did not allow credit for advertisements promoting ``competing nuts.'' Credit-Back allows credit for this
activity determined by the portion of the product represented by almonds and/or product weight, and (6) The previous
program did not allow credit for advertisements that promote more than two complementary products. Credit-Back
allows credit up to the portion represented by almonds. 

In addition, Mr. Wasson submitted materials on the benefits of generic advertising. A summary of the materials is
as follows. 



Generic Advertising and Promotion Programs 



Generic advertising, i.e., advertising activities which focus on the general properties of a product such as flavor,
nutritional benefits and convenience, rather than touting specific brand names, is a proven promotional tool which
is often used to increase demand for agricultural commodities. When used in conjunction with brand name promotion,
generic advertising has proven to be highly successful. 

For these reasons, generic advertising of agricultural commodities has grown steadily since the first commodity
board was created more than 50 years ago. In 1990, about 350 generic promotion programs were in effect at the federal
and state levels, covering more than 80 commodities at a cost of over $530 million annually. 

Each of the federal programs referred to above are overseen by USDA. The Agricultural Marketing Service (``AMS'')
of the USDA currently oversees promotional programs contained in various federal marketing orders authorized under
the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 (the AMAA). These marketing orders cover fruits, vegetables, specialty
crops and milk. In addition, AMS has oversight responsibility for numerous federal statutes which authorize research
and promotion programs for a variety of commodities, including beef, cotton, dairy, eggs, honey, limes, mushrooms,
pork, potatoes, soybeans, milk, and watermelons. 

The success of many of these advertising and promotion programs has been well documented. For instance, an advertising
campaign conducted by the Potato Board has yielded dramatic results. 

The Potato Board was founded in 1972 at a time when potato consumption was steadily declining. Many people had poor
images of potatoes, did not know of their nutritional value and believed that they were fattening. In the years after
its formation, the Board initiated numerous advertising campaigns designed to improve the potato's poor reputation
and increase consumer sales. As a result, potato consumption has increased by 12% and 96% of the public is now aware
that potatoes are a high fiber, low fat food which can be included in any healthy diet. 

Efforts of the National Dairy Promotion and Research Board to promote milk and milk products have also met with success.
The Board was founded in 1984 and since then has spent more than $75 million annually on the promotion of dairy products.
As a result, dairy product consumption rose by 12% between 1983 and 1990. 



