 

One purpose of the reserve fund would be to provide stability in the administration of the order in the case of a short
crop. Also, establishing a reserve should minimize the necessity of the committee borrowing money at the beginning
of a fiscal year or raising an assessment rate during a season of less than anticipated production. 
Finally, reserve funds could be used to cover necessary liquidation expenses in the event the order is terminated.
Upon such termination, any funds not needed to defray liquidation expenses should be disposed of as determined by
the Secretary. To the extent possible, however, these funds should be returned pro rata to the handlers from whom they
were collected. 
Under proposed 956.45, for the payment of production research or promotional activities as authorized by
the order, the committee should also be authorized to receive voluntary contributions. Testimony also indicated
that contributions should be authorized for first-year administrative start-up costs. Such contributions should
be received by the committee without any obligations to the donor, and the expenditure of such funds should be under
the complete control of the committee and subject to the provisions of the order. The committee should not receive
a voluntary contribution from any person if that contribution could represent a conflict of interest. Testimony
indicates that donations should be considered as miscellaneous receipts, the same as interest or dividend income,
and be subject to all of the accounting provisions of the order. 
(d) Under proposed 956.50, the order should authorize the committee to establish and provide for the establishment
of production research, marketing research and development, and marketing promotion projects, including paid
advertising, designed to assist, improve, or promote the marketing, distribution, consumption, or efficient production
of Walla Walla Sweet Onions. Funding for these programs should come from any authorized receipts of the committee
including assessment income, voluntary contributions and miscellaneous income such as interest. 
The committee should have the authority to initiate new production and marketing research projects, as well as to
contribute to research which may currently be taking place. 
Testimony indicated that public funds for research are becoming scarcer and more difficult to obtain. Marketing
order proponents believe that their industry needs to finance research on improved onion storage and cultural practices.

The record also supports the need for marketing research and promotion projects. Research would enable the Walla
Walla Sweet Onion industry to identify and analyze its current markets and find ways of expanding current markets
and developing new ones. 
Expanding markets for Walla Walla Sweet Onions could be accomplished by promotional activities, including paid
advertising, to acquaint wholesalers, retailers, and consumers with the product available from the Walla Walla
area. 
Market development projects would enable the committee to compile meaningful market data and to explore marketing
possibilities, such as how to gain entry to or recapture a specific market. That authority also would enable the committee
to contact buyers and food editors to distribute educational material relating to the handling and marketing of Walla
Walla Sweet Onions, and disseminate to the industry the results of current or past marketing research projects. It
would also allow the committee to give out promotional literature, recipes, and information relative to consumption
or use. 
Record testimony indicated that the committee should be authorized to develop and register a common identifying
mark, or logo, that could be used by all Walla Walla Sweet Onion producers and handlers to distinguish the Walla Walla
Sweet Onion in the marketplace. Proponents supported utilizing such a mark in conjunction with any paid advertising,
to make the consumer aware that they are purchasing Walla Walla Sweet Onions. Witnesses supported advertising as
a means of increasing demand for Walla Walla Sweet Onions. 






