 

FDA has determined that there is no need to set a tolerance for the amount of APH(3
&rsquo;)II that will be consumed because the agency knows of no reason why this protein would have any properties that
would distinguish it toxicologically from any other phosphorylating enzymes in the food supply. Also, as discussed
above, APH(3
&rsquo;)II will not affect efficacy of orally administered antibiotics because APH(3
&rsquo;)II is rapidly digested under normal conditions in the GI tract, and even in abnormal gastric conditions where
APH(3
&rsquo;)II may not be rapidly digested, the amount of ATP available in food would allow only a small proportion of kanamycin
and neomycin to be inactivated. Therefore, the agency concludes that there is no need to require quality control and
assurance procedures to ensure that the APH(3
&rsquo;)II level will be no more than 0.1 percent of the total protein in commercial tomato varieties. 

A third comment argued that Calgene did not provide data to establish that APH(3
&rsquo;)II would not be present after tomato processing and after extraction of edible oils. 

The agency's exposure estimates included an assumption that APH(3
&rsquo;)II would be present in both processed tomatoes and fresh tomatoes even though the high temperatures involved
in processing inactivate enzymes and therefore, processed tomato products are unlikely to contain enzymatically
active APH(3
&rsquo;)II (Ref. 18). In addition, well-established processing procedures used to extract edible oils from oilseed
crops do not extract significant amounts of protein (Ref. 23). Therefore, exposure to APH(3
&rsquo;)II obtained from rapeseed oil and cottonseed oil would be negligible (Ref. 18). The comment did not present
any information to contradict FDA's analysis and conclusion on this point. 



4. The Potential for Side Effects From Consumption of Genetically Engineered Foods 



One comment asked whether there might be side effects from consumption of genetically engineered foods, and if so,
whether these side effects would be short term or long term. Another comment noted that food plants and humans exhibit
complex and unpredictable behavior and that therefore, the safety of a food substance should be based on thoughtfully
gathered empirical evidence. 

The comments did not point to any specific side effects of genetically engineered foods. FDA has evaluated the safety
of APH(3
&rsquo;)II and has determined that it is safe for its proposed use. This safety assessment is in fact based on empirical
evidence, such as the structure and function of APH(3
&rsquo;)II, the low level at which APH(3
&rsquo;)II occurs in foods, the digestibility of APH(3
&rsquo;)II, and the inability of APH(3
&rsquo;)II to interfere with clinically useful antibiotics under usual conditions of use for the antibiotics. 



5. Relevance of Clinical Studies 



Several comments noted that a National Institutes of Health (NIH) gene therapy trial in which cancer patients were
infused with cells containing the 

kan

r

 gene, and which was cited by Calgene as strong evidence for the safety of the 

kan

r

 gene, provides little information concerning the safety of the 

kan

r

 gene and APH(3
&rsquo;)II in food. One comment also noted that the combination of data from the in vitro studies and the gene therapy
study was an inadequate basis for a safety determination of the 

kan

r

 gene and APH(3
&rsquo;)II in food that millions of people might eat. 

In determining that APH(3
&rsquo;)II is safe for its proposed food additive use, FDA did not rely on the NIH gene therapy trial. However, FDA does
believe that the in vitro degradation data provide important information that should be and was considered by the
agency as part of its overall safety assessment of the 

kan

r

 gene and APH(3
&rsquo;)II, as discussed earlier in this document. 



C. Possible Effect on Clinical Efficacy of Orally Administered Kanamycin or Neomycin 



Several comments questioned whether the presence of APH(3
&rsquo;)II in tomatoes or other foods might compromise the clinical efficacy of orally administered kanamycin or
neomycin. One comment noted that Calgene claimed that at most only 76,800 people annually were administered kanamycin
or neomycin orally, and argued that those people deserved not to be put at risk. The comment further requested that
Calgene be required to perform animal studies on the effects of ingestion of APH(3
&rsquo;)II on the efficacy of orally administered kanamycin and neomycin. The comment asserted that if APH(3
&rsquo;)II were shown to compromise clinical efficacy of kanamycin or neomycin, food containing APH(3
&rsquo;)II should be appropriately labeled. 

Other comments observed that ingested APH(3
&rsquo;)II would not impair the efficacy of orally administered kanamycin and neomycin, that these antibiotics
are rarely administered orally, and that the 

kan

r

 gene is therefore a good choice as a selectable marker gene. 

FDA agrees with Calgene that kanamycin and neomycin are rarely administered orally. The primary clinical role for
orally administered neomycin, and to a lesser extent kanamycin, is cleansing the bowel of microbes prior to bowel
surgery. This use is relatively minor because of severe side effects (auditory nerve damage and kidney damage) that
may result from the antibiotic that is absorbed from the GI tract (Ref. 38). 

As discussed above, for most individuals receiving oral kanamycin or neomycin, APH(3
&rsquo;)II will be inactivated by the acidic environment of the stomach and degraded by the digestive enzymes present
in the GI tract. More important, even for patients receiving simultaneous treatment to reduce stomach acidity, the
amount of ATP available from food would allow, at most, only a small fraction of kanamycin or neomycin to be inactivated.
The comment advocating animal studies did not contradict directly or indirectly FDA's analysis concerning the inactivation
and degradation of APH(3
&rsquo;)II or the information concerning ATP levels. FDA has therefore determined that the presence of APH(3
&rsquo;)II in food will not compromise therapy with orally administered kanamycin or neomycin. On this basis, FDA
has concluded that neither animal studies on the effects of ingestion of APH(3
&rsquo;)II on the efficacy of the antibiotics, nor special labeling of foods containing APH(3
&rsquo;)II for patients receiving orally administered kanamycin or neomycin, are necessary. 



