 

Indian tribes are strongly encouraged to request tribal government review of the proposed application. If tribal
governments have any tribal process recommendations on applications submitted to CDC, they should forward them
to Henry S. Cassell, III, Grants Management Officer, Grants Management Branch, Procurement and Grants Office, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 255 East Paces Ferry Road, NE., Mailstop E13, Atlanta, GA 30305. This should
be done no later than 30 days after the application deadline date. The granting agency does not guarantee to ``accommodate
or explain'' for tribal process recommendations it receives after that date. 



Public Health System Reporting Requirements 



This program is not subject to the Public Health System Reporting Requirements. 



Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number 



The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance number is 93.200. 



Other Requirements 



A. Paperwork Reduction Act 



Projects that involve the collection of information from 10 or more individuals and funded by cooperative agreement
will be subject to review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction Act. 



B. Technical Review 



All protocols, studies, and results of research that ATSDR carries out or funds in whole or in part will be peer reviewed
to meet the requirements of CERCLA Section 104(i)(13), as amended by SARA. 



C. Cost Recovery 



CERCLA as amended by SARA, provides for the recovery of costs incurred for response actions at each Superfund site
from potentially responsible parties. The recipient would agree to maintain an accounting system that will keep
an accurate, complete, and current accounting of all financial transactions on a site-specific basis, i.e., individual
time, travel, and associated cost including indirect cost, as appropriate for the site. The recipient would also
maintain documentation that describes the site-specific response actions taken with respect to the site, e.g.,
contracts, work assignments, progress reports, and other documents that describe the work performed at a site. The
recipient will retain the documents and records to support these financial transactions and documentation of work
performed, for possible use in a cost recovery case, for a minimum of ten (10) years after submission of a final Financial
Status Report (FSR), unless there is litigation, claim, negotiation, audit or other action involving the specific
site, then the records will be maintained until resolution of all issues on the specific site. 



D. Third Party Agreements 



Project activities which are approved for contracting pursuant to the prior approval provisions shall be formalized
in a written agreement that clearly establishes the relationship between the recipient and the third party. 

The written agreement shall at a minimum: 

1. State or incorporate by reference all applicable requirements imposed on the contractors under the terms of the
grant and/or cooperative agreement, including requirements concerning technical review (ATSDR selected reviewers),
ownership of data, and the arrangement for copyright when publications, data, or other copyrightable works are developed
under or in the course of work under a PHS grant-supported project or activity. 

2. State that any copyrighted or copyrightable works shall be subject to a royalty-free, nonexclusive, and irrevocable
license to the government to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use them, and to authorize others to do so for Federal
government purposes. 

3. State that whenever any work subject to this copyright policy may be developed in the course of a grant by a contractor
under a grant, the written agreement (contract) must require the contractor to comply with these requirements and
can in no way diminish the government's right in that work. 



