 

Carcinogenicity studies with dichlorodiphenyl sulfone are planned with both sexes of rats and mice using the dosed
feed route of administration. 

Chemical 6. Elmiron (CAS No. 37319178)_14-day studies via oral gavage in B6C3F1 mice and F344 rats.


Elmiron is a pentosan polysulfate used as an experimental drug in the United States for the compassionate treatment
of interstitial cystitis, and used in Europe to prevent thrombosis and hyperlipidemia. The United States Food and
Drug Administration Nominated elmiron to the NTP as an ``orphan'' drug in need of chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity
evaluation. Currently, 14-day studies are being undertaken with oral administration of the drug to rats and mice,
to determine if expected effects on the clotting system will be the basis on which to select doses for further evaluations.
Chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity evaluations by standard designs are under consideration. 

Chemical 7. Benzophenone (CAS No. 119619)_2-year studies via dosed-feed in B6C3F1 mice and F344 rats.


Benzophenone is found in many consumer products, e.g., as a fragrance and flavor enhancer, photoinitiator, ultraviolet
curing agent, a polymerization inhibitor, and in the manufacture of pesticides and various pharmaceuticals. Benzophenone
and the structurally related compound 2-hydroxy-4-methoxy benzophenone were nominated for study from a class of
ether compounds having widespread potential for human exposure. The carcinogenic potential of benzophenone has
only been evaluated by topical administration to female Swiss mice. No indication of carcinogenicity was reported.
In NTP 13-week studies, the oral administration of benzophenone was found to cause hepatocellular hypertrophy in
rats and mice, and evidence of cholestatic liver injury and renal damage in rats. Marked induction of hepatic CYP 450
IIB was observed in rats and mice. Chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies proposed for this chemical are of
the standard design, but with a stop exposure group using a dose which produced marked liver and kidney lesions in prechronic
studies. Toxicokinetic studies are also planned. 

Chemical 8. 2-Hydroxy-4-methoxybenzophenone (CAS No. 131577)_2-year studies via dosed-feed in
B6C3F1 mice and F344 rats. 2-Hydroxy-4-methoxybenzophenone is a UV stabilizer used in cosmetic, pharmaceutical
and plastic products. Consumer exposure is likely greatest through its use in skin moisturizers and sunscreens where
products containing up to 6% 2-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzophenone are permitted. In NTP 13-week studies by the oral
and topical routes, similar sites of toxicity were seen, primarily the liver and kidney, and effects on sperm density
and the length of the estrous cycle were noted. Other NTP studies indicated that absorption was good after both oral
and topical administrations, and major metabolites after intravenous administration were identified. Two-year
studies of standard design are planned for this chemical by the oral route of administration rather than a topical
one to provide information more comparable to that obtained with Benzophenone. In addition, the severity of the lesions
in the topical prechronic studies was limited, indicating that a rigorous evaluation of the carcinogenicity of the
chemical would be better achieved using oral administration. 

Chemical 9. Methacrylonitrile (CAS No. 126987)_2-year studies via oral gavage in B6C3F1 mice and F344
rats. Methacrylonitrile is an industrial chemical widely used in a variety of organic processes related to the manufacture
of polymers. It is a highly reactive unsaturated aliphatic nitrile found in cigarette smoke, and is known to liberate
cyanide 

in vivo. 

Methacrylonitrile has been studied extensively by the NTP including studies of 14-day and 90-day durations in rats
and mice by gavage. In addition, absorption, disposition, toxicokinetics, cell proliferation and developmental
toxicity studies have been performed. This chemical will be the subject of modeling efforts with physiologically-based-pharmacokinetic
modeling techniques, and is also recommended for 2-year chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies of a standard
design. 

Chemical 10. Acrylonitrile (CAS No. 107131)_2-year studies via oral gavage in B6C3F1 mice and F344
rats. Acrylonitrile is extensively used for the manufacture of synthetic fibers, resins, elastomers, rubber and
plastics. Estimated production is in the range of 30 million to 1.5 billion pounds per year. There is limited evidence
for the carcinogenicity of acrylonitrile in workers and Zt has been shown to produce chromosome damage in the blood
cells of exposed workers. Acrylonitrile has produced brain, stomach and zymbal gland tumors in 2-year studies in
rats, but has not been studied in mice. Brain tumors are rare chemically induced lesions in rodents. There is little
chance that the outcome of a mouse cancer study would change the classification of acrylonitrile as a rodent carcinogen,
but given the quantitiative differences in acrylonitrile metabolism in rats and mice, it is possible that clues to
possible critical metabolities will be gained from comparative studies in mice. Therefore, as part of the nitrile
class study, acrylonitrile will be studied in mice by the standard NTP protocol. Toxicokinetic estimates will be
derived by analysis of an acrylonitrile-glutathione conjugation product in the urine. 



