 

(b) The criteria could measure compliance with a rolling average but allow discontinuities in the averaging period.
Thus, days on which meteorological conditions interfere with achieving the 2 ppt criteria at Roe Island would be counted
instead as days of meeting the criteria upstream at Chipps Island. This approach could be applied only until all days
that are required at the upstream site are met. 
3. As a part of EPA's coordination process in developing this proposal, the Agency has discussed its proposed criteria
at length with the operators of California's major water projects. These operators, who will have substantial responsibilities
under any implementation plan developed by the State Board, raised a question about how compliance with the 2 ppt salinity
criteria should be measured. Under existing operational models, these operators would translate the proposed criteria
into a set of flow parameters, and would operate the system pursuant to those flow parameters so as to achieve the 2 ppt
salinity criteria at the targeted sites. However, because all models contain imperfections, it has been proposed
that the operators should actually model compliance at a site somewhat downstream of the targeted site so as to provide
a ``margin of error'' or a ``confidence interval''. 
EPA's preliminary review of this issue suggests that use of a ``confidence interval'' of this kind is unwarranted,
for two primary reasons. First, the model that predicts the location of the 2 ppt isohaline based on flows is extremely
accurate. EPA's preliminary review of the model's accuracy during the five months covered by the proposed salinity
criteria, using historical data, found that the model correctly predicts the number of days for the isohaline position
more than 95 percent of the time. Second, the use of a 28 day averaging period, as described above, would adequately
address most of the variability associated with factors not included in the salinity-flow model. For these reasons,
EPA believes that the use of these proposed confidence intervals would require substantial additional flows through
the estuary without any corresponding ecological benefit to the Estuarine Habitat designated use. 
EPA expects that the State Board will develop an implementation plan for these Estuarine Habitat criteria by changing
the volume and timing of water flows through the estuary. EPA believes that an implementation plan that relies on the
salinity-flow model, without making additional allowances for confidence intervals as described above, would
be acceptable for purposes of protecting the designated use. Further, EPA notes that the State's triennial review
provides a mechanism for regularly reviewing the adequacy of any implementation decisions concerning confidence
intervals for the proposed salinity criteria. 
EPA solicits comment from the public on this issue, and welcomes any evaluation on the merits of the use of this or other
forms of confidence intervals with the proposed criteria. Specifically, EPA requests comment on whether the proposed
criteria without the above confidence interval adjustment would be protective. Alternatively, would a confidence
interval based on an extended number of days of compliance at the targeted sites yield the desired level of confidence
without requiring the higher flows required by the confidence interval proposal outlined above? 
4. Will these criteria be adequate to protect low-salinity habitat conditions in wetter years? The SFEP workshop
that developed the scientific rationale for an estuarine index based their conclusions on correlations between
mean position of the 2 ppt isohaline during appropriate months and the abundance of estuarine organisms at all trophic
levels. With the exception of mollusks, yearly measures of abundance increase either linearly or logarithmically
as the mean location of the 2 ppt isohaline moves down the estuary. 
EPA has developed its proposed Estuarine Habitat criteria based on the number of days at particular locations in the
estuary, rather than a mean position over a series of months. These criteria have the advantage of being more easily
implemented, and more directly tie certain salinity ranges to certain geographic locations (such as the extensive
shallows of Grizzly Bay). However, basing the number of days on a certain historical period (such as 1940 to 1975) does
not mean that the mean position of the 2 ppt isohaline for these reference years will be achieved. By using the historical
period of 1940 to 1975 to define the number of days at each location, we are approximating the actual historical (late
1960's to early 1970's) mean position of the 2 ppt isohaline in drier years. However, EPA's criteria may not provide
overall conditions equal to those during the late 1960's to early 1970's. This is because the mean position of the 2
ppt isohaline in wetter years has been substantially downstream of the wetter year positions in the proposed rule
(see Table below). 



<TABLE>





Mean Position, in km, of the February Through June 

2 

ppt Isohaline, by Year Type, for 

19401975 

Historical Period and Late 

1960's 

to Early 

1970's 

Historical Period (Based on DAYFLOW Information and the Salinity/Flow Relationship Developed by Kimmerer and Monismith;
SFEP 

1993

b), and EPA Criteria 

1Year type 
1C 
1D 
1BN 
1AN 
1W
 


19401975

70 
67 
59 
56 
19641975
 
74 
73 
62 
59 
EPA criteria_with trigger9 
77 
73 
70 
67 
65 
EPA criteria_without trigger 
77 
76 
75 
74 
74 

9The EPA criteria include the Roe Island criteria with its ``trigger'', which in some years will not be triggered.
These two sets of results indicate the mean position of the 2 ppt isohaline in the event that the Roe Island criteria
is and is not triggered.

</TABLE>





