 

IV. Other Matters 


Executive Order 12866


This final rule was reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under Executive Order 12866 on Regulatory
Planning and Review. Any changes made in this final rule as a result of that review are clearly identified in the docket
file, which is available for public inspection in the Office of the Department's Rule's Docket Clerk, Room 10276,
451 Seventh St. SW, Washington, DC. 


Environmental Impact


A Finding of No Significant Impact with respect to the environment was made in accordance with HUD regulations at 24
CFR part 50, which implement section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, at the time of development
of the interim rule. This finding remains applicable to this final rule and is available for public inspection during
regular business hours in the Office of General Counsel, the Rules Docket Clerk room 10276, 451 Seventh Street, SW,
Washington, DC 20410. 


Executive Order 12612, Federalism


The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under section 6(a) of Executive order 12612, Federalism, has determined
that the policies contained in this final rule will not have substantial direct effects on States or their political
subdivisions, or the relationship between the Federal government and the states, or on the distribution of power
and responsibilities among the various levels of government. Specifically, the final rule is directed to owners
of multifamily housing projects, and will not impinge upon the relationship between the Federal Government and State
and local governments. As a result, the rule is not subject to review under the order. 


Executive Order 12606, The Family


The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under Executive Order 12606, The Family, has determined that this
final rule does not have potential for significant impact on family formation, maintenance, and general well-being
within the meaning of the order. This final rule implements the system of preferences authorized by subtitle D of title
VI of the 1992 HCD Act, which provides that owners of certain section 8 covered projects that were originally designed
primarily for occupancy by elderly families (i.e., families whose heads, spouses or sole members are 62 years or older)
may elect to give preference in occupancy to vacant units in the project to elderly families. Although subtitle D provides
for preferences for elderly families in projects meeting the conditions established by subtitle D, subtitle D also
requires that owners of such projects must reserve no less then a minimum number of units in these projects for disabled
families who are not elderly or near-elderly. The minimum number is determined in accordance with the formula established
by statute. 
Since the subtitle D preference system provides a primary preference for elderly families, and a secondary preference
for disabled families who are near-elderly, there is the possibility that this statutory system of preferences would
limit the availability of certain section 8 housing for (1) disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly
(if an owner gives preference to elderly families for units), and (2) such families with children, and thus adversely
impact the maintenance and well-being of these families. (Although owners can apply the same preferences and reservation
of units to families with children as to families without children, owners cannot restrict admission to any units
because of familial status as long as the family qualifies for the unit on the basis of the relevant age or disability
criterion for admission.) The Department believes that the number of projects that would be eligible for the preferences
provided by subtitle D is limited, and thus, the impact on family maintenance and well being would not be significant
within the meaning of the order. 


Regulatory Flexibility Act


The Secretary, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 605(b)) has reviewed and approved this
final rule, and in so doing certifies that this final rule would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities. This final rule reflects a system of occupancy preferences authorized by statute which
applies to section 8 newly constructed or substantially rehabilitated housing without regard to the size of entities
involved.


Regulatory Agenda


This rule was listed as sequence number 1803 in the Department's Semiannual Agenda of Regulations published on November
14, 1994 (59 FR 57632, 57657) in accordance with Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act. 


Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Programs


The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance program number is 14.156. 


List of Subjects 


24 CFR Part 880 


Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



24 CFR Part 881 


Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



24 CFR Part 883 


Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



24 CFR Part 884 


Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,
Rural areas. 


24 CFR Part 886 


Grant programs_housing and community development, Lead poisoning, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements. 




Accordingly, 24 CFR parts 880, 881, 883, 884, and 886 are amended as follows: 


PART 880_SECTION 8 HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS PROGRAM FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION 


1. The authority citation for 24 CFR part 880 continues to read as follows: 






Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437f, 3535(d), and 1361113619.



