 

(2) For purposes of this section, family size includes 
the unborn child and other members of the Medicaid budgetary 
unit. 
(b) Establishing the income standard. 
(1) For optional groups of pregnant women and infants 
under 436.226(a)(1) and (2), the agency may establish 
separate income standards or use a single income standard. 
(2) For the optional groups of children under 
436.226(a) (3) and (4), the agency must establish separate 
income standards. 
(3) The standards must be based on family size_
(i) For pregnant women, at a level that covers family 
incomes that are at or below 185 percent (or at or below 
some lesser percent that the agency chooses) of the Federal 
poverty income guidelines for a family of the size involved; 
(ii) For infants under 1 year of age, at a level that 
covers family incomes that are at or below 185 percent (or 
at or below some lesser percent that the agency chooses) of 
the Federal poverty income guidelines for a family of the 
size involved; 
(iii) For children age 1 up to age 6, at a level that 
covers family incomes that are at or below 133 percent of 
the Federal poverty income guidelines for a family of the 
size involved; 
(iv) For children born after September 30, 1983 who 
are 6 years of age up to age 19 years of age, at a level 
that covers family incomes that are at or below 100 percent 
of the Federal poverty income guidelines for a family of the 
size involved. 
(c) Establishing the resource standard. 

At State 
option, the agency may apply resource standards in 
determining financial eligibility that are no more 
restrictive than the SSI standard for pregnant women and no 
more restrictive than the AFDC standard for infants and 
children. 
(d) 

Methodologies for determining income and 
resources. 

(1) Except as specified in paragraph (d) (2) 
through (4) of this section, in determining family income 
and resources, the agency must use the methodologies 
established in accordance with 436.601. 
(2) In determining family income, the agency must use 
the income methodologies of the approved AFDC plan or the 
State's title IVE adoption assistance and foster care plan 
as appropriate, or it may use any less restrictive 
methodologies specified in the State plan which conform with 
436.601(d). Methodologies include, but are not limited 
to, those used for disregarding income. 
(3) In determining countable income, the agency may 
not deduct costs incurred for medical care or any other type 
of remedial care to reduce income to the level of the 
standard established. 
(4) The resource methodologies used in determining 
financial eligibility of pregnant women must not be more 
restrictive than the methodologies applied under SSI. The 
resource methodologies used in determining financial 
eligibility of infants and children must not be more 
restrictive than the methodologies applied under the State's 
approved AFDC plan. 
(5) In determining the financial responsibility of 
relatives, the State must use the requirements of 436.602. 
(e) 

State plan requirements. 

The State plan must_
(1) Specify the income standards; and 
(2) If the State elects to apply resource standards, 
specify those resource standards. 
16. A new 436.615 is added to subpart G to read as 
follows: 


436.615 

Income and resource standards and methodologies: 
Aged and disabled individuals with incomes at or below 
Federal poverty income guidelines. 


(a) 

General rule. 

If the agency provides Medicaid to 
aged and disabled individuals under 436.235, it must 
determine financial eligibility in accordance with the 
requirements of this section. 


