 

The NAS report assigns prostate cancer to a category labeled limited/suggestive evidence of an association, which
it defined as meaning there is evidence suggestive of an association between herbicide exposure and a particular
health outcome, but that evidence is limited because chance, bias, and confounding could not be ruled out with confidence.
Prostate cancer is a very common male genitourinary cancer which shows marked increased prevalence with age. There
are statistically significant occupational studies which show no association between prostate cancer and herbicide
exposure (e.g., Fingerhut M.A., Halperin W.E., Marlow D.A., Piacitelli L.A., Honchar P.A., Sweeney M.H., Greife
A.L., Dill P.A., Steenland K., Suruda A.J. 1991. Cancer mortality in workers exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.
New England Journal of Medicine 324:212218; Manz A., Berger J., Dwyer J.H., Flesch-Janys D., Nagel S., Waltsgott
H. 1991. Cancer mortality among workers in chemical plant contaminated with dioxin. Lancet 338:959964; Saracci
R., Kogevinas M., Bertazzi P.A., Bueno De Mesquita B.H., Coggon D., Green L.M., Kauppinen T., L'Abbe K.A., Littorin
M., Lynge E., Mathews J.D., Neuberger M., Osman J., Pearce N., Winkelman R. 1991. Cancer mortality in workers exposed
to chlorophenoxy herbicides and chlorophenois. Lancet 338:10271032). Some occupational studies have shown
a slight elevated risk for prostate cancer among farm and forestry workers (e.g., Burmeister L.F., 1981. Cancer mortality
in Iowa farmers: 19711978. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 66:461464; Alavanja M.C., Merkle
S., Teske J. Eaton B., Reed B. 1989. Mortality among forest and soil conservationists. Archives of Environmental
Health 44:94101); however, only one study concerning a small sub-set of farmers (Morrison H., Savitz, D.,
Semenciw R., Hulka B., Mao Y., Morison D., Wigle D. 1993. Farming and prostate cancer mortality. American Journal
of Epidemiology 137:270280) associated the increased risk of prostate cancer among farmers specifically
with herbicide exposure. The Morrison study is so recent that it it too early to determine whether its results will
be replicated by other research. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association
between prostate cancer and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an association, and he has
determined that a positive association does not exist. 


The NAS report assigns peripheral neuropathy, hepatobiliary cancers, bone cancers, female reproductive cancers,
renal cancers, testicular cancer, leukemia, abnormal sperm parameters and infertility, cognitive and neuropsychiatric
disorders, motor/coordination dysfunction, metabolic and digestive disorders, immune system disorders, circulatory
disorders, respiratory disorders (other than lung cancer), and nasal/nasopharyngeal cancer to a category labeled
inadequate/insufficient evidence to determine whether an association exists, which is defined as meaning that
the available studies are of insufficient quality, consistency, or statistical strength to permit a conclusion
regarding the presence or absence of an association with herbicide exposure. 

Peripheral neuropathy can be induced by many common medical and environmental disorders unrelated to herbicide
exposure, such as aging, alcoholism, diabetes, and exposure to other toxic chemicals. The last time VA considered
this issue, it determined, after receiving the advice of the Veterans' Advisory Committee on Environmental Hazards,
that there was sufficient evidence to meet the requirements for a ``significant statistical association,'' the
standard in effect at that time, between exposure to herbicides containing dioxin and the subsequent development
of peripheral neuropathy under certain circumstances (See 57 FR 223638). That conclusion, however, relied
heavily on case reports, which are anecdotal and have no statistical significant, and occupational studies such
as Singer and colleagues (1982) (Singer R., Moses M., Valciukas J., Lilis R., Selikoff I.J., 1982. Nerve conduction
velocity studies of workers employed in the manufacture of phenoxy herbicides. Environmental Research 29:297311)
whose credibility is compromised because they did not apply consistent methods to define a comparison group, determine
exposure, evaluate clinical deficits, use standard definitions of peripheral neuropathy, or eliminate confounding
variables. The Singer study, for example, excluded individuals with excessive alcohol consumption from the controls
but not from the subjects of the study. Other occupational studies, such as Suskind and Herzberg (1984) (Suskind R.R.,
Hertzberg V.S., 1984. Human health effects of 2,4,5T and its toxic contaminants. Journal of the American Medical
Association 251:23722380), which did not have those methodological problems, showed no difference in the
incidence of peripheral neuropathy for workers exposed to herbicides and workers not so exposed. Accordingly, the
Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association between peripheral neuropathy and herbicide
exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an association, and he has determined that a positive association
does not exist. 

