 

2. Waste Management Practices 



The largest volume wastes generated by the organobromines industry are wastewaters disposed by injection into underground
deep wells regulated under the Safe Drinking Water Act Underground Injection Control (UIC) program (40 CFR parts
144148). Some of the combined waste streams being deep well-injected are classified as hazardous wastes under
40 CFR part 261. As a result, the industry must comply with applicable regulations under the Land Disposal Restrictions
(LDR) program in 40 CFR part 268, which require that hazardous wastes may not be land-disposed without treatment to
specified levels or by specified methods. Disposal by underground injection is included in the definition of ``land
disposal'' in 40 CFR 268.2. Specific restrictions on the underground injection of hazardous wastes are codified
in 40 CFR part 148. 
One of the two major production plants submitted a petition under 40 CFR 148.20 for an exemption from these LDR requirements
for the disposal of wastes in wells located at its plant. They provided site-specific information to demonstrate
that there would be no migration of the injected wastes to an underground source of drinking water for as long as the
wastes remain hazardous (40 CFR 148.20). Their demonstration showed that the geological and geochemical conditions
at the site and the physicochemical nature of the wastestreams were such that the hazardous constituents in the fluids
will not migrate within 10,000 years vertically or laterally. The petition was approved by the Agency and the exemption
was granted. EPA expects the facility to continue this form of disposal at the same level in the future regardless of
this listing determination because of economic considerations. As a result, EPA believes that wastes being disposed
by underground injection at this plant will not pose a risk to human health and the environment. 
The situation with respect to the second major facility is different. This facility consists of several plants located
a few miles apart. Each plant has its own set of injection wells. One plant, which according to the Agency's information
generates listed hazardous wastewater, has two wells into which listed hazardous waste is currently injected. Another,
which according to the Agency's information does not produce a listed wastewater, has at least three wells which do
not accept hazardous waste. 
None of the wells at this facility have an approved no-migration petition. Therefore, for currently listed wastewaters,
the facility will have to consider waste treatment prior to disposal. An option under consideration by the plant is
the construction of a wastewater treatment plant to treat the wastewaters prior to either release to surface waters
or deep well injection. The facility is not likely to want to abandon the use of deep well injection for economic reasons.
Shipment of wastewaters off site would be economically prohibitive given the large wastewaters volumes involved.
For unlisted wastewaters, the most plausible management scenario would be continued deep well injection. 
The Agency believes that it would be unlikely that the facility would attempt to store wastewater in lagoons. The area
has a moist climate, so evaporation is not a viable option. The plant is currently under several consent agreements
to remove contamination resulting from the previous use of unlined lagoons for temporary wastewater storage. 
Therefore, the Agency selected the plausible mismanagement scenario for modeling purposes for unlisted wastewaters
to be the current practice of underground injection for this plant's wastewaters. EPA has no information or reason
to believe that, if not listed, the wastewaters would be managed in a different manner. 

In addition to underground injection, certain other waste management practices commonly used in the organobromine
chemicals industry are regulated by specific RCRA regulations. Both major plants use Bromine Recovery Units (BRUs)
to recover bromine values from organic liquid and vapor waste streams. In these units, the organics are burned and
the combustion products are removed by a wet scrubber. The BRUs are halogen acid furnaces (HAFs), which meet the regulatory
definition of industrial furnace in 40 CFR 260.10. 
The combustion of hazardous waste in industrial furnaces is regulated under 40 CFR part 266, subpart H which regulate
air emissions from these units and require monitoring and analyses. These regulations impose emissions standards
and air quality limits for the BRUs, which are designed to control and reduce the level of risk posed by this management
practice (

e.g.,

 40 CFR 266.104(e) establishes controls for dioxin- and furan-containing wastes). Both major plants burn listed
spent solvents and still bottoms in these units; therefore, they are already subject to the performance standards
of part 266, subpart H. EPA believes that residuals managed in this manner and in compliance with applicable regulations
do not pose any additional risk to human health and the environment because the facilities are currently in compliance
with their permits to operate these units. EPA has not found any compelling evidence indicating that the major plants
would manage these wastes in any other way. These recovery units are integrated into the major plants and abandoning
their use would require considerable plant modifications to be made with no economic benefit to the facilities. 




