 

I recognize that there are some benefits that will be likely to accrue from approval of MMT use. In addition to the obvious
economic benefits associated with reductions in petroleum use and in fuel prices, there might also be some favorable
health and environmental effects. It is probable that, if MMT use were to result in reduced NO

X

 emissions from motor vehicles, this would be accompanied by some site-specific decreases in ozone formation. The
small decreases in cancer risks claimed by Ethyl are considerably more speculative and cannot be quantified with
existing information. In any case, it is not possible for me to weigh any modest hypothetical decrease in cancer risk
or limited site-specific ozone benefit against a risk of effects on the nervous system that could significantly decrease
the quality of life for a large number of individuals. In addition, EPA is or will be taking a number of other actions
under the Clean Air Act to reduce emissions of carcinogenic air pollutants and to limit ozone formation.
<FOOTCITE>85</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
85

</FOOTNAME>
For example, reductions in levels of carcinogenic particulates will accrue due to controls placed on diesel sulfur
(55 FR 34120, August 21, 1990). Reductions in carcinogenic toxic emissions (and NO

X

 emissions after the year 2000) will accrue as a result of regulations requiring the introduction of reformulated
gasoline in 1995 promulgated under section 211(k) of the Act as amended in 1990 (59 FR 7716, February 16, 1994) and as
a result of the Agency's vehicle-based refueling emissions regulations (59 FR 16262, April 6, 1994). EPA has already
issued tighter tailpipe standard for NO

X

 as required under the new amendments, and future ozone state implementation plans will address other NO

X

 control strategies. In addition, the recently-promulgated enhanced emission I/M program regulations for the first
time establish a performance standard to reduce in-use NO

X

 emissions in the more serious ozone nonattainment areas. Regarding stationary source control strategies, other
provisions of the Act call for a two million ton NO

X

 reduction from certain utilities.

</FOOTNOTE>


Based on the EPA analyses described in this decision and on the administrative record compiled by EPA as part of this
decision, I have concluded that there is a reasonable basis for concern about the effects on public health that could
result if EPA were to approve use of MMT in unleaded gasoline pursuant to Ethyl's application. I have also concluded
that the actual and hypothetical benefits which could accrue from MMT use are insufficient to outweigh the concerns
regarding potential adverse health effects. In circumstances where there is substantial uncertainty regarding
the nature of potential health effects which would result if a fuel additive waiver were approved, the burden of resolving
such uncertainties should fall on the waiver applicant rather than on the public. This policy is consistent with the
general policy established by the recently promulgated health effects testing rule, which requires that manufacturers
of new fuels or fuel additives complete all necessary testing prior to registration. 

Therefore, for the reasons set forth above, utilizing the discretion afforded me under section 211(f)(4) of the Act,
I am today denying Ethyl's request for a waiver of the section 211(f)(1) prohibitions against the use of MMT in unleaded
gasoline. As previously stated in this decision, should Ethyl wish to undertake research intended to alleviate the
present uncertainties concerning the adverse health effects which could be associated with the use of MMT in unleaded
gasoline, the Agency will work with Ethyl to resolve the details of the needed research. If Ethyl decides to undertake
the research which is needed, and which would likely be required in any case to register MMT for unleaded gasoline under
the Agency's recently promulgated fuel and fuel additive health effects testing regulations, EPA will reconsider
granting a waiver to Ethyl at that time. 

EPA has determined that this action does not meet any of the criteria for classification as a significant regulatory
action under Executive Order 12866. Therefore, no regulatory impact analysis is required. This action is not a ``rule''
as defined in the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., because EPA has not published, and is not required
to publish, a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking under the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. 553(b), or any other
law. Therefore, EPA has not prepared a supporting regulatory flexibility analysis addressing the impact of this
action on small entities. 

This is a final Agency action of national applicability. Jurisdiction to review this action lies exclusively in the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Under section 307(b)(1) of the Act, judicial review of
this action is available only by the filing of a petition for review in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit within 60 days of August 17, 1994. Under section 307(b)(2) of the Act, today's action may not be challenged
later in a separate judicial proceeding brought by the Agency to enforce the statutory prohibitions. 




Dated: July 13, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Carol M. Browner, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrator. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9418941 Filed 81694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>


