 

Executive Order 12866 


These regulations are not subject to the requirements of Executive Order 12866 because they relate to a foreign and
military affairs function of the United States.


Paperwork Reduction Act 


The collections of information provided for in this final rule have been reviewed and approved by the Office of Management
and Budget in accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3504(h)) under OMB control number 15050121.

The estimated average annual burden per respondent varies, depending on individual circumstances, with an average
of 60 hours. 
Comments concerning the accuracy of this burden estimate and suggestions for reducing this burden should be directed
to Donald Crafts, Staff Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States and Acting Director of
the Office of International Investment, Room 5100, Department of the Treasury, 15th Street and Pennsylvania Ave.,
NW, Washington, DC 20220, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (15050121),
Washington, DC 20503.


Regulatory Flexibility Act 


These regulations implement amendments to Section 721 of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. App. 2170)(``DPA'').
Section 709 of the DPA (50 U.S.C. App. 2159) provides that the regulations issued under it are not subject to the rulemaking
requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 553). Notwithstanding this exemption, section 709 of
the DPA was amended by section 136 of the Defense Production Act Amendments of 1992 (Pub. L. 102558) to require
any regulation issued under the DPA to be published in the 

Federal Register

 for at least thirty days to provide for public comment. This requirement subjects this final rule to the Regulatory
Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

). The impact of this final rule on small entities is expected to be insignificant. This final regulation imposes additional
informational requirements on entities controlled by foreign governments. Most businesses affected by this rule
will likely be large businesses, because these are the most likely to be controlled by a foreign government. Accordingly,
it is certified that the final rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.



Discussion of the Final Rule 


Section 837(a) of the Defense Authorization Act creates for the first time a mandatory investigation provision under
Exon-Florio. There are three points worth noting about this provision. First, this provision is limited in application
to certain types of acquisitions. Specifically, the acquirer in question must be a foreign government controlled
entity, or an entity acting on behalf of a foreign government. Furthermore, the acquisition must be one which ``could
result in control of a person engaged in interstate commerce in the United States that could affect the national security
of the United States'' (emphasis added). Thus, even where the other specified criteria are met, this provision does
not mandate an investigation for cases that could not ``affect the national security of the United States.'' 

Second, for purposes of determining whether the acquisition results in foreign government control, CFIUS is applying
the same functional test for control as provided in section 800.204. 
Third, in contrast to the criterion for Presidential action under Exon-Florio, 

i.e.

, that the foreign party acquiring control might take action that ``threatens to impair the national security,''
the criterion for undertaking an investigation of transactions involving government controlled entities is that
there could be an effect on the national security. 
The term ``foreign government'' has been broadly defined for purposes of these regulations to include any government
or body exercising governmental functions, and includes but is not limited to national as well as various regional
and local levels of government. It is important to note that the definition is not limited to the particular levels
of government that are specified in the regulation, and that other governmental bodies, including supra-national
entities such as the European Union (including its component parts), are covered by this regulation. 
For purposes of the mandatory investigation provision, the regulations define the term ``engage in'' as used in the
phrase ``seeks to engage in any merger, acquisition or 
takeover ***'' to mean ``seeks to acquire control through.'' The purpose of this regulation is to
clarify that the mandatory investigation provision would not be triggered in cases where a foreign government controlled
entity's participation in an acquisition is solely for the purpose of investment, as defined in section 800.217 of
the regulations. The Committee believes that this reading is supported by the legislative history, and particularly
floor statements made by members of Congress who sponsored this particular amendment. 

See, e.g., 

Cong. Rec., Sept. 18, 1992, pages S 14050 through 14053 (comments of Senators Exon, Sarbanes and Riegle); and Cong.
Rec. Oct. 3, 1992, page H 10986 (comments of Representative Collins). Subparagraph 800.402(c)(5)(iii) has been
changed in the final regulations by the addition of the words ``for example'' to clarify that an agency or representative
role are examples of ways in which a foreign person can act on behalf of a foreign government, but are not the only ways
in which such a relationship could be conducted. 



Drafting Information



