 

Any suspension, revocation, or modification of the authorization under the General Authorization will be conducted
in accordance with 15 CFR part 904. 



Terms and Conditions 



Monitoring and Coordination 



In order to ensure that research activities conducted under the General Authorization do not either individually
or cumulatively result in takes other than by Level B harassment, NMFS plans to coordinate and monitor research activities.
Monitoring will be accomplished, in part, through NMFS and MMC review of required annual reports. Coordination of
research activities will be accomplished, in part, by requiring persons conducting research under the General Authorization
to notify the appropriate NMFS Regional Office(s) at least 2 weeks before initiation of on-site activities. The Regional
Office(s) will review these notifications and coordinate upcoming research to minimize adverse impacts on marine
mammals in the wild. Where appropriate, Regional Offices may convene meetings to coordinate research under the General
Authorization. In the event of any circumstance where research activities result in a taking which exceeds Level
B harassment, for example, in the case of potential or actual injury to or death of a marine mammal or marine mammal stocks
in the wild, research activities must be immediately discontinued and the principal investigator must notify NMFS.
NMFS will determine whether: The research activity in question may continue under the General Authorization; revision
of the research methodology is necessary to remove any potential to injure marine mammals or marine mammal stocks;
or, a permit is necessary to continue the research. The reporting of such incidents is a condition of conducting research
under the General Authorization. Similarly, in certain instances (e.g., reports of abuse of the General Authorization),
it may be necessary for a NMFS observer to monitor research activities directly. Therefore, a condition of conducting
research under the General Authorization is that, upon notification, the principal investigator must allow a NMFS
observer to observe research activities. 



Reporting Requirements 



Persons conducting research under the General Authorization must submit annual reports of activity. This information
will be used to monitor the effects of the activities on individual animals and their populations, to assess possible
cumulative impacts, and to determine whether the activity is being conducted as described in the letter of intent.
Annual reports will also be used to track the progress of the research, to determine whether the research continues
to meet the bona fide requirement, and to allow for coordination with similar research in the same area. 

Photography (e.g., still photography, videotaping, and motion picture filming) often will be one of the methodologies
employed by researchers engaged in scientific research under the General Authorization. Such photography does
not require a photography permit issued under the MMPA provided the primary use of the resulting images will be for
the conduct of the research or presenting or publishing the results. In such case, such images may be incidentally
used for other scientific, educational, or commercial purposes provided the names of all photographers are disclosed
in the annual report and any photographs, videotape, or film obtained during the conduct of research under the General
Authorization are identified by a statement that refers to the General Authorization and includes the file number
provided by NMFS in the confirmation letter, the name of the photographer, and the date the image was taken. This statement
must accompany the image(s) in all subsequent uses or sales. The annual report must note incidental scientific, educational,
or commercial uses of the images. However, if the primary use of the images will be for educational or commercial use,
a separate photography permit must first be obtained. 



Classification 



NMFS prepared an EA for this action and concluded that this interim final rule will not significantly affect the human
environment. As a result, preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement on this action is not required by section
102(2) of the National Environmental Policy Act or its implementing regulations. Copies of the EA are available on
request (see 

ADDRESSES

). 

This interim final rule has been determined to be not significant for purposes of E.O. 12866. 

Pursuant to section 553(b)(3)(B) of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), the Assistant Administrator for Fisheries,
NOAA, (AA) finds there is a good cause to waive prior notice and opportunity to comment on this rule. It is contrary to
public interest to provide prior notice and opportunity for comment because of the deadline for implementation mandated
by the 1994 Amendments. 

Pursuant to section 553(d) of the APA, the AA finds there is good cause to waive the required 30-day delay in the effective
date. Any delay in this action would deny timely coverage by the General Authorization to qualified persons. This
General Authorization grants an exception from the MMPA requirement to obtain a scientific research permit for the
taking of marine mammals. 

This interim final rule involves an existing collection-of-information requirement subject to the Paperwork Reduction
Act that has been approved by OMB (control number 06480084). The burden for collection of that information
was estimated to average 43 hours per response, including the time to complete permit applications, complete reporting
requirements, and request subsequent modifications or authorizations. The public reporting burden for the collection-of-information
associated with the General Authorization established under the current rule is estimated to average 17 hours per
response. Send any comments regarding these burden estimates or any other aspect of these requirements, including
suggestions for reducing the burden to NMFS and OMB (see 

ADDRESSES

). 



List of Subjects 



50 CFR Part 215 



Administrative practice and procedure, Marine mammals, Penalties, Pribilof Islands, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements. 



50 CFR Part 216 



Administrative practice and procedure, Imports, Indians, Marine mammals, Penalties, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Transportation.

 


Dated: September 27, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Gary Matlock, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Program Management Officer, National Marine Fisheries Service.




For reasons set out in the preamble, 50 CFR parts 215 and 216 are amended as follows: 



PART 215_PRIBILOF ISLANDS 


</SIGNJOB>
