 

(v) Managing the accreditation process of local law enforcement agencies; 
(vi) Developing technical and physical security systems in public housing or the private sector; 
(vii) Design and implementation of community policing programs; and 
(viii) Working with Federal and local law enforcement agencies. 
(2) 

Activities/tasks to be funded.

 The grantees selected for funding under this NOFA shall perform the following tasks: 
(i) 

Task 1_Public Housing Police Department Upgrades.

 The following subtasks are to be performed in 11 designated cities that have both municipal police and housing authority
police departments serving public housing residents. In addition, the grantee will be required to hold a briefing,
for up to three representatives from each designated city, of the tasks to be accomplished under this grant. The briefing
is to be conducted in the Washington, DC area immediately after completion and approval of the management and work
plan under section (j)(4) of this NOFA. The Department conducted a study to identify housing authority (HA) police
departments that met the following criteria: they were moving towards national or State accreditation; their officers
were State or local commissioned police officers and/or had completed police academy training; and they had operations
and salaries that were funded with HUD operating subsidies or other HUD funds. Based upon this study the Department
determined that the HAs listed below had their own HA police departments which met these criteria. The 11 housing authorities
(HA) and cities for Task 1 are: 



Baltimore HA and Community Development, Baltimore, MD 
Boston HA, Boston, MA 
Buffalo HA, Buffalo, NY 
Chicago HA, Chicago, IL 
Cuyahoga Metropolitan HA, Cleveland, OH 
HA of the City of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 
HA of the City of Oakland, Oakland, CA 
HA of the City of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 
Newark HA, Newark, NJ 
Philadelphia HA, Philadelphia, PA 
HA of the City of Waterbury, Waterbury, CT 



The New York City Housing Authority has a housing authority police department. This department has already been accredited
as of March 27, 1994 and 

therefore will not be

 included in this NOFA. 
(A) 

Task 1 Subtask 1_Law Enforcement Services Agreements.

 The grantee shall facilitate law enforcement service agreements, for additional law enforcement services beyond
the HA cooperation agreement, between housing authorities and local government. The grantee shall work with public
housing officials and local governments in the 11 cities with public housing police departments to negotiate and
implement additional law enforcement service agreements between local police and public housing officials. The
anticipated agreements would relate to the provision of police services to public housing residents by municipal
police and public housing police, access to emergency services, baseline services provided to public housing residents,
reporting of crimes city-wide and in public housing, and other items that may be of mutual interest to the city and/or
housing authority. 
(B) 

Task 1 Subtask 2_Policy and Procedures Manual.

 The grantee shall work with public housing police departments in 11 cities to develop and implement a state of the art
police policy and procedures manual. Where a manual exists, the manual should be edited to the point that relevant
policies, procedures and general orders are clearly defined for public housing services. 
(C) 

Task 1 Subtask 3_Personnel Management System.

 The grantee shall work with public housing police departments in 11 cities to develop and implement a modern police
personnel management system to include recruitment, selection, initial and continuing training, evaluation,
compensation, job descriptions, and promotional systems. The grantee shall also, through focus groups and/or needs
assessment, identify topics for a core curriculum for continuing HA police officer training in areas specific to
HAs, such as vertical patrols, investigative techniques, and sensitivity training. 
(D) 

Task 1 Subtask 4_Fiscal Tracking System.

 The grantee shall work with public housing authorities and housing police departments in 11 cities to develop a consistent
fiscal tracking system that incorporates modern financial management systems into the way the authorities and police
justify and track expenditures. Fiscal planning should be incorporated into the fiscal system so that a procedure
exists to reflect anticipated costs five years into the future. In addition, the grantee shall work with housing authority
officials in 11 cities to identify the source of funding for police and security upgrades and establish timelines
for completion of upgrades. 
(E) 

Task 1 Subtask 5_Emergency Dispatch System.

 The grantee shall work with public housing police departments and municipal police departments in 11 cities to develop
a state of the art emergency dispatch system for public housing residents that reflects the most expeditious way to
provide residents in each of the 11 cities with emergency police response. This task is to include developing recommendations
for assuring communications between public housing police departments and municipal police departments, 911 services,
non-emergency calls, anticipated expenditures by authority for technical upgrades, and training requirements
for officers and dispatchers. 
(F) 

Task 1 Subtask 6_Records Management.

 The grantee shall work with public housing police departments in 11 cities to develop a records management system
that represents state of the art practices in collecting, coding, filing, analyzing and accessing police information.
This task is to include an assessment of computer hardware and software that may be appropriate for use in each city,
interface between records and dispatch in the housing police, interface between municipal police departments and
housing authority police departments, compliance with Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) and/or the National Incident
Based Reporting System (NIBRS) procedures, forms for collecting data, and staffing requirements for the records
function. 
(G) 

Task 1 Subtask 7_Patrol Strategies.

 The grantee shall work with public housing police departments in 11 cities to develop and implement modern police
patrol strategies for public housing police departments to include patrol procedures, vertical patrols, development
of staffing criteria, patrol beat development, response to calls or crimes, proactive strategies, bicycle patrols,
investigation of crimes by patrol personnel, follow-up procedures with victims, stake-out strategies, and use
of crime analysis. 





