 

In calculating actual utilization of units reserved for disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly, units
occupied by elderly families where a member of the family is disabled do not count as part of the required percentage.
Another factor to be considered is that the percentage of units which are reserved under subtitle D for disabled families
who are not elderly or near-elderly is not linked to specific units. 

Since most elderly projects, even when designed for occupancy by seniors, have a portion of the units designed to be
accessible and usable by persons with physical disabilities, there may be a tendency to assume that these ``accessible''
units will be designated to fulfill the required percentage of units reserved for disabled families who are not elderly
or near-elderly. This is not the case. Disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly and therefore qualify
for the units reserved under subtitle D may have any one of a variety of disabilities, many of which will not require
an accessible unit. Thus, in determining whether a project has met its obligation under subtitle D, the relevant factor
is the number of disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly in occupancy, not the units in which they reside.
The accessible units may be occupied by elderly families, or by a mixture of elderly families and disabled families
who are not elderly or near-elderly. Similarly, a project may have reached its required percentage of occupancy by
disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly, and have vacant accessible units. In such case, an owner is
under no obligation to offer these units to disabled families before offering such units to elderly families. However,
the owner must offer such vacant accessible units to current tenants who need any of the accessible features of the
unit before offering it to the first elderly or non-elderly family on the waiting list. In selecting from the waiting
list, the owner can give elderly disabled families who need the accessible unit a preference over elderly non-disabled
families. 

The Department emphasizes that when a vacancy occurs and it is a disabled family's turn to be placed in a project pursuant
to the preference system, the fact that the vacant unit may not be accessible, does not entitle the housing provider
to skip over the disabled family. Where the available unit is not accessible and the disabled family needs an accessible
unit, the housing provider is to accommodate the family, either by (1) making that unit accessible, or (2) by transferring
a tenant who is living in an accessible unit but does not need an accessible unit to the inaccessible unit and offering
the disabled family an accessible unit. 



B. Secondary System of Preferences: Section 653. 



Under the statutory system of preferences, if there are an insufficient number of elderly families to fill vacant
covered section 8 units, an owner may give a secondary preference to disabled families who are near-elderly. Similarly,
if there are an insufficient number of disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly to fill vacant covered
section 8 units reserved for such disabled families, an owner may give a secondary preference to disabled families
who are near-elderly to fill those units. However, in the event that there are an insufficient number of elderly families,
disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly, or near-elderly disabled families to fill vacancies that
occur, the owner must make vacant covered section 8 units generally available to eligible families who apply for housing,
without regard to the statutory system of preferences or reservation of units. 

The statute looks to the Department to establish a standard for determining whether there are an insufficient number
of families to fill vacant units subject to the preferences or reservations established in this interim rule. These
standards are already in place in the existing section 8 regulations. The interim rule provides that before an owner
can determine that there are an insufficient number of families to fill vacant covered section 8 units, an owner must
conduct marketing to attract applicants qualifying for the preferences (including outreach to such applicants)
in accordance with 880.601(a), 881.601(a), 883.702(a), 884.226, or 886.321(a), as applicable. Additionally,
the owner must make a good faith effort to lease to applicants qualifying for the preferences (which must include taking
all feasible actions to fill vacancies by renting to such families), and not reject any such applicant family except
for reasons acceptable to the Department or the contract administrator (in accordance with HUD guidelines). 



C. Waiting Lists 



Owners of covered section 8 housing projects designed primarily for occupancy by elderly families, which are required
to have a percentage of covered section 8 units reserved for disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly
pursuant to section 652, or which have other units available to disabled families pursuant to statutory and regulatory
requirements (e.g., near-elderly disabled families admitted under the secondary preferences of section 653) would
not be able to use this interim rule to remove applicants from a waiting list. Moreover, an owner would have to continue
to select applicants for covered section 8 vacant units in accordance with current HUD procedures with the exception
noted below. 

Procedures presently in effect provide that the applicant's place on the waiting list and the application of preferences
determine the order of selection for admission. Section 655 provides that the existing Federal preferences apply
within each group (i.e. elderly families, disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly, and disabled families
who are near-elderly) to the extent that they currently apply under each applicable multifamily housing program.

6

 Local preferences also are permitted under existing rules. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


6

</FOOTNAME>
For example, an elderly family with a Federal preference would be selected for a vacant unit before an elderly family
without a Federal preference. 

</FOOTNOTE>


However, under this interim rule, if the applicants at the top of the waiting list are disabled families who are not
elderly or near-elderly, and such disabled families currently occupy the full percentage of covered section 8 units
required to be reserved for them under subtitle D, the owner may, but is not required to, skip over the disabled applicants
on the waiting list, and select elderly families for vacant covered section 8 units. The owner would only be required
to select disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly, and who are at the top of the waiting list for vacant
covered section 8 units when: (1) The number of disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly in covered section
8 units drops below the minimum required percentage, (2) the owner has adopted a secondary preference under section
653(a) of the 1992 HCD Act, and there are not sufficient numbers of elderly families or near-elderly disabled families
to fill the elderly units (in accordance with section 654 of the 1992 HCD Act), or (3) the owner has not adopted a secondary
preference under section 653(a), and there are not sufficient numbers of elderly families to fill the elderly units.







