 

3. Dispute Resolution 


Disputes involving highway routing agreements between political jurisdictions within a State are to be resolved
by the State's routing agency. Unresolved disputes involving through highway routing or routing designation agreements
between States or Indian tribes may be submitted to the Administrator for resolution. Details of the dispute shall
be furnished to the Administrator by the petitioner, together with a description of what was done to try to settle it,
plus a recommendation of the actions that should be taken by the Administrator to resolve the dispute. The FHWA has
revised 397.75 of this regulation to clearly set forth the importance of public safety in any routing designation.
The State or Indian tribe filing the petition for dispute resolution shall be responsible for providing a comparative
risk analysis for the proposed routing designation and the current routing condition. Once a dispute is submitted
to the Administrator, no court action may be taken for one year or until after a decision by the Administrator, whichever
occurs first. 


4. Judicial Review of Dispute Decision 


A party to a dispute who is adversely affected by a dispute resolution decision of the Administrator can obtain judicial
review of the decision if such court action is filed within 90 days after the Administrator's decision becomes final.



5. Preemption Determinations and Waivers of Preemption 


On September 24, 1992, the FHWA published an interim final rule (57 FR 44132) amending 49 CFR 397 by adding a subpart
E which established procedures applicable to preemption determinations and waivers of preemption. This final rule
amends subpart E to make these procedures applicable to NRHM routing designations which are now included in subpart
C. 
Any highway routing designation established, maintained or enforced by a State, a political subdivision thereof,
or an Indian tribe is preempted if: 
(1) Compliance with both the highway routing designation and any requirement of chapter 51 of title 49, United States
Code, or of a regulation prescribed thereunder is not possible; 
(2) The highway routing designation, as applied or enforced is an obstacle to accomplishing and carrying out chapter
51 of title 49, United States Code, or the regulations prescribed thereunder; or 
(3) A State or Indian tribe establishes, maintains or enforces any routing designation that does not comply with the
procedural and substantive requirements of the Federal standards set forth in this regulation. 
Any person, including a State, political subdivision thereof, or Indian tribe, affected by a NRHM routing designation
can apply to the Administrator for a determination of whether such routing designation is preempted. 
A State, political subdivision, or Indian tribe may apply to the Administrator for a waiver of preemption. The Administrator
is authorized to waive preemption of a NRHM routing designation, based on a determination that it provides equal or
better protection to the public than these regulations would provide, and it does not unreasonably burden commerce.



Technical Amendments 


Public Law 103272 (108 Stat. 745), enacted on July 5, 1994, codified certain U.S. transportation laws as title
49, United States Code. Like other transportation statutes, the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act was repealed
and its contents restated in title 49. This final rule changes the citations contained in the NPRM to conform to the
provisions of the new law. 





