 



(h) Respiratory protection. 

Revised Paragraph (h) mandates the use of respirators under particular circumstances during asbestos construction
work. As prescribed in the standard, respirators must be worn (1) during all Class I work; (2) during all Class III work
when TSI or surfacing ACM or PACM is being disturbed; (3) during all Class II and III asbestos jobs where wet methods
are not used or where insufficient or inadequate data prevents development of a negative exposure assessment; or
(4) in emergencies. For this final regulatory impact analysis, OSHA identified an additional need for respirators
in new construction, during removal and repair of flooring products, during routine maintenance in general industry,
and during custodial work in industrial, commercial and residential buildings. Respirators were assigned to construction
activities where baseline exposure ranges suggested workers would occasionally exceed the revised PEL. Incremental
compliance costs for respirators were presented above under (c) Permissible exposure limits.



(i) Protective clothing. 

Paragraph (i) in this final rulemaking has been revised such that protective clothing will be required for all Class
I activities and in Class III activities where thermal system insulation or surfacing ACM/PACM is being disturbed
in which a negative exposure assessment has not been produced, in addition to the requirement that clothing be worn
when the PEL or excursion limit (EL) is exceeded. OSHA anticipates an additional need for protective clothing in the
following construction activities where workers may occasionally exceed the PEL:

&bull;A/C pipe installation

&bull;A/C sheet installation

&bull;Remove flooring products

&bull;Repair flooring

&bull;Custodial work in industrial buildings

&bull;Custodial work in public, commercial and residential buildings.

OSHA assumes that to provide protective clothing to employees as required by the standard, employers will minimize
costs by providing to each employee one set of disposable clothing and gloves for each worker-day. For disposal, clothing
can be combined with other contaminated waste and sealed in impermeable bags. Summing incremental costs for protective
disposable clothing, OSHA estimates total costs of $17.9 million associated with revised Paragraph (i). 



(j) Hygiene facilities and practices for employees. 

Revised Paragraph (j) provides for decontamination areas, equipment rooms, showers, change rooms, and lunch areas
for Class I activities. Class II and Class III activities may conduct decontamination in adjacent areas on impermeable
drop cloths, with clothing and equipment cleaned with HEPA vacuums. Decontamination following Class IV activities
must be at least as stringent as required for the class of activity within which the Class IV work is being performed.

OSHA anticipates that Class I hygiene requirements will apply for the first time to boiler repair, pipe repair and
miscellaneous maintenance in general industry. Annual compliance costs will total $5.5 million for equipment and
labor involved with the hygiene facilities in Class I work.

Employers can decontaminate Class II and Class III work using drop cloths and HEPA vacuums, controls required under
(g) Methods of compliance. OSHA's estimated costs for drop cloths and HEPA vacuums were presented above in the discussion
of revised Paragraph (g).

OSHA assumes that decontamination following Class IV work conducted in regulated areas will be provided by the primary
contractor at the job site. Costs for decontamination of Class IV employees, then would be captured by the total decontamination
costs for the activity in the regulated area. In addition, OSHA assumed that drop cloths and HEPA vacuums will be needed
by custodians following higher-risk activities outside regulated areas. Costs for drop cloths and HEPA vacuums
were presented under (g) Methods of compliance, above.



(k) Communication of hazards. 

Revised Paragraph (k) supplements the existing hazard-communication requirements in the asbestos standard by
introducing provisions for notification of building and facility owners, contractors, employees and building
occupants of the presence, location and quantity of asbestos-containing material (ACM) or presumed asbestos-containing
material (PACM). The final revisions to (k) also include training requirements that mirror the training required
under the EPA ASHARA legislation, for employees working around ACM or PACM. Training required under revised Paragraph
(k) appears to strengthen the content of training required under existing (k) by explicitly referencing the EPA Model
Accreditation Plan (MAP) and Operations and Maintenance (OM) worker protection training.

5





<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
Revised Paragraph (k) allows employers to substitute_for Class II activities working with generic building materials_training
suitable to the removal or disturbance of that category of building material. 

</FOOTNOTE>


For this final regulatory impact analysis, OSHA identified incremental compliance costs for employee training
and notifications involving building/facility owners, construction employers, construction employees, and
building occupants. For the purpose of cost estimation, OSHA categorized employee training into three groups: (1)
Classes I and II, (2) Class III, and (3) Class IV.

6

 For each of the three categories of training required by the revised standard, OSHA estimated compliance costs as
follows:



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


6

</FOOTNAME>
Class I training was assumed to require a total of 32 hours, whereas Class II training was assumed to require a total
of 24 hours. Total costs for Class I and Class II training are combined in this discussion.



</FOOTNOTE>

