 

(ii) That the current routing presents a greater risk but less than 50 percent more risk to the public than the deviation
under the proposed routing restriction, then the proposed routing restriction made by a State or Indian tribe shall
only go into effect if it does not force a deviation of more than 25 miles or result in an increase of more than 25 percent
of that part of a trip affected by the deviation, whichever is shorter, from the most direct route through a jurisdiction
as compared to the intended deviation. 
(iii) That the current route has the same or less risk to the public than the deviation resulting from the proposed routing
designation, then the routing designation shall not be allowed. 
(5) Agreement of other States; burden on commerce. Any NRHM routing designation which affects another State or Indian
tribe shall be established, maintained, or enforced only if: 
(i) It does not unreasonably burden commerce, and 
(ii) It is agreed to by the affected State or Indian tribe within 60 days of receipt of the notice sent pursuant to paragraph
(b)(3)(i) of this section, or it is approved by the Administrator pursuant to 397.75. 
(6) Timeliness. The establishment of a NRHM routing designation by any State or Indian tribe shall be completed within
18 months of the notice given in either paragraph (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, whichever occurs first. (7) Reasonable
routes to terminals and other 
facilities. In establishing or providing for reasonable access to and from designated routes, the State or Indian
tribe shall use the shortest practicable route considering the factors listed in paragraph (b)(9) of this section.
In establishing any NRHM routing designation, the State or Indian tribe shall provide reasonable access for motor
vehicles transporting NRHM to reach: 
(i) Terminals, 
(ii) Points of loading, unloading, pickup and delivery, and 
(iii) Facilities for food, fuel, repairs, rest, and safe havens. 
(8) Responsibility for local compliance. The States shall be responsible for ensuring that all of their political
subdivisions comply with the provisions of this subpart. The States shall be responsible for resolving all disputes
between such political subdivisions within their jurisdictions. If a State or any political subdivision thereof,
or an Indian tribe chooses to establish, maintain, or enforce any NRHM routing designation, the Governor, or Indian
tribe, shall designate a routing agency for the State or Indian tribe, respectively. The routing agency shall ensure
that all NRHM routing designations within its jurisdiction comply with the Federal standards in this section. The
State or Indian tribe shall comply with the public information and reporting requirements contained in 397.73.

(9) Factors to consider. In establishing any NRHM routing designation, the State or Indian tribe shall consider the
following factors: 
(i) Population density. The population potentially exposed to a NRHM release shall be estimated from the density
of the residents, employees, motorists, and other persons in the area, using United States census tract maps or other
reasonable means for determining the population within a potential impact zone along a designated highway route.
The impact zone is the potential range of effects in the event of a release. Special populations such as schools, hospitals,
prisons, and senior citizen homes shall, among other things, be considered when determining the potential risk to
the populations along a highway routing. Consideration shall be given to the amount of time during which an area will
experience a heavy population density.
(ii) Type of highway. The characteristics of each alternative NRHM highway routing designation shall be compared.
Vehicle weight and size limits, underpass and bridge clearances, roadway geometrics, number of lanes, degree of
access control, and median and shoulder structures are examples of characteristics which a State or Indian tribe
shall consider. 





