 


(a) Student stipends. 


(b) Tuition and fees. 


(c) Student travel in conjunction with training assignments. 






(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c) and 771a) 



386.33

What are the requirements for grantees in disbursing scholarships? 





(a) Before disbursement of scholarship assistance to an individual, a grantee_


(1)(i) Shall obtain documentation that the individual is_ 


(A) A U.S. citizen or national; or 



(B) A permanent resident of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Palau,
or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands; or 



(ii) Shall confirm from documentation issued to the individual by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service
that he or she_


(A) Is a lawful permanent resident of the United States; or 



(B) Is in the United States for other than a temporary purpose with the intention of becoming a citizen or permanent
resident; and 



(2) Shall confirm that the applicant has expressed interest in a career in clinical practice, administration, supervision,
teaching, or research in the vocational rehabilitation, supported employment, or independent living rehabilitation
of individuals with disabilities, especially individuals with severe disabilities; 



(3) Shall have documentation that the individual expects to maintain or seek employment in a designated State rehabilitation
agency or in a nonprofit rehabilitation, professional corporation, professional practice group, or related agency
providing services to individuals with disabilities or individuals with severe disabilities under an agreement
with a designated State agency; 



(4) Shall reduce the scholarship by the amount in which the combined awards would be in excess of the cost of attendance,
if a scholarship, when added to the amount the scholar is to receive for the same academic year under Title IV of the Higher
Education Act, would otherwise exceed the scholar's cost of attendance; 



(5) Shall limit scholarship assistance to the individual's cost of attendance at the institution for no more than
four academic years except that the grantee may provide an extension consistent with the institution's accommodations
under section 504 of the Act if the grantee determines that an individual has a disability that seriously affects the
completion of the course of study; and 



(6) Shall obtain a Certification of Eligibility for Federal Assistance from each scholar as prescribed in 34 CFR 75.60,
75.61, and 75.62.





(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 18200018.) 






(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c) and 771a(b)) 


386.34

What assurances must be provided by a grantee that intends to provide scholarships? 





A grantee under this part that intends to grant scholarships for any academic year beginning after June 1, 1992, shall
provide the following assurances before an award is made: 



(a) 

Requirement for agreement. 

No individual will be provided a scholarship without entering into a written agreement containing the terms and conditions
required by this section. An individual will sign and date the agreement prior to the initial disbursement of scholarship
funds to the individual for payment of the individual's expenses, such as tuition. 



(b) 

Disclosure to applicants. 

The terms and conditions of the agreement that the grantee enters into with a scholar will be fully disclosed in the
application for scholarship. 



(c) 

Form and terms of agreement. 

Each scholarship agreement with a grantee will be in the form and contain the terms that the Secretary requires, including
at a minimum the following provisions: 



(1) The scholar will_


(i) Maintain employment_ 



(A) In a nonprofit rehabilitation agency or related agency or in a State rehabilitation agency or related agency,
including a professional corporation or professional practice group through which the individual has a service
arrangement with the designated State agency; 



(B) On a full- or part-time basis; and 



(C) For a period of not less than the full-time equivalent of two years for each year for which assistance under this
section was received, within a period, beginning after the recipient completes the training for which the scholarship
was awarded, of not more than the sum of the number of years required in this paragraph and two additional years; and




(ii) Repay all or part of any scholarship received, plus interest, if the individual does not fulfill the requirements
of paragraph (c)(1(i) of this section, except as the Secretary by regulations may provide for repayment exceptions
and deferrals. 



(2) The employment obligation in paragraph (c)(1) of this section as applied to a part-time scholar will be based on
the accumulated academic years of training for which the scholarship is received. 



(3) Until the scholar has satisfied the employment obligation described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the
scholar will inform the grantee of any change of name, address, or employment status and will document employment
satisfying the terms of the agreement. 



(4) Subject to the provisions in 386.41 regarding a deferral or exception, when the scholar enters repayment
status under 386.43(e), the amount of the scholarship that has not been retired through eligible employment
will constitute a debt owed to the United States that_


(i) Will be repaid by the scholar, including interest and costs of collection as provided in 386.43; and 


