 

Fear of reprisal may occur even in situations where a person does not have to provide a name, since in small communities
it might be fairly easy to figure out or at least narrow down the persons likely to have reported the information. In
addition, employees may fear reprisal from their employers should they report possible violations of NPDES statutes,
regulations, or permit conditions. However, such fears may be diminished by the fact that SDCL 34A2111
requires the identity of the complainant to be kept confidential. 



Protection of Agencies and Regulated Community/Favoring Special Interests 



A frivolous claim may place a strain on an organization trying to cooperate. However, the potential for strain is offset
by the potential to promote the general good which complaints may provide the State in identifying and correcting
problems early on. Also, it would seem that there would be few instances of complaints being merely frivolous or harassing.


There is always the chance that actions by governmental entities may be misconstrued by the general public. This is
not a basis for determining a program does not meet the requirements for delegation. However, this is an issue both
the SDDENR and the EPA will be sensitive to as they administer and oversee the NPDES program. 

The State of South Dakota is a sparsely populated state with relatively few industries. Moreover, the existence of
overlapping business and personal networks provides an opportunity for someone removed from a situation to provide
information instead of someone concerned about retaliation from an employer. South Dakota's small population and
overlapping networks may be productive sources of information. These networks can work to the advantage of the NPDES
program in that possible NPDES violations, particularly those affecting surface waters may be reported in connection
with information supplied to other environmental programs. For example, according to the DENR, the DENR Ground Water
program has the lead on spills and contacts the NPDES staff when there is a potential for surface waters to be affected.
The Mining program will generally receive any tips regarding mining problem spills/discharges (e.g. cyanide) and
share them with the NPDES staff. Game Fish  Parks recently referred a case of a discharge without a permit to the
DENR. That agency also uses its own authority when the discharge is in the area of a fishery. All of these programs are
not affected by the prohibition in SDCL 34A2111 and, in the past, have received and forwarded complaints
which also related to NPDES-related activities. 

The concern expressed that information may fall between the cracks is a valid one. It is possible this could occur in
any process for receiving information sources outside the administering office. However, the system established
for investigating and responding to complaints provides that the DENR will investigate and respond to all citizen
complaints where a signed complaint form has been received and will investigate all complaints received from other
government agencies. 



Conclusion 



EPA determines that the procedure South Dakota has established is adequate to comply with the Clean Water Act and with
NPDES federal regulations. South Dakota has established a process to deal with issues raised by the general public
by accepting signed complaints and being required to keep the identity of the source confidential and by referring
other complaints to another State agency. The Governor, as a signatory to the MOA, has committed to follow the process
for receiving and responding to information from sources outside the State NPDES program. 

Though section 111 may not provide an adequate program for public reporting in other states or for other programs,
under the particular circumstances of the DENR NPDES program, the state procedures are adequate for the following
reasons: (1) South Dakota is not heavily industrialized, (2) the prohibition pertains only to water programs and
not other media programs, (3) the state is sparsely populated for the most part, (4) the right of entry (34A246)
is not impaired, (5) the prohibition provision does not appear to be directly enforceable by dischargers, and (6)
the State NPDES program retains the authority to respond in emergencies (see 34A268), to enforce against
persons causing pollution of waters (see 34A221), and to conduct investigations to determine the responsible
person for causing a discharge which may cause or has caused pollution of state waters (see 34A271.1)
regardless of the source of information leading to these actions. 

The situation in South Dakota is such that there are overlapping networks of state agencies and there are active environmental
groups which will identify issues on behalf of their membership and of individuals who communicate information and
concerns to their groups. 

EPA notes that anonymous tips are just one source of complaints, albeit a significant source. The statute does not
place restrictions on any other sources of information or other activities than those defined in 34A240,
44, and 45. 

EPA oversight includes an hotline number (18002278917) to receive complaints from all sources.
Oversight also includes monitoring the DENR process and results from public participation in compliance and enforcement.
If there appears to be a problem, EPA will revisit this aspect of the program with DENR. 




