 

B. Section 618.8270_Travel, Subsistence, and Other Related Expenses 


Commenters generally supported proposed 618.8270, but challenged whether the level of detail in policy and
procedure requirements was necessary. The FCC commended the FCA Board for its openmindedness and willingness to
reconsider the existing requirement for individual disclosure of bank director reimbursable expenses and replace
it with an aggregate disclosure requirement. The FCC and other commenters stated that while it is quite appropriate
for the FCA to require each FCS institution's board to develop written policies concerning the reimbursement of travel,
subsistence, and other related expenses, the details of such policies should be left to each board's discretion.
In their judgment, the degree of detail spelled out in proposed 618.8270(a) constitutes micro-management,
which they believed the current FCA Board was seeking to remove from the regulations. Another commenter responded
that the administrative burden created by the detailed policy requirements, documentation, reporting, and auditing
is not supported by the value, if any, that would be added to the stockholder disclosure process. 
In February 1994, subsequent to publication of the proposed regulations, the FCA Board adopted the previously mentioned
Policy Statement on Regulatory Philosophy (59 FR 32189, June 22, 1994) that stated ``It is the FCA Board's philosophy
to promulgate regulations that are necessary to implement the law and to promote the safety and soundness of the Farm
Credit System.'' One method cited for achieving the FCA Board's regulatory objective was to issue regulations, to
the extent feasible, that specify performance criteria and objectives rather than operational methods for achieving
its purposes. In light of this recently adopted position, the FCA reevaluated proposed 618.8270 and made modifications
accordingly. 
The examples of guidelines and limitations that an institution may consider addressing in their travel policy (i.e.,
modes of transportation; mileage rates for use of personal vehicles and per diem allowances, including maximum or
limitations on lodging, meals and incidental expenses; and telephone calls and any other miscellaneous expenses)
were eliminated from the final rule. The examples cited in proposed 618.8270(a)(2)(i) through (iv) were removed
because many commenters interpreted them as mandatory regulatory requirements. However, the FCA Board continues
to believe that the management of each FCS institution should determine to what extent the individual items cited
as sample guidelines and limitations in the proposed rule are necessary to ensure that the reimbursement of expenses
for directors, officers, and employees is reasonable and 
well-justified. 
Certain aspects of proposed 618.8270 that incorporated, in part, procedures from existing 611.400(b)
and (c) were eliminated from the final rule. The FCA Board believes that such detailed operating procedures should
remain at the discretion of each FCS institution's management rather than be formally prescribed by regulations.
Therefore, all of the procedures in proposed 618.8270(a)(3) and (4) were removed and the basic requirement
for maintaining written records of expense reimbursements was assimilated into final 618.8270(a). 
One commenter recommended that the last sentence in 618.8270(b) referring to ``the personnel authorized
to process reimbursements,'' be amended by substituting ``approve'' for ``process.'' The commenter asserted that
the persons who normally process reimbursements are accounting clerks, and stated that it is not usually part of their
function to attempt to determine whether expenses are appropriate. In an effort to clarify the regulation, the last
sentence was stricken from the final rule. 
Two commenters misinterpreted proposed 618.8270(c) to require that an internal auditor review every expense
claim and record. The FCA has clarified that the regulation only requires an internal auditor to determine whether
the institution's policies and procedures are being consistently followed by testing the reimbursement process
through a sampling of expense claims and records. The final rule reads that ``Each board shall require a review by the
institution's internal auditor (or person designated by the board) of at least a sampling of records maintained ***.''
Furthermore, the requirement for an internal audit review of travel records is now contained in 618.8270(b)
in the final rule. 




