 

(2) Respond to Funding Corporation inquiries and provide any followup information requested by the Funding Corporation
in connection with the preparation of the report to investors in accordance with instructions of the Funding Corporation.


(3) Notify the Funding Corporation promptly of any events occurring subsequent to publication of the report that
may be material either to the financial condition and results of operations of the bank or to the combined financial
condition and results of operations of the bank and its related associations. Furnish the Funding Corporation with
any information necessary to provide interim Systemwide disclosure to investors to make the most recently published
report to investors not misleading. 

(4) Provide in the engagement letter with its external auditor that the external auditor shall, after notifying the
bank, respond to inquiries from the Funding Corporation relating to preparation of the report. 

(5)(i) Certify to the Funding Corporation that: 

(A) All information needed for preparation of the report to investors has been submitted in accordance with the instructions
of the Funding Corporation; 

(B) The information submitted is prepared in accordance with all applicable statutory and regulatory requirements;
and 

(C) The information submitted is true, accurate, and complete to the best of management's knowledge and belief. 

(ii) The certification required by paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section shall be prepared as specified by the Funding
Corporation and shall be manually signed and dated on behalf of the bank by: 

(A) The officer(s) designated by the board of directors to certify the information submitted to the Funding Corporation;
and 

(B) The chief executive officer. 

(d) 

Responsibilities of associations. 

Each association shall: 

(1) Provide its related bank with the information necessary to allow the bank to provide accurate and complete information
regarding the bank and its related associations to the Funding Corporation for preparation of the report. 

(2) Provide in the engagement letter with its external auditor that the external auditor of the association shall,
after notifying the association, respond to inquiries of the related bank pertaining to preparation of the combined
financial data of the association and its related bank. 



630.5 



Prohibition against incomplete, inaccurate, or misleading disclosure. 



Neither the Funding Corporation, nor any institution supplying information to the Funding Corporation under this
part, nor any employee, officer, director, or nominee for director of the Funding Corporation or of such institutions,
shall make or cause to be made any disclosure to investors and the general public required by this part that is incomplete,
inaccurate, or misleading. When any such institution or person makes or causes to be made disclosure under this part
that, in the judgment of the FCA, is incomplete, inaccurate, or misleading, whether or not such disclosure is made
in published statements required by this part, such institution or person shall promptly furnish to the Funding Corporation,
and the Funding Corporation shall promptly publish, such additional or corrective disclosure as is necessary to
provide full and fair disclosure to investors and the general public. Nothing in this section shall prevent the FCA
from taking additional actions to enforce this section pursuant to its authority under title V, part C of the Act. 



630.6 



Farm Credit System audit committee and bank audit committees. 



(a) 

Farm Credit System audit committee. 

(1) The board of the Funding Corporation shall establish and maintain a System Audit Committee and adopt a written
charter describing the committee's composition, authorities, and responsibilities. 

(2) The System Audit Committee shall consist of no fewer than three members. Members shall be independent of management
of any disclosure entity and association and free from any relationship that, in the opinion of the board of directors
of the Funding Corporation, would interfere with the exercise of independent judgment as a committee member. Members
shall be knowledgeable in public and corporate finance, and financial reporting and disclosure. 

(3) The System Audit Committee shall report to the board of the Funding Corporation and shall be given adequate resources
and authorities to discharge its responsibilities, including the ability to consult the Funding Corporation's
legal counsel. 

