 



Response. 

Before using the Standardized NUHOMS, the general 
licensee must evaluate them to ensure the site is encompassed by the design 
bases of the approved cask. The events listed in the comment are among the 
site-specific considerations that must be evaluated. 


The site evaluation for a nuclear plant considers the effects of nearby 
transportation and military activities. It is incumbent upon the user of the 
cask to determine if the SER for the facility encompasses the design basis 
analysis performed for the Standardized NUHOMS or any certified cask. The 
great majority of the aircraft are single-engine propeller airplanes which 
typically weigh on the order of 1,500 to 2,000 pounds. The cask's inherent 
design will withstand tornado missiles and other design loads and also 
provides protection from the collision forces imposed by these light general 
aviation aircraft without adverse consequences. NUREG800, Section 3.5.1.6 
``Standard Review Plan for Light Water Reactors,'' contains methods and 
acceptance criteria for determining if the probability of an accident 
involving larger aircraft (both Military and civilian) exceeds the acceptable 
criterion. It is incumbent upon the licensee to determine whether or not the 
reactor site parameters are enveloped by the cask design basis as required by 
10 CFR 72.212(b)(3). These would include an evaluation demonstrating that the 
requirements of 10 CFR 72.106 have been met. 

Turbine missile analyses typically show a very low probability of a 
turbine missile breaking the turbine casing. The site's turbine missile 
analyses must be considered as part of the facility's analysis of the 
suitability of the storage location. External fires are handled by 
established fire control programs. Explosions are prevented by control of 
combustibles under the licensee's fire protection program. Sabotage is 
considered under the criteria for security programs that each licensee must 
implement. (See also response to comment N.1). 


F.7. 

Comment. 

Several commenters raised issues about the pad and 
foundation for the Standardized NUHOMS. One commenter referred to a previous 
rulemaking that stated that the NUHOMS casks required site-specific approvals 
because they are constructed in place. Other commenters, concerned with 
seismic events at the Davis-Besse Nuclear Power Station and soil stability 
issues similar to cask use at the Palisades Plant, asserted that there was a 
necessary relationship of the Standardized NUHOMS cask or module to the pad at 
a specific site and that evaluation of it could not be based on the reactor 
site seismic analysis. Each site required singular seismic and soil analysis 
for dynamic loads and not just static loads. 


Response. 

The NUHOMS design referred to in the July 18, 1990, 
55 FR 29181, rulemaking includes the site-specific pad as an integral part of 
the concrete HSM and therefore it is important to safety. The Standardized 
NUHOMS considered in this rulemaking have the HSMs as free-standing units; 
that is, they have no structural connections to the pad. The Standardized 
NUHOMS does not rely on the pad to perform a safety function to protect public 
health and safety. The vendor analyzed the HSM containing the DSC for peak 
ground accelerations of 0.25g caused by earthquakes and found that it would 
neither slide nor overturn. NRC evaluated the Standardized NUHOMS under a 
wide range of site conditions that could diminish cask safety. Further, under 
the NRC general license, before using the Standardized NUHOMS a licensee must 
verify that reactor site parameters are within the envelope of conditions 
reviewed by NRC for the cask approval. If potential conditions exist at the 
reactor site (including potential erosion, soil instability, or earthquakes) 
that could unacceptably diminish cask safety by any credible means, the 
licensee's analysis must include an evaluation of the potential conditions to 
verify that impairment of cask safety is highly unlikely. 


The NRC's regulations do not explicitly require a licensee using a cask 
under a general license to evaluate the cask storage pad and foundation under 
such site conditions for erosion or earthquakes. If conditions at the reactor 
site could unacceptably diminish cask safety by affecting the stability of the 
supporting foundation so as to put the cask in an unsafe condition, the cask 
may not be used unless the foundation is appropriately modified or a suitable 
location at the reactor site is found. Implicitly, therefore, the pad and the 
underlying foundation materials must be analyzed under site conditions that 
include erosion, soil instability, and earthquakes, even though the pad has no 
direct safety function and the cask is designed to retain its integrity even 
assuming the occurrence of a range of site conditions. 

The licensee has the responsibility under the general license to 
evaluate the match between reactor site parameters and the range of site 
conditions (i.e., the envelope) reviewed by NRC for an approved cask. 
Typically, the licensee will have a substantial amount of information already 
assembled in the Final Safety Analysis Report (FSAR) for the nuclear reactor. 
In addition, the envelope for the approved cask is identified in the NRC SER 
and Certificate of Compliance and in the cask vendor's SAR for the cask. Of 
course, the licensee should consider whether the envelope evaluated by NRC 
adequately encompasses the actual location of the cask at the reactor site. 
The licensee should also consider whether there are any site conditions 
associated with the actual cask location that could affect cask design and 
that were not evaluated in the NRC safety evaluation for the cask. 





