 

Furthermore, it is important to note the recommendation contained in a 1994 study of marine pipeline safety by the
National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences titled_Improving The Safety Of Marine Pipelines.
The study, co-sponsored by the Minerals Management Services and RSPA, had input from persons in industry, academia,
and state and federal government who are experts in their fields and knowledgeable about the marine pipeline environment,
suggested that: 



*** marine pipelines already constructed be exempted from federal or state requirements for the
use of currently available smart pigs for external or internal corrosion detection. New medium- to large-diameter
pipelines running from platform to platform or platform to shore should be designed to accommodate smart pigs whenever
reasonably practical. 




Accordingly, RSPA denies INGAA's petition to except new offshore gas transmission lines. However, as discussed
below, RSPA has reconsidered benefits associated with the offshore gas transmission lines and proposes to modify
the requirement under 192.150(b)(7) of the final rule with respect to replacements in these lines. 



Proposed Rules 


First, as discussed above in the section titled ``Stay of compliance with line section replacement,'' RSPA proposes
to extend to February 1, 1995, the compliance date with respect to replacements in gas transmission lines. 
Second, RSPA proposes to modify 192.150(b) to add a new exception for replacements in the line sections of existing
gas transmission lines in Class 1 and 2 locations. This exception would be limited to those situations in which an operator,
who wishes to avail itself of the exception, can demonstrate that modifying the line section to accommodate smart
pigs is not feasible, and not needed for future safety. 
The safety prong of this test requires consideration of the operating and maintenance history of the line section.
RSPA expects that the operator will take into account such factors as the reason for the replacement, corrosion history,
leak history, and the risk of outside force damage. For example, if the replacement that triggers the application
of 192.150(a) is required because of corrosion and the line section has a history of corrosion problems, or
if external damage from earth movement is a concern, future safety considerations may require the line section to
accommodate smart pigs. 




