 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO> 21 CFR Part 177</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 91F0449]</RINDOCK>


Indirect Food Additives: Polymers


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending the food additive regulations to provide for the safe use of hydrogenated
butadiene/acrylonitrile copolymers in repeated use food-contact articles. This action is in response to a petition
filed by Polysar Rubber Corp.

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Effective September 7, 1994; written objections and requests for a hearing by October 7, 1994. The Director of the
Office of the Federal Register approves the incorporation by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR
part 51 of a certain publication in 21 CFR 177.2600(c)(4)(i), effective September 7, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit written objections to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Vir D. Anand, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS216), Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St.
SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2024183081.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 In a notice published in the 

Federal Register

 of December 19, 1991 (56 FR 65907), FDA announced that a food additive petition (FAP 2B4299) had been filed by Polysar
Rubber Corp., 1265 South Vidal St., Sarnia, Ontario, Canada N7T 7MI. The petition proposed that the food additive
regulations be amended in 177.2600 

Rubber articles intended for repeated use

 (21 CFR 177.2600) to provide for the safe use of hydrogenated butadiene/acrylonitrile copolymers in repeated use
food-contact articles.


FDA, in its evaluation of the safety of this additive, reviewed the safety of the additive and the chemical impurities
that may be present in the additive resulting from its manufacturing process. Although the additive itself has not
been shown to cause cancer, it has been found to contain minute amounts of unreacted acrylonitrile, a carcinogenic
reactant used in the manufacture of the additive. Residual amounts of reactants and manufacturing aids, such as acrylonitrile,
are commonly found as contaminants in chemical products, including food additives.



 I. Determination of Safety


 Under section 409(c)(3)(A) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C. 348(c)(3)(A), the so-called
``general safety clause'' of the statute, a food additive cannot be approved for a particular use unless a fair evaluation
of the data available to FDA establishes that the additive is safe for that use. FDA's food additive regulations (21
CFR 170.3(i)) define ``safe'' as ``a reasonable certainty in the minds of competent scientists that the substance
is not harmful under the intended conditions of use.''
 The anticancer or Delaney clause (section 409(c)(3)(A) of the act) further provides that no food additive shall be
deemed safe if it is found to induce cancer when ingested by man or animal. Importantly, however, the Delaney clause
applies to the additive itself and not to the impurities in the additive. That is, where an additive itself has not been
shown to cause cancer, but contains a carcinogenic impurity, the additive is properly evaluated under the general
safety clause using risk assessment procedures to determine whether there is a reasonable certainty that no harm
will result from the proposed use of the additive (

Scott

 v. 

FDA

 728 F.2d 322 (6th Cir. 1984)).


 II. Safety of Petitioned Use of the Additive


 FDA estimates that the petitioned use of the additive, hydrogenated butadiene/acrylonitrile copolymer, will result
in exposure to the additive of no greater than 7 parts per trillion (ppt) in the daily diet (Ref. 1). 
 FDA does not ordinarily consider chronic toxicological testing to be necessary to determine the safety of an additive
whose use will result in such low exposure levels (Ref. 2), and the agency has not required such testing here. However,
the agency has reviewed the available toxicological data from acute toxicity studies on the additive. No adverse
effects were reported in these studies.
 FDA has evaluated the safety of this additive under the general safety clause, considering all available data and
using risk assessment procedures to estimate the upper-bound limit of risk presented by acrylonitrile, a carcinogenic
chemical that may be present as an impurity in the additive. This risk evaluation of acrylonitrile has two aspects:
(1) Assessment of the exposure to the impurity from the proposed use of the additive; and (2) extrapolation of the risk
observed in the animal bioassays to the conditions of probable exposure to humans.


 A. Acrylonitrile


FDA has estimated the worst-case exposure to acrylonitrile from the petitioned use of the additive in the manufacture
of repeated use food-contact articles to be 0.02 ppt of the daily diet (3 kilograms) or 0.06 nanogram (ng) per person
per day (Ref. 1). The agency used data from two carcinogenicity studies on acrylonitrile monomer fed to rats to estimate
the upper-bound limit of lifetime human risk from exposure to this chemical stemming from the proposed use of hydrogenated
butadiene/acrylonitrile copolymers and the level of acrylonitrile that may be present in the additive (Ref. 3).
The results of the bioassays on acrylonitrile monomer demonstrated that the material was carcinogenic for rats under
the conditions of the studies. The test material caused significantly increased incidences of carcinogenic tumors
at many tissue sites.

 Based on the estimated worst-case exposure of 0.06 ng per person per day, FDA estimates that the upper-bound limit
of individual lifetime risk from the use of the hydrogenated butadiene/acrylonitrile copolymers is 8 x 10

11 

 or 8 in 100 billion (Ref. 4). Because of the numerous conservative assumptions used in calculating the exposure estimate,
the actual lifetime averaged individual daily exposure to acrylonitrile is expected to be substantially less than
the worst-case exposure, and therefore, the calculated upper-bound limit of risk would be less. Thus, the agency
concludes that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm from exposure to acrylonitrile would result from the proposed
use of hydrogenated butadiene/acrylonitrile copolymers.


B. Conclusion on Safety


 FDA has evaluated data in the petition and other relevant material and concludes that the proposed use of the additive
in repeated use food-contact articles is safe. Based on this information, the agency has also concluded that the additive
will have the intended technical effect. Therefore, 177.2600 should be amended as set forth below.


 C. Need for Specifications


 The agency has also considered whether a specification is necessary to control the amount of acrylonitrile impurity
in the food additive. The agency finds that a specification is not necessary for the following reasons: (1) Because
of the low level at which acrylonitrile may be expected to remain as an impurity following production of the additive,
the agency would not expect this impurity to become a component of food at other than extremely small levels; and (2)
the upper-bound limit of lifetime risk from exposure to this impurity, even under worst-case assumptions, is very
low, less than 8 in 100 billion.
In accordance with 171.1(h) (21 CFR 171.1(h)), the petition and the documents that FDA considered and relied
upon in reaching its decision to approve the petition are available for inspection at the Center for Food Safety and
Applied Nutrition by appointment with the information contact person listed above. As provided in 21 CFR 171.1(h),
the agency will delete from the documents any materials that are not available for public disclosure before making
the documents available for inspection.


 III. Environmental Impact


The agency has carefully considered the potential environmental effects of this action. FDA has concluded that the
action will not have a significant impact on the human environment, and that an environmental impact statement is
not required. The agency's finding of no significant impact and the evidence supporting that finding, contained
in an environmental assessment, may be seen in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.


 IV. Objections


Any person who will be adversely affected by this regulation may at any time on or before October 7, 1994, file with the
Dockets Management Branch (address above) written objections thereto. Each objection shall be separately numbered,
and each numbered objection shall specify with particularity the provisions of the regulation to which objection
is made and the grounds for the objection. Each numbered objection on which a hearing is requested shall specifically
so state. Failure to request a hearing for any particular objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing
on that objection. Each numbered objection for which a hearing is requested shall include a detailed description
and analysis of the specific factual information intended to be presented in support of the objection in the event
that a hearing is held. Failure to include such a description and analysis for any particular objection shall constitute
a waiver of the right to a hearing on the objection. Three copies of all documents shall be submitted and shall be identified
with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document. Any objections received in response to the
regulation may be seen in the Dockets Management Branch between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


 V. References


 The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


 1. Memorandum from the Chemistry Review Branch (HFS247) to the Indirect Additives Branch, FDA (HFS216),
concerning FAP 2B4299 (Polysar Rubber Corp.) and exposure to the food additive and its component (acrylonitrile),
November 24, 1992. 
 2. Kokoski, C. J., ``Regulatory Food Additive Toxicology,'' in 

Chemical Safety Regulation and Compliance

, edited by F. Homburger, J. K. Marquis, and S. Karger, New York, NY, pp.2433, 1985.
 3. Memorandum of the Cancer Assessment Committee, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, FDA, on ``Acrylonitrile
Risk Assessment,'' dated November 24, 1981. 
 4. Memorandum from the Quantitative Risk Assessment Committee, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, FDA,
concerning acrylonitrile (FAP 2B4299), dated April 19, 1993.


 List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 177


 Food additives, Food packaging, Incorporation by reference.
 Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, 21 CFR part 177 is amended as follows:


PART 177_INDIRECT FOOD ADDITIVES: POLYMERS


 1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 177 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 Secs. 201, 402, 409, 721 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 342, 348, 379e).




 2. Section 177.2600 is amended in paragraph (c)(4)(i) by alphabetically adding a new entry to read as follows:



177.2600 

Rubber articles intended for repeated use.


 * * * * *


 (c) * * *
  (4) * * *
  (i) * * *


Hydrogenated butadiene/acrylonitrile copolymers (CAS Reg. No. 88254108) produced when acrylonitrile/butadiene
copolymers are modified by hydrogenation of the olefinic unsaturation to leave not more than 10 percent 

trans

 olefinic unsaturation and no 




,




-olefinic unsaturation as determined by a method entitled ``Determination of Residual 




,




-Olefinic and Trans Olefinic Unsaturation Levels in HNBR,'' developed October 1, 1991, by Polysar Rubber Corp.,
1256 South Vidal St., Sarnia, Ontario, Canada N7T 7MI, which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be obtained from the Division of Petition Control, Center for Food Safety and Applied
Nutrition (HFS215), Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, or may be examined at
the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol St. NW., suite 700, Washington, DC. 


* * * * *


Dated: August 24, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
William K. Hubbard,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Interim Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9421900 Filed 9694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>


