 

When inspection of regulated articles or outdoor household articles reveals gypsy moth, treatment is often necessary.
Treatment is done by qualified certified applicators, which are private businesses that charge, on the average,
$50 to $100 to treat a shipment of articles. Most qualified certified applicators are small businesses. By declaring
an area as a generally infested area, the regulations may increase business for the qualified certified applicator
located in generally infested areas. It is estimated that these businesses will average $50 to $150 per month in additional
income per business. Since the seven counties in Ohio to be regulated contain the metropolitan areas of Akron, Cleveland,
and Toledo, we expect that several hundred shipments containing outdoor household articles will require inspection
to move out of the generally infested area. We anticipate training up to 24 qualified certified applicators to perform
these inspections. 
The majority of direct costs from this rule would be incurred by establishments moving trees or shrubs with roots,
such as nurseries. We estimate that approximately 130 such establishments move approximately 1,050 shipments of
trees and shrubs each year to areas outside the generally infested areas. All of these establishments are believed
to be small entities. These establishments would need to be inspected, either by an inspector or through self-inspection
under a compliance agreement. If the inspection reveals signs of gypsy moth, the establishment would have to be treated
in order to ship regulated articles outside the generally infested area. We estimate that annually, approximately
10 percent of these establishments (13 establishments) will be required to treat the establishment, and that the
average area to be treated will be 17 acres. At an average treatment cost of $10 per acre, the average total annual cost
to each establishment would be $170. 
The Christmas tree industry would also be impacted by this rule change, since Christmas trees moved interstate from
generally infested areas to areas not generally infested would have to be moved under a certificate or permit. We estimate
that there are about 5 Christmas tree producers in the generally infested areas who ship approximately 100 trees each
year to nonregulated areas. All of these establishments are believed to be small entities. Services of an inspector
will be available without charge to inspect the premises and issue certificates and permits. We estimate that 10 percent
of these premises will be found to contain gypsy moth, and will require treatment in order to ship trees. The average
area to be treated is estimated to be 80 acres, and treatment costs are estimated to average $10 per acre. Therefore,
we estimate that the total annual treatment costs for one Christmas tree producer would be approximately $800. 
It is expected that, in most cases, Christmas tree growers would meet the requirements for certification by having
inspectors determine that the plantations where the trees are grown are free from gypsy moth. This alternative would
be less costly than inspecting or treating individual shipments of trees and would minimize the economic impact of
the change to the regulations. 
Under these circumstances, the Administrator of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service has determined that
this action will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. 


Executive Order 12372 


This program/activity is listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance under No. 10.025 and is subject to Executive
Order 12372, which requires intergovernmental consultation with State and local officials. (See 7 CFR part 3015,
subpart V.) 


Executive Order 12778 


This rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. This rule: (1) Preempts all State and
local laws and regulations that are inconsistent with this rule; (2) has no retroactive effect; and (3) does not require
administrative proceedings before parties may file suit in court challenging this rule. 


Paperwork Reduction Act 


In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

), the information collection or recordkeeping requirements included in 301.45 through 301.4512
have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and there are no new requirements. The assigned OMB
control number is 05790088. 


List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 301 


Agricultural commodities, Plant diseases and pests, Quarantine, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Transportation.




Accordingly, 7 CFR part 301 is amended to read as follows: 


PART 301_DOMESTIC QUARANTINE NOTICES 


1. The authority citation for part 301 continues to read as follows: 





Authority:

 7 U.S.C. 150bb, 150dd, 150ee, 150ff, 161, 162, and 164167; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.51, and 371.2(c). 




