 

Rulemaking Analyses and Notices



Executive Order 12866 and DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures



NHTSA has considered the impact of this rulemaking action under E.O. 12866 and the Department of Transportation's
regulatory policies and procedures. This rulemaking document was reviewed under E.O. 12866, ``Regulatory Planning
and Review.'' This action has been determined to be ``significant'' under the Department of Transportation's regulatory
policies and procedures. NHTSA estimates that the annual economic impact of this proposed rule would be between $69
and $92 million. The range reflects cost estimates from NHTSA and the manufacturers, respectively, and baseline
use of technologies as of model year 1992 vehicles. The cost estimates assume adjustable upper anchorages will be
used in the front seat of 4-door vehicles and other vehicles with B-pillars close to the front seat occupant (e.g.,
pickups and vans), and seat-frame-mounted anchorages for the front seat of 2-door vehicles. Child rerouters are
assumed to be used in the rear seats of all vehicles with rear seating positions. If all occupants that currently wear
their belt incorrectly wore their belt correctly, an estimated 33 lives could be saved and 833 moderate to critical
injuries could be reduced annually.



Regulatory Flexibility Act



NHTSA has also considered the impacts of this notice under the Regulatory Flexibility Act. I hereby certify that this
proposed rule would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small businesses. Few, if any,
of the vehicle manufacturers qualify as small entities. To the extent that any affected parties would qualify as small
businesses, the economic impacts associated with this proposal would not be significant, as explained above.



Paperwork Reduction Act



In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96511), there are no requirements for information
collection associated with this proposed rule.



National Environmental Policy Act



NHTSA has also analyzed this proposed rule under the National Environmental Policy Act and determined that it would
not have a significant impact on the quality of the human environment.



Executive Order 12612 (Federalism)



NHTSA has analyzed this proposal in accordance with the principles and criteria contained in E.O. 12612, and has determined
that this proposed rule would not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism
Assessment.



Civil Justice Reform



This notice does not have any retroactive effect. Under section 103(d) of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety
Act (Safety Act; 15 U.S.C. 1392(d)), whenever a Federal motor vehicle safety standard is in effect, a State may not
adopt or maintain a safety standard applicable to the same aspect of performance which is not identical to the Federal
standard, except to the extent that the State requirement imposes a higher level of performance and applies only to
vehicles procured for the State's use. Section 105 of the Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1394) sets forth a procedure for judicial
review of final rules establishing, amending or revoking Federal motor vehicle safety standards. That section does
not require submission of a petition for reconsideration or other administrative proceedings before parties may
file suit in court.



Submission of Comments



Interested persons are invited to submit comments on the proposal. It is requested but not required that 10 copies
be submitted.

All comments must not exceed 15 pages in length. (49 CFR 553.21). Necessary attachments may be appended to these submissions
without regard to the 15-page limit. This limitation is intended to encourage commenters to detail their primary
arguments in a concise fashion.

If a commenter wishes to submit certain information under a claim of confidentiality, three copies of the complete
submission, including purportedly confidential business information, should be submitted to the Chief Counsel,
NHTSA, at the street address given above, and seven copies from which the purportedly confidential information has
been deleted should be submitted to the Docket Section. A request for confidentiality should be accompanied by a cover
letter setting forth the information specified in the agency's confidential business information regulation.
49 CFR part 512.

All comments received before the close of business on the comment closing date indicated above for the proposal will
be considered, and will be available for examination in the docket at the above address both before and after that date.
To the extent possible, comments filed after the closing date will also be considered. Comments received too late
for consideration in regard to the final rule will be considered as suggestions for further rulemaking action. Comments
on the proposal will be available for inspection in the docket. The NHTSA will continue to file relevant information
as it becomes available in the docket after the closing date, and it is recommended that interested persons continue
to examine the docket for new material.

Those persons desiring to be notified upon receipt of their comments in the rules docket should enclose a self-addressed,
stamped postcard in the envelope with their comments. Upon receiving the comments, the docket supervisor will return
the postcard by mail.



List of Subjects in 49 CFR Part 571



Imports, Motor vehicle safety, Motor vehicles.



PART 571_FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARDS



In consideration of the foregoing, it is proposed that 49 CFR Part 571 be amended as follows:






