 

Finally, the heading for 292.24 was edited for clarity to read: ``Determination of compliance and noncompliance.''


Conclusion


Having carefully considered the comments received on the proposed rule, and explained the basis for adopting or not
adopting changes proposed by reviewers, the Department hereby adopts a final rule to ensure that the use and development
of private lands within the Hells Canyon Recreation Area are compatible with the purposes for which Congress established
the Area and its management direction.
The standards established by the final rule are those essential to protection of the Area. The approach adopted is
not one of direct federal regulation of private land but rather one of relying, to the greatest extent possible, on
local zoning authority. The rule gives private landowners notice of those uses that are compatible with the purposes
of the HCNRA, provides a mechanism whereby the landowner and the agency may determine compliance or noncompliance
with the standards of the rule and gives constructive notice to private landowners that incompatible uses of private
land may trigger the use of the Secretary's condemnation authority. Nevertheless this rule is predicated on the premise
that the use of the Secretary's condemnation authority is to be a last resort and that the agency shall make every effort
to work harmoniously and cooperatively with private landowners to ensure protection of the HCNRA.


Regulatory Impact


This final rule has been reviewed under USDA procedures and Executive Order 12866 on Regulatory Planning and Review.
It has been determined that this is not a significant rule. This rule will not have an annual effect of $100 million or
more on the economy nor adversely affect productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety,
nor state or local governments. This rule will not interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency nor raise
new legal or policy issues. Finally, this action will not alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user
fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients of such programs. Accordingly, this final rule
is not subject to OMB review under Executive Order 12866.
Moreover, this final rule has been considered in light of the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), and
it has been determined that this action will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities as defined by that Act. To the extent that the rule imposes additional requirements on any small entity, these
requirements are the minimum necessary to protect the public interest, are not administratively burdensome or costly
to meet, and are well within the capability of small entities to perform.


Takings Implication


Since this rule is premised on the formal exercise of the Secretary's eminent domain authority, it is not an ``action''
as that term is defined in Section 2(c)(1) of Executive Order 12630. Nonetheless, the Office of General Counsel has
reviewed this rule for takings implications and determined that there is no risk of a taking related to this rule or
its implementation.


Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform Act


This rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. Accordingly, (1) all state and local
laws and regulations that are in conflict with this rule or which impede its full implementation are preempted; (2)
no retroactive effect will be given to this rule; and (3) it will not require administrative proceedings before parties
could file suit in court challenging its provisions.


Environmental Impact


This rulemaking was discussed as a proposed rule in the final Environmental Impact Statement and Comprehensive Management
Plan for the Hells Canyon National Recreation Area, pages 155158. The analysis completed for the Comprehensive
Management Plan was revalidated in April 1990 with the signing of the Wallowa-Whitman National Forest Land and Resource
Management (pages 12). Information pertaining to the environmental analysis may be obtained by writing or
calling the persons or offices listed under 

ADDRESSES

 and 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT

.


Information collection requirements


As outlined in the rule at 292.24, a landowner may request an optional compliance determination from the Forest
Service. As such, this rule contains information requirements as defined in 5 CFR Part 1320. These information requirements
are assigned control number 05960135 and are approved for use through March 1997.


List of Subjects in 36 CFR Part 292


Recreation and recreation uses, and National forest.




Therefore, for the reasons set forth in the preamble, part 292 of title 36 of the Code of Federal Regulations, is amended
by adding a new subpart E to read as follows:


PART 292_NATIONAL RECREATION AREAS [AMENDED]


Subpart E_Hells Canyon National Recreation Area_Private Lands


Sec.


292.20Purpose and scope.
292.21Definitions.
292.22Land category assignments.
292.23Standards of compatible land use and development.
292.24Determination of compliance and noncompliance.
292.25Information requirements.





Authority:

 89 Stat. 1117; 16 U.S.C. 460gg460gg13.

