 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The proposed action would bring the Mound Plant Glass Melter out of cold shutdown mode and use it for treating mixed
waste that was generated at the Mound Plant and is now in storage. The Glass Melter, housed in an annex of the Liquid Waste
Disposal Building, consists of a burn chamber of stainless steel (lined with refractory material) with an exhaust
(offgas) system connected to a system of pipes and scrubbers ending in a stack. (Scrubbers are devices that remove
small particles, gasses, and airborne radionuclides generated during thermal treatment.) Waste in sealed drums
would be transported by truck from the Mound Hazardous Waste Storage Building or Radioactive Mixed-Waste Storage
Building to the annex, staged on a concrete loading dock adjacent to the annex, and then moved individually to a fume
hood in the annex where the contents would be transferred into a feed system for processing in the melter. The waste
would be added to molten soda-lime silica glass in the burn chamber of the Glass Melter. Ash from the combustion process
would fall to the glass surface, where it would be incorporated into the melt. When the molten glass would reach a prescribed
chemical mix (or a prescribed level of radioactivity), it would be discharged from the melter into 
19 liter (five gallon) containers. The containers would then be transferred to a storage area in the building using
mechanical aids (e.g., hoists and a roller conveyor system) to cool and to await transport by truck to existing onsite
storage facilities. 



The Glass Melter would have an estimated annual capacity of approximately 48,000 kg (106,000 lb) of wastes, based
on an average throughput of 23 kg/hour (51 lb/hr) and a 2,080-hour work year. As originally proposed by the Department,
and as analyzed in the environmental assessment, operating at this capacity would have enabled DOE to eliminate the
existing backlog of approximately 43,000 kg (95,000 lb) of mixed waste in approximately six years, while processing
hazardous and mixed wastes [approximately 39,000 kg (86,000 lb) annually of nonradioactive solvents and mixed wastes]
as generated. 

Since the environmental assessment was written, DOE has decided to close the Mound Plant. DOE proposes, therefore,
to use the Glass Melter only for the mixed waste backlog. DOE has not yet fully characterized this waste for radioactive
contamination levels. The radiation level of the waste feed would be limited by the need to comply with the Environmental
Protection Agency's National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants and by internal Mound limitations.
If, after characterization, the radiation level of the waste is determined to be low enough that the capacity of the
Glass Melter would be the factor controlling the processing rate, then the schedule for treatment of the backlog waste
could be as short as one year. 

The environmental impacts of the proposed treatment of only the mixed waste backlog are adequately covered, and are
bounded by, the analysis in this environmental assessment, because calculations of radiological exposures and
impacts were based on assumptions of waste radioactivity content that would exceed the actual content under the current
proposed action. (According to the environmental assessment, the mixed waste backlog is estimated to have a total
activity of 211 curies of tritium and 0.42 curies of plutonium-238; the calculations for Glass Melter operations,
however, are based on a total waste activity content of 
240 curies/yr of tritium and 0.48 curies/yr of plutonium-238.) The discussion below, which is based on the environmental
assessment, therefore, would apply equally to 
the new proposed action. If the Department later proposes to use the Glass Melter to 
treat other than mixed waste backlog, it will undertake appropriate further review under the National Environmental
Policy Act. 

Routine operation of the Glass Melter would generate treated offgas, scrubber sludge, scrubber liquid effluent,
and several solid waste streams. The sludge generated by the scrubbing operations [approximately 770 kg (170 lb)
per year] would be transferred by pipeline (1) back to a Glass Melter feed port for reprocessing, (2) to an existing
cementation process for immobilization in concrete, or (3) to container storage for any subsequent additional treatment
required under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) land disposal restrictions. Filtered liquid scrubber
effluent [approximately 36,000 kg (79,000 lb) per year], depending on its composition, would be (1) pumped to an existing
wastewater treatment facility, (2) pumped to the cementation process for immobilization as concrete (if the waste
processed involved significant tritium concentrations), or (3) packaged for any subsequent additional treatment
required under RCRA land disposal restrictions. Most liquid effluent would be treated at Mound's existing radioactive
wastewater treatment facility and released via an existing outfall permitted under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System. 

The Glass Melter would generate, per year, approximately 3,200 kg (7,000 lb) of glass block (mixed waste); 8,900 kg
(20,000 lb) of cementized scrubber effluent and sludge (also mixed waste); and 1,900 kg (4,200 lb) of maintenance
wastes (filters, replacement parts, etc.). (The maintenance wastes will generally be considered mixed waste, although
certain of the replacement parts may have only surface radioactive contamination or may not be hazardous waste.)
The mixed wastes would be stored onsite until a mixed waste disposal facility is available. 




</SUPPLEM>
