 

C. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Comments on the Proposed Rule Change Received from Members, Participants,
or Others



Written comments were not and are not intended to be solicited with respect to the proposed rule change, and none have
been received.



III. Date of Effectiveness of the Proposed Rule Change and Timing for Commission Action



Within thirty-five days of the date of publication of this notice in the 

Federal Register

 or within such longer period (i) as the Commission may designate up to ninety days of such date if it finds such longer
period to be appropriate and publishes its reasons for so finding or (ii) as to which the self-regulatory organization
consents, the Commission will:

(A) by order approve the proposed rule change or

(B) institute proceedings to determine whether the proposed rule change should be disapproved.



IV. Solicitation of Comments



Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and arguments concerning the foregoing. Persons making
written submissions should file six copies thereof with the Secretary, Securities and Exchange Commission, 450
Fifth Street, NW., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of the submission, all subsequent amendments, all written statements
with respect to the proposed rule change that are filed with the Commission, and all written communications relating
to the proposed rule change between the Commission and any person, other than those that may be withheld from the public
in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552, will be available for inspection and copying in the Commission's
Public Reference Section, 450 Fifth Street, NW., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of such filing will also be available
for inspection and copying at the principal office of the above-referenced self-regulatory organization.

All submissions should refer to File No. SROCC9407 and should be submitted by August 10, 1994.




For the Commission by the Division of Market Regulation, pursuant to delegated authority.



<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9417584 Filed 71994; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>






