 

14.2.1(3)Surfaces



Paragraph (3) requires that public sidewalk surfaces be stable, firm, and slip-resistant and lie in a single plane
with minimal warping. It applies the requirements of ADAAG 4.3.8 (Changes in Level) to changes in level, such as those
that may occur between paving squares or at expansion joints, and references ADAAG Fig. 7(c) to illustrate its application
to abrupt changes in level. This paragraph also requires stairs within the public sidewalk to comply with ADAAG 4.9
(Stairs). Paragraph (3) further limits the size of openings in gratings in the public sidewalk in the direction of
travel and prohibits gratings in the continuous passage and limits the vertical and horizontal gaps permitted where
public sidewalks cross railways at grade. 



Comment.

 The NPRM proposed that public sidewalk surfaces be stable, firm and slip-resistant. Several commenters were concerned
about the requirement for slip resistance on public sidewalks, noting that moisture, ice, and snow frequently compromise
pedestrian traction on public rights-of-way, particularly on sloping public sidewalks and public sidewalk curb
ramps. State and local government agencies were concerned about liability in the event of a pedestrian fall if their
public sidewalks were not always slip-resistant because of environmental conditions, particularly snow and ice.




Response.

 These guidelines cover only new construction and alterations and thus can require only that State and local government
entities and their contractors specify slip-resistant surfaces and finishes appropriate for exterior use when
new work is put in place. Operational issues are subject to the Department of Justice regulations implementing title
II of the ADA which require that jurisdictions maintain accessible features (28 CFR 35.133). No change has been made
to this provision.



Comment.

 Several commenters raised concerns that the slopes of the continuous passage and the public sidewalk that contains
it might not be consistent and noted that differences could be hazardous to pedestrians. The California Accessibility
Regulations (title 24 part 2 (1993)) require public sidewalks and public sidewalk curb ramps to have a consistent
slope. Standard details and specifications submitted by several commenters contain similar language.



Response.

 The interim final rule has been changed to include a requirement that new public sidewalks should be consistently
graded. This is standard practice in new construction. In alterations, the warping of a continuous passage may be
necessary to provide a usable route to elements along an existing public sidewalk. Where a public sidewalk in the right-of-way
is contiguous with a paved walk on a site, as is common in urban areas where their design and construction may be undertaken
as part of a single project, ADAAG 14 will apply to the public sidewalk only. Transitions must be smoothly blended.

 


Comment.

 The NPRM proposed that gratings with elongated openings be placed so that the long dimension is perpendicular to the
dominant direction of travel. Several individuals pointed out that gratings in public sidewalks may be located where
pedestrians will cross them in two perpendicular directions, noting that those who use wheelchairs can become stuck
in the long openings in such situations. Commenters reported on the difficulty of turning a wheelchair on grating
surfaces. Several others found gratings hazardous for persons using walkers, crutches, and canes, even when the
gratings comply with ADAAG 4.5.4 (Gratings). An architect noted that urban public sidewalks frequently have large
expanses of gratings over public sidewalk vaults where transformers, utilities, and subway construction occur
below grade. One Department of Transportation regional engineer inquired whether public sidewalk freight elevator
covers and similar appurtenances should be prohibited from the continuous passage. 



Response.

 This provision has been revised to prohibit gratings in the continuous passage in new construction. An appendix note
clarifies that grating proportions or location can be varied to ensure that gratings do not encroach on the required
continuous passage. Openings in gratings can be no greater than 1/2 inch wide when measured perpendicular to the direction
of travel. Where public sidewalks intersect and travel is in two directions, openings may not exceed 1/2 inch in either
direction. Gratings have also been prohibited in landings and public sidewalk curb ramps and in adjacent surfaces
at street crossings (see ADAAG 14.2.4(8)). Elevator covers and similar items located in a continuous passage must
comply with surface requirements. 



Comment.

 A few commenters requested that the guidelines address public sidewalks that cross railways at grade level, citing
projects currently under design. 



Response.

 A provision derived from ADAAG 10 (Transportation Facilities) has been added, limiting the horizontal gap in new
public sidewalk construction to the minimum necessary for passage of wheel flanges, not to exceed 21/2 inches. Horizontal
surfaces must be flush. Although the NPRM did not expressly include this provision, it is taken from ADAAG 10.3.1(13)
(New Construction), which was referenced in the NPRM. The provision at ADAAG 14.2.1(3)(d) represents an exception
to surface requirements that might otherwise preclude public sidewalk construction across rail lines. 


