 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE




National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods; Renewal


Office of the Secretary


<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 94]</RINDOCK>



This notice announces the renewal of the National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods. The
Committee is being renewed in cooperation with the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and was recommended
by a 1985 report of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) Committee on Food Protection, Subcommittee on Microbiological
Criteria, ``An Evaluation of the Role of Microbiological Criteria for Foods.''
USDA is charged with the enforcement of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA), the Poultry Products Inspection Act
(PPIA), and the Egg Products Inspection Act (EPIA). Under these Acts, USDA is responsible for the wholesomeness and
safety of meat, poultry, egg products and products thereof intended for human consumption. Similarly, the Secretary
of HHS is charged with the enforcement of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA). Under this Act, HHS is responsible
for ensuring the safety of human foods and animal feeds.
In order to continue to meet the responsibilities under the FMIA, PPIA, EPIA, and the FFDCA, the National Advisory
Committee of Microbiological Criteria for Foods is being renewed. The Committee will be tasked with advising and
providing recommendations to the Secretaries on the development of microbiological criteria by which the safety
and wholesomeness of food can be assessed, including criteria for microorganisms that indicate whether foods have
been processed using good manufacturing processes.
Renewal of this Committee is necessary and in the public interest because the development of a sound public policy
in this area can best be accomplished by a free and open exchange of information and ideas among Federal, State, and
local agencies; the industry; the scientific community; and other interested parties. The complexity of the issues
to be addressed assures that more than one meeting will be required to accomplish the Committee's tasks.



Members will be appointed by the Secretary of USDA after consultation with the Secretary of HHS. Because of their interest
in the microbiological criteria for foods, advice on membership appointments will be requested from the Department
of Commerce's National Marine Fisheries Service, and the Department of Defense's U.S. Army Natick Research and Development
Center. Nominations for membership are based primarily on expertise in food science, microbiology, and other relevant
disciplines.



For additional information, please contact: Mr. Craig Fedchock, Advisory Committee Specialist, U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service, Room 2151, South Agriculture Building, 14th and Independence
Avenue, S.W., Washington, DC 20250.



Done at Washington, DC, on April 22, 1994.




<SIGNER>
Wardell Townsend, Jr.,



</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Administration.



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9411640 Filed 51294; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3410DMM
</BILLING>


