 

(b) 

Form

. (1) Appeals to the Regional Director shall be submitted on the form designed for regional Appeals (BP10) and
accompanied by one complete copy or duplicate original of the institution Request and response. Appeals to the General
Counsel shall be submitted on the form designed for Central Office Appeals (BP11) and accompanied by one complete
copy or duplicate original of the institution and regional filings and their responses. Appeals shall state specifically
the reason for appeal. 

(2) An inmate may not raise in an Appeal issues not raised in the lower level filings. An inmate may not combine Appeals
of separate lower level responses (different case numbers) into a single Appeal. 

(3) An inmate shall complete the appropriate form with all requested identifying information and shall state the
reasons for the Appeal in the space provided on the form. If more space is needed, the inmate may use up to one letter-size
(81/2
&rsquo;
&rsquo;&times;11
&rsquo;
&rsquo;) continuation page. The inmate shall provide two additional copies of any continuation page and exhibits
with the regional Appeal, and three additional copies with an Appeal to the Central Office (the inmate is also to provide
copies of exhibits used at the prior level(s) of appeal). The inmate shall date and sign the Appeal and mail it to the
appropriate Regional Director, if a Regional Appeal, or to the National Inmate Appeals Section, Office of General
Counsel, if a Central Office Appeal (see 28 CFR part 503 for addresses of the Central Office and Regional Offices).




542.16 

Assistance. 



(a) An inmate may obtain assistance from another inmate or from institution staff in preparing a Request or an Appeal.
An inmate may also obtain assistance from outside sources, such as family members or attorneys. However, no person
may submit a Request or Appeal on the inmate's behalf, and obtaining assistance will not be considered a valid reason
for exceeding a time limit for submission unless the delay was caused by staff. 

(b) Wardens shall ensure that assistance is available for inmates who are illiterate, disabled, or who are not functionally
literate in English. Such assistance includes provision of reasonable accommodation in order for an inmate with
a disability to prepare and process a Request or an Appeal. 



542.17 

Resubmission. 



(a) 

Rejections

. The Coordinator at any level (CCM, institution, region, Central Office) may reject and return to the inmate without
response a Request or an Appeal that is written in a manner that is obscene or abusive, or does not meet any other requirement
of this part. 

(b) 

Notice. 

When a submission is rejected, the inmate shall be provided a written notice, signed by the Administrative Remedy
Coordinator, explaining the reason for rejection. If the defect on which the rejection is based is correctable, the
notice shall inform the inmate of a reasonable time extension within which to correct the defect and resubmit the Request
or Appeal. 

(c) 

Appeal of rejections. 

When a Request or Appeal is rejected and the inmate is not given an opportunity to correct the defect and resubmit, the
inmate may appeal the rejection, including a rejection on the basis of an exception as described in 542.14(d),
to the next appeal level. The Coordinator at that level may affirm the rejection, may direct that the submission be
accepted at the lower level (either upon the inmate's resubmission or direct return to that lower level), or may accept
the submission for filing. The inmate shall be informed of the decision by delivery of either a receipt or rejection
notice. 



542.18 

Response time. 



If accepted, a Request or Appeal is considered filed on the date it is logged into the Administrative Remedy Index as
received. Once filed, response shall be made by the Warden or CCM within 20 calendar days; by the Regional Director
within 30 calendar days; and by the General Counsel within 40 calendar days. If the Request is determined to be of an
emergency nature which threatens the inmate's immediate health or welfare, the Warden shall respond not later than
the third calendar day after filing. If the time period for response to a Request or Appeal is insufficient to make an
appropriate decision, the time for response may be extended once by 20 days at the institution level, 30 days at the
regional level, or 20 days at the Central Office. Staff shall inform the inmate of this extension in writing. Staff
shall respond in writing to all filed Requests or Appeals. If the inmate does not receive a response within the time
allotted for reply, including extension, the inmate may consider the absence of a response to be a denial at that level.




542.19 

Access to indexes and responses. 



Inmates and members of the public may request access to Administrative Remedy indexes and responses, for which inmate
names and Register Numbers have been removed, as indicated below. Each institution shall make available its index,
and the indexes of its regional office and the Central Office. Each regional office shall make available its index,
the indexes of all institutions in its region, and the index of the Central Office. The Central Office shall make available
its index and the indexes of all institutions and regional offices. Responses may be requested from the location where
they are maintained and must be identified by Remedy ID number as indicated on an index. Copies of indexes or responses
may be inspected during regular office hours at the locations indicated above, or may be purchased in accordance with
the regular fees established for copies furnished under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).

 


<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9424362 Filed 93094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 441005P
</BILLING>


