 




<DOCTITLE>Meeting of Panel/Request for Public Comment </DOCTITLE>



The fifth, and probably final, meeting of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Human Embryo Research Panel will
be held June 2122 from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. each day at the Holiday Inn Bethesda, 8120 Wisconsin Avenue, Bethesda,
Maryland. The Panel is a group of special consultants to the Advisory Committee to the Director (ACD), NIH, established
to recommend guidelines for Federal funding of research involving the 

ex utero

 human embryo resulting from 

in vitro

 fertilization or other sources. At the June meeting, the Panel will work toward the resolution of outstanding issues
and review a draft report of its findings and conclusions. 


Background


Research involving the 

ex utero 

human embryo has many potential scientific and therapeutic benefits. Among the most direct and immediate possible
gains are the treatment of infertility and the advancement of preimplantation diagnosis of genetic and chromosomal
abnormalities. Other research focusing on the processes of fertilization and implantation could clarify the causes
of infertility. Studies of normal and abnormal early embryonic development could enhance understanding of the causes
of pregnancy loss, birth defects, and the mechanisms of uncontrolled cell growth that occur in cancer. Other research
efforts could be applied to the development of novel contraceptives. In the longer term, research on embryonic stem
cells could have therapeutic applications in a broad range of areas, including bone marrow transplantation, repair
of damaged tissues, and treatment of degenerative diseases of the nervous and muscular systems. 
The NIH has received a number of applications for support of research involving the 

ex utero

 human embryo as well as research involving parthenogenesis (the initiation of development of an ovum without sperm).
Before proceeding with the consideration of specific human embryo research proposals for funding, the NIH must address
the profound moral and ethical issues raised by the use of human embryos in research and develop guidelines to govern
the review and conduct of Federally-funded research. The Human Embryo Research Panel was established to assist the
NIH in this effort. The Panel's charge is to consider various areas of research involving the 

ex utero

 human embryo and provide advice as to those areas it views to be acceptable for Federal funding, areas that warrant
additional review, and areas that are unacceptable for Federal support. For those areas of research considered acceptable
for Federal funding, the Panel will recommend specific guidelines for the review and conduct of this research. Issues
related to human germ-line gene modification are not within the Panel's purview. The Panel's final report will be
presented to the ACD for review. 
During part of its first and second meeting, the Panel reviewed the wide range of scientific and human health benefits
that could result from governmental support of research involving the 

ex utero

 human embryo. At the third meeting, Panel deliberations focused on issues related to the moral status of the human
embryo and acceptability of areas of 

ex utero 

human embryo research; ethically acceptable sources of human embryos and oocytes, including informed consent requirements,
issues raised by compensation of sperm/egg providers, and concerns regarding commercialization; and, appropriate
mechanisms/levels of review of research proposals involving the 

ex utero 

human embryo. The fourth meeting of the Panel was devoted to the consideration of a preliminary draft of proposed guidelines.



Public Comment Process


The NIH continues to seek public comment on these and other issues raised by Federal funding of human embryo research
and encourages interested individuals and organizations to share with the Panel their views and perspectives on
these important matters. Those who wish to submit written comments of any length should forward these to Steven Muller,
Ph.D., Chair, NIH Human Embryo Research Panel,
 c/o National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Building 

#

1, room 218, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. 
Each meeting of the Panel has also provided an opportunity for interested individuals and organizations to make brief
oral presentations to the Panel. To register to make an oral statement before the Panel, individuals and organizations
should contact Ms. Peggy Schnoor at the NIH by telephoning 3014961454 or by sending a facsimile message
to 3014020280 or 3014021759. Oral statements must not exceed five minutes in length,
and a copy of the remarks should be forwarded to the above address one week in advance of the scheduled presentation
date. Opportunities to present statements are limited and will be determined by the order in which requests are received.


The NIH will endeavor to provide seating for all members of the public who wish to attend the meetings. To ensure that
adequate seating is available for the public, individuals interested in attending the meeting are asked to notify
the NIH by using the telephone or facsimile numbers listed above. Individuals who require special accommodations
are also asked to contact Ms. Schnoor at the above number. General questions about the Panel or future meetings should
also be directed to Ms. Schnoor.



Dated: May 20, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Ruth L. Kirschstein, M.D.,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Director, NIH.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413484 Filed 6294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 414001P
</BILLING>


