 

<TABLE>




Table IV

10._

Estimates of Risk For Nonsmoking Workers Exposed to ETS at the Workplace

1,2

 

1
1Annual risk2

1Lifetime occupational risk3



Lung cancer
0.010.02
0.41
Heart disease
0.150.36
716

1Risks are expressed as number of cases per 1,000 workers at risk.

2The annual risk for nonsmoking workers is estimated assuming the proportion of nonsmoking workers exposed to ETS
at the workplace ranges from 18.81 to 48.67.

3Assumes 45 years of occupational exposure and is calculated as 1(1p)45, where p is the annual risk.

</TABLE>


E. OSHA's Risk Estimates_Indoor Air Quality


Adverse health effects associated with poor IAQ are described as Building-Related Illness (BRI) and Sick Building
Syndrome (SBS). SBS related conditions are not easily traced to a single specific substance, but are perceived as
resulting from some unidentified contaminant or combination of contaminants. Symptoms are relieved when the employee
leaves the building and may be reduced by modifying the ventilation system.
Research in Britain [Ex. 444], Denmark [Ex. 4284] and the United States [Ex. 3745] indicates
that about 20% of all office workers are afflicted with such symptoms. If the 20% level were to be considered as ``background'',
a simple approach would be to determine that any building, more than 20% of whose occupants report the symptoms, would
be considered to be ``sick''. However, the question then arises as to how much greater than 20% would the incidence
have to be to be considered excess and how would one address such issues as statistical significance for any one building.
Furthermore, the definition used in assessing symptom occurrence can cause substantial variations in estimating
symptom prevalence, even in the same building. The problem with many investigations of ``sick'' buildings is that
rarely have ``non-sick'' or control buildings been used to determine background prevalence of the symptoms. Until
now, it appears that limited research has been done to address the issue of background levels of symptoms. OSHA seeks
input on data sources to address expected background levels of SBS related conditions. 
Mendell and Smith [Ex. 4218] examined symptom reports compiled in a number of individual studies for a number
of buildings which had different types of ventilation. On the basis of the information gathered in the individual
studies, Mendell and Smith compared the prevalence of sick building symptoms in buildings with five types of ventilation:
natural only; fans only; air conditioned with no humidification; air conditioned with steam humidification; and
air conditioned with water-based humidification. Overall, they found the prevalence of work-related headache,
lethargy, upper respiratory/mucous membrane, lower respiratory and skin symptoms significantly increased in
buildings with any type of air conditioning as compared to buildings with no air conditioning. Thus, according to
this analysis, a basic problem with SBS appears to reside in the air conditioning system or, in some building aspect
associated with the presence of air-conditioning. 
Building-related illness (BRI) describes those specific medical conditions of known etiology which can often be
documented by physical signs and laboratory findings. Symptoms may or may not disappear when the employee leaves
the building. Currently, OSHA does not have any data on BRI related symptoms to conduct a quantitative risk assessment.

The number of cases of illness in the United States related to poor indoor air quality has not yet been quantified; however
OSHA has made an attempt to develop a preliminary risk estimate of SBS using a similar methodology as was done for ETS.
The National Health Interview Survey was the primary data source for U.S. population frequency rates for acute upper
respiratory symptoms other than the common cold, influenza, acute bronchitis, and pneumonia and frequency rates
on severe headaches other than migraines. For this preliminary risk assessment, OSHA used the reported frequency
rates as representative of population incidence rates for upper respiratory conditions and severe headaches. OSHA
seeks comment on the use of frequency data in place of incidence data. 
Observed relative risks for comparable conditions were estimated by Mendell [Ex. 4219]. Mendell's data source
was the California Healthy Building Study. This study surveyed a representative sample of 12 public office buildings
in Northern California to ascertain the occurrence of work-related symptoms associated with air-conditioned office
buildings. All buildings were either smokefree or had separately ventilated designated smoking areas. The sample
included 6 buildings with air- conditioning systems, 3 buildings with mechanical ventilation and no air-conditioning,
and 3 buildings with natural ventilation. The study included 880 workers. Mendell estimated relative risks for several
building related symptoms and a subset of these estimates are shown in Table IV11. In an effort to define comparable
symptoms between the reported national statistics from NHIS and Mendell's study and for computational ease OSHA
grouped ``runny nose'', ``stuffy nose'', ``dry/irritated throat'', and ``dry/irritated/itching eyes'' as upper
respiratory/mucous membrane symptoms. Mendell reported relative risks for upper respiratory conditions and frequent
headaches in air-conditioned buildings as compared to naturally ventilated buildings. The relative risk for frequent
headaches was reported to be 1.5. For upper respiratory conditions, such as ``stuffy nose'', ``runny nose'', etc.,
the relative risks ranged from 1.4 to 1.8. OSHA used 1.4 as an observed relative risk for upper respiratory conditions.

CDC reports in the ``Current Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey, 1992'' that the annual rate for
severe headaches, requiring medical attention or activity restriction, is at least 5 per thousand and the rate for
upper respiratory conditions is at least 9 per thousand. In addition, it is estimated that the proportion of office
buildings in the U.S. with air-conditioning is 70 percent (see Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis section).
Using the above information and the same methodology as described in section IV-D, OSHA estimated that the lifetime
excess burden for severe headaches experienced in air-conditioned office buildings is 57 per one thousand exposed
employees and the lifetime risk for acute upper respiratory conditions is 85 per one thousand exposed employees.
OSHA's risk estimates for indoor air are shown in Table IV12. OSHA used data derived from a study of air-conditioned
office buildings to make an assessment of the occupational risk in all air-conditioned buildings. Furthermore,
OSHA made an implicit assumption that an increase in work-related headaches associated with an air-conditioned
office environment occurs in the same proportion as headaches which can be severe enough to affect work activity.
OSHA seeks comment on the applicability of the Mendell study for estimating occupational risk in air-conditioned
buildings due to poor indoor air quality. In addition, OSHA seeks comment on its methodology of developing annual
and lifetime risk estimates attributable to occupational exposures. 


