 

(9) Negotiation in lieu of competitive bidding of borrowers' contracts.

(10) Award of contracts for construction of purchase of material and equipment with fewer than three bids.

(11) Long-range engineering plans.

(12) Borrowers' environmental reports.

(13) Amendments to all types of power supply contracts or agreements including extensions of time to existing contracts
and superseding contracts with no significant changes; the addition of new delivery points; and modification of
existing delivery points between distribution borrowers and non-REA borrower power suppliers, except where facilities
are subject to a power survey or certification by REA.

(14) Final statements of engineering fees requiring REA approval, except for generation facilities.

(c) In addition, all other authorities of an engineering nature pertaining to distribution and transmission conferred
upon other persons in 1700.130.



1700.126 

Chiefs, Area Operations Branches.



The Chiefs, Area Operations Branches in conformance with applicable regulations and REA policy are delegated authority
to approve or execute for the electric program's distribution borrowers:

(a) The following matters with unpaid and outstanding distribution loans.

(1) Affidavits, certificates, filings, and confirmation statements with respect to the recording, filing or renewing
of security instruments, including financing statements under the Uniform Commercial Code of the applicable state.

(2) Municipal and county franchises, licenses, ordinances, and permits to construct or operate facilities obtained
by borrowers as required by its security instruments.

(3) Notice of clearance of REA loan documents.

(b) Matters concerning borrower facilities, organization, or corporate status:

(1) Sales and leases of borrower's capital assets involving transactions in amounts of $500,000 or less, except for
facilities subject to power supply surveys or certification by REA.

(2) Partial releases of lien, associated with sales of a borrower's capital assets, involving transactions in amounts
of $500,000 or less.

(3) Approval of large retail power contracts which have not been delegated to the General Field Representatives_Electric.



1700.127

 Director_Power Supply Division.



The Director_Power Supply Division in conformance with applicable Regulations and REA policy is delegated authority
to approve or execute for the electric program's power supply borrowers:

(a) Approval of the following loans, loan guarantees, and loan documents:

(1) Approval of insured loans, loan guarantees, and lien accommodations or subordinations in amounts of less than
$10,000,000 for power supply borrowers, except for those approvals reserved for the Administrator in 1700.72(a).

(2) All certifications and findings required by the RE Act or other applicable laws and regulations, the placing and
releasing of conditions precedent to the advance of funds, and all mortgages, loan contracts or other documents relating
to the delegations set forth in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

(b) The following matters for unpaid and outstanding loans:

(1) Rescission of loans or termination of loan guarantee commitments when the amount of the rescission or termination
is $10,000,000 or less, except for discretionary or operating loans.

(2) Requests to extend the period for advancing loan funds when the amount of unadvanced loan funds is $10,000,000
or less, except for:

(i) Requests from borrowers that are delinquent in their loan payments to REA, loans guaranteed by REA or in litigation
that may affect loan security.

(ii) Requests that do not fully comply with the requirements specified in REA regulations.

(iii) Cases where the Administrator has further reserved this authority.

(3) Execution of basis date agreements for all approved requests to extend the period for advancing loan funds.

(4) Loan budget adjustments (reclassifications or transfers) except when such adjustments would provide funds
for:

(i) Changes in generation and transmission facilities that are subject to a power survey or certification by REA.

(ii) Any proposed change for more than $10,000,000.

(iii) Any proposed operating costs.

(5) Advance of loan funds under ``stop orders'' and ``special conditional agreements'' when the conditions have
been met, except when the borrower is delinquent in its loan payments to REA, loan guaranteed by REA or when the borrower
is in litigation which may affect loan security or the Administrator has reserved this authority.

(6) Imposition of special controls on the advance of loan funds when it has been determined that loan feasibility may
be jeopardized.

(7) Approval of prepayments in accordance with 7 CFR part 1786 and all related documents.

(8) Complete releases of lien when a borrower has paid in full its indebtedness.

(9) Approval of mortgages for refinancing transactions, regardless of amount.

(c) Matters concerning borrower facilities, organization, or corporate status:

(1) Agreements between electric borrowers for operation of facilities.

(2) Management and operating agreements between electric borrowers and subsidiary organizations engaged in rural
development activities.

(3) Sales and leases of borrowers' capital assets involving transactions in amounts of $10,000,000 or less and the
related releases of lien.






