 

(2) If, after reviewing the record, the district director determines that the applicant has adequately rebutted
the grounds for reopening but, after such determination, obtains additional evidence of the grounds set forth in
paragraph (a) of this section, the Service may not seek further action regarding reopening of the application, but
instead may pursue revocation proceedings under section 340(a) of the Act.
(f) 

Judicial review.

 If a decision of the Office of Examinations, Administrative Appeals Unit, is adverse to the applicant, the applicant
may seek judicial review in accordance with section 310 of the Act.
(g) 

Effect of final decision of denial upon applicant's status.

 (1) A decision to reopen a naturalization proceeding and to deny naturalization shall be effective as of the date of
the original order purporting to admit the applicant to citizenship. The order purporting to admit the applicant
to citizenship shall then have no legal effect.
(2) A district director's decision to reopen naturalization proceedings and to deny naturalization will be final,
unless the applicant seeks administrative or judicial review within the period specified by law or regulation.
(3) When a decision to reopen naturalization proceedings and to deny naturalization becomes final, the district
director shall order the applicant to surrender his or her certificate of naturalization. The district director
shall then cancel the certificate of naturalization.
(4) Notwithstanding the service of a notice of intent to reopen naturalization proceedings and to deny naturalization,
the applicant shall be considered to be a citizen of the United States until a decision to reopen proceedings and deny
naturalization becomes final.
(h) 

Applicant's request for reopening or modification of application.

 After having been granted naturalization and administered the oath of allegiance and renunciation, an applicant
may move that the Service reopen his or her naturalization application for the purpose of amending the application
in accordance with 334.5 of this chapter.


340.11

[Redesignated as 340.2 and revised]


3. Section 340.11 is redesignated as 340.2 and is revised to read as follows:


340.2

Revocation proceedings pursuant to section 340(a) of the Act.


(a) 

Recommendation for institution of revocation proceedings.

 Whenever it appears that any grant of naturalization may have been illegally procured or procured by concealment
of a material fact or by willful misrepresentation, the facts shall be reported to the district director having jurisdiction
over the naturalized person's last known place of residence in the United States. If the district director is satisfied
that a prima facie case exists for revocation pursuant to section 340(a) of the Act, he or she shall report the facts
in writing to the Assistant Commissioner, Adjudications, with a recommendation regarding the institution of revocation
proceedings.
(b) 

Recommendation for criminal prosecution.

 If it appears to the district director that a case described in paragraph (a) of this section or one in which a final decision
has been reached under 340.1(g) is amenable to criminal penalties under 18.U.S.C. 1425 for unlawful procurement
of citizenship or naturalization, the district director may present such facts to the appropriate United States
Attorney for possible criminal prosecution.
(c) 

Reports.

 It shall be the responsibility of the district director to advise the Service office that originated the information
upon which the revocation inquiry is based about the progress of the investigation, and report the findings of the
inquiry as soon as practicable.



Dated: May 19, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Doris Meissner,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Commissioner, Immigration and Naturalization Service.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9418370 Filed 72794; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 441010M
</BILLING>

