 

Although District 2 producers and handlers usually face competition from non-regulated areas during much of their
shipping season, it is important that handling requirements apply to shipments from that district to protect the
good quality image enjoyed by South Texas onions in the marketplace and promoted by the committee's market development
program. In the absence of quality and inspection requirements, low quality onions from District 2 could be shipped.
Such shipments could negatively effect the South Texas industry's market development efforts and quality image.
Also, in the interest of equity and uniform regulation application, it is desirable that handlers from District 2
pay assessments in support of these activities. Assessments paid have helped to provide an on-going production research
program that has benefitted the entire industry with the development of new onion varieties and new cultural techniques,
as well as an effective market development program that helps increase sales. Therefore, these comments are denied.

The three remaining comments were from the South Texas Onion committee, Mr. John R. Bearden, and Mr. B. L. Lackey. These
comments stated that if the rule is not adopted by April 1, the anticipated beginning of the red onion harvesting and
shipping season, poor quality red onions will be dumped on the market, thereby diminishing consumer confidence and
depressing the market for South Texas onions. After evaluating the comments, the Department has decided to implement
the committee's recommendation as proposed, and make the final rule effective upon publication in the 

Federal Register

. 
Based on available information, the Administrator of the AMS has determined that this action will not have a significant
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. 
Section 8(e) of the Act requires that whenever grade, size, quality or maturity requirements are in effect for onions
under a domestic marketing order, imported onions must meet the same or comparable requirements, subject to concurrence
by the United States Trade Representative. Because this rule establishes grade, size, quality and maturity requirements
on red onions and changes the regulatory period under the South Texas onion marketing order, corresponding changes
are needed in the onion import regulation. Such changes have been addressed in a separate onion import rule. 
The information collection requirements contained in the referenced sections have been previously approved by
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the provisions of 44 U.S.C. chapter 35 and have been assigned OMB number
05810074. 
After consideration of all relevant material presented, including the proposal submitted by the committee, comments
received, and other information, it is hereby found that this regulation, as hereinafter set forth, will tend to effectuate
the declared policy of the Act. It is further found that good cause exists for not postponing the effective date of this
section until 30 days after publication in the 

Federal Register

 because (1) the shipping season for onions has already begun and for maximum effectiveness this rule should apply
to as many shipments as possible; (2) the proposed rule was discussed at an open public meeting, and all interested
persons had an opportunity to voice concerns; and (3) there are no special preparations required of the handler that
cannot be completed by the effective date. 


List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 959 


Marketing agreements, Onions, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 7 CFR part 959 is hereby amended as follows: 
1. The authority citation for 7 CFR part 959 continues to read as follows: 





Authority:

 7 U.S.C. 601674. 


PART 959_ONIONS GROWN IN SOUTH TEXAS 


2. In 959.322, the introductory paragraph is revised to read as follows: 


959.322 

Handling regulation. 


During the period beginning March 1 and ending June 15, no handler shall handle any onions unless they comply with paragraphs
(a) through (d) or (e) or (f) of this section. In addition, no handler may package or load onions on Sunday during the
period March 1 through May 20. 


* * * * * 


Dated: April 8, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Robert C. Keeney,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Director, Fruit and Vegetable Division.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948890 Filed 41194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341002P
</BILLING>


