 

IV. Regional Educational Advising Consultancy



The fourth part of the proposal should contain details on the Regional Educational Advising Consultancy (REAC) for
Mexico and Central America. Funding for the REAC should be contained within the $130,000 budget. The Agency recommends
that the person(s) dedicated to the REAC work a minimum of 20 hours per week. The REAC would service overseas educational
advising centers in Mexico and Central America. The objective of the REAC is to:

1. Attain widespread recognition as the regional resource center for educational advising;

2. Encourage regional communication and networking among Mexican and Central American advising centers;

3. Foster information sharing through such means as the development and sharing of materials (i.e., advising handouts),
a regional newsletter, workshops, electronic mail, Internet, etc.;

4. Provide advice to advising centers on how to conduct regional and in-country workshops, pre-admission and pre-departure
orientation sessions, outreach activities, etc.

5. Provide needs assessments, training, and professional development for the educational advisers in the region
as necessary.

Please note that travel within the region for needs assessments and consultations, must be arranged by means of an
annual request (via cable) to the educational advising centers via the USIS office in each country.



Proposed Budget



Applicants must submit a comprehensive line-item budget for which specific details are available in the application
packet. The budget should not exceed $130,000, including the REAC. The applicant should submit separate line-item
budgets for the Educational Advising Center in Mexico City and for the REAC.

Cost-sharing is encouraged. Cost-sharing may be in the form of allowable direct or indirect costs. The recipient
must maintain written records to support all allowable costs which are claimed as being its contribution to cost participation,
as well as cost to be paid by the Federal government. Such records are subject to audit. The basis for determining the
value of cash and in-kind contributions must be in accordance with OMB Circular A110, Attachment E. Cost sharing and
matching should be described in the proposal. In the event the recipient does to provide the minimum amount of cost-sharing
as stipulated in the recipient's budget, the Agency's contribution will be reduced in proportion to the recipient's
contribution.

The recipient's proposal shall include the cost of an audit that: (1) Complies with the requirements of OMB Circular
No. A133, Audits of Institutions of Higher Education and Other Nonprofit Institutions; (2) complies with
the requirements of American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) Statement of Position (SOP) No.
929; and (3) includes review by the recipient's independent auditor of a recipient-prepared supplemental
schedule of indirect cost rate computation, if such a rate is being proposed.

The audit costs shall be identified separately for: (1) Preparation of basic financial statements and other accounting
services; and (2) preparation of the supplemental reports and schedules required by OMB Circular No. A133,
AICPA SOP 929, and the review of the supplemental schedule of indirect cost rate computation.

Applicants should refer to the application package for a list of allowable costs.






