 

Many people have expressed confusion regarding the relationship between the safe harbor for discounts and the statutory
exception for discounts. (See section 1128B(b)(3)(A) of the Act.) Specifically, we are asked if there are any practices
involving discounts which were protected by Congress under the statutory exception which do not fit within the safe
harbor for discounts. Our intention is that 

all

 the discounts or reductions in price that Congress intended to protect under the statutory exception for discounts
are protected under the safe harbor for discounts. Moreover, as is illustrated by the discussion above regarding
discounts to beneficiaries, we are proposing to expand the safe harbor for discounts to include additional practices
that we do not consider abusive.

In the preamble to the final regulation, we stated that when reporting a discount, one only need report the actual purchase
price and note that it is a ``net discount'' (56 FR 35981). However, for purposes of submitting a claim or request for
payment, what is necessary is that the value of the discount is accurately reflected in the actual purchase price.
It is not necessary to distinguish whether this price is the result of a discount, or to state ``net discount.'' Consequently,
buyers who were uncertain about how and where to report on a particular form the fact that the price was due to a discount
need not be concerned with reporting that fact, as long as the actual purchase price accurately reflects the discount.
Finally, we are proposing some minor editorial changes that do not affect the substance of the provision, but hopefully
make it easier to understand.



F. Technical Correction



&bull;A typographical error at 56 FR 35978 gave a citation to a HCFA rule on payment for intraocular lenses as ``55 FR
436.'' We would correct this citation to the HCFA rule to read as ``55 FR 4536.''

&bull;We are proposing the deletion of 1001.953 which calls for the completion of an OIG report on compliance
with the investment interest safe harbor at 1001.952(a)(2)(i) and 1001.952(a)(2)(vi) within a specified
period of time after publication of the original safe harbor provisions. While the OIG is continuing its work on evaluating
this safe harbor provision, we believe completion of this report to be an internal administrative process that need
not be set forth in the regulations.



III. Regulatory Impact Statement



As we indicated in the original safe harbor final rule published on July 29, 1991, consistent with the intent of the
statute, the original safe harbor rulemaking and these proposed clarifications are designed to permit individuals
and entities to freely engage in business practices and arrangements that encourage competition, innovation and
economy. In doing so, the regulations impose no requirements on any party. Health care providers and others may voluntarily
seek to comply with these provisions so that they have the assurance that their business practices are not subject
to any enforcement action under the anti-kickback statute. We believe that the economic impact of these provisions
would be minimal. 

In addition, we generally prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis that is consistent with the Regulatory Flexibility
Act (5 U.S.C. 601612). We have determined, and the Secretary certifies, that this proposed regulation would
not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small business entities, and we have, therefore,
not prepared a regulatory flexibility analysis.



List of Subjects in 42 CFR Part 1001



Administrative practice and procedure, Fraud, Health facilities, Health professions, Medicaid, Medicare.


