 

DOC Position 


We agree and have excluded these sales from our analysis. 


Comment 17 


Petitioner believes that for purposes of calculating profit related to the value added in the United States, U.S.
brokerage and handling (including merchandise processing and harbor maintenance), U.S. unloading, U.S. loading
and U.S. freight to processors costs, where applicable, should be attributed to the COM of CA clinker and flux in the
United States because these expenses are incurred only after the product has arrived in the United States. Petitioner
further believes that certain U.S. selling expenses (e.g., credit, warranty, indirect selling expenses, inventory
carrying costs and product liability expenses) should also be included as part of U.S. further manufacturing costs.

Respondent does not believe that the Department should consider these charges and expenses to be part of U.S. further
manufacturing costs, as petitioner requests. Lafarge contends that petitioner's argument is inconsistent with
the antidumping statute and was put forth by petitioner solely to increase the profit allocated to further manufacturing
and, as a result, the adjustment to USP. 


DOC Position 


We disagree with petitioner. Because U.S. brokerage and handling, and U.S. unloading and loading costs, are incurred
on the imported merchandise prior to the commencement of further manufacturing in the United States, we find that
they do not form part of the value added in the United States. Regarding the costs of freight to processors' warehouses
associated with flux sales, we find that they do form part of the costs of further manufacturing the imported flux in
the United States because these costs are incurred to transport the imported flux to and among the processors' warehouses
for further manufacture. For U.S. cement sales, however, such transfer freight costs represent costs incurred to
transport the already further manufactured clinker (i.e., the finished cement) to the warehouses from which the
finished product is ultimately sold to U.S. customers. No freight to processors costs are incurred on U.S. cement
sales because the further processing occurs at Lafarge's plant which is located at the U.S. port of importation. Regarding
U.S. selling expenses, these expenses are incurred to sell both the imported and further manufactured products.
Therefore, adding these expenses to U.S. further manufacturing costs, as petitioner suggests, would disproportionately
increase the U.S. value added for purposes of calculating profit. (See e.g., Wire Rods from France.) Of the expenses
at issue, we have only included costs of freight to processors associated with U.S. flux sales as part of U.S. value
added in our final profit calculation. 


Comment 18 


Petitioner claims that the Department should recalculate respondent's U.S. indirect selling and GA expenses
for both cement and flux sales. Petitioner argues that, based on the Department's instructions, LCA's administration
costs should have been reported as GA (rather than indirect selling expenses), allocated based on cost of sales
and included in the U.S. COM. According to petitioner, the Department should reduce the reported indirect selling
expenses and the corresponding ESP cap. 
Respondent maintains that LCA's calculation correctly assigned its administrative expenses to its operations.
According to Lafarge, because LCA's administrative staff supports LCA's sales operations as well as factory operations,
a portion of LCA's administrative expenses should be considered sales administration and treated as an indirect
selling expense. Respondent notes, however, that it would not object if the Department reduces the amount of administrative
expenses assigned to the products under investigation under petitioner's proposal. Respondent contends that if
the Department accepts petitioner's argument that U.S. indirect selling expenses and GA should be recalculated,
it should revise petitioner's calculations to use the correct, verified figures. 


DOC Position 


We agree with petitioner on the need to reclassify LCA's administrative expenses. Because these expenses are more
appropriately characteristic of GA expenses, we have reclassified them from indirect selling to GA expenses
based on verified data on the record. 


Comment 19 


Petitioner argues that no offset to financial expenses should be allowed for the short-term interest income claimed
by Lafarge for purposes of calculating clinker CV and clinker and flux further manufacturing costs. Petitioner contends
that the Department was unable to verify that the interest income reported was short-term in nature. Nor could the
Department verify whether the reported interest income was related to the manufacture of the subject merchandise,
according to petitioner. 
Respondent asserts that the Lafarge corporate policy is not to invest in assets which produce other than short-term
interest income. Accordingly, respondent maintains that all interest income earned by respondent's parent company
Lafarge Coppee was short-term in nature, and an offset to interest expense should be allowed for the entire reported
short-term interest income amount. 


DOC Position 


We agree with petitioner. The Department normally allows an offset to financial expenses for interest income earned
on short-term investments of working capital related to the production of the subject merchandise. The Department
does not offset interest expense with interest income earned on long-term investments related to activities unrelated
to the manufacturing process. Because we were unable to verify the nature of the interest income reported, we have
disallowed the financial expense offset claimed by Lafarge. 


Comment 20 


Petitioner notes that the Department discovered at verification that the depreciation of RD assets was not
included in the RD expenses reported for purposes of calculating clinker CV. Petitioner states that the Department
should include this depreciation in the reported RD expenses. 


