 

(h) 

Defense Systems Management College, Fort Belvoir, Va.

 (1) The Provost and professors in grades GS13 through 15. 
(i) 

George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies, Garmisch, Germany.

 (1) The Director, Deputy Director, and positions of professor, instructor, and lecturer at the George C. Marshall
European Center for Security Studies, Garmisch, Germany, for initial employment not to exceed 3 years, which may
be renewed in increments from 1 to 2 years thereafter. 


Section 213.3107Department of the Army 


(a) 

General.

 (1) Not to exceed 30 positions on the faculty and staff which are classified in the GS1700 occupational group
and the GS1410 Librarian series, located at the U.S. Army Russian Institute, Garmisch, Germany, and the U.S.
Army Foreign Language Training Center Europe, Munich, Germany. 
(2) (Reserved). 
(3) Not to exceed 500 Medical and Dental Intern, Resident and Fellow positions, whose incumbents are training under
graduate medical/dental education programs in Army Medical Department facilities worldwide, and whose compensation
is fixed under 5 U.S.C. 53515356. Employment under this authority may not exceed 4 years, unless extended with
prior approval of OPM. 
(b) 

Aviation Systems Command.

 (1) One scientific and professional research position in the U.S. Army Research and Technology Laboratories, the
duties of which require specific knowledge of aviation technology in non-allied nations. 
(c) 

Corps of Engineers.

 (1) (Reserved).
(2) Nonsupervisory trades, crafts, and manual labor positions at grades WG6 and below on survey, construction,
short-term maintenance, or floating-plant operations, where because of turnover, lack of housing facilities,
mobility of work site, or remoteness of personnel servicing facilities, an adequate labor force can be recruited
only by immediate gate hiring on a local basis. This authority can be used only when OPM has determined that it is specifically
applicable to a given situation; ordinarily, it will not be used for employment in OPM central office, regional, and
branch office cities or in cities where there is a local OPM area office to service the employing establishment. 
(d) 

U.S. Military Academy, West Point, New York.

 (1) Civilian professors, instructors, teachers (except teachers at the Children's School), Cadet Social Activities
Coordinator, chapel organist and choir-master, Director of Intercollegiate Athletics, Associate Director of
Intercollegiate Athletics, Facility Manager, Building Manager, three Physical Therapists (Athletic Trainers),
Associate Director of Admissions for Plans and Programs, Deputy Director of Alumni Affairs; and librarian when filled
by an officer of the Regular Army retired from active service, and the military secretary to the Superintendent when
filled by a U.S. Military Academy graduate retired as a regular commissioned officer for disability. 
(e) 

U.S. Army School of the Americas, Fort Benning, Georgia.

 (1) Positions of Translator (Typing), GS10405/9, and Supervisory Translator, GS104011.
No new appointments may be made under this authority after December 31, 1985. 
(f) 

Central Identification Laboratory.

 (1) One position of Scientific Director, GM19015, and four positions of Forensic Scientist, GM19014.
Initial appointment to these positions is NTE 35 years, with provision for indefinite numbers of renewals
in 1-, 2-, or 3-year increments. 
(g) 

Defense Language Institute.

 (1) All positions on the faculty and staff which are classified in the GS1700 occupational group, the GS1040
Language Specialist series, and the GS303 Bilingual Clerk series, that require either a proficiency in a foreign
language or a knowledge of foreign language teaching methods. 
(h) 

Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, PA.

 (1) Positions of professor, instructor, or lecturer associated with courses of instruction of at least 10 months
duration for employment not to exceed 5 years, which may be renewed in 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, or 5-year increments indefinitely
thereafter. 
(2) Nine senior policy analyst positions, GS14/15, at the Strategic Studies Institute, Army War College,
with appointments to be made initially for up to 3 years and thereafter extended annually if needed. 
(i) (Reserved). 
(j) 

U.S. Military Academy Preparatory School, Fort Monmouth, New Jersey.

 (1) Positions of Academic Director, Department Head, and Instructor. 




