 




<CFRNO>9 CFR Parts 54 and 91 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 930702] </RINDOCK>


Inspection and Handling of Livestock for Exportation 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA.

 
</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.

 

</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 We are amending the regulations regarding inspection and handling of livestock for exportation to provide that United
States origin health certificates include all test results, certifications, or other statements required by the
foreign country of destination. This action is necessary to ensure that the origin health certificate contains all
of the information required by the foreign country of destination. We are also amending the requirements concerning
scrapie for sheep and goats intended for export. This action clarifies the regulations and makes the terminology
used in the export regulations consistent with that used in our domestic scrapie regulations. We are also revising
one definition in the domestic scrapie regulations to make the definitions in those regulations consistent with
each other.

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 October 26, 1994.

 
</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Dr. Najam Faizi, Senior Staff Veterinarian, Import-Export Animals Staff, National Center for Import-Export, Veterinary
Services, APHIS, USDA, room 762, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782, (301) 4368383.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


The regulations in 9 CFR part 91, ``Inspection and Handling of Livestock for Exportation'' (referred to below as the
regulations), prescribe conditions for exporting animals from the United States. 
On May 13, 1994, we published in the 

Federal Register

 (59 FR 2497924982, Docket No. 930701) a proposal to amend the regulations by providing that United
States origin health certificates include all test results, certifications, or other statements required by the
foreign country of destination. We also proposed to amend the requirements concerning scrapie for sheep and goats
intended for export, in order to clarify the regulations and make the terminology used in the export regulations consistent
with that used in the domestic scrapie regulations. Additionally, we proposed to revise a definition in the domestic
scrapie regulations to make the definitions in those regulations consistent with each other. 
We solicited comments concerning the proposed rule for a 60-day comment period ending July 12, 1994. The one comment
we received by that date supported the proposal as written. 
Therefore, based on the rationale set forth in the proposed rule, we are adopting the provisions of the proposal as
a final rule without change. 


Executive Order 12866 and Regulatory Flexibility Act 


This final rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12866. The rule has been determined to be not significant for
purposes of Executive Order 12866, and, therefore, has not been reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget. 
In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 604, we have performed a Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis regarding the impact of
this rule on small entities. 
This rule requires that the origin health certificate required for animals exported from the United States include
any test results, certifications, or other statements required by the foreign country of destination. It also revises
the export regulations in 9 CFR part 91 to make them consistent with the regulations in 9 CFR parts 54 and 79 regarding
the Voluntary Scrapie Flock Certification Program. 
No issues were raised by public comments in response to the Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis we published
in our proposal, and we identified no significant alternatives to this rule. We anticipate that the changes involving
certification will have little or no impact on domestic exporters. In order for exporters to sell their animals abroad,
the animals must meet the import requirements of the country of destination. Therefore, it is in the exporter's interest
to ensure that those requirements are met. This rule change requires only that the origin health certificate include
all test results, certifications, or other statements required by the country of destination. However, estimates
of the number of animals and the number of small entities that will be affected, and the potential costs to exporters,
are not available. 
The changes to the regulations concerning sheep and goats with regard to scrapie will affect some producers. Under
the regulations, sheep and goats from ``source flock'' premises may not be exported. Under the regulations prior
to the effective date of this rule, source flock premises are considered those from which an animal affected with scrapie
was moved within 18 months or less prior to showing signs of scrapie. Under this rule, the export of sheep and goats from
source flocks continues to be prohibited, but the meaning of source flock is revised to mean a flock in which at least
two animals were diagnosed as scrapie-positive animals at an age of 54 months or less, provided the second diagnosis
was made within 60 months of the first, and provided the requirements of a flock plan have not been completed. This change
makes the regulations more restrictive, and may increase the number of animals prohibited exportation because they
originated in a source flock. However, as of July 1993, there were only five source flocks in the United States. 


Executive Order 12372 


This program/activity is listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance under No. 10.025 and is subject to Executive
Order 12372, which requires intergovernmental consultation with State and local officials. (See 
7 CFR part 3015, subpart V.) 


Executive Order 12778 


This rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. This rule: (1) Preempts all State and
local laws and regulations that are inconsistent with this rule; (2) has no retroactive effect; and 
(3) does not require administrative proceedings before parties may file suit in court challenging this rule. 


Paperwork Reduction Act 


In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

), the information collection or recordkeeping requirements included in this rule have been approved by the Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) under OMB control number 05790020. 


List of Subjects 


9 CFR Part 54



Animal diseases, Goats, Indemnity payments, Sheep.



</SUPPLEM>
