 

In the second example, BPA in mid-February 1993 started drafting the nearly 1 million acre-feet stored behind Libby
Dam to meet firm power needs. The Service had been working with the Corps to develop an Memorandum of Agreement (MOA)
that included a flow regime for 1993 using all or part of this stored water for white sturgeon reproduction. Approximately
400,000 acre-feet of this water ended up being released as the 1993 experimental flow test. As previously described,
BPA acknowledged that this experimental test flow was probably insufficient to maximize sturgeon spawning opportunity
and ensure egg/larvae survival in 1993, likely contributing to another year-class failure. The BPA also noted that
the early drafting ``*** was done consistent with the Pacific Northwest Coordination Agreement***''
Regardless of the causes, these actions demonstrate the continued reluctance to manage Kootenai River water for
most non-hydropower purposes. 

Regarding the Sturgeon Technical Committee, the Service agrees that committee members were not authorized to approve
future management actions, or did not necessarily support the interim flow proposal. As stated in the proposed rule,
the Service adopted the interim flow proposal based upon the best empirical data and only as a minimum first step to
address flow related problems affecting white sturgeon reproduction in the Kootenai River. 

In summary, no substantive comments were received indicating that the Kootenai River white sturgeon is more abundant,
widespread or less endangered than described in the proposed rule. Opposing comments were based primarily upon concerns
that listing of the Kootenai River white sturgeon would affect water management at Libby Dam (and Koocanusa Reservoir)
or impact the economy of the Kootenai River basin, rather than information concerning the species status. Because
many of these comments focused on recovery concerns, they will be useful in developing recovery options for the Kootenai
River population of white sturgeon. Some opposing comments questioned the adequacy of the Service's data, specifically
concerning the current status of the population and whether all of the causes of decline have been considered. The
Service has continued to gather information regarding the status of the Kootenai River white sturgeon since publication
of the proposed rule in July 1993 and believes that this final rule is based on the best scientific and commercial information
available. As discussed in detail in the ``Summary of Factors Affecting the Species'' section, the Service concludes
that the Kootenai River population of white sturgeon continues to decline from the combined effects of lack of recruitment
and natural mortality and is in danger of extinction. 



Summary of Factors Affecting the Species 



Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1533) and regulations (50 CFR part 424) promulgated to implement
the listing provisions of the Act set forth the procedures for adding species to the Federal Lists. A species may be
determined to be an endangered or threatened species due to one or more of the five factors described in section 4(a)(1).
These factors and their applicability to the Kootenai River population of white sturgeon (

Acipenser transmontanus

) are as follows: 



A. 

The Present or Threatened Destruction, Modification, or Curtailment of its Habitat or Range



The significant modifications to the natural hydrograph in the Kootenai River caused by flow regulation at Libby
Dam is considered the primary reason for the Kootenai River white sturgeon's continuing lack of recruitment and declining
numbers (Apperson and Anders 1991). Since 1972 when Libby Dam began regulating flows (though not fully operational
until 1975), spring flows in the Kootenai River have been reduced an average 50 percent, and winter flows have increased
by 300 percent over normal. As a consequence, natural high spring flows required by white sturgeon for reproduction
rarely occur during the May to July spawning season when suitable temperature, water velocity, and photoperiod conditions
exist. Spring flows in the Kootenai River below Libby Dam are also normally far below the flows observed in 1974, the
last year with appreciable white sturgeon production (Apperson 1992). Flows in 1974 exceeded 35,000 cfs (1,000 cms)
during most of the spawning season. The current operation of Libby Dam drastically alters seasonal downstream discharge
by storing the natural spring runoff, providing more predictable flows throughout the year, and allowing late summer
load factoring (power peaking) flows (Apperson 1992). 




