 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 



Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service


<CFRNO>9 CFR Part 77 </CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 940471] </RINDOCK>



Tuberculosis in Cattle and Bison; State Designation 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA.

 

</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Interim rule and request for comments. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 We are amending the tuberculosis regulations concerning the interstate movement of cattle and bison by raising the
designation of New York from a modified accredited State to an accredited-free State. We have determined that New
York meets the criteria for designation as an accredited-free State.

 

</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Interim rule effective on June 6, 1994. Consideration will be given only to comments received on or before August 5,
1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Please send an original and three copies of your comments to Chief, Regulatory Analysis and Development, PPD, APHIS,
USDA, room 804, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782. Please state that your comments refer
to Docket No. 940471. Comments received may be inspected at USDA, room 1141, South Building, 14th Street
and Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC, between 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays.
Persons wishing to inspect comments are requested to call ahead on (202) 6902817 to facilitate entry into the
comment reading room.

 

</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Dr. Ronald A. Stenseng, Senior Staff Veterinarian, Cattle Diseases and Surveillance Staff, Veterinary Services,
APHIS, USDA, room 729, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782, (301) 4368715. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 

Background 



Bovine tuberculosis is the contagious, infectious, and communicable disease caused by 

Mycobacterium bovis. 

The tuberculosis regulations, contained in 9 CFR part 77 (referred to below as the regulations), regulate the interstate
movement of cattle and bison because of tuberculosis. Cattle or bison not known to be affected with or exposed to tuberculosis
are eligible for interstate movement without restriction if those cattle or bison are moved from jurisdictions designated
as accredited-free States or modified accredited States. The regulations restrict the interstate movement of cattle
or bison not known to be affected with or exposed to tuberculosis if those cattle or bison are moved from jurisdictions
designated as nonmodified accredited States. 

The status of a State is based on its freedom from evidence of tuberculosis, the effectiveness of the State's tuberculosis
eradication program, and the degree of the State's compliance with the standards contained in the ``Uniform Methods
and Rules_Bovine Tuberculosis Eradication,'' which is part of the regulations via incorporation by reference in
part 77. A State must have no findings of tuberculosis in any cattle or bison in the State for at least 5 years in order
to be designated as an accredited-free State. 

Before publication of this interim rule, New York was designated in 
77.1 of the regulations as a modified accredited State. However, New York now meets the requirements for designation
as an accredited-free State. Therefore, we are amending the regulations by removing New York from the list of modified
accredited States in 77.1 and adding it to the list of accredited-free States in that section. 



Immediate Action 



The Administrator of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service has determined that there is good cause for publishing
this interim rule without prior opportunity for public comment. Immediate action is warranted, as New York currently
meets the criteria for designation as an accredited-free State. This action provides prospective cattle and bison
buyers with accurate and up-to-date information, which may affect the marketability of cattle and bison since some
prospective buyers prefer to buy cattle and bison from accredited-free States. 

Because prior notice and other public procedures with respect to this action are impracticable and contrary to the
public interest under these conditions, we find good cause under 5 U.S.C. 553 to make it effective upon publication
in the 

Federal Register

. We will consider comments that are received within 60 days of publication of this rule in the 

Federal Register

. After the comment period closes, we will publish another document in the 

Federal Register

. It will include a discussion of any comments we receive and any amendments we are making to the rule as a result of the
comments. 



Executive Order 12866 and Regulatory Flexibility Act 



This interim rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12866. 

For this action, the Office of Management and Budget has waived its review process required by Executive Order 12866.


There are approximately 21,000 cattle herds in New York, with a total of about 1,560,000 cattle. An estimated 90 percent
of these herds are owned by small entities. Changing the status of New York may affect the marketability of cattle and
bison from the State, since some prospective cattle and bison buyers prefer to buy cattle and bison from accredited-free
States. This may result in some beneficial economic impact on some small entities. However, based on our experience
in similar designations of other States, the impact should not be significant. 

Under these circumstances, the Administrator of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service has determined that
this action will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. 



Executive Order 12372 



This program/activity is listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance under No. 10.025 and is subject to Executive
Order 12372, which requires intergovernmental consultation with State and local officials. (See 7 CFR part 3015,
subpart V.) 




</SUPPLEM>
