 

(3) In determining the value added in the United States and Canada of equipment supplied by an allied supplier, any
equipment that is delivered to the allied supplier by an outside supplier and is incorporated into the allied supplier's
equipment, is considered:

(i) 100 percent U.S./Canadian, if at least 70 percent of its value is added in the United States or Canada; and

(ii) 0 percent U.S./Canadian, if less than 70 percent of its value is added in the United States or Canada.

(4)(i) Value is added in the United States or Canada by an allied supplier or outside supplier to the extent that the
supplier produces or assembles passenger motor vehicle equipment at a plant or factory located within the territorial
boundaries of the United States or Canada.

(ii) In determining the value added in the United States or Canada of passenger motor vehicle equipment produced or
assembled within the territorial boundaries of the United States or Canada, the cost of all foreign materials is subtracted
from the total value (e.g., the price paid at the final assembly plant) of the equipment. Except as provided in (c)(3),
material is considered foreign to whatever extent part or all of the cost of the material is not determined to represent
value added in the United States or Canada, traced back to raw materials. For any material which is imported into the
United States or Canada from a third country, the value added in the United States or Canada is zero, even if part of the
material originated in the United States or Canada. Neither suppliers nor anyone else is required to trace the value
added in the United States or Canada backwards; however, any portion of the cost of a material which is not traced to
value added in the United States or Canada is considered foreign. Example:

 A supplier located in the United States or Canada uses sheet steel to produce exterior panels which are shipped to a
final assembly plant. In determining the value added in the United States or Canada of the exterior panels, the supplier
must subtract the price it paid for the sheet steel except to the extent that the supplier determines that the price
paid represents value added in the United States or Canada.

(iii) For the minor items listed in the 583.4 definition of ``passenger motor vehicle equipment'' as being
excluded from that term, outside and allied suppliers may, to the extent that they incorporate such items into their
equipment, treat the cost of the minor items as value added in the country of assembly.

(iv) For passenger motor vehicle equipment which is imported into the territorial boundaries of the United States
or Canada from a third country, the value added in the United States or Canada is zero, even if part of its material originated
in the United States or Canada.

(v) The payment of duty does not result in value added in the United States or Canada.



