 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 






EPA's Contaminated Sediment Management Strategy_Reinventing Government to Streamline Decision-Making 






Contaminated sediment poses ecological and human health risks in many watersheds throughout the United States.
In these watersheds, sediment serves as a contaminant reservoir from which fish and bottom dwelling organisms can
accumulate toxic compounds and pass them up the food chain. Sediment contaminants can be passed to larger fish, birds,
and mammals until they accumulate to levels that may be toxic to humans. Toxic chemicals in sediment come from discharges
of industrial waste and sewage; stormwater runoff from waste dumps, city streets and farms, and air pollutants contained
in rainwater. The magnitude of the toxics problem in the United States is evidenced in more than 1,200 State advisories
that have been issued against consuming fish that have accumulated toxic bioaccumulative contaminants from sediment
and other sources. 

More than ten Federal statutes provide authority to many EPA program offices to address the problem of contaminated
sediment. This has resulted in fragmented, and in some cases duplicative, efforts to complete the necessary research,
technology development, and pollution control activities required to effectively manage contaminated sediment.
Often it has been difficult for EPA programs to agree upon the fundamental question of whether sediment at a particular
site poses ecological or human health risks. EPA's proposed Contaminated Sediment Management Strategy was developed
to streamline decision-making within and among the Agency's program offices by promoting and ensuring: the use of
consistent sediment assessment practices, consistent consideration of risks posed by contaminated sediment,
the use of consistent approaches to management of contaminated sediment risks, and the wise use of scarce resources
for research and technology development. 



Goals of the Contaminated Sediment Management Strategy 



EPA's proposed Contaminated Sediment Management Strategy describes actions that the Agency will take to accomplish
the following four strategic goals: (1) Prevent further sediment contamination that may cause unacceptable ecological
or human health risks; (2) When practical, clean up existing sediment contamination that adversely affects the Nation's
waterbodies or their uses, or that causes other significant effects on human health or the environment; (3) Ensure
that sediment dredging and dredged material disposal continue to be managed in an environmentally sound manner;
(4) develop and consistently apply methodologies for analyzing contaminated sediments. 



What the Strategy Does 



The proposed Contaminated Sediment Management Strategy is comprised of six component sections: assessment, prevention,
remediation, dredged material management, research, and outreach. In each section, EPA describes actions that
the Agency will take to accomplish the four broad strategic goals. 


</SUPPLEM>
