 

2. The Trust will be registered under the Act as a unit investment trust and will offer units in series (``Trust Series''),
each of which will contain shares of one Fund that is normally offered with a sales load, and U.S. Government zero coupon
obligations. The Trust's objective is to provide protection of capital while providing for capital appreciation
through investments in zero coupon obligations and shares of the Funds. Each Trust Series will be organized pursuant
to a reference trust agreement that will incorporate a trust indenture and agreement relating to the entire Trust
(collectively, the ``Trust Agreement'') and that will name a qualified bank as trustee (``Trustee'').
3. Each Trust Series will be sponsored by the Sponsor, which will perform the functions typical of unit investment
trust sponsors. These functions will include depositing Fund shares in the Trust; acquiring zero coupon obligations
and depositing them in the Trust; arranging for the evaluation of the zero coupon obligations; offering units to the
public; and maintaining a secondary market in units. The Sponsor expects to deposit in the Trust substantially more
than $100,000 aggregate value of zero coupon obligations and Fund shares.
4. Trust units will be offered for sale to the public through the final prospectus by the Sponsor. Trust Series are intended
to be offered to the public initially at prices based on the net asset value of the Fund shares selected for deposit in
that Trust Series, plus the offering side value of the zero coupon obligations contained therein, plus a sales charge.
The Trust will redeem units at prices based on the aggregate bid side evaluation of the zero coupon obligations and
the net asset value of the Fund shares.
5. With the deposit of the securities in the Trust Series on the initial date of deposit, the Sponsor will have established
a proportionate relationship between the principal amounts of zero coupon obligations and Fund shares in the Trust
Series. The Sponsor will be permitted under the Trust Agreement to deposit additional securities, which may result
in a corresponding increase in the number of units outstanding. Such units may be continuously offered for sale to
the public by means of the prospectus.
6. The Trust will be structured so that each Trust Series will contain a sufficient amount of zero coupon obligations
to assure that, at the specified maturity date for such Trust Series, the purchaser of a unit would receive back the
approximate total amount of the original investment in the Trust, including the sales charge. Such investor would
receive more than the original investment to the extent that the underlying Fund made any distributions during the
life of the Trust and/or had any value at the maturity of the Trust Series.
7. The Sponsor intends to maintain a secondary market for Trust units, but is not obligated to do so. The existence of
such a secondary market will reduce the number of units tendered to the Trustee for redemption and thus alleviate the
necessity of selling portfolio securities to raise the cash necessary to meet such redemptions. In the event that
the Sponsor does not maintain a secondary market, the Trust Agreement will provide that the Sponsor will not instruct
the Trustee to sell zero coupon obligations from any Trust Series until shares of the Fund have been liquidated in order
not to impair the protection provided by the zero coupon obligations, unless the Trustee is able to sell such zero coupon
obligations and still maintain at least the original proportionate relationship to unit value. The Trust Agreement
also provides that zero coupon obligations cannot be sold to meet Trust expenses.
8. The Trust has taken certain steps to reduce the impact of the termination of a Trust Series on the Fund deposited therein.
First, the Trust will, with respect to all unitholders still holding units at scheduled termination and to the extent
desired by such unitholders, transfer the registration of their proportionate number of Fund shares from the Trust
to a registration in the investor's name in lieu of redeeming such shares. Second, the Fund will offer all such unitholders
the option of investing the proceeds from the zero coupon obligations in Fund shares at net asset value (

i.e.

, without the imposition of the normal sales load). The Fund also will offer unitholders the option of investing all
distributions from the Trust during the life of the Trust Series in Fund shares at net asset value. Thus, it is anticipated
that many of the unitholders will become and remain direct shareholders of the Fund and that many will elect to invest
their proceeds of the Trust Series in an account of the Fund.

