 

d. Coverage under this permit will expire five (5) years from the date of issuance. It is EPA's position (40 CFR 122.28(b)(1))
that an expired general permit continues in force and effect until a new general permit is issued. Only those facilities
authorized to discharge under the expiring general permit and submit an NOI 90 days prior to the expiration of this
general permit are covered by the continued permit. 

2. 

Types of Placer Mine Operations Covered by the Permit. 

EPA is proposing to issue a General NPDES permit for Alaska placer mining operations which are facilities that mine
and process gold placer ores using gravity separation methods to recover the gold metal contained in the ore. This
permit applies to all open-cut and mechanical dredge (not suction dredges) gold placer mines except those open-cut
mines that mine less than 1,500 cubic yards of placer ore per mining season and dredges that remove less than 50,000
cubic yards of placer ore per mining season. These operations are covered by the effluent guidelines and described
in 40 CFR 440.140(b). EPA has completed a literature research project considering the environmental effects of all
suction dredge operation and potential controls that could be placed on them. Based on this research, EPA has concluded
that suction dredges with intake hoses of greater than 4 inches will be covered by this permit. 

Operations utilizing hydraulic removal of overburden are covered by this permit. 

This permit does not authorize discharges resulting from beneficiation methods utilizing cyanidation, froth flotation,
heap or vat leaching and mercury amalgamation. 

3. 

Limitations on Coverage. 

Many streams and stream reaches in Alaska have been designated as part of the federal wild and scenic rivers system
or as a Conservation System Unit (CSU) by the federal government. Additional conditions may be required by the Alaska
Department of Fish and Game in resident and anadromous fish streams. ``The Atlas to the Catalog of Waters Important
for Spawning, Rearing or Migration of Anadromous Fish'' lists the streams in the State which require a Habitat permit
from the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. Because this permit does not relieve a permittee of the requirements of
other applicable federal, state or local laws, permittees should contact the appropriate state or federal agencies
to inquire about additional permits that may be required. 

4. 

Individual Permits. 

Owners or operators authorized by a general permit may be excepted from coverage by a general permit by applying to
the Director of the NPDES program for an individual permit. This request may be made by submitting an NPDES permit application,
together with supporting documentation for the request no later than 90 days after publication by EPA of the final
general permit in the 

Federal Register

, or 180 days prior to the commencement of operation of a new source or new discharger. The Director may require any person
authorized by a general permit to apply for and obtain an individual permit, or any interested person may petition
the Director to take this action. The Director may consider the issuance of individual permits when: 

a. The single discharge or the cumulative number of discharges is/are a significant contributor of pollution; 

b. The discharger is not in compliance with the terms and conditions of the general permit; 

c. A change has occurred in the availability of demonstrated technology or practices for the control or abatement
of pollutants applicable to the point source;

d. Effluent limitations guidelines are subsequently promulgated for the point sources covered by the general permit;


e. A Water Quality Management plan containing requirements applicable to such point sources is approved; or 

f. The requirements listed in the previous paragraphs are not met. 



B. Description of the Industry 



1. 

Mechanical Operations (Traditional Sluicing). 

Placer mining involves the mining and extraction of gold or other heavy metals and minerals primarily from alluvial
deposits. These deposits may be in existing stream beds or ancient often buried stream deposits, i.e. paleo or fossil
placers. Many Alaskan placer deposits consist of unconsolidated clay, sand, gravel, cobble and boulders that contain
very small amounts of native gold or other precious metals. Most are stream deposits and occur along present stream
valleys or on benches or terraces above existing streams. Beach placer deposits have been and continue to be important
producers in Alaska. These deposits, most notable near Nome, include both submerged and elevated beach placer deposits.


Essential components of placer mining include overburden removal, mining of the gold placer gravels and processing
(gold recovery). 

a. 

Overburden Removal. 

Various types of overburden include barren alluvial gravels, broken slide rock or glacial deposits. In some parts
of Alaska the pay gravels are overlaid by silty, organic-rich deposits of barren, frozen material generally comprised
of wind-blown particles (loess). Particularly high ice content is common. Most facilities utilize mechanical methods
for removal of overburden because they generally use the same excavating equipment for mining. 



