 

Liability under section 1592 is based upon a finding of culpability and is not limited to the importer of the goods.
The penalty provisions reach importers, brokers, manufacturers, shippers, and the like, and may also include aiders
and abettors of violations. These penalties serve to punish violators and deter future violative conduct but they
do not serve to compensate the Government for harm. It is inapposite to impose standards of reasonable care promulgated
by the Mod Act to a bond violation situation. Customs does not believe that the proposed regulation is in conflict with
the Mod Act and therefore sees no reason to modify or withdraw the proposed rule based on this comment.



Comment:

 Several commenters suggested that imposition of liquidated damages equal to three times the value of merchandise
which is not redelivered serves to punish rather than compensate when the violation involves illegal transshipment
of textile merchandise. These commenters noted that an importer could be found to be negligent and incur a 1592 penalty
but pay considerably less than a three-times-the-value-of-the-merchandise claim assessed as liquidated damages.



Customs response:

 Illegally transshipped textile merchandise, while prohibited in nature, does not cause a health or safety hazard
to the general public. Accordingly, Customs agrees with the thrust of this comment and, therefore, the regulatory
text as set forth below, has been redrafted to limit any liquidated damages assessment for transshipment violations
to the value of the merchandise involved in the breach.



Conclusion



Accordingly, for the above reasons, Customs has determined that the proposed regulatory changes should be adopted
as a final rule, subject to the textual modifications to the proposed regulatory text as discussed in the above comment
analysis and as set forth below.



Executive Order 12866



This document does not meet the criteria for a ``significant regulatory action'' as specified in Executive Order
12866.



Regulatory Flexibility Act



Pursuant to the provisions of the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

), it is certified that the regulatory amendments will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number
of small entities. Establishment of a conditional release period for textiles and textile products, which is necessary
for law enforcement purposes, will affect only the relatively small percentage of importers who import such merchandise
contrary to law. Accordingly, the amendments are not subject to the regulatory analysis or other requirements of
5 U.S.C. 603 and 604.



List of Subjects in 19 CFR Part 141



Bonds, Customs duties and inspection, Entry procedures, Imports, Release of merchandise.



Amendments to the Regulations



Accordingly, for the reasons set forth above, Part 141, Customs Regulations (19 CFR Part 141), is amended as set forth
below.




