 

In addition, the rule change clarifies that a member may be summarily suspended or denied access to Exchange services
if there is a reasonable belief that the member is violating and will continue to violate any material provision of
the Rules of the Exchange or the federal securities laws or the rules promulgated thereunder, and if such violations
indicate that the member cannot be permitted to continue to do business with safety to investors, creditors, other
members, or the exchange. This provision is consistent with the summary suspension provisions of Section 6(d)(3)
of the Act and merely codifies that material violations of Exchange rules and the Act can result in a finding that the
member cannot be permitted to continue business with safety to customers, creditors or the Exchange. The Commission
notes that in determining that a material violation of Exchange rules or the Act and rules thereunder warrant an emergency
or summary suspension under Rule 2, the CHX must take into consideration the egregious nature of the conduct and the
likelihood of continuing violations.
Proposed Rule 2 also sets forth new due process procedures for review of a summary suspension action by the CHX president
under the rule. Those provisions ensure that a person aggrieved by a summary suspension will have a right to an expeditious
review of the matter, including the final decision by the hearing panel. Under the new provisions, any person suspended
under Rule 2 must be furnished with the reasons for the action within two business days of the suspension. In addition
any appeal will be heard within 10 days. The Commission believes these provisions ensure adequate due process and
that a suspension under these new provisions will be handled and treated in a timely manner, consistent with the requirements
of Section 6(b)(7) of the Act.
The Commission also believes that the proposed rule change to adopt a formal standard of review that prohibits an appeal
panel from overturning the fact finder's decision if the factual conclusions are supported by substantial evidence
and if the decision itself is not arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion, is consistent with Section 6(b)(7)
of the Act.
<FOOTCITE>22</FOOTCITE>
 Section 6(b)(7) requires that the rules of the exchange provide fair procedures for disciplining members and denying
access to services offered by an exchange. The Commission believes that adopting a formal standard for review will
add certainty and consistency to the Exchange's appellate process.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
22

</FOOTNAME>
15 U.S.C. 78f(b)(7) (1988).
</FOOTNOTE>


The Commission further believes the liability provisions described above should be approved. Specifically, the
rule change prohibiting members from suing Exchange officers, directors, employees, or agents of the Exchange will
prevent those parties from having liability to members when acting on official Exchange business, while maintaining
members' ability to pursue actions against the Exchange itself, as well as the ability to sue those persons and the
Exchange for violations of the federal securities laws. Moreover, under the provisions, actions against Board members
for breach of fiduciary duty consistent with Delaware law could still be pursued.
<FOOTCITE>23</FOOTCITE>
 The Commission believes this provision is consistent with the Act because it will help to ensure that such persons
will be able to carry out their duties under the Act and enforce compliance with the Act, the rules thereunder and Exchange
rules without the threat of personal liability from a lawsuit.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
23

</FOOTNAME>
The new rule does not conflict with the limitation of Board of Governor's monetary damages for breach of fiduciary
duty approved by the Commission in Securities Exchange Act Release No. 33901 (April 12, 1994), 59 FR 18586 (April 19,
1994). That provision limits a governor's monetary liability for a breach of their fiduciary duty as a director to
the full extent of Delaware state law. That rule, as well as the new provision being approved herein, will not prevent
the imposition of other legal remedies for breach of fiduciary duty, such as rescission and injunction.
</FOOTNOTE>


In addition, limiting the liability of the Exchange to its members to willful misconduct, gross negligence, bad faith,
or fraudulent or criminal acts of the Exchange or its officers, employees or agents, will preserve members' right
to pursue actions against the Exchange in certain circumstances where the Exchange should be held accountable, or
where there has been a violation of the federal securities laws. We find this provision consistent with the Act for
the same reasons set forth in our order approving a limitation on Board of Governor liability for monetary damages
for breach of fiduciary duty.
<FOOTCITE>24</FOOTCITE>



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
24

</FOOTNAME>


See

 Securities Exchange Act Release No. 33901, note 23 

supra. See also

 Securities Exchange Act Release No. 30346 (February 6, 1992), 57 FR 5195 (February 12, 1992).
</FOOTNOTE>


Finally, the Commission believes that the rule change requiring that members who are unsuccessful in a suit against
the Exchange to pay the Exchange's legal expenses if they exceed $50,000 is consistent with Section 6(b)(4) of the
Act,
<FOOTCITE>25</FOOTCITE>
 which requires that the rules of the exchange provide for the equitable allocation of reasonable dues, fees and other
charges among its members. Because the funds to pay the legal expenses incurred by the Exchange in defending legal
suits are generated, in part, by membership fees, the Commission believes the rule change reflects a reasonable business
decision by the membership to shift the financial burden of litigation to the responsible member under certain circumstances.
Because the Exchange's legal expenses must be reasonable and must accrue to at least $50,000 before a member would
be obligated to compensate the Exchange, the Commission believes the rule change should not provide an undue disincentive
to litigation, in so far as it will permit the discovery needed to assess the merits of the members' cases. The Commission
also notes that the provision specifically excludes internal disciplinary actions by the Exchange and administrative
appeals. This will ensure that members will be able to freely pursue their right to appeal any disciplinary action
brought by the Exchange for violations of its rules. The Commission also notes that if the minimum amount in the fee
provision were substantially lower it might have a more difficult time concluding that the provision was consistent
with Section 6(b)(4) because such a lower threshold amount could be found to represent an inequitable allocation
of fees to the disadvantage of certain members.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
25

</FOOTNAME>
15 U.S.C. 78f(b)(4) (1988).




</FOOTNOTE>

