 

The Act and its implementing regulations found at 50 CFR 17.61, 17.62, and 17.63 for endangered plants and 17.71 and
17.72 for threatened plants not covered by a special rule, set forth a series of prohibitions and exceptions that apply
to listed plant species. With respect to the four plants proposed to be listed as endangered, the prohibitions of section
9(a)(2) of the Act, implemented by 50 CFR 17.61 would apply. These prohibitions, in part, make it illegal with respect
to any endangered plant for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to import or export; transport
in interstate or foreign commerce in the course of a commercial activity; sell or offer for sale these species in interstate
or foreign commerce; remove and reduce to possession these species from areas under Federal jurisdiction; maliciously
damage or destroy any such species on any area under Federal jurisdiction; or remove, cut, dig up, damage, or destroy
any such endangered plant species on any other area in knowing violation of any State law or regulation or in the course
of any violation of a State criminal trespass law.

The six plants proposed to be listed as threatened would be subject to similar prohibitions (16 U.S.C. 1538(a)(2)(E);
50 CFR 17.61, 17.71). Seeds from cultivated specimens of threatened plant taxa are exempt from these prohibitions
provided that a statement ``of cultivated origin'' appears on the shipping containers. Certain exceptions apply
to agents of the Service and State conservation agencies. The Act and 50 CFR 17.62, 17.63, and 17.72 also provide for
the issuance of permits to carry out otherwise prohibited activities involving endangered or threatened plant species
under certain circumstances. The Service anticipates that trade permits may be sought or issued for at least 1 of these
10 plant species because 

Carpenteria californica 

is common in cultivation in England and California. Requests for copies of the regulations on listed plants and inquiries
regarding them may be addressed to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Ecological Services, Endangered Species Permits,
911 N.E. 11th Avenue, Portland, Oregon 972324181 (503/2312063; FAX 503/2316243).



Public Comments Solicited 



The Service intends that any final action resulting from this proposal will be as accurate and as effective as possible.
Therefore, comments or suggestions from the public, other concerned governmental agencies, the scientific community,
industry, or any other interested party concerning this proposed rule are hereby solicited. Comments particularly
are sought concerning:
(1) Biological, commercial trade, or other relevant data concerning any threat (or lack thereof) to these taxa;

(2) The location of any additional populations of these species and the reasons why any habitat should or should not
be determined to be critical habitat as provided by section 4 of the Act;

(3) Additional information concerning the range, distribution, and population size of these species; and

(4) Current or planned activities in the subject area and their possible impacts on these species.

Any final decision on this proposal will take into consideration the comments and any additional information received
by the Service, and such communications may lead to a final regulation that differs from this proposal.

The Endangered Species Act provides for a public hearing on this proposal, if requested. Requests must be received
within 45 days of the date of publication of the proposal. Such requests must be made in writing and addressed to the
Field Supervisor of the Sacramento Field Office (see 

ADDRESSES 

section).



National Environmental Policy Act



The Fish and Wildlife Service has determined that an Environmental Assessment, as defined under the authority of
the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, need not be prepared in connection with regulations adopted pursuant
to section 4(a) of the Act. A notice outlining the Service's reasons for this determination was published in the 

Federal Register

 on October 25, 1983 (48 FR 49244).



References Cited



A complete list of all references cited is available upon request from the Sacramento Field Office (see 

ADDRESSES

 section).



Author



The primary author of this proposed rule is Kenneth Fuller, Sacramento Field Office (see 

ADDRESSES

 section); telephone 916/9784866.



List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 17



Endangered and threatened species, Exports, Imports, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, and Transportation.



Proposed Regulation Promulgation




