 

Since a situation exists that requires the immediate adoption of this regulation, it is found that notice and opportunity
for public prior comment hereon are impracticable, and that good cause exists for making this amendment effective
in less than 30 days. 



Comments Invited 



Although this action is in the form of a final rule that involves requirements affecting immediate flight safety and,
thus, was not preceded by notice and opportunity to comment, comments are invited on this rule. Interested persons
are invited to comment on this rule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Communications
should identify the Rules Docket number and be submitted in triplicate to the address specified above. All communications
received on or before the closing date for comments will be considered, and this rule may be amended in light of the comments
received. Factual information that supports the commenter's ideas and suggestions is extremely helpful in evaluating
the effectiveness of the AD action and determining whether additional rulemaking action would be needed. 

Comments are specifically invited on the overall regulatory, economic, environmental, and energy aspects of the
rule that might suggest a need to modify the rule. All comments submitted will be available, both before and after the
closing date for comments, in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report that summarizes each
FAA-public contact concerned with the substance of this AD will be filed in the Rules Docket. 

Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments submitted in response to this notice must submit
a self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: ``Comments to Docket No. 94CE09AD.''
The postcard will be date stamped and returned to the commenter. 

The regulations adopted herein will not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this final rule does not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment. 

The FAA has determined that this regulation is an emergency regulation that must be issued immediately to correct
an unsafe condition in aircraft, and is not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive Order 12866. It has
been determined further that this action involves an emergency regulation under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures
(44 FR 11034, February 26, 1979). If it is determined that this emergency regulation otherwise would be significant
under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures, a final regulatory evaluation will be prepared and placed in the Rules
Docket (otherwise, an evaluation is not required). A copy of it, if filed, may be obtained from the Rules Docket. 



List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39 



Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Incorporation by reference, Safety. 


Adoption of the Amendment 



Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration
amends part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) as follows: 


PART 39_AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES 



1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows: 







Authority:

 49 U.S.C. App. 1354(a), 1421 and 1423; 49 U.S.C. 106(g); and 14 CFR 11.89. 



39.13 

[Amended] 



2. Section 39.13 is amended by adding a new airworthiness directive to read as follows: 





