 

Discussion 



The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), which is the airworthiness authority for the United Kingdom, recently notified
the FAA that an unsafe condition may exist on certain Jetstream Model 4101 airplanes. The CAA advises that it has received
reports of fatigue failure of the case drain line in the hydraulics system due to a lack of support against vibration.
This condition, if not corrected, could result in the loss of the main system hydraulics. 

Jetstream has issued Service Bulletins J4129005, Revision 1, dated August 12, 1994, and Revision 2,
dated August 30, 1994, which describe procedures for installation of new case drain pipes and an additional fairlead
support for the hydraulics case drain line in the rear spar area of the engine/nacelle. Accomplishment of this installation
will provide support against vibration and reduce the possibility of fatigue failure of the case drain line in the
hydraulics system. The CAA classified these service bulletins as mandatory in order to assure the continued airworthiness
of these airplanes in the United Kingdom. 

This airplane model is manufactured in the United Kingdom and is type certificated for operation in the United States
under the provisions of section 21.29 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR 21.29) and the applicable bilateral
airworthiness agreement. Pursuant to this bilateral airworthiness agreement, the CAA has kept the FAA informed
of the situation described above. The FAA has examined the findings of the CAA, reviewed all available information,
and determined that AD action is necessary for products of this type design that are certificated for operation in
the United States. 

Since an unsafe condition has been identified that is likely to exist or develop on other airplanes of the same type
design registered in the United States, the proposed AD would require installation of new case drain pipes and an additional
fairlead support for the hydraulics case drain line in the rear spar area of the engine/nacelle. The actions would
be required to be accomplished in accordance with the service bulletins described previously. 

As a result of recent communications with the Air Transport Association (ATA) of America, the FAA has learned that,
in general, some operators may misunderstand the legal effect of AD's on airplanes that are identified in the applicability
provision of the AD, but that have been altered or repaired in the area addressed by the AD. The FAA points out that all
airplanes identified in the applicability provision of an AD are legally subject to the AD. If an airplane has been
altered or repaired in the affected area in such a way as to affect compliance with the AD, the owner or operator is required
to obtain FAA approval for an alternative method of compliance with the AD, in accordance with the paragraph of each
AD that provides for such approvals. A note has been included in this notice to clarify this requirement. 

The FAA estimates that 9 airplanes of U.S. registry would be affected by this proposed AD, that it would take approximately
10 work hours per airplane to accomplish the proposed actions, and that the average labor rate is $60 per work hour.
Required parts would be supplied by the manufacturer at no cost to operators. Based on these figures, the total cost
impact of the proposed AD on U.S. operators is estimated to be $5,400, or $600 per airplane. 

The total cost impact figure discussed above is based on assumptions that no operator has yet accomplished any of the
proposed requirements of this AD action, and that no operator would accomplish those actions in the future if this
AD were not adopted. 

The regulations proposed herein would not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this proposal would not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment. 

For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this proposed regulation (1) is not a ``significant regulatory action''
under Executive Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under the DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44
FR 11034, February 26, 1979); and (3) if promulgated, will not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative,
on a substantial number of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. A copy of the draft
regulatory evaluation prepared for this action is contained in the Rules Docket. A copy of it may be obtained by contacting
the Rules Docket at the location provided under the caption 

ADDRESSES

. 



List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39 



Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Safety. 



The Proposed Amendment 



Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration
proposes to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) as follows: 



PART 39_AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES 



1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows:

 




Authority:

 49 U.S.C. App. 1354(a), 1421 and 1423; 49 U.S.C. 106(g); and 14 CFR 11.89. 



39.13 



[Amended] 



2. Section 39.13 is amended by adding the following new airworthiness directive:

 




Jetstream Aircraft Limited: 

Docket 94NM170AD.

 





Applicability: 

Model 4101 airplanes; constructors numbers 41005 through 41015 inclusive, 41019 through 41024 inclusive, 41028,
and 41029; certificated in any category.

 

