 

3.4.1. Epidemiologic Studies 


Epidemiology has been defined as ``the study of the distributions and determinants of 
disease and injuries in human populations'' (Mausner and Kramer, 1985). Knowing the 
frequency of illness in groups and the factors that influence the distribution is the tool of 
epidemiology that allows the evaluation of causal inference with the goal of prevention and 
cure of disease. Epidemiologic studies are a means of evaluating the effects of neurotoxic 
substances in human populations, but such studies are limited because they must be 
performed shortly after exposure if the effect is acute. Most often these effects are suspected 
to be a result of occupational exposures due to the increased opportunity for exposure to 
industrial and other chemicals. 


3.4.1.1. Case reports. 


The first type of human study undertaken is the case report or case 
series, which can identify cases of a disease and are reported by clinicians or discerned 
through active or passive surveillance, usually in the workplace. For example, the 
neurological hazards of exposure to Kepone, dimethylaminopropionitrile, and methyl-n-butyl 
ketone were first reported as case studies by physicians who noted an unusual cluster of 
diseases in persons later found to have been exposed to these chemicals (Cone et al., 1987). 
However, case histories where exposure involved a single neurotoxic agent, though 
informative, are rare in the literature; for example, farmers are exposed to a wide variety of 
potentially neurotoxic pesticides. Careful case histories assist in identifying common risk 
factors, especially when the association between the exposure and disease is strong, the mode 
of action of the agent is biologically plausible, and clusters occur in a limited period of time. 
Case reports are inexpensive compared with other types of epidemiologic studies and 
can be obtained more quickly than more complex studies. They provide little information 
about disease frequency or population at risk, but their importance has been clearly 
demonstrated, particularly in accidental poisoning or acute exposure to high levels of 
toxicant. They remain an important source of index cases of new diseases and for 
surveillance in occupational settings. These studies require confirmation by additional 
epidemiologic research employing other study design. 


3.4.1.2. Cross-sectional studies. 


In cross-sectional studies or surveys, both the disease and 
suspected risk factors are ascertained at the same time and the findings are useful in 
generating hypotheses. A group of people is interviewed, examined, and tested at a single 
point in time to ascertain a relationship between a disease and a neurotoxic exposure. This 
study design does not allow the investigator to determine whether the disease or the exposure 
came first, rendering it less useful in estimating risk. These studies are intermediate in cost 
and time required to complete compared with case reports and more complex analytical 
studies. 


3.4.1.3. Case-control (retrospective) studies. 


Last (1986) defines a case-control study as 
one that ``starts with the identification of persons with the disease (or other outcome variable) 
of interest, and a suitable control population (comparison, reference) group of persons 
without the disease.'' He states that the relationship of an ``attribute'' to the disease is 
measured by comparing the diseased with the nondiseased with regard to how frequently the 
attribute is present in each of the groups. The cases are assembled from a population of 
persons with and without exposure and the comparison group is selected from the same 
population; the relative distribution of the potential risk factor (exposure) in both groups is 
evaluated by computing an odds ratio that serves as an estimate of the strength of the 
association between the disease and the potential risk factor. The statistical significance of 
the ratio is determined by calculating a p-value and is used to approximate relative risk. 
The case-control approach to the study of potential neurotoxins in the environment has 
provided a great deal of information. In his recent text, Valciukas (1991) notes that the 
case-control approach is the strategy of choice when no other environmental or biological 
indicator of neurotoxic exposure is available. He further states: ``Considering the fact that 
for the vast majority of neurotoxic chemical compounds, no objective biological indicators of 
exposure are available (or if they are, their half-life is too short to be of any practical value), 
the case-control paradigm is a widely accepted strategy for the assessment of toxic 
causation.'' The case-control study design, however, can be very susceptible to bias. The 
potential sources of bias are numerous and can be specific to a particular study, and will be 
discussed only briefly here. Many of these biases also can be present in cross-sectional 
studies. For example, recall bias or faulty recall of information by study subjects in a 
questionnaire-based study can distort the results of the study. Analysis of the 
case-comparison study design assumes that the selected cases are representative persons with 
the disease_either all cases with the disease or a representative sample of them have been 
ascertained. It further assumes that the control or comparison group is representative of the 
nondiseased population (or that the prevalence of the characteristic under study is the same in 
the control group as in general population). Failure to satisfy these assumptions may result 
in selection bias, but violation of assumptions does not necessarily invalidate the study 
results. 
An additional source of bias in case-control studies is the presence of confounding 
variables, i.e., factors known to be associated with the exposure and causally related to the 
disease under study. These must be controlled either in the design of the study by matching 
cases to controls on the basis of the confounding factor or in the analysis of the data by using 
statistical techniques such as stratification or regression. Matching requires time to identify 
an adequate number of potential controls to distinguish those with the proper characteristics, 
while statistical control of confounding requires a larger study. 
The definition of exposure is critical in epidemiologic studies. In occupational 
settings, exposure assessment is based on the job assignment of the study subjects, but can be 
more precise if detailed company records allow the development of exposure profiles. 





