 

&bull;$19,000,000 will be awarded to Florida for the Dade County public schools and Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami.


&bull;$4,939,700 (10% of the total) will be awarded under discretionary grant announcements which will be issued
separately setting forth application requirements and evaluation criteria. 
The purpose of targeted assistance grants is to provide, through a process of local planning and implementation,
direct services intended to result in the economic self-sufficiency and reduced welfare dependency of refugees
through job placements. 
The targeted assistance program reflects the requirements of section 412(c)(2)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act (INA), which provides that targeted assistance grants shall be made available ``(i) primarily for the purpose
of facilitating refugee employment and achievement of self-sufficiency, (ii) in a manner that does not supplant
other refugee program funds and that assures that not less than 95 percent of the amount of the grant award is made available
to the county or other local entity.'' 


II. Authorization 



Targeted assistance projects are funded under the authority of section 412(c)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act (INA), as amended by the Refugee Assistance Extension Act of 1986 (Pub. L. 99605), 8 U.S.C. 1522(c); section
501(a) of the Refugee Education Assistance Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96422), 8 U.S.C. 1522 note, insofar as it incorporates
by reference with respect to Cuban and Haitian entrants the authorities pertaining to assistance for refugees established
by section 412(c)(2) of the INA, as cited above; section 584(c) of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related
Programs Appropriations Act, 1988, as included in the FY 1988 Continuing Resolution (Pub. L. 100202), insofar
as it incorporates by reference with respect to certain Amerasians from Vietnam the authorities pertaining to assistance
for refugees established by section 412(c)(2) of the INA, as cited above, including certain Amerasians from Vietnam
who are U.S. citizens, as provided under title II of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs
Appropriations Acts, 1989 (Pub. L. 100461), 1990 (Pub. L. 101167), and 1991 (Pub. L. 101513).



III. Client and Service Priorities 


Targeted assistance funding should be used to assist refugee families to achieve economic independence. To this
end, ORR expects States and counties to ensure that a coherent plan of services is developed for each eligible family
that addresses the family's needs from time of arrival until attainment of economic independence. Each service plan
should address a family's needs for both employment-related services and other needed social services. 

Services funded under the targeted assistance allocations are required to focus primarily on those refugees who,
either because of their protracted use of public assistance or difficulty in securing employment, continue to need
services beyond the initial years of resettlement. The targeted assistance program, however, is not intended to
be limited to cash assistance recipients. TAP-funded services may also be provided to other refugees in need of services,
regardless of whether the refugees are receiving cash assistance. 
In addition to the statutory requirement that TAP funds be used ``primarily for the purpose of facilitating refugee
employment'' (section 412(c)(2)(B)(i)), funds awarded under this program are intended to help fulfill the Congressional
intent that ``employable refugees should be placed on jobs as soon as possible after their arrival in the United States''
(section 412(a)(1)(B)(i) of the INA). Therefore targeted assistance funds must be used primarily for services which
directly enhance refugee employment potential, have specific employment objectives, and are designed to enable
refugees to obtain jobs with less than one year's participation in the targeted assistance program. Examples of these
activities are: Job development; job placement; job-related and vocational English; short-term job training specifically
related to opportunities in the local economy; on-the-job training; business and employer incentives (such as on-site
employee orientation, vocational English training, or bilingual supervisor assistance); and business technical
assistance. General or remedial educational activities_such as adult basic education (ABE) or preparation for
a high school equivalency or general education diploma (GED)_may be provided within the context of an individual
employability plan for a refugee which is intended to result in job placement in less than one year. ORR encourages
the continued provision of services after a refugee has entered a job to help the refugee retain employment or move
to a better job. Targeted assistance funds cannot be used for long-term training programs such as vocational training
that last for more than a year or educational programs that are not intended to lead to employment within a year. If TAP
funds are used for the provision of English language training, such training should be provided concurrently, rather
than sequentially, with employment or with other employment-related services, to the maximum extent possible.

A portion of a local area's allocation may be used for services which are not directed toward the achievement of a specific
employment objective in less than one year but which are essential to the adjustment of refugees in the community,
provided such needs are clearly demonstrated and such use is approved by the State. 





