 

Rather than requiring the service area to include those geographies accounting for a ``preponderance'' of the institution's
loans, as in the December proposal, or the areas accounting for a ``substantial portion'' of the institution's loans,
as in the existing regulation, the revised proposal would require the service area to include those geographies in
which the institution has made ``a significant number and amount of loans.'' The agencies intend the meaning of ``significant''
to be broad, and to include all geographies around its branches and proprietary deposit-taking ATMs where an institution
has made more than a handful of loans. Because of this change in the proposal, the criterion in the small institution
assessment method that requires a majority of an institution's loans to be in its service area(s) for a satisfactory
rating would not be redundant as it might have been in the December proposal.

Under the revised proposal, as in the December proposal, the agencies would consider whether the delineation reflects
illegal discrimination, and thus would, as some commenters suggested, consider the racial composition of geographies
in reviewing an institution's delineation. The agencies have eliminated the term ``redlining'' because the agencies
believe that term is included in the term ``illegal discrimination.'' In this regard, illegal discrimination includes
the practice of refusing to lend to an area or neighborhood on the basis of race or other prohibited bases.

Some commenters thought that the agencies should require institutions to justify the methodology for delineations,
and that the regulation expressly provide for community input into the delineation. Under the revised proposal,
examiners would review whether the service area meets the requirements of the regulation, but the agencies would
not prescribe or review the method by which an institution defines its service area. Rather than having the agencies
determine whether a delineation is ``reasonable,'' it is simpler and more effective in meeting the purposes of the
statute to focus on the lending patterns of the institution, whether low- and moderate income areas are excluded,
and whether the service area reflects illegal discrimination. Furthermore, the revised proposal would not expressly
provide for community input into the delineation. As part of the assessment context, agency staff would review comments
from the community with regard to the performance of an institution, including its delineation of its service area(s).

The revised proposal would retain the requirement from the December proposal that institutions delineate multiple
service areas, with clarifying modifications. The revised proposal would not require institutions to delineate
an MSA or other political boundary. The requirements that would govern under the revised proposal should prevent
institutions from inappropriately limiting their service area(s) in order to exclude certain geographies.

Some commenters suggested requiring the service area to include full census tracts and block numbering areas to facilitate
data collection and reporting. The agencies agree, and the revised proposal would contain such a requirement.

While comments generally supported the separate treatment of wholesale or limited purpose institutions, many commenters
questioned whether wholesale or limited purpose institutions should have nationwide service areas and suggested
that more consideration should be given to qualified investments in the institution's local area. Some commenters
claimed that permitting wholesale banks to define a ``national community'' violated the ``local community'' orientation
of the statute. The revised proposal would eliminate a mandatory nationwide service area for wholesale or limited
purpose institutions. Such institutions have chosen to locate in particular communities, and it is appropriate
that their CRA performance reflect their location. The revised proposal would therefore require that a wholesale
or limited purpose institution designate as its service area the area or areas around its offices, or a broader statewide
or regional area that includes such areas. The institution would have a broad scope in preparing this designation,
so long as the area meets the purposes of the CRA and does not arbitrarily exclude low and moderate income geographies.
Performance under the community development test would focus on qualified investments, community development
loans outstanding and community development services that benefit the areas within the institution's service area.
Qualifying activities that benefit areas outside the institution's service area would be considered up to an amount
equal to the amount of qualifying activities within the institution's service area. However, if the institution
could demonstrate only a limited need or opportunity to provide qualifying activities within its service area, the
appropriate agency could modify or eliminate this limitation.




