 

Monthly negotiated rulemaking sessions were held from January through June 1994 in and around Washington, DC. 


Proposed Regulatory Changes 



The Secretary submitted drafts of proposed regulatory language to implement section 422(g)(1) (A) and (B) for discussion
at the negotiated rulemaking sessions. Although not required by OBRA to be negotiated, a draft regulation to implement
section 422(g)(1)(C) was also submitted by the Secretary at the request of industry negotiators but was withdrawn
when substantial opposition to its approach was expressed. Nevertheless, the dialogue with the other negotiators
was quite helpful, and the Secretary intends to reconsider the approach and propose regulatory language on this subject
in the regular course at a later time after consultation with interested parties. Consensus was reached on all aspects
of the other rules and the accompanying preamble. In reaching consensus, the negotiators agreed that all of the rules
proposed in this notice properly come within the Secretary's statutory powers, but they reserve the right to challenge
the validity of the underlying statutes or subsequent interpretations of the rules by the Secretary. 
The following summarizes the major changes in this notice of proposed rulemaking:


Section 682.410Fiscal, administrative and enforcement requirements 


Paragraph (a) of this section currently establishes fiscal requirements for guaranty agencies by (1) defining reserve
funds in terms of sources and permitted uses, (2) regulating the investment of those funds, (3) providing for reimbursement
of reserve funds in the event that revenue is derived from assets developed or purchased with those funds or those assets
are converted to uses unrelated to the FFEL Program and (4) establishing minimum reserve fund levels. At the outset
of the negotiated rulemaking proceeding industry negotiators requested a better definition of the reserve fund,
and many of the proposed amendments to this section are intended to be responsive to that request. 
Paragraph (a)(1) specifies the receipts that must be credited to the reserve fund. The Secretary proposes to amend
that paragraph to clarify certain matters. First, paragraph (a)(1)(ii) currently refers only to funds ``appropriated
by'' a State for the loan guaranty programs, but funds received from a State in any other manner for that purpose are
already covered by paragraph (a)(1)(ix). Accordingly, the Secretary proposes to substitute the broader phrase
``received from'' in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) to obviate any possibility of confusion. Second, paragraph (a)(1)(vi),
which now refers to administrative cost allowance payments, is proposed to be amended to add transitional support
payments under section 458(a) of the HEA, which Congress created in OBRA when it eliminated the administrative cost
allowance. Third, although paragraph (a)(1)(vii) currently includes funds collected by the guaranty agency without
any qualification, this paragraph has always been understood to apply only to collections on FFEL loans on which a
claim has been paid. That qualification is now proposed to be made explicit. Finally, the Secretary proposes to rearrange
the wording of paragraph (a)(1)(ix) for stylistic reasons only. 
Paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) currently specify the permitted uses of the reserve fund. Since the former statutory provisions
that segregated certain reserve fund receipts for restricted uses were later repealed, it is no longer necessary
to have two different sets of permitted uses. To simplify the regulation the Secretary proposes to combine the two
paragraphs by redesignating current paragraph (a)(3)(i) as paragraph (a)(2)(x) and removing the balance of the
current paragraph (a)(3). Although it is already well understood that neither the current paragraph (a)(3) nor the
current paragraph (a)(2)(ii) was meant to permit excessive or otherwise unreasonable expenditures, the Secretary
plans to make that understanding explicit in the subsequent rule proposal on misuse, misapplication, and improper
expenditures. The Secretary now also proposes to add three new paragraphs to paragraph (a)(2). Paragraph (a)(2)(viii)
would make explicit the currently-understood authority for guaranty agencies to use reserve funds to make borrower
refunds arising from claims and defenses. Paragraph (a)(2)(ix) would authorize the reversal of prior credits to
the reserve funds under certain conditions, including contemporaneous documentation that the amounts were received
as only temporary infusions of capital. Finally, the guaranty agency representatives questioned the legality and
fairness of any retroactive application of the other proposed amendments to this section and requested that paragraph
(a)(2)(xi) be added. Under this provision prior actions would remain lawful if a guaranty agency had acted in good
faith, as measured by the laws, rules, standards, customs, and practices prevailing at the times of the actions. Although
the Secretary's representatives defended the general power of the Secretary to amend retroactively regulations
governing guaranty agencies, they agreed to the requested paragraph in the interest of fairness. 
The Secretary recognizes that the customary problems involved in allocating shared expenses among different activities
conducted within a single entity or among related entities and the particular problems created by the limited life
expectancies of some guaranty agencies as a result of OBRA may pose difficulties for the agencies in determining the
propriety of payments from the reserve fund under paragraph (a)(2). In the subsequent rulemaking proceeding on misuse,
misallocation, and improper expenditures the Secretary plans to establish procedures for the formal review of cost
allocation programs and major capital expenditures by guaranty agencies. In the meantime, the staff of the Department
of Education stands ready to assist program participants by providing informal advice in these areas. 
The Secretary proposes to add a new paragraph (a)(3) to clarify the appropriate accounting method for reserve fund
reporting. Generally-accepted accounting principles provide for the deferral of certain items of income and the
accrual of certain items of expenses on financial statements to match related income and expenses, and many guaranty
agencies have established these accounts. On the other hand, part E of ED Form 1130, the annual report for guaranty
agencies, requires that sources and uses of program funds be reported to the Secretary strictly on a cash basis. See
ED Form 1130 Instructions (May 1993 ed.), pp. 7980. To avoid any confusion, the new paragraph (a)(3) would expressly
provide that deferrals and accruals for reserve fund reporting be made only with the prior approval of the Secretary.






