 




<CFRNO>21 CFR Part 878</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 91N0281]</RINDOCK>



General and Plastic Surgery Devices; Effective Date of Requirement for Premarket Approval of Silicone Inflatable
(Saline-Filled) Breast Prosthesis; Public Hearing



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of public hearing.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing a public hearing on a proposed rule to amend its regulations to
require the filing of a premarket approval application (PMA) or a notice of completion of a product development protocol
(PDP) for the silicone inflatable (saline-filled) breast prosthesis, a medical device. The purpose of the public
hearing is to assist the agency in determining when to issue a final rule to require the filing of a PMA for the silicone
inflatable breast prosthesis.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The public hearing will be held on Thursday, June 2, 1994, from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Submit written notices of participation
and comments by May 16, 1994. Written comments will be accepted until July 5, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

The public hearing will be held at the Sheraton Washington Hotel, 2660 Woodley Rd. NW., Washington, DC 20008. Submit
written notices of participation and comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration,
rm. 123, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857. Written notices of participation can also be faxed to 3015940113.
A limited number of hotel rooms have been reserved at the Sheraton Washington Hotel for June 1, 1994. Attendees are
responsible for making their own reservations. In order to receive the established rate, attendees should refer
to the FDA hearing. Two copies of any comments are to be submitted, except that individuals may submit one copy. Comments
are to be identified with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document. 


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Thomas Arrowsmith-Lowe, Office of Health Affairs (HFY40), Food and Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane,
Rockville, MD 20857, 3014431472.





SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
I. Background


Section 515(b)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C. 360e(b)(1)) establishes the requirement
that a preamendments device that FDA has classified into class III is subject to premarket approval. Section 515(b)(2)(A)
of the act provides that a proceeding for the promulgation of a final rule to require premarket approval shall be initiated
by publication of a notice of proposed rulemaking in the 

Federal Register

.
If the proposed rule to require premarket approval for a preamendments device is made final, section 501(f)(2)(B)
of the act (21 U.S.C. 351(f)(2)(B)) requires that a PMA or notice of completion of a PDP for any such device be filed within
90 days of the date of promulgation of the final rule or 30 months after final classification of the device under section
513 of the act (21 U.S.C. 360c), whichever is later. If a PMA or notice of completion of a PDP is not filed by the later of
the two dates, commercial distribution of the device is required to cease. The device may, however, be distributed
for investigational use if the manufacturer, importer, or other sponsor of the device complies with the investigational
device exemption (IDE) regulations. The act does not permit an extension of the 90-day period after promulgation
of a final rule within which an application or a notice is required to be filed.


II. Summary of Risks and Benefits


In the 

Federal Register

 of January 8, 1993 (58 FR 3436), FDA published a proposed rule to require the filing, under section 515(b) of the act
(21 U.S.C. 360e(b)), of PMA's for the classified silicone inflatable (saline-filled) breast prosthesis and all
substantially equivalent devices. In accordance with section 515(b)(2)(A) of the act, FDA included in the preamble
to the proposal the agency's proposed findings regarding: (1) The degree of risk of illness or injury designed to be
eliminated or reduced by requiring the device to meet the premarket approval requirement of the act, and (2) the benefits
to the public from use of the device (58 FR 3436 at 3438). The following is a summary of those findings. 
The envelope or shell of the silicone inflatable breast prosthesis is made of silicone rubber. Accordingly, prolonged
contact with the prosthesis raises the same questions about the potential risks for adverse immunological effects
and/or connective tissue disorders that have been asked with regard to the use of silicone gel-filled breast prostheses
and silicone injections. In addition, no satisfactory, independent data base has been compiled to serve as a basis
for the thorough evaluation of the chronic toxic effects and the possible teratogenic effects of silicone. Lastly,
neither particles which may shed from the silicone shell, nor the chemical forms of silicone monomers or other additives
which may leach from the shell, have yet been adequately characterized with regard to metabolism, distribution,
and excretion.
The most common risk associated with breast augmentation and reconstruction is fibrous capsular contracture, the
formation of a constricting fibrous layer around the prosthesis. Capsular contracture may result in excessive breast
firmness, discomfort, pain, disfigurement, and/or displacement of the implant. Deflation of the implant is another
risk associated with use of the device. Deflation, which results from partial or total loss of the contents due to puncture,
rupture, or other failure of the shell, or a faulty valve, results in the loss of shape of the prosthesis, and often requires
surgical intervention to correct. Lastly, the presence of any breast prosthesis may interfere with standard mammography
procedures used to screen patients for breast cancer. By compressing overlying breast tissue, the presence of the
implant makes it more difficult to detect small tumors. In addition, the presence of the implant can produce a shadow
on the radiograph that may reduce visual clarity of a significant portion of the breast.
Whether performed for reconstruction or augmentation purposes, breast prosthesis implantation is a discretionary,
elective surgical procedure performed for its psychological benefits. Several studies have been published that
show psychological improvement in both reconstruction and augmentation patients; however, these studies did not
use objective, standardized methodologies that have been validated for measuring the psychological benefit of
the device. 
The silicone inflatable (saline-filled) breast prosthesis is currently the only device legally available for breast
augmentation. For breast reconstruction, the current legal restrictions on the use of silicone gel-filled implants
limit their use to those cases where the silicone inflatable (saline-filled) breast prosthesis is considered medically
unsatisfactory. 

III. Public Hearing 


Based on the available scientific evidence and comments received on the proposed rule, FDA has concluded that PMA's
will need to be submitted and evaluated for the silicone inflatable (saline-filled) breast prosthesis. However,
the agency has also determined that a public hearing is warranted to assist the agency in determining when to issue
a final rule to require the filing of PMA's for the silicone inflatable breast prosthesis. 
The agenda for the hearing will include: (1) An overview by FDA of the statutory procedure for requesting the submission
of PMA's for preamendment class III devices; (2) a presentation by FDA on the preclinical and clinical studies that
are required to be completed to support a PMA for the silicone inflatable breast prosthesis; (3) oral testimony by
the manufacturers on the status of their scientific studies, including their prospective clinical studies, and
the scheduled timeframe for completion of those studies; and (4) oral testimony by consumers and/or representatives
of consumer and health professional organizations to assist the agency in determining when to require the filing
of PMA's for the silicone inflatable breast prosthesis. To the extent possible, oral testimony should address the
following issues: 


Manufacturers


1. To what extent do protocols for your pre-clinical testing and ongoing clinical prospective studies reflect the
elements identified in the guidance for submission of PMA's for the silicone inflatable breast prosthesis? For major
items that do not comply with the FDA guidance document, what is the basis for the scientific validity of the involved
tests and/or studies?
2. When were such studies commenced, and when do you expect to have completed all the studies that are necessary for
submission of a PMA?
3. How many patients are being implanted with silicone inflatable (saline-filled) breast prostheses at the current
time (e.g., 1993 through the present)?



Consumers and Representatives of Consumer and Health Professional Organizations


1. Based on the risks to health as you understand them today, what degree of priority do you recommend that FDA give to
calling for safety and effectiveness data for the silicone inflatable breast prosthesis?
2. Based on the benefits of the device as you understand them today, to what extent do you believe that continued availability
of the silicone inflatable breast prosthesis fulfills an important patient need that would otherwise be unmet if
the device was no longer commercially available or restricted in its availability?
3. Do you believe that FDA should distinguish between use of the device for breast reconstruction versus use for augmentation
purposes in its regulation of the silicone inflatable breast prosthesis?



IV. Notice of Hearing Under 21 CFR Part 15



The Commissioner of Food and Drugs is announcing that the public hearing will be held in accordance with 21 CFR part
15. The presiding officer will be Carol Scheman, Deputy Commissioner for External Affairs, Food and Drug Administration.
Ms. Scheman will be joined by other FDA officals.

Persons who wish to participate must file a written notice of participation with the Dockets Management Branch (address
above) on or before May 16, 1994. All notices submitted should be identified with the docket number found in brackets
in the heading of this document and should contain the person's name, address, telephone number, FAX number, business
affiliation, if any, a brief summary of the presentation, and the approximate time requested for the presentation.
The agency requests that individuals or groups having similar interests consolidate their comments and present
them through a single representative. FDA may require joint presentations by persons with common interests. FDA
will allocate the time available for the hearing among the persons who properly file a notice of participation.
After reviewing the notices of participation and accompanying information, FDA will schedule each appearance and
notify each participant by mail, telephone, or FAX, of the time allotted to the person and the approximate time the
person's presentation is scheduled to begin. The schedule of the public hearing will be available at the hearing.
After the hearing, it will be placed on file in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) under docket number 91N0281.

Under 15.30 the hearing is informal, and the rules of evidence do not apply. No participant may interrupt the
presentation of another participant. Only the presiding officer and panel members may question any person during
or at the conclusion of their presentation.
 Public hearings, including hearings under part 15, are subject to FDA's guideline (21 CFR part 10, Subpart C) concerning
the policy and procedures for electronic media coverage of FDA's public administrative proceedings. Under 10.205,
representatives of the electronic media may be permitted, subject to certain limitations, to videotape, film, or
otherwise record FDA's public administrative proceedings, including presentations by participants. The hearing
will be transcribed as stipulated in 15.30(b). Orders for copies of the transcript can be placed at the meeting
or through the Dockets Management Branch (address above).

Any handicapped persons requiring special accommodations in order to attend the hearing should direct those needs
to the contact person listed above.
 To the extent that the conditions for the hearing, as described in this notice, conflict with any provisions set out
in part 15, this notice acts as a waiver of those provisions as specified in 15.30(h). 
The administrative record of the proposed rule will remain open until July 5, 1994, to allow comments on matters raised
at the hearing. Persons who wish to provide additional materials for consideration should file these materials with
the Dockets Management Branch (address above) by July 5, 1994.





Dated: April 29, 1994.

</FURTHER>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9410785 Filed 5294; 10:14 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

