 

Lafarge submitted in its December 29, 1993, response sample pricing proposals associated with the graduated requirements
customers in question. At verification, we were able to examine in detail only one of those pricing proposals. This
proposal, dated January 9, 1991, was specifically for 1991 (all the prices and discounts mentioned referenced 1991
only) and was silent on the effective period of the terms it quoted. We also reviewed a letter that was dated January
20, 1994, the last day of verification, and was faxed to the respondent on that day by the customer in question. This
letter attempted to show that the January 9, 1991, pricing proposal constituted the date of the agreement regarding
the essential terms of sale for all sales made to that customer after that date. This letter also discussed renewal
of the pricing arrangement. However, not only was this letter unclear as to exactly what kind of agreement the parties
had reached pursuant to the proposal, but it also did not indicate when renewal was discussed. In accordance with the
Department's practice, the date of any such renewal would constitute a new date of sale. Also in accordance with our
practice, we required some form of documentation attesting to the date of renewal, yet no documentation apart from
the faxed letter was provided. Lafarge was also unable to provide any such documentation for the other customers in
question. 

Without some documentary evidence of a renewal prior to the POI, we cannot assume that the terms of the January 1991
pricing proposal were in effect during the POI. See Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Certain Forged
Steel Crankshafts from the Federal Republic of Germany, 52 FR 28170, 28172 (July 28, 1987) (Crankshafts from the FRG);
and Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Gray Portland Cement and Clinker from Mexico, 55 FR 29244,
29248 (July 18, 1990) (Gray Portland Cement from Mexico). Because we have no such evidence, we have determined that
the dates of sale for the shipments at issue are within the POI. Accordingly, we have included them in our final dumping
analysis. We do not think, however, that the pricing information contained in the invoice listing referred to by respondent
is appropriate for use in our dumping analysis. This data was only submitted at verification to support the reconciliation
of Lafarge's reported POI sales with its financial statements (information previously submitted in its responses).
For purposes of making CV-to-price comparisons in our dumping analysis, this listing constitutes new information
under 19 CFR 353.31(a)(i), and was therefore not timely submitted. It is not the Department's practice to accept new
information at verification, because it leaves no opportunity for petitioners to analyze the sales reporting and
provide deficiency questions, and no opportunity for petitioners to analyze and comment on these sales. In addressing
this issue previously, we have stated: 




The untimely submission of key information *** precluded the Department from conducting a reasonable
and thorough analysis of this information prior to the verification, just as petitioners were unable to comment on
the new [information] *** The purpose of verification is to establish the accuracy of a response rather
than to reconstruct the information to fit the requirements of the Department. 




Final Result of Sales at Less Than Fair Value; Light-Walled Welded Rectangular Carbon Steel Tubing from Argentina,
54 FR 13913 (April 6, 1989); Final Determinations of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Certain Hot-Rolled Carbon Steel
Flat Products and Cold-Rolled Carbon Steel Flat Products from the Netherlands, 58 FR 37199, 37203 (July 9, 1993).




Even if this listing had been submitted seven days prior to verification, in accordance with 19 CFR 353.31(a)(i),
it did not contain sufficient data for purposes of dumping analysis. Therefore, because we did not have complete sales
information on the record to properly analyze these sales, we used BIA. 

However, we do not think that use of the petition rate as BIA for these sales, as suggested by petitioner, is warranted.
In this case, we are using partial BIA because Lafarge has provided responses to our questionnaires. When we resort
to partial BIA, it is our practice to use the highest non-aberrational margin based on respondent's reported sales.
This is an adverse figure, yet is based on the respondent's calculated margins. Therefore, we have used as BIA for these
sales the highest, non-aberrational margin calculated for any of respondent's reported U.S. sales of cement. 



Comment 2 



Petitioner contends that certain reported U.S. cement sales alleged to have been made under an exclusive supply contract
dated outside the POI should be included in the Department's analysis. Petitioner argues that the Department was
unable to verify that these sales were in fact made pursuant to a Master Agreement that Lafarge claims was an exclusive
supply contract. Accordingly, petitioner maintains that respondent failed verification with respect to these
sales. Furthermore, petitioner contends that, even if the Department had been able to verify these sales, respondent
never had an exclusive supply contract with this particular customer. Petitioner asserts that the Master Agreement
is neither ``exclusive'' nor a ``contract.'' Therefore, petitioner argues that the Department should determine
that the appropriate date of sale for these particular sales is the date of invoice, which is within the POI, and the
Department should include these sales in its dumping calculation. 

Respondent maintains that the Department should consider the date of the Master Agreement as the date of sale for the
subject sales. Respondent argues that the blanket purchase orders issued by the customer prior to the POI indicates
the customer's commitment to purchase its requirements from the respondent for specific products at the specific
prices set by the Master Agreement. 





