 

&bull;Interim storage for the stabilized high-activity waste form. 
&bull;Production and disposal of a stabilized low-activity waste form. 
&bull;Management of encapsulated strontium and cesium inventory. 
DOE also needs to address closure of tanks (including disposal of tanks, piping, ancillary facilities, and contaminated
soil). Although tank closure is included in the TPA, closure is not included in the proposed action for the TWRS EIS
because the impacts of tank closure cannot be meaningfully evaluated at this time. DOE will conduct an appropriate
NEPA review, such as preparing a tank closure EIS, in the future. 


TWRS EIS Alternatives 


A number of alternatives can be constructed from the range of options available for the four major subcomponents of
the TWRS, which are retrieval, pretreatment, immobilization and storage/disposal. Combinations of these options
comprise the range of reasonable alternatives currently envisioned for TWRS. The TPA establishes one specific case
within the range of alternatives to be considered in the TWRS EIS. The TWRS EIS will also evaluate a number of other alternatives
constructed from the range of options described for the four major subcomponents of the TWRS and a no-action alternative
in order to adequately evaluate the full range of potential environmental impacts. 


TPA Preferred Alternative


On March 31, 1993, DOE, EPA, and Ecology agreed to enter into formal negotiations on matters relating to Hanford tank
waste remediation, environmental restoration activities, cost control, and implementation and administration
of the Hanford Federal Facility Agreement and Consent Order. The negotiations were concluded in September 1993,
with tentative agreement on all matters under negotiation. The revised TPA received public review during November
1993, and the TPA was scheduled to be signed by the three parties on January 25, 1994. The full TPA covers subjects outside
the purview of the TWRS program. The elements of the TPA which are within the scope of the TWRS program constitute elements
of the preferred alternative for purposes of the TWRS EIS. Accordingly, the TPA preferred alternative consists of
the following activities: 
&bull;Upgrading the infrastructure of the high-level waste tank farms to provide improved facility management
and operation. 
&bull;Characterization of the wastes in all 177 SSTs and DSTs to facilitate treatment, immobilization and disposal.

&bull;Construction and operation of additional DSTs (beyond the six tanks proposed in the interim action EIS noticed
here) as necessary to support waste management and disposal. 
&bull;Stabilization of SST waste by removing and storing the pumpable liquids in DSTs, thus reducing the potential
for leaks to the surrounding soil. 
&bull;Retrieval of the waste from SSTs and DSTs with priority on the SSTs. The retrieval criterion is removal of 99%
of the waste from all SSTs on a tank-by-tank basis. 
&bull;Construction and operation of a waste pretreatment facility to treat the tank waste and to prepare the low-activity
fraction for final processing. The high-activity fraction of the waste would be stored pending final processing.
Separate complexes would be constructed to house enhanced sludge washing and cesium and strontium ion exchange processes.
An evaporator would be included in the low-activity waste pretreatment complex. These complexes could be stand-alone
facilities, a set of distributed facilities, or part of a central processing complex. 
&bull;Construction and operation of a low-activity waste vitrification plant of appropriate capacity. Bounding
analysis may be used if definitive designs are not available. DOE would maintain in a standby condition the capability
to restart the grout facility if its operation is necessary before new DSTs are available to provide tank space to resolve
safety issues. 
&bull;Storage/disposal of the vitrified low-activity waste on-site at Hanford. 
&bull;Construction and operation of a high-activity waste vitrification plant of appropriate capacity. Bounding
analysis may be used if definitive designs are not available. 
&bull;Construction and operation of storage for vitrified high-activity waste until a repository for permanent
disposal is available. 
&bull;Existing cesium and strontium capsules would be either over-packed and stored, or dissolved and blended with
the high-activity vitrification waste stream. 


Additional Alternatives


Additional alternatives will be constructed from the range of options described below in order to adequately evaluate
the full range of potential environmental impacts. 




