 

Such changes are hereby recommended and would be implemented upon amendment of the order. 
(2) Section 945.20 Establishment and membership should be amended to provide that at least one member and alternate
member position for District No. 1 on the Idaho-Eastern Oregon Potato Committee shall be represented by producers
predominately of potatoes for seed. The committee is the administrative body selected by the Secretary to make recommendations
for operating the order. Currently, the order specifies that the committee shall consist of eight members, of whom
five shall be producers. For each member there shall be an alternate who shall have the same qualifications as the member.
However, there has been no requirement that any producer should be predominately a seed producer. There are approximately
200 seed producers involved in this unique production and marketing facet of the industry. Since approximately 90
percent of the order's seed production comes from District No. 1, it is appropriate that the seed producer member and
alternate should come from that district. 
Seed potatoes are typically produced in areas isolated from where potatoes are produced for commercial fresh or processing
markets. Seed potato needs are different than those for fresh market consumption. Seed potato buyers are particularly
concerned about receiving certified seed potatoes, which require that certain plant diseases are within established
tolerances, and that potatoes are of an appropriate (smaller) size for planting. 
This change in representation would allow for new and more specific ideas from this unique facet of the industry. Providing
for such representation would be consistent with a stated objective of the Department's Guidelines for Fruit, Vegetable,
and Specialty Crop Marketing Orders of improving representation and allowing for different and more contemporary
ideas. 
A proponent for this proposal testified that proposed seed producer members not be required to be producing potatoes
or to have produced potatoes during the previous two years. However, the order specifies that to be eligible to serve
as a producer on the committee the person must be currently producing potatoes. Also, being a current producer would
result in better qualified nominees who would be more knowledgeable of the current problems and situation regarding
seed potato production and marketing. To best represent seed producers, the nominees for the position should be current
producers who predominately produce seed potatoes and who have produced such potatoes during at least three of the
last five years. The order defines 

Producer 

as any person engaged in the production of potatoes for market. It is also a requirement that to vote in any referendum
held under the order a producer must be producing potatoes at that time. Currently, the order only specifies two types
of committee members_producers and handlers. 
This proposal would encourage, to the maximum extent possible, broader-based participation by all industry members
of the regulated community in the administration of the order. It is hereby concluded that this provision should be
changed. 
The section should also be amended by adding a 
paragraph (d) to require that at least every six years, the committee shall review committee size, composition, and
representation and recommend to the Secretary whether changes should be made, as provided in 945.23 Redistricting
and reapportionment. Currently, no minimum period is specified during which the committee should review whether
significant changes in the industry warrant a change in committee representation. However, the industry is dynamic
and some changes in acreage, production, and number of producers and handlers occur every year. Although review of
the committee structure could be conducted annually, testimony indicated that at least every six years was an appropriate
period within which the committee should review the changes and recommend whether the Secretary should change committee
makeup or representation. Record evidence supports the need to provide the committee with flexibility to make necessary
changes in the composition of the committee to reflect future changes in industry structure or production shifts.
These changes to this section are hereby recommended. 



