 

Moreover, as discussed earlier, the NPS found that continued use of the highway by commercial traffic, excluding
the transport of hazardous materials, would not adversely affect park resources or visitor experience. For these
reasons, the NPS proposed the rule primarily to resolve the conflict between current regulation and existing use,
with the intent being to authorize general commercial use of U.S. Highway 191 subject to certain restrictions. 

Two commenters expressed that any restriction on commercial vehicles, such as the prohibition on hazardous materials
transports, was unfair or unnecessary. NPS acknowledges that the rule is a compromise between two opposing viewpoints
and that not all interested parties are supportive of the compromise. 



Section by Section Analysis 



Although portions of the proposed rule apply to all park roads, virtually all comments focused primarily on the issues
related specifically to U.S. Highway 191. Based on this response, the order of sections in the final rule has been changed
slightly from that in the NPRM to improve the flow from Highway 191-specific sections to more general sections applicable
to all park roads. Comments are addressed according to the section numbering used in the final rule. 

Section 7.13(a)(1). This section authorizes commercial vehicles to use U.S. Highway 191. One commenter expressed
support for the authorization of commercial vehicles to use U.S. Highway 191 in Yellowstone, but was concerned that
the restriction of hazardous materials transport on U.S. Highway 191 in Yellowstone may establish a precedent that
would be expanded to include restrictions on commercial vehicles traveling on that portion of U.S. Highway 191 which
passes through Grand Teton National Park. The Yellowstone special regulation is being promulgated primarily to
address a particular and unique situation regarding the specific twenty-mile portion of U.S. Highway 191 that travels
through the northwest corner of Yellowstone National Park. The highway that travels from the West Entrance through
the interior of the park to the South Entrance is not considered a portion of U.S. Highway 191 and is not opened to commercial
vehicle use by this rule. Any future consideration of the regulations at Grand Teton National Park is not related to
the Yellowstone situation and would require a separate rulemaking process with public review. 


As proposed, Section 7.13(a)(2), which was identified in the NPRM as section (a)(3), would have prohibited the transport
of hazardous materials on all park roads including U.S. Highway 191 except under certain circumstances requiring
a permit. This section was developed primarily to address issues related to U.S. Highway 191. All comments received
on this section related only to U.S Highway 191. In part as a result of the focus of these comments, the NPS has realized
that the general application of this section to other park roads raises complex issues related to park suppliers and
hazardous materials deliveries to the Cooke City, Montana, area that were not evaluated in the two environmental
assessments or addressed in the NPRM. To minimize confusion regarding hazardous materials transports on other park
roads, which are currently managed under other permitting processes, the wording of this section in the final rule
has been revised to limit its applicability specifically to U.S. Highway 191. 

Two commenters representing the commercial trucking industry suggested that the language as published in the NPRM
for section 7.13(a)(2) is ``overly broad'' when referring to Department of Transportation definitions and regulations
found in 49 CFR Subtitle B. These commenters offered conflicting suggestions as to the most appropriate sections
to cross-reference. The NPS agrees that more specific wording is appropriate and has revised the final wording of
this section as follows:




The transporting on U.S. Highway 191 of any substance or combination of substances, including any hazardous substance,
hazardous material, or hazardous waste 

as defined in 49 CFR 171.8 

that requires placarding 

of the transport vehicle in accordance with 49 CFR 177.823, 

or any marine pollutant that requires marking, as defined in 49 CFR Subtitle B, is prohibited; provided, however,
that *** (additional wording is 

italicized

)




One commenter suggested that the superintendent's authority to issue permits established in this section was essentially
redundant with the permit authority established in 7.13(a)(4). In light of the changes in wording, the NPS
disagrees. Section 7.13(a)(4) applies to commercial vehicles on all park roads and replaces, in part, section 7.13(c),
which is being deleted. Section 7.13(a)(2) applies specifically to the transport of hazardous materials on U.S.
Highway 191. 



