 

Current initiatives to reduce Herstatt risk in foreign exchange transactions point to the need for greater future
overlap of final interbank settlement facilities in Asia, Europe, and North America. While in the future Asian and
European systems may well be open later during their local banking days, the achievement of a significant overlap
in payment system hours also requires earlier opening hours for U.S. payment systems, especially to achieve overlapping
hours with Asian markets. With such earlier hours, opportunities may increase substantially for more nearly simultaneous
settlements of multi-currency transactions, and associated reductions in Herstatt risk. It should be noted, however,
that although simultaneous or near-simultaneous payment for multi-currency transactions reduces the temporal
dimension of settlement risk, achieving final payment in one currency against a simultaneous, but provisional,
payment in another currency does not eliminate fully Herstatt risk. Therefore, to address fully the problem of controlling
Herstatt risk, it is important that the overlap in operating hours include overlap in systems that provide final settlement
in central bank money.

3

 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


3

</FOOTNAME>
Fedwire in the United States and BOJ-NET in Japan, for example, currently provide real-time gross settlement services
in the U.S. dollar and yen, respectively. Significant projects to establish real-time gross settlement systems
are now underway in France, the United Kingdom, and other countries, and legal developments are occurring that will
help ensure the availability of payment systems in all or most European countries that provide for final payments
on an intraday basis. Thus, in the next few years, concerns about the lack of intraday final payment capabilities in
major industrialized countries are likely to be reduced substantially. 
</FOOTNOTE>


Domestic markets. With respect to domestic markets, there are relatively few types of transactions for which immediate
and final payment at a particular time during the day is an absolute requirement. The demand for final payment at a particular
time during the day for corporate customers is currently quite small and is limited to such things as payments to settle
mergers and acquisitions and the distribution of funds from underwritings of securities. In general, because banks
often make funds available to corporate customers before final settlement, corporate customers are largely unaware
of the distinctions between final and provisional payment or when during the day payments are actually settled. Instead,
corporations generally rely on their banks to make decisions regarding how their large-value payments are originated
and received. 
Even in the interbank markets, participants are typically satisfied with same-day settlement for certain types
of transactions. At present, Federal funds contracts do not generally stipulate that payment must be made at or before
a specific time of day other than before the close of the Fedwire funds transfer service. Federal funds contracts are
generally settled using the Fedwire funds transfer system. 
For some futures exchange settlements, the convention today is to accept irrevocable commitments to pay from designated
settlement banks to cover clearing members' settlement obligations prior to the start of the current day's trading,
with the settlement banks actually fulfilling the obligation via Fedwire funds transfers by 10 a.m. e.t. The futures
clearing organizations and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) have expressed a desire for settlement
to occur in final funds before the commencement of trading. Such earlier settlement is viewed as reducing risks to
futures exchanges and the financial markets despite some concerns that it would merely shift risks from the clearing
organizations to their settlement banks. Settlement banks would clearly need to manage carefully their own cash
needs earlier in the day in order to make settlement payments at an earlier time, which is not necessary under current
arrangements. 
Within a few years, there may be a demand for later Fedwire funds transfer hours from banks that provide services to
the futures and options markets. This demand could arise from two sources. First, some clearing organizations are
progressively moving toward same-day settlement of margin obligations arising from the current day's trading activity.
Second, some of the exchanges are contemplating longer trading hours for certain of their products. The exchanges
are beginning to incorporate automated trade matching and confirmation systems that will permit timely same-day
calculation of all margin obligations. Indications are that these systems, which will remove a significant obstacle
to same-day settlement, could be widely adopted within three to five years. Longer trading hours, in combination
with the desire for same-day settlement, would argue for a later Fedwire funds transfer service closing time. 





