 


Tuesday


January 4, 1994





Part II


Department of Health and Human Services





Food and Drug Administration





21 CFR Parts 20 and 101
Food Labeling; General Requirements; Final Rules and Proposed Rule








Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 2/Tuesday, January 4, 1994/Rules and Regulations




<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>




<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>

21 CFR Part 101



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93N0478]</RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN O905ADO8 and O905AB68 </RINDOCK>


Dietary Supplements; Establishment of Date of Application


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is publishing this final rule to establish July 1, 1995, as the date on which
it will apply the mandatory nutrition labeling and nutrient content claims provisions of the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act (the act) to dietary supplements of vitamins, minerals, herbs, and other similar nutritional substances
(hereinafter referred to as dietary supplements). This action is in accordance with the Dietary Supplement Act of
1992 (the DS act) and the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 (the 1990 amendments), which allows the Secretary
of Health and Human Services (the Secretary) (and, by delegation, FDA) to delay, for up to 1 year, the date on which FDA
applies those provisions to foods (including dietary supplements) if the agency finds that compliance with them
would cause ``undue economic hardship.''


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE: 

July 1, 1995.

 
</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Laina M. Bush, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS726), Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St.
SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022055271.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 




I. Background


On November 8, 1990, President Bush signed into law the 1990 amendments (Pub. L. 101535). This statute adds
to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) among other sections, section 403(q) (21 U.S.C. 343(q)), which
makes nutrition labeling mandatory for most foods, and section 403(r)(2) (21 U.S.C. 343(r)(2)), which gives FDA
authority to define nutrient content claims. 
In accordance with the 1990 amendments, FDA published proposed rules on November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60366 

et seq

.), and final rules on January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2066 

et seq

.) implementing, among other things, the sections of the act on mandatory nutrition labeling and nutrient content
claims, among other things, for foods in conventional food form. Because of the DS act, the final regulations did not
include provisions on the nutrition labeling of, or nutrient content claims for, dietary supplements. 
The DS act (Pub. L. 102571) was signed into law on October 6, 1992. In section 202(a)(1), the DS act established
a moratorium until December 15, 1993, on the implementation of the 1990 amendments with respect to dietary supplements
that are not in the form of conventional food. Section 202(a)(2) of the DS act required the Secretary (and, by delegation,
FDA) to issue new proposed regulations that are applicable to dietary supplements no later than June 15, 1993, and
final regulations by December 31, 1993. On June 18, 1993, FDA issued proposed regulations in response to this provision
of the DS act (58 FR 33700 

et seq

.). Elsewhere in this issue of the 

Federal Register

, FDA is issuing the final rules.
Under section 10(a)(1)(A) and (B) of the 1990 amendments (21 U.S.C. 343 note), section 403(q) and (r)(2) of the act
are effective 6 months after the promulgation of final regulations or after the date that proposed regulations are
considered to be final regulations. Thus, because the final regulations on the nutrition labeling of, and nutrient
content claims for, dietary supplements are being issued on January 4, 1994, section 403(q) and 403(r)(2) will be
effective with respect to dietary supplements July 5, 1994. However, section 10(a)(3)(B) of the 1990 amendments
provides that if the Secretary and, by delegation, FDA  `` * * * finds that compliance
with sections 403(q) and 403(r)(2) of such Act would cause an undue economic hardship, the Secretary may delay the
application of such sections for no more than one year.'' 
FDA found such ``undue economic hardship'' existed for the conventional food industry in a final rule published on
January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2070), entitled ``Food Labeling: Establishment of Date of Application'' (hereinafter called
the date of application final rule). In that document, FDA delayed the application of section 403(q) and (r)(2) for
1 year, until May 8, 1994.
In the proposed rules on nutrition labeling (58 FR 33715 at 33725) and nutrient content claims (58 FR 33731 at 33748)
for dietary supplements, FDA asked for comment on whether a similar delay in application of section 403(q) and (r)(2)
would be appropriate for dietary supplements. The agency gave interested persons until August 17, 1993, to comment
on whether the 6-month proposed compliance date would cause ``undue economic hardship.'' FDA received approximately
2,000 letters of which approximately one-third contain one or more comments concerning either the date of application
or other economic issues from consumers, consumer advocacy organizations, health care professionals, professional
societies, universities, manufacturers, distributors, retailers, trade associations, and State governments.
A discussion of the agency's decision, and a summary of the comments, concerning the delay of the date of application
and other economic issues and the agency responses follow. 


II. Undue Economic Hardship


A. Comments


Several comments requested that FDA extend the date that the nutrition labeling and nutrient content claim provisions
of the act will be applied to dietary supplements. Most comments requested an additional year, for a total compliance
period of 18 months. One comment proposed a delay of at least 9 months. The comments reported many examples of the difficulties
in meeting a 6-month compliance period. Several comments stated that the amount of time needed to redesign labels
would far exceed the resources available. One comment reported that the insufficient time allowed to revise labels
would result in some products being removed from the market temporarily while new labels are being prepared. An additional
comment requested the extension because of the difficulties in the logistics of revising existing labels, printing,
packaging, and exhausting existing label supplies with a short compliance period. 
Other comments that requested a delay cited the savings that could be gained with insignificant loss of benefits.
One comment reported that inventory disposal could be reduced by 85 percent with an 18-month compliance period. Another
comment stated that FDA's cost estimate of $20 million represents 1 percent of industry sales but a much larger percentage
of industry profits. The comment explained that extending the compliance period would reduce the costs of compliance
and, therefore, minimize any reduction in profits. 
One comment requested a delay because there will be additional costs for compliance with the upcoming United States
Pharmacopoeia (USP) standards. The comment stated that resources could be better spent if these compliance efforts
were completed concurrently rather than consecutively.
One comment requested a delay because of the overlap with the final months of the extended period that was allowed for
foods in conventional food form. The comment reported that many conventional food manufacturers and their label
suppliers are rushing to produce final labels for such foods. The comment said that supplement manufacturers will
not be able to secure revised labels for their products from label manufacturers in time to meet a 6-month deadline
because of the competition for label manufacturers' resources. 
The agency agrees that it will be difficult for dietary supplement manufacturers to comply within 6 months, especially
in light of the fact that label suppliers are currently stressed with label orders from manufacturers of food in conventional
food form who are attempting to meet the May 1994 deadline for complying with the 1990 amendments. The agency also agrees
that an extension of the date of application would result in significant savings for the industry. Administrative
costs, printing costs, and label inventory disposal costs are all dependent on the length of the compliance period.
The agency has determined that the costs of the regulations could be reduced with an extension. 
The agency made a determination in the date of application final rule that the 1990 amendments will result in an undue
economic hardship on manufacturers of food products in conventional food form (58 FR 2070 at 2075). The agency notes
that the costs of compliance for manufacturers of foods in conventional food form represent less than 1 percent of
sales. The costs of compliance with a 6-month compliance period for dietary supplements is approximately 2 percent
of sales. Therefore, if the agency does not extend the date of application for dietary supplement manufacturers,
that segment of the food industry will be asked to bear higher relative costs than the agency determined were reasonable
for foods in conventional food form.
For all these reasons, the agency determines that the congressionally mandated date of application will result in
an undue economic hardship for dietary supplement manufacturers. 


B. The Agency's Determination of a Date of Application of Section 403(q) and (r)(2) of the Act as Applied to Dietary
Supplements 


The agency has determined that undue economic hardship will result if the dietary supplement industry is required
to comply with section 403(q) and (r) of the act within 6 months. As will be shown in the following discussion on the economic
impact, a 6-month delay (total of 12 months to comply) in the application of section 403(q) and (r)(2) to dietary supplements
would result in over 40 percent savings of compliance cost, and a 12-month delay (total of 18 months to comply) would
result in over 50 percent savings. Given the large disparity in costs of compliance for manufacturers of dietary supplements
if they are required to comply in 6 months, as compared to those that are being borne by manufacturers of food in conventional
form, FDA finds that it should tailor the delay to reduce the costs for dietary supplement manufacturers and thus to
minimize the disparity. Therefore, the agency concludes that it is appropriate to delay the application date for
dietary supplements for 12 months, as it did for foods in conventional food form. Thus, the agency intends to apply
section 403(q) and (r)(2) to foods labeled after July 1, 1995. The agency fully expects that some dietary supplement
firms will be able to comply before this date once the pressure on printing labels for foods in conventional food form
is eased after May 8, 1994. Therefore, consumers can expect to begin enjoying the health benefits of the label changes
prior to July 1, 1995. 


III. Economic Impact


Some comments agreed with the agency's estimates of the costs of relabeling. Many comments were directed at issues
covered by the advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPRM), which addressed the safe use of dietary supplements
(58 FR 33690, June 18, 1993). Several comments stated that the three proposals that the agency issued (there was a proposed
rule on health claims (58 FR 33700 in addition to the proposals on nutrition labeling and nutrient content claims))
and the ANPRM should be considered one proposal. These comments stated that the economic impact of the four documents
would exceed $100 million and would be considered a major rule under Executive Order 12291. 
The agency disagrees. Executive Order 12291 did not apply to advance notices. Therefore, no analysis of that document
was required by that Executive Order. (FDA has not taken any action with respect to the ANPRM that would make it subject
to Executive Order 12866). The three proposals are concerned with the labeling of dietary supplements, while the
ANPRM is concerned with other issues. Thus, the costs and benefits associated with regulatory alternatives described
in the ANPRM can be separated from those resulting from the three proposals on labeling actions. The agency has evaluated
the labeling actions together, however, because it is not possible to separate the impacts of the various labeling
actions. Finally, FDA is taking no further action with respect to the ANPRM at this time. 


A. Scope


1. Several comments objected to the agency's estimate of the number of products that will be affected by the nutrition
labeling and nutrient content claims rulemakings. Two comments stated that there are 25,000 products that are potentially
affected by the rules, rather than the agency's estimate of 5,000 products. Another comment stated that there are
approximately 25,000 herbal products alone that would be required to be tested and relabeled. Another comment objected
to the agency's estimate because the agency failed to include amino acids, herbal products, and other dietary supplements
that have no recognizable food function. 
In its analysis of the proposals, FDA stated that there could be as many as 25,000 products that could be considered
to be dietary supplements. The agency reduced that number to 5,000, an estimate of the number of vitamin and mineral
supplement products, because: (1) Many products that contain herbs or other similar nutritional substances would
not be subject to the nutrition label requirements because they do not contain the nutrients that must be declared,
and (2) some products marketed as dietary supplements would be unaffected by the 1990 amendments because they bear
drug claims that make them subject to the drug provisions of the act. For these reasons, it is clear that not all 25,000
products would be required to be tested or relabeled in response to the regulations implementing the 1990 amendments.

However, FDA is convinced by the comments that some herbal products and other dietary supplements might need to be
tested and relabeled as a result of these regulations. FDA is unable to determine exactly how many of those products
would be covered by the food provisions of the act rather than by the drug provisions. Therefore, the agency's final
analysis of the rules is based on a range of products between 5,000 and 25,000.
2. Several comments objected to the agency's estimate that approximately 150 firms will be affected by the regulations.
Some comments stated that approximately 500 firms would be affected by the proposed rules if made final. Another comment
stated that 250 herb manufacturers and 150 manufacturers of dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals would be
affected. Another comment objected to the agency's source for the number of firms. The comment explained that Dunn
and Bradstreet's Electronic Yellow Pages is primarily a listing for public companies, and the majority of supplement
manufacturers are privately-held corporations. The comment suggested that conservative estimates suggest that
there are a minimum of 150 herb companies alone.
The agency has confirmed that the Electronic Yellow Pages covers both public and private organizations of all types
and sizes. The agency admits that the Electronic Yellow Pages is not a perfect source for the number of firms, but FDA
believes that it is not entirely inadequate. The major difference between the agency's estimate and those of the comments
is the inclusion or exclusion of manufacturers herbal products and products containing other similar nutritional
substances. As stated in the response to the previous comment, the agency has determined that at least some of these
types of dietary supplement products may be subject to the nutrition labeling provisions. However, because many
of these products do not contain significant amounts of nutrients, many manufacturers will not be faced with the necessity
of relabeling their products. For these reasons, the agency believes that its estimate of the number of firms may be
low, but that to include all herbal products manufacturers and manufacturers of other similar nutritional substances
would inflate the estimate. However, the agency has no basis on which to arrive at the actual number of firms. Therefore,
in its final analysis, the agency is estimating the total number of firms affected to be between 150 and 300.


B. Costs


3. Several comments disagreed with the agency's estimate of administrative costs. The comments stated that actual
administrative expenses would be at least $1,000 per label. Administrative expenses, according to the comments,
are associated with the creation or redesign, proofreading, legal review, pricing, bid review, and retraining of
customer service and sales staff. One comment estimates that administrative costs to one firm would be 80 to 120 hours
of executive time, or approximately $2,500 to $3,750.
FDA recognizes that the factors that determine administrative costs are very complicated. The agency's estimates
of administrative costs are based on a compliance cost model for food labeling created for FDA by Research Triangle
Institute (RTI) (Ref. 1). According to RTI, many firms estimate that administrative effort would be twice as high
for a 6-month compliance period as for a 12-month compliance period. In the dietary supplement proposals, FDA estimated
that for a 6-month compliance period, manufacturers of dietary supplements will incur administrative costs of $850
per firm. The range of administrative cost estimates submitted in the comments was broad and there were no identifiable
patterns to the estimates given. Although FDA acknowledges that its assumptions may have resulted in underestimates,
the comments did not provide enough detailed information to permit FDA to evaluate the administrative cost estimates
that they submitted. Therefore, the agency is not altering its original estimates based on these comments.
The agency has determined that total administrative costs for a 6-month compliance period are between $130,000 and
$250,000, depending on the exact number of firms affected by the regulations. As determined by the contractor's study
(Ref. 1), administrative costs are lower with longer compliance periods. A 1-year compliance period results in administrative
costs of between $65,000 and $125,000. An 18-month compliance period results in administrative costs of between
$50,000 and $94,000. 
4. One comment stated that the requirement that herbal dietary supplements be required to bear nutrition labeling
would mandate that all herbal products be assayed for their nutrient content. The comment further explained that
testing for 12 nutrients would cost $588 per product for a total of $15 million for 25,000 products. 
The agency agrees that to the extent that herbal product manufacturers will provide nutrition labeling, herbal products
will need to be assayed for their nutrient content. The agency notes, however, that many herbs do not contain significant
amounts of the nutrients that must be listed in the nutrition label, and that this fact is determinable from reference
works without testing. Thus, these herbs will not need to be tested. Many comments admitted that, in general, herbal
products do not contain significant amounts of nutrients and are not consumed for their nutrient content. However,
some herbal products and combination products will require nutrient testing.
In the proposals, the agency assumed that dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals will not undergo any additional
testing as a result of the nutrition labeling requirements. Comments did not object to this assumption.
Therefore, in its final analysis, the agency is estimating that as many as 20,000 products may undergo testing once
every 5 years for a total discounted analytical cost over the next 20 years of $33 million (7 percent discount rate).
5. One comment agreed, and several comments disagreed, with the agency's estimate of label printing and redesign
costs. The comments that disagreed stated that printing and redesign costs would be at least $800 to $1,200 per label.
One comment stated that the cost of redesigning and printing each label would be 2 hours of desktop redesign, $20 for
linotronic service, and $600 for new plates, for a total of $750 per label.
One comment objected to FDA's assumption that label revisions for supplements are less comprehensive than revisions
for foods in conventional food form. The comment states that incorporating the ``Nutrition Facts'' section plus
the ingredient list will necessitate complete redistribution of information on many labels.
In the analysis of the proposed rules, the agency estimated that, for a 6-month compliance period, printing and redesign
costs would be approximately $1,000 per label. The comments do not suggest that the agency's estimate is incorrect.
Therefore, the agency's final analysis of printing costs is based on a per label cost of $1,000 for each of between 15,000
and 75,000 labels, or between $15 million and $75 million. According to the RTI study, the length of the compliance
period determines a firm's ability to combine planned label changes with mandated changes. Therefore, incremental
labeling and redesign activities are less costly with lengthier compliance periods. If the agency extended the compliance
period by only 6 months, printing and redesign costs would be between $7.5 million and $37.5 million. The 1-year extension
that the agency is providing will reduce printing and redesign costs to between $6 million and $28 million.
6. Several comments provided data on label inventories that would be subject to disposal. These comments stated that
a 4- to 6-month supply of product labels is common, resulting in $3.4 million to $5.1 million of label inventory that
will be discarded. Another comment suggested that its dietary supplement label and box inventory disposal costs
would be $325,000 with a 6-month compliance period, $200,000 with a 1-year compliance period, and $50,000 with an
18-month compliance period. One comment estimated the cost of discarding noncompliant labels would be approximately
$30,000 for one firm. 
The estimates provided by the comments are in line with the agency's preliminary estimate of label inventory disposal
costs. Therefore, the agency is not changing its estimate based on the comments. The cost of label inventory disposal
for a 6-month compliance period is between $5 million and $25 million, depending on the number of products affected.
According to the RTI study and comments, lengthier compliance periods allow firms to use up more existing label supplies,
thus reducing inventory disposal costs. According to data submitted in response to the Regulatory Impact Analysis
document that was published in the 

Federal Register

 of November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60366), and adjusted to reflect the range of products affected, if the agency had extended
the compliance period for an additional 6 months, inventory disposal costs would be between $3 million and $13 million.
The 18-month compliance period that the agency is providing will result in costs of between $2 million and $9 million.
7. Several comments disagreed with the agency's estimate of the cost of inventory disposal. The comments argued that
firms would dispose of finished product in addition to labels. The comments stated that typical product costs for
dietary supplements would result in an inventory value for the disposal of 5,000 products of between $48 million and
$73 million. One firm estimated its own cost of discarding noncompliant inventory would be approximately 30 percent
of finished goods inventory, or about $45,000.
Because these proposals cover only the labeling of dietary supplements, the agency does not agree that there would
be any reason for firms to dispose of any product inventory. Nor did the comments provide an explanation as to why it
would be necessary to do so. Moreover, any product packaged and labeled in accordance with law before the date that
FDA begins to apply the section 403(q) and (r) of the act will not need to be relabeled. Therefore, the agency is not changing
its estimate based on this comment.
8. Several comments argued that the agency failed to consider the cost of discarding and redesigning catalogs, product
literature, and advertising. The comments suggested that these costs would be at least $40,000 per firm, or $20 million
for all firms.
The comments did not provide an explanation as to why it would be necessary to discard and redesign catalogs and product
literature. The agency does agree that, to the extent that these materials are labeling, they must comply with the
nutrient content and health claims provisions of the act. However, the agency believes that many of the claims made
in these types of materials are drug claims or structure-function claims, not health claims, and therefore are not
subject to these rules. The comments did not present evidence to support a different finding. Consequently, the agency
has no basis on which to conclude that extensive catalog and product literature redesign will be required by these
final rules. Therefore, the agency is not changing its estimate based on these comments.
9. Several comments argued that the agency failed to consider the cost of relabeling of product returned from the retailer.
The comments stated that it is common practice in the supplement industry to accept returns from retailers in the event
of a label change. Industry firms would be faced with a number of products returned from retailers unwilling to carry
products with older labels. The comments estimated the cost of processing returns, disposing of product, and applying
for full credit at $48 million.
Any product labeled before the applicability date will not need to comply with the new nutrition labeling and nutrient
content claim provisions. Therefore, no product that is labeled in accordance with law before July 1, 1995, need be
returned, relabeled, or destroyed as a result of these new provisions. However, FDA agrees that to the extent that
product is returned, the cost of disposing of product returned from retailers because of ``old'' labeling should
be considered a cost of these regulations. However, the agency is unpersuaded of the magnitude of the cost and is unsure
of the extent to which ``old'' product will be returned. The comments provided insufficient information with which
the agency could estimate these costs. Therefore, the agency is not changing its estimates based on this comment.
10. Several comments expressed concern that the rules may cause the loss of many thousands of jobs, the closing of many
firms, and the loss of products from the marketplace. According to one comment, the proposed rules would cause the
loss of more than $10 million in sales and as many as 100 jobs in one company. Another comment stated a belief that 2 million
Americans will lose their jobs as a result of the regulations. The comments did not provide any specific information
as to how the regulations would cause the loss of jobs and products.
The agency agrees that the inability to make certain nutrient content or health claims may reduce the marketability
of certain products and perhaps lead to a company's decision to remove a product from the marketplace. However, these
rules affect only labeling; they do not require any supplement to be removed from the market. Moreover, the agency
does not believe that many products are currently making health claims, as distinguished from drug claims or structure-function
claims. Therefore, the agency has no basis to find that these regulations will cause the problems described in these
comments. The agency believes that there is every reason to expect that the continued marketing of the vast majority
of dietary supplement products will be unaffected by these regulations.
11. In the analysis of the proposed rules, the agency recognized that the rules could have an adverse impact on small
businesses. Most of the costs associated with labeling regulations are fixed costs, which are typically more burdensome
for small firms than for large firms because of the smaller sales base on which to spread costs.
One comment stated that the small business exemption was inadequate because small firms would not be able to avoid
complying with the regulations because of competitive pressure. Another comment stated that the proposals would
be catastrophic to small business owners and workers. 
FDA notes that the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act Amendments of 1993, which were enacted on August 13, 1993,
provide relief for small businesses from the requirements of section 403(q) of the act. The agency believes that the
new exemption for small businesses will significantly mitigate any negative impact on small firms.
12. One comment stated that the proposed rule regarding health claims will cause pain, suffering, and death that would
not occur were labeling and advertising allowed to include health claims. The comment was unspecific as to why these
results would occur.
If the absence of health claims causes pain, suffering, or death, these regulations provide any party with a vehicle
for submitting data to support a particular health claim for agency review. Therefore, the agency does not agree with
this comment.


C. Benefits


13. One comment stated that the regulations will provide benefits by preventing consumers from wasting money on unnecessary
and ineffective dietary supplements. Another comment stated that if someone wanted to waste a little money taking
too many vitamins or supplements in the hope of avoiding serious illness and the need for harsh drugs, they should be
allowed to do so.
Because there are sources other than labeling that provide information about the potential uses of dietary supplements,
the agency believes that limiting the use of claims on labels or labeling will be of limited effect in preventing consumers
from purchasing supplements that they erroneously believe will prevent serious illness. However, these regulations
will ensure that the labels of dietary supplements will provide full nutrition labeling to help consumers to maintain
healthy dietary practices, and they will help to ensure that any nutrient content or health claims made in the labeling
of these products are scientifically valid, truthful, and not misleading. For these reasons, these regulations
will provide a significant benefit.
14. Some comments stated that the cost of providing nutrition information on the labels of dietary supplements of
herbs would greatly outweigh any clear public benefit. The comments explained that herbs do not contain significant
amounts of the core nutrients and are not normally consumed for their nutritional value. Therefore, the value to consumers
of including nutrition labeling on herb products is insignificant.
The agency agrees with this comment. However, the agency notes that those products that do not contain significant
amounts of the 14 mandatory nutrients will generally not be required to bear nutrition labeling. Therefore, although
there will be no clear public benefit, there will also be no cost.


D. Summary of the Economic Impact


FDA has examined the economic implications of the final rules amending on nutrition labeling, nutrient content claims,
and health claims for dietary supplements as required by Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act
(Pub. L. 96354). Executive Order 12866 directs agencies to assess all costs and benefits of available regulatory
alternatives and, when regulation is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits (including
potential economic, environmental, public health and safety effects; distributive impacts; and equity). The Regulatory
Flexibility Act requires analyzing options for regulatory relief for small businesses. FDA finds that these final
rules on dietary supplements, taken together, are not significant as defined by Executive Order 12866. In accordance
with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the agency certifies that the final rules will not have a significant impact
on a substantial number of small businesses.
The agency has reviewed the comments and has determined that the costs of compliance associated with the 18month
compliance period provided by the agency include administrative costs of between $50,000 and $100,000, analytical
costs of between $0 and $33 million, printing and redesign costs of between $6 and $28 million, and label inventory
disposal costs of between $2 and $9 million. Total discounted costs of the final regulations, taken together are between
$8 and $60 million (7 percent discount rate). If the agency did not extend the application of the rules, total discounted
costs would be between $20 and $133 million for a 6-month compliance period, or between $11 and $84 million for a 1-year
compliance period. 


IV. Environmental Impact


The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24 (a)(11) that this action is of a type that does not individually or cumulatively
have a significant impact on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental impact statement is required.



V. Reference


The following reference has been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


1. RTI, ``Compliance Costs of Food Labeling Regulations,'' FDA Contract No. 223872097, Project Officer_Richard
A. Williams, Jr., Research Triangle Park, NC, December 1990.


VI. Conclusion


For the reasons stated above, FDA hereby establishes July 1, 1995, as the date on which it will apply the mandatory nutrition
labeling and nutrient content claims provisions of the act to dietary supplements. 




Dated: December 23, 1993.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
David A. Kessler,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Commissioner of Food and Drugs.

</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
Donna E. Shalala,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of Health and Human Services.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9331812 Filed 122993; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>




