 

(6) Information concerning petitioner's exhaustion of administrative remedies before the Architect of the Capitol,
including the date that an internal complaint of discrimination or retaliation was filed and the date, if applicable,
that the petitioner received a final decision from the Architect of the Capitol; 
(7) Name, address, and telephone number of the representative, if any, who will act for the petitioner; 
(8) Signature of the petitioner or the petitioner's representative. 
(e) 

Amendments to a petition for review. 

Failure to raise a claim in the petition for review shall not bar its submission later unless to do so would prejudice
the rights of the other parties or unduly delay the proceedings. 
(f) 

Class Actions. 

One or more employees of the Architect of the Capitol may file a petition for review as representatives of a class of
employees in any matter within the Board's jurisdiction as set forth in 29.3. In determining whether it is appropriate
to treat an appeal as a class action, the Board will be guided, but not controlled, by the applicable provisions of the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. 




29.11

Board procedures on petitions for review. 



In adjudicating petitions for review filed by employees of the Architect of the Capitol, the Board will generally
follow the same procedures as it does for adjudicating petitions for review filed by General Accounting Office (GAO)
employees under 4 CFR part 28, subpart B. The Board specifically adopts the regulations contained in 4 CFR 28.19 through
28.90 as the procedures it will follow for petitions for review filed by Architect of the Capitol employees. The Architect
of the Capitol will have the same obligations and responsibilities as are assigned to the GAO under those regulations.
The regulations concerning ex parte communications, contained in 4 CFR part 28, subpart I, will also be applicable
to all proceedings brought by or on behalf of employees of the Architect of the Capitol. 




29.12

Proceedings brought by the General Counsel seeking corrective action, disciplinary action or a stay. 



The regulations contained in 4 CFR part 28, subpart G, concerning proceedings brought by the General Counsel seeking
corrective action, disciplinary action or a stay, are hereby adopted and made applicable to the Board's authority
with respect to employment practices within the Architect of the Capitol with the following qualifications: 

(a) The authority of the General Counsel to bring proceedings seeking corrective action, disciplinary action, or
a stay will be limited to matters involving allegations of unlawful discrimination or retaliation as described in
29.3. 

(b) Wherever the regulations in 4 CFR part 28, subpart G assign rights, responsibilities, or obligations to the GAO
or its employees those same rights, responsibilities, or obligations will be assigned to the Architect of the Capitol
or its employees, respectively. 




29.13

Applicability of this part to pending cases. 



(a) The regulations in this part apply to all claims brought by employees of the Architect of the Capitol alleging discrimination
or retaliation (as described in 29.3) where: 

(1) The alleged discrimination or retaliation occurred on or after the July 22, 1994, effective date of the Architect
of the Capitol Human Resources Act; or 

(2) The internal complaint of discrimination or retaliation was filed with the Architect of the Capitol on or after
the July 22, 1994, effective date of the Architect of the Capitol Human Resources Act; or 

(3) The final decision of the Architect of the Capitol on an internal complaint of discrimination or retaliation was
issued on or after the July 22, 1994, effective date of the Architect of the Capitol Human Resources Act. 

(b) The regulations in this part do not apply to any claim of discrimination or retaliation by an employee of the Architect
of the Capitol which was pending before, or an appeal from, the Office of Senate Fair Employment Practices on the July
22, 1994, effective date of the Architect of the Capitol Human Resources Act. Any such claims shall continue to be processed
pursuant to the procedures established in the Government Employee Rights Act of 1991, 2 U.S.C. 1201, et seq. 

 


<SIGNER>
Nancy A. McBride, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Chair, Personnel Appeals Board, 
U. S. General Accounting Office. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9428274 Filed 111594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 161001P
</BILLING>


