 

A limited number of manatees (about 15) used the springs in the 
1970's prior to the establishment of the Banana Island Sanctuary. 
They seemed to tolerate and even enjoy some human contact. These 
``tame'' manatees readily approached divers and allowed themselves to 
be petted and lightly scratched (Hartman 1979, Powell and Rathbun 
1984). By 1980, the number of manatees wintering in the bay had 
increased to just over 100. This increase was greater than could be 
accounted for by reproduction, so it was apparent that some manatees 
were immigrating from other areas (Powell and Rathbun 1984). The 
number of manatees that chose to interact with the public increased 
only slightly. 

Concern for the welfare of the manatees in Kings Bay increased, 
culminating in 1980 when the first manatee sanctuaries were 
established. The authority to establish manatee protection areas, 
either refuges or sanctuaries, is provided by the Endangered Species 
Act of 1973, as amended, and the Marine Mammal Protection Act, and is 
codified at 50 CFR 17, Subpart J. Under Subpart J, the Director may 
establish, by regulation, manatee protection areas whenever he or she 
determines there is substantial evidence that there is imminent 
danger of a taking (including harassment) of one or more manatees, 
and that such establishment is necessary to prevent such a taking. 
This regulation allows the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to regulate 
activities in state waters to protect an endangered species. 

In 1983 the Crystal River National Wildlife Refuge was created 
to protect manatees from any potential negative impacts of human 
activities. The refuge owns Banana Island, Warden Key and Buzzard 
Island in Kings Bay, a house on the eastern shore currently being 
used as the headquarters, and some other properties in the area. 

Manatee use of Kings Bay during winter months now exceeds 240 
animals (FWS unpublished data). A majority of manatees currently 
using the spring do not tolerate close human contact and leave the 
warmer spring waters when humans approach too closely. Research 
conducted during the 198889 winters indicated manatees spend a 
disproportionate amount of their time in sanctuaries, in direct 
relationship to the number of boats present, regardless of weather 
conditions (Buckingham 1990). 

Efforts have been made to make divers, snorklers, and boaters 
aware of the manatee harassment problem. Visitors have been 
instructed through posters, brochures, and by dive shop personnel 
that they should not aggressively pursue manatees or drive them from 
the springs. Most visitors to King's Bay have been very cooperative 
in this regard. While most visitors conscientiously avoid outright 
harassment, many seek the manatees out, approaching them to observe 
and even pet them. Although a few manatees tolerate and occasionally 
invite attention, most appear to find these interactions intolerable 
and alter their behavior accordingly. At times, the large number of 
humans concentrated in this relatively confined area forces all the 
manatees to seek less disturbing conditions. 

The largest manatee aggregations on Florida's west coast are 
found during winter months on the ledges surrounding the refuge's 
main spring. Manatees often collect there in the evenings and remain 
throughout the early morning hours. When few divers are present and 
those few are quiet, manatees usually linger around the main boil, 
particularly in colder weather. However, on days when divers arrive 
in force soon after sunrise, those manatees least able to tolerate 
human crowding begin leaving the spring and move into the 
sanctuaries. As greater numbers of divers arrive, more manatees 
leave (FWS unpublished data). On days when the temperatures of the 
surrounding waters are not excessively cold, this may not be 
critical, although it still alters the manatee's natural behavior. 
On days when surrounding water temperatures are below 68
&cir; F it 
presents a potentially serious problem. 

Although some manatees can tolerate limited exposure to waters 
as cold as 56.3
&cir; F (13.5
&cir; C) (Hartman, 1979) others become lethargic 
and cease feeding at temperatures less than in 68
&cir; F (20
&cir; C) water 
(Campbell and Irvine 1981). Carcasses recovered following major cold 
events showed atrophy of fat, emaciation, and an absence of food in 
the gastrointestinal tract with no sign of disease; characteristics 
consistent with death from hypothermia. Manatees appear unable to 
increase heat production through metabolic activity sufficient to 
counter losses to the environment. Manatees are tropical warm-water 
mammals. They feed on low-energy forage and have high thermal 
conductance and exceptionally low metabolic rates (only 15 to 22 
percent of predicted values based on body size) (Irvine 1983). 
Florida is at the northern limit of their winter range. 

Subadult manatees appear to be especially susceptible to death 
from hypothermia. This is probably a combination of their larger 
surface to volume ratio and their lack of experience in finding 
thermal refuges. The length of time a manatee can tolerate cold 
water before its health is compromised depends on its condition_a 
factor which cannot easily be measured on free-ranging manatees. 
Experiments on Amazonian manatees (

T. inunguis

) showed that 
underweight, nutritionally stressed, and fasting mammals have a 
drastically lowered capacity for heat production (Scrimshaw et al. 
1968, Chandra and Newberne 1977:127176). 

During an extreme cold event in 1990, several manatees died in 
Brevard County, Florida. These manatees sought thermal refuge at the 
warm-water discharge from an electrical power generating plant on the 
Banana River. Although the discharge raised the temperature of the 
water approximately 10
&cir; F, under those extreme conditions, it was 
insufficient to keep them alive. There is probably no thermal refuge 
in Florida warm enough to guarantee the health of all resident 
manatees during an extremely cold winter. 


