 

(5) Control measures which are inconsistent with erosion control measures normally used on other cropland in the
area. 


(d) Crops of wheat, feed grains, upland cotton, and rice planted as cover on ACR or CU for payment are required to be close
sown, unless a producer on a farm who elects to plant such crops: 


(1) Files a request with the county committee to not close sow the cover; 


(2) Pays a fee, as specified in part 718 of this title, to cover the cost of a farm visit to verify that such cover is not
harvested, hayed, or grazed; and 


(3) Ensures that the residue of a destroyed close sown program crop, as opposed to regrowth, will not be hayed or grazed
after the end of the nonhaying and nongrazing period. 

(e) Residue and stubble of destroyed program crops may be recommended as locally approved cover, provided that the
crop residue, as opposed to regrowth, shall not be grazed after the end of the nongrazing period announced by the county
committee in accordance with 1413.66(a). 


(f) The State committee shall establish the final seeding date for planting the cover and shall approve, after consulting
the SCS State Conservationist regarding whether the crops or practices will sufficiently protect the land from weeds
and wind and water erosion, appropriate crops planted or maintained as cover, including, as appropriate, native
grasses and legumes or other vegetation. 


(g) With respect to upland cotton CAB's enrolled in any of the 1994 through 1997 acreage reduction programs, production
of black-eyed peas shall be allowed on CU for payment and up to 50 percent of the required ACR, subject to the following
restrictions: 


(1) Production of such a crop for harvest shall be approved only if the State committee has authorized vegetables as
a locally approved cover for green manure; 


(2) Producers furnish a contract or similar agreement that specifies: 


(i) The acreage to be harvested; and 


(ii) The production shall be donated to a food bank or similar institution; and 


(3) Such agreement is signed by a representative of the food bank. In addition such representative shall certify to
ASCS in writing: 

(i) that the food bank received the commodity; and 

(ii) the commodity has not been, or will not be, disposed of through a cash sale. 


1413.66 

Use of ACR and CU for payment acreage. 




(a) Haying and/or grazing of acreage devoted to conservation uses and designated as ACR and CU for payment shall be
allowed, except for a consecutive 5-month period between April 1 and October 31 as established by the State committee.
Locally approved covers shall not be hayed or grazed or used as green manure if such cover consists of program crops
or mixtures containing program crops. Haying includes silage, forage, haylage, and green chop. 


(b) Except as provided in paragraphs (a), (c) and (h) of this section, harvesting on ACR and CU for payment acreage is
prohibited for all crops: 


(1) In the current year; and 


(2) After December 31 of the current year if the crop would normally mature and be harvested in the current year. 


(c) Harvesting of a crop on ACR and CU for payment acreage may be permitted when: 


(1) Both of the following rules apply: 


(i) the crop matured in the preceding year; and 


(ii) the county committee determines that the crop was not harvested because of adverse weather or other conditions
beyond the producer's control, and the harvesting will be completed by the producer as soon as possible. 


(2) IOC's or designated crops are planted on ACR and CU for payment acreage. 


(d) ACR or CU for payment acreage that has been seeded with a nurse crop may be clipped, and the clippings removed, if
both of the following rules apply: 


(1) the clippings were destroyed and no value is derived from the clippings; and 


(2) the producer pays the cost of a farm visit by representatives of the county committee to verify that the clippings
were destroyed, and no value was derived from the clippings. 


(e) Acreage that the producer has swathed before being designated as ACR or CU for payment may be designated as ACR or
CU for payment if the producer pays an inspection fee in accordance with part 718 of this title, and representatives
of the county committee witness the destruction of the hay production. 



