 





<RINDOCK>[OPP300333; FRL47677]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Pesticides; Prioritization of Actions Subject to the Delaney Clause; Policy Notice</DOCTITLE>




<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 EPA is announcing that it will temporarily cease review and processing of tolerance petitions received under the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) and the associated registration applications received under the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) if any of the pesticide uses that are subject of the applications
and petitions appear to result in a residue that needs a food additive regulation under section 409 of the FFDCA and
such a regulation would be barred by the Delaney Clause. EPA is adopting this policy to concentrate on food additive
regulations currently in force which are inconsistent with the Delaney Clause and to avoid expending EPA resources
on action which may be revised once various policy issues are resolved.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 April 6, 1994.



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Tina E. Levine, Registration Support Branch, Registration Division (7505W), Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental
Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington DC 20460, (703) 3088393.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 


I. Background


EPA's regulations regarding FIFRA registration in 40 CFR 152.112(g) require that all needed tolerances for pesticide
residues in food be in place prior to the approval of a FIFRA registration for the use of a pesticide which will result
in such residues. Raw food tolerances for pesticides are established under section 408 of FFDCA, 21 U.S.C. 346a, and
tolerances for certain processed foods and for feed additives (``food additive regulations'') for pesticides are
established under FFDCA section 409, 21 U.S.C. 348.
EPA's current policy is that a food additive regulation is needed when there is a possibility that the processing of
a raw food containing pesticide residues would result in residues in the processed food or in animal feed at a level
greater than the raw food tolerance. EPA determines whether there is such a possibility based on the review of processing
data supplied by the applicant for registration purposes or the petitioner for a tolerance. 
Under section 409, a food additive regulation for a pesticide residue may not be promulgated if EPA concludes that
the pesticide ``induces cancer'' in man or animal as specified in the Delaney Clause. 21 U.S.C. 348(c)(3). In 

Les v. Reilly

, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that the Delaney Clause barred the establishment of
a food additive regulation for any pesticide that meets the induce-cancer standard no matter how infinitesimal the
risk, 968 F.2d 985 (9th Cir. 1992), 

cert. denied

, 113 S. Ct. 1361 (1993). The court overturned EPA's interpretation of the Delaney Clause as subject to an exception
for pesticide residues which pose a 

de minimis

 risk.
FIFRA and section 408 of the FFDCA contain no Delaney Clause and instead require consideration of both risks and benefits
in making regulatory decisions. Thus, pesticide uses which might qualify under the standards for registration and
a section 408 tolerance could still fail to meet the standard for a food additive regulation under section 409. Where
that is the case, and a section 409 food additive regulation is needed, EPA regulations state that a FIFRA registration
may not be granted, and it is EPA policy not to approve a section 408 tolerance for such a use either. 
In the wake of 

Les v. Reilly

, the National Food Processors Association (NFPA) and other food processing and production groups have petitioned
EPA to change its policy linking actions under section 408 (raw food) and section 409 (processed food). Such a change
in policy would require EPA to amend its regulations concerning the registration requirement that all needed section
409 food additive regulations be in place. Additionally, the NFPA petition challenges the factual basis for EPA's
conclusion that processing studies are an accurate measure of whether processed foods will contain pesticide residues
greater than the section 408 tolerance and thus need a section 409 tolerance.
In response to the NFPA petition, EPA has published for public comment a notice (``NFPA petition notice'') summarizing
the petition and current EPA policies and procedures that are potentially affected by issues raised in the NFPA petition,
including EPA's procedures for determining when a 409 food additive regulation is needed and EPA's policy of coordinating
the decision on the 408 tolerance and registration with the 409 food additive regulation (58 FR 7473, Feb. 5, 1993).
Further, EPA also has released, on Febrary 2, 1993, a list of 32 pesticides that either have or need section 409 food
additive regulations under EPA's policy and that also appear to induce cancer within the meaning of the Delaney Clause.
EPA intends to update this list periodically. Although EPA has not made a formal ``induces cancer'' finding for many
of these pesticides, EPA currently believes that most, if not all, of the pesticides classified in Group A, B, or C according
to EPA's Cancer Assessment Guidelines will come within the Delaney Clause standard. EPA places a high priority on
responding to the legal, policy, science, and factual issues raised by the NFPA petition and the 

Les v. Reilly

 decision. However, these issues are both complex and interrelated and cannot be addressed quickly.


II. Reasons for Policy on Tolerance Petitions and Registration Actions Affected by Delaney Clause


EPA is adopting this policy at the present time as part of the priorities it has established following the decision
in 

Les v. Reilly

. The 

Les v. Reilly

 decision clearly established that the Delaney Clause bars the existence of a food additive regulation for any pesticide
that induces cancer in man or animal. EPA has determined that there presently exist as many as 50 food additive regulations
for pesticides that may meet the induce-cancer standard. EPA's first priority, thus, following the 

Les v. Reilly

 decision is to determine which of these regulations must be revoked and to do so promptly. Because food additive regulations
are only established in situations where EPA believes they are needed to prevent the adulteration of food, EPA's second
priority will be to determine what action should be taken, if any, against the FIFRA registrations and section 408
tolerances which are associated with the food additive regulations to be revoked. This issue has been made more complex,
as explained above, by the NFPA petition which challenges EPA's existing policies on this matter. Finally, EPA's
third priority is to address the many petitions for establishing food additive regulations which raise Delaney Clause
problems. 
Ideally, EPA would prefer to address simultaneously all pending petitions to establish food additive regulations
and all existing food additive regulations which are inconsistent with the Delaney Clause. EPA, however, has limited
resources. EPA estimates that in the next several months it will initiate revocation actions against over 25 food
additive regulations based on the Delaney Clause. EPA will also have to resolve what policy to follow on the associated
section 408 tolerances and registrations and implement those actions as well. This could result in EPA action against
80 or more pesticide uses. Aggressively moving to deny pending applications which raise Delaney Clause problems
could exhaust EPA's limited resources on pesticide uses not on the market while tolerances inconsistent with the
statute remain in place. Finally, EPA also must take into account that it receives thousands of registration and tolerance
actions each year. Devoting substantial resources to petitions raising Delaney Clause issues will delay action
on the more routine actions. This is especially the case where EPA has not yet resolved the important policy issues
relating to the interrelationship of section 409 food additive regulations and section 408 tolerances and FIFRA
registrations because actions taken today might have to be revised if EPA policies are altered. EPA will reexamine
this policy once it has resolved the policy issues raised by the NFPA petition.


III. Policy 


EPA will temporarily stop all review and processing work related to 

establishing

 a registration and/or tolerance(s) for any chemical/crop combination in which: (1) either the chemical has been
found to induce cancer in man or animal or the chemical has shown evidence of carcinogenicity in animals or humans;
and (2) the pesticide residue in or on a raw agricultural commodity concentrates when that commodity is processed
or EPA otherwise determines that a food additive regulation is needed for the use. This will include any work on registrations
under FIFRA section 3, experimental use permits under FIFRA section 5, associated tolerances under section 408 of
the FFDCA, as well as food additive regulations under section 409 of the FFDCA. Work on tolerances and registrations
for other uses of the chemical, where a food additive regulation is not needed, may continue. However, EPA approves
or denies tolerance petitions in toto. Therefore, if a petition seeks a tolerance for any residue that appears subject
to the Delaney Clause, that petition cannot be approved and work on all tolerances in that petition will temporarily
stop. The Agency advises any person who has submitted a pending tolerance petition containing a tolerance that appears
to be subject to the Delaney Clause to amend the petition to separate the tolerances not affected by the Delaney Clause
so that work on these tolerances may resume. 
EPA will also disapprove any State registrations approved under section 24 of FIFRA if the registration depends on
the existence of a food additive regulation that is subject to revocation under the Delaney Clause. The basis of such
disapproval would be that the registration is ``inconsistent with the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act,'' FIFRA
sec. 24(c)(3). States are urged not to approve such section 24(c) registrations, since State approval followed within
90 days by EPA disapproval will be disruptive and cause unncessary economic burdens. 


IV. Implementation


Once the determination has been made that a pesticide use may result in a residue that appears to be subject to the Delaney
Clause, the PM will notify the applicant or petitioner in writing of the status of the tolerance petition and associated
application(s), i.e., that all review and processing work has been stopped and the reason for this action. These registrations
and petitions will continue to be considered pending; EPA is not denying these registrations and petitions. If a registrant
wishes to amend the tolerance petition after such notification to allow work to continue on uses not affected by the
Delaney Clause, such an amendment may be submitted to the PM by the usual procedure. The tolerance petitions or registration
applications will not be returned to the registrant or subject to any ``abandoned petition'' policy unless EPA, in
the future, prescribes some further action that registrants must respond to affirmatively within a set time period.
EPA will notify applicants and petitioners if and when the the Agency resumes review and processing of a petition and
associated registration applications on which review was stopped under this policy. Such notice may be by letter,
or by issuance of a policy notice or rule in which implementation is addressed.
EPA believes its limited resources are best directed at first removing regulations inconsistent with the statute
and EPA policies and then making final determinations on petitions which, because they meet the above criteria, are
likely to be denied. To the extent, however, that a petitioner believes that EPA has wrongly characterized its petition
as meeting the criteria or that there exists some other basis for granting the petition, EPA will, on a case-by-case
basis, consistent with its obligation to protect the public health, adjust its priorities so that a formal action
can be taken on the petition. In addition, EPA will give any petitioner a denial, if that is requested.
There are approximately 60 actions currently in review that EPA believes are subject to this policy. EPA will begin
sending individual notices to registrants and petitioners within 30 days of this notice and expects to complete notification
within 90 days. A registrant who receives no notification may assume that petitions and application actions continue
in active review. 
This policy does not affect the registration of new products or new uses which have an associated 409 tolerance that
has already been established even if, under the Delaney Clause, that tolerance would not now be granted. However,
EPA intends to revoke such tolerances in the future, and will, after revocation, immediately stop review and processing
of additional pending actions dependent on the tolerance at that time. Registrants who intend to submit new registration
applications under these circumstances may wish to await further Agency action before submitting applications
that may be affected by such revocations.
A final decision on whether to approve or deny the tolerance petitions and associated FIFRA applications that appear
to be subject to the Delaney Clause must await resolution of the complex, interrelated issues raised in the NFPA petition
and summarized above and will be staggered in such a manner so as to conserve resources for addressing currently approved
food additive regulations, tolerances, and registrations. Some of these issues may be addressed by pending legislation.
In the absence of such legislative changes, EPA does not believe that most of the issues will be addressed until later
this year. 




List of Subjects


Environmental protection, Agricultural commodities, Food and feed additives, Pesticides and pests.




Dated: March 21, 1994.



</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Susan H. Wayland,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Director, Office of Pesticide Programs. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 947701 Filed 4594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>


