 

Under Section II.B MCI and NewCo will not receive information from BT that other United States competitors identify
as proprietary and maintain as confidential, but that has been obtained by BT as the result of its provision of interconnection
or other telecommunications services to the competitors in the United Kingdom. In order to obtain interconnection,
other licensed operators are commonly required to provide BT with a statement of requirements containing detailed
information about their planned services and interconnection needs. As interconnection needs change over time,
BT will receive more confidential information. BT may also learn the identities and service needs of particular customers
of its competitors who need to have private circuits interconnected with BT. Of course, there is no alternative to
interconnection with BT because of its local monopoly bottleneck and overall market power in the United Kingdom.
Section II.C similarly forbids MCI and NewCo from receiving confidential, non-public information from BT that BT
may obtain from other United States competitors of MCI and NewCo through its correspondent relationships with them.
United States international telecommunications providers have no reasonable alternative at present to using BT
for at least some of their correspondent traffic to and from the United Kingdom. A limited exception is provided to
allow MCI to obtain certain types of aggregate information it may need to comply with its transparency obligations
under Sections II.A.3(ii) and II.A.5, but in no circumstances may MCI use this exception to receive individual information
about other providers that is otherwise prohibited by this section.
Finally, Section II.D. addresses a specific competitive risk in the context of international correspondent relationships,
by prohibiting MCI from seeking or accepting from BT any non-public information about the future prices or pricing
plans of any competitor of MCI in the provision of international telecommunications services between the United
States and United Kingdom. BT and its United States correspondents, in the course of accounting rate negotiations,
exchange considerable information including business plans and traffic projections. Section II.D addresses the
substantial risk of violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Act that would arise if BT were to obtain non-public pricing
information from MCI's competitors once BT becomes MCI's single largest owner, by precluding any sharing of price
information through BT. Risks of price collusion, tacit or explicit, are considerable in an industry with a small
number of large providers offering similar types of services.


3. International Simple Resale Requirements


The international simple resale provision of the proposed Final Judgment, Section II.E, is directed at actions by
BT, using its dominant position in the United Kingdom, that would discriminate in favor of MCI, including the diversion
of most or all of BT's traffic from the United Kingdom through MCI and NewCo. Such conduct could raise prices to United
States consumers or otherwise harm competition in the United States, unless United States carriers are licensed
to operate in the United Kingdom and interconnected with BT so that they can respond effectively to BT's conduct.
International simple resale (``ISR'') (see Section IV.I) is the transmission through private or leased international
telecommunications facilities (or by any other international means where usage is not measured) of voice or data
traffic (excluding certain enhanced capabilities), if that traffic is carried over the public switched telecommunications
network in both the country where it originates and the country where it terminates. ISR avoids the correspondent
system, and traffic sent by ISR would be exempt from proportionate allocation policies. When all providers on an international
route are equally capable of using ISR, it can lessen the risk of discriminatory practices in switched correspondent
services, and can enable United States providers to retaliate against attempts by a foreign carrier to use its market
power to increase the settlement liabilities of unaffiliated carriers relative to those of its United States affiliate.
ISR between the United States and the United Kingdom can lawfully occur only when the telecommunications regulatory
authorities of both countries find generally that equivalency exists between them in policies relating to open entry
and non-discrimination. However, that equivalency finding will not be sufficient for all United States providers
to begin offering ISR to the United Kingdom, because in the United Kingdom each provider of international simple resale
services must also be individually licensed. To provide ISR, a firm must have the ability to use international facilities
and interconnections to the domestic networks at both ends of the international route.





