 




<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 39 </CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93SW16AD; Amendment 398979; AD 941508]</RINDOCK>



Airworthiness Directives; Robinson Helicopter Company Model R22 Helicopters 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration, DOT. 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule; request for comments.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This amendment adopts a new airworthiness directive (AD) that is applicable to Robinson Helicopter Company Model
R22 helicopters. This action requires an initial inspection and repetitive checks and visual inspections for corrosion
and cracks on certain main rotor blades. This amendment is prompted by reports of chordwise cracks found in the main
rotor blades. The actions specified in this AD are intended to prevent abnormal in-flight vibrations, failure of
the main rotor blade, and subsequent loss of control of the helicopter. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Effective August 9, 1994. 



Comments for inclusion in the Rules Docket must be received on or before September 23, 1994. 

 

</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Submit comments in triplicate to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel,
Attention: Rules Docket No. 93SW16AD, 2601 Meacham Boulevard, Room 663, Fort Worth, Texas 76137.




</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Ms. Lirio Liu, Aerospace Engineer, Los Angeles Aircraft Certification Office, FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate,
3229 East Spring Street, Long Beach, California 908062425, telephone (310) 9885229, fax (310) 9885210.




</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

This amendment adopts a new airworthiness directive that is applicable to Robinson Helicopter Company Model R22
helicopters equipped with main rotor blades, part number (P/N) A0162, with serial numbers (S/N) up to and including
7569 (all suffixes), that have over 500 hours time-in-service (TIS) or more than 1 year TIS. The manufacturer reports
finding two main rotor blades with cracks caused by corrosion on the main rotor blade skins. The cracks started at the
trailing edge on both the upper and lower surfaces and extended several inches in the chordwise direction. The FAA
has determined that corrosion or cracks in the main rotor blade skins create an unsafe condition. This condition,
if not corrected, could result in abnormal in-flight vibrations, failure of the main rotor blade, and subsequent
loss of control of the helicopter. 



The FAA has reviewed Robinson Helicopter Company Service Bulletin (SB) #72, dated March 29, 1993, that describes
procedures for a visual pilot check for corrosion or cracks in the skin of the main rotor blade, after the onset of any
unusual vibrations, or within 25 hours TIS; and, thereafter at intervals of 4 months TIS. After reviewing the available
data, the FAA has determined that repetitive visual inspections should be performed by a mechanic at intervals of
100 hours TIS, and the repetitive visual owner/operator (pilot) checks should be performed at intervals of 25 hours
TIS. 

Since an unsafe condition has been identified that is likely to exist or develop on other Robinson Helicopter Company
Model R22 helicopters of the same type design, this AD is being issued to prevent abnormal in-flight vibrations, failure
of the main rotor blade, and subsequent loss of control of the helicopter. This AD requires an initial visual inspection
by a certificated mechanic, (1) for main rotor blades that have less than 500 hours TIS and have been installed for less
than 1 year, upon or prior to the accumulation of 525 hours TIS or upon or prior to the main rotor blades having been installed
for 1 year, whichever is earlier, or (2) for main rotor blades with 500 or more hours TIS or that have been installed for
1 year or more within the next 25 hours TIS. The inspection threshold is 1 year and 500 hours TIS. Thereafter, inspections
for corrosion and cracks are required at intervals of not more than 100 hours TIS, or before further flight after the
onset of abnormal vibrations. This AD also requires repetitive checks for corrosion and cracks in the main rotor blade
at intervals not to exceed 25 hours TIS. These checks may be performed by an owner/operator holding at least a private
pilot certificate but must be documented in the aircraft records showing compliance with this AD in accordance with
sections 43.11 and 91.417(a)(2)(v) of the Federal Aviation Regulations. These checks do not require the use of tools,
precision measuring equipment, training, pilot logbook endorsements, or the use of technical data not contained
in the AD. These 25 hours TIS checks are additional measures to ensure that a crack that is visible without the aid of
a magnifying glass has not developed during the time between maintenance inspections. However, this AD does not require
visual checks at intervals of 4 months as specified by the SB, dated March 29, 1993. Due to the criticality of the main
rotor blades and the short compliance times, this rule must be issued immediately to correct an unsafe condition in
aircraft. 

Since a situation exists that requires the immediate adoption of this regulation, it is found that notice and opportunity
for prior public comment hereon are impracticable, and that good cause exists for making this amendment effective
in less than 30 days. 

</SUPPLEM>
