 

(b) 

Sources. 

Sources of program income include, but are not limited to, payments received from workers' compensation funds or
fees for services to defray part or all of the costs of services provided to particular clients. 

(c) 

Use of program income. 

(1) Program income, whenever earned, must be used for the provision of IL services or the administration of the State
plan, as appropriate. 

(2) A service provider is authorized to treat program income as_

(i) A deduction from total allowable costs charged to a Federal grant, in accordance with 34 CFR 80.25(g)(1); or 

(ii) An addition to the grant funds to be used for additional allowable program expenditures, in accordance with 34
CFR 80.25(g)(2). 

(3) Program income may not be used to meet the non-Federal share requirement under 34 CFR 365.12(b).

 


(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c); 34 CFR 80.25) 



364.7 



What requirements apply to the obligation of Federal funds and program income? 



(a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, any Federal funds, including reallotted funds, that
are appropriated for a fiscal year to carry out a program under 34 CFR part 365, 366, or 367 that are not obligated by the
DSU or center prior to the beginning of the succeeding fiscal year, and any program income received during a fiscal
year that is not obligated by the DSU or center prior to the beginning of the succeeding fiscal year, must remain available
for obligation by the DSU or center during that succeeding fiscal year. 

(b) Federal funds appropriated for a fiscal year under part B of chapter 1 and under chapter 2 of title VII of the Act remain
available for obligation in the succeeding fiscal year only to the extent that the DSU complied with any matching requirement
by obligating, in accordance with 34 CFR 76.707, the non-Federal share in the fiscal year for which the funds were appropriated.


(c) The provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to discretionary grants awarded by the Secretary
under sections 722 and 752 of the Act. 




(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 718) 



Subpart B_What Are the Application Requirements? 



364.10 

What are the application requirements? 



To receive a grant from a State's allotment of funds under parts B and C of chapter 1 of title VII of the Act and 34 CFR parts
365 and 366, a State shall submit to the Secretary, and obtain approval of, a three-year State plan meeting the requirements
in subpart C of this part.

 


(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 796c(a)(1)) 



364.11 

When must the State plan be submitted for approval? 



The designated State unit (DSU) shall submit to the Secretary for approval the three-year State plan no later than
July 1 of the year preceding the first fiscal year of the three-year period for which the State plan is submitted.

 


(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 796c(a)(4)) 



364.12 

How does the Secretary approve State plans? 



(a) 

General. 

The Secretary approves a State plan that the Secretary determines meets the requirements of section 704 of the Act
and subparts B through D of this part and disapproves a plan that does not meet these requirements. 

(b) 

Informal resolution. 

If the Secretary intends to disapprove the State plan, the Secretary attempts to resolve disputed issues informally
with State officials. 

(c) 

Notice of formal hearing. 

If, after reasonable effort has been made to resolve the dispute informally, no resolution has been reached, the Secretary
provides written notice to the DSU of the intention to disapprove the State plan and of the opportunity for a hearing.


(d) 

Hearing. 

(1) If the DSU requests a hearing, the Secretary designates one or more individuals, either from the Department or
elsewhere, not responsible for or connected with the Department's administration of the programs authorized by
Title VII of the Act, to conduct a hearing. 

(2) If more than one individual is designated, the Secretary designates one of those individuals as the Chief Hearing
Official of the Hearing Panel. If one individual is designated, that individual is the Hearing Official. 



