 

Hepatobiliary cancers are cancers of the liver and bile duct. There are a variety of risk factors that should be considered
by a credible study, including hepatitis B and C, alcohol abuse, cirrhosis, exposure to polychlorinated biphenyl
(PCB), and smoking. The relevant studies are few, and have not adequately controlled for these risk factors. A Swedish
case control study (Hardell L., Bengtsson N.O., Jonsson U., Eriksson S., Larsson L.G., 1984. Aetiological aspects
on primary liver cancer with special regard to alcohol, organic solvents and acute intermittent porphyria: an epidemiological
investigation. British Journal of Cancer 50:389397) showed a relationship between herbicide exposure and
the subsequent development of hepatobiliary cancer; however, other studies of similar size (Ronco G, Costa G., Lynge
E., 1992. Cancer risk among Danish and Italian farmers. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 49:220225;
Wiklund K., 1983. Swedish agricultural workers: a group with a decreased risk of cancer. Cancer 51:566568)
indicated no relationship. A large occupational study (Fingerhut et al., 1991) and a study of farmers in Denmark and
Italy (Ronco et al., 1992) found no relationship. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence
against an association between hepatobiliary cancer and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for
such an association, and he has determined that a positive association does not exist.

Bone cancers were considered together with joint cancers by NAS. Because of the rarity of bone cancers, most studies
have been too small to detect a significant risk. There has not been a consistent finding of bone cancer in exposed groups;
the preponderance of studies show no association, and the few studies that demonstrate a positive relationship (Fingerhut
et al., 1991; Breslin P., Kang H., Lee y., Burt V., Shepard B.M., 1988. Proportionate mortality study of U.S. Army and
U.S. Marine Corps veterans of the Vietnam War. Journal of Occupational Medicine 30:412419) are small and have
large confidence intervals which include one. The small size of the studies and the confidence limitations compromise
their significance. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association between
bone cancers and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an association, and he has determined
that a positive association does not exist.

Female reproductive cancers reviewed by NAS include those of the breast, uterus, cervix, ovary, and other genital
malignancies. The data related to women and herbicide exposure is extremely limited because few of the studies included
women. A large number of the breast cancer studies showed no association. Two studies (Thomas T.L., Kang H., Dalager
N., 1991. Mortality among women Vietnam veterans, 19731987. American Journal of Epidemiology 134:973980;
Manz et al., 1991) showed an increased risk for breast cancer which was not significant since both studies failed to
control for reproductive histories and had methodological problems. Only one small case control study (Donna A.,
Betta PG., Robutti F., Crosignani P., Berrino F., Bellingeri D., 1984. Ovarian mesothelial tumors and herbicides:
a case control study. Carcinogenesis 5:941942) showed an association with ovarian cancer, but the confidence
intervals were very wide. The larger occupational and farm worker studies all showed significantly lower mortality
ratios than expected. Likewise, studies of exposures generally found less uterine and cervical cancer than expected.
Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association between female reproductive
cancers and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an association, and he has determined that
a positive association does not exist.

The leather industry, asbestos, cadmium, petroleum products, analgesics, smoking, and obesity have been associated
with renal cancers. Studies of renal cancer have generally produced inconclusive results, in some cases because
of failure to adequately control for these confounding factors. Only one study of agricultural and forest workers
(Alavanja et al., 1989) showed a significantly increased risk of death from renal cancers; however, the preponderance
of studies, including the two largest (Wiklund, 1983; Burmeister, 1981), showed either no relationship with renal
cancers or increased risk which was not significant. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence
against an association between renal cancers and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an
association, and he has determined that a positive association does not exist.



