 

Whenever the Administrator finds that the applicable implementation plan for any area is substantially inadequate
to attain or maintain the relevant [NAAQS], to mitigate adequately the interstate pollutant transport described
in section [176A] or section [184], or to otherwise comply with any requirement of this Act, the Administrator shall
require the state to revise the plan as necessary to correct such inadequacies. 





Under section 110(k)(5), the Administrator is to notify the state of the inadequacies and may establish reasonable
deadlines, not exceeding 18 months after notice, for submission of the plan revisions. 



Importantly, the Act does not address how states' attainment demonstrations are to account for transport of ozone
pollution and its precursors.
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>
 As was the case prior to the 1990 Amendments, neither section 110 nor any other provision of the Act specifies when states
must submit SIP revisions to address the transport issue. Even with the advent of the very specific SIP submission
schedules in the subpart II ozone program under the 1990 Amendments, no deadline is specified for compliance with
the section 110(a)(2)(D) prohibition. EPA believes it may reasonably take action to make a finding of substantial
inadequacy as soon as EPA has a factual basis to believe that states need to act in order to prevent the pollution transport
problem from continuing past the downwind areas' attainment deadlines. Absent a LEV-equivalent program, EPA believes
it is necessary that the states take action now to adopt the OTC LEV program, and waiting to make this finding may compromise
their ability to achieve the reductions by the time they are needed for timely attainment and maintenance thereafter.
This action is fully justified by the terms of section 110(k)(5). This provision states that ``[w]henever'' EPA makes
the requisite finding of inadequacy, the state is obliged to submit a SIP revision. By its terms, section 110(k)(5)
makes clear that the timing of a SIP call depends only on EPA's determination of inadequacy, and the section does not
contain any provision that would tie SIP calls to any particular point on the SIP development timeline specified in
sections 181 and 182. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>
EPA's proposed interpretation of sections 110(a)(2)(D) and (k) is best understood in the context of the general statutory
scheme for attainment and maintenance of the ozone NAAQS. EPA's April 26 proposal contains a substantial explanation
of the statutory program to address ozone pollution in subpart II of part D of title I added in the 1990 Amendments to
the Act. See 59 FR at 2172122 (citing General Preamble for the Implementation of Title I of the Clean Air Act Amendments
of 1990, 57 FR 13498 (April 16, 1992)). As explained there, section 181 provides for the classification of areas according
to their degree of ozone pollution. The greater the degree of pollution, the longer the area has to attain and the more
stringent control measures it must adopt. The classifications and deadlines by which the areas are to attain the ozone
NAAQS are: marginal (1993); moderate (1996); serious (1999); severe (2005 or 2007, depending on the ozone design
value); and extreme (2010). 

Section 182 establishes the specific requirements and graduated control measures applicable for each type of area.
One basic requirement is that states were to submit emissions inventories by November 1992. A key upcoming requirement
is that, by November 15, 1994, states are to have submitted, for all moderate and above areas, demonstrations that
the states' SIPs will provide for attainment of the ozone NAAQS by the relevant attainment dates. As described in detail
in the April 26 notice and the General Preamble, section 182 specifies a host of control requirements that states must
adopt for various areas to ensure progress toward attainment. 

</FOOTNOTE>


Requiring submission of specific SIP revisions pursuant to section 110(k)(5) is consistent with past EPA actions.
Prior to 1990 and the enactment of section 184, EPA required states to submit specific reasonably available control
technology (RACT) control measures applicable to stationary sources as part of a SIP call under section 110(k)(5).
There, EPA's rationale was that: 




Because of the relative imprecision of ozone databases and modeling techniques *** EPA historically
has required most areas to include in their control strategies certain stationary source control measures that EPA
believes are reasonably available, and necessary to ensure that the SIP ``provides for'' attainment of the ozone
standard as expeditiously as practicable.
<FOOTCITE>9</FOOTCITE>





<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
9

</FOOTNAME>
For purposes of implementing the Clean Air Act after December 31, 1987 and prior to the 1990 Amendments, EPA interpreted
the statute as requiring states to develop corrective plans to attain ``as expeditiously as practicable.'' See 52
FR at 45044 

et seq.

 (Nov. 24, 1987); See also Delaney v. EPA, 898 F.2d 687 (9th Cir. 1990). 



</FOOTNOTE>

See 52 FR at 45062 (Nov. 24, 1987) (footnote added). EPA took this action right away in response to a new list of areas
violating the ozone standard. See 52 FR at 45055; 53 FR 34500 (Sept. 7, 1988); 55 FR 30973 (July 30, 1990). EPA did not
wait for these areas to develop attainment plans before issuing a SIP call requiring them to adopt specific controls
necessary for attainment. Likewise, here EPA is proposing to require submission of the OTC LEV program as necessary
for compliance with section 110(a)(2)(D). 



EPA believes it has authority under section 110(k)(5) to find that the states' SIPs are substantially inadequate
for lack of the many additional measures needed to fully achieve the emissions reductions necessary to adequately
mitigate transport, but does not believe it should make such a broad finding of substantial inadequacy at this time.
This is because the states are on track to incorporate many additional control measures into their SIPs for purposes
of their attainment demonstration obligations. In preparing these demonstrations, the OTR states are actively
working to adopt regional strategies to address transport. In the ordinary course, EPA believes it should allow states
the first opportunity to address transport in their forthcoming SIP revisions. There is still this opportunity for
states to adopt such other control measures to achieve the necessary reductions in time for downwind states to meet
their attainment deadlines and to maintain the NAAQS thereafter.
<FOOTCITE>10</FOOTCITE>
 If those efforts do not result in timely adoption of a regional strategy that will provide the emission reductions
needed for attainment and maintenance, EPA may consider making a more comprehensive finding of SIP inadequacy insofar
as other measures in addition to LEV are lacking. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
10

</FOOTNAME>
Section 181(a)(1) specified that ozone nonattainment areas are to attain the NAAQS ``as expeditiously as practicable
but not later than'' the dates specified in that section. Based on currently available information, EPA does not believe
that the serious and severe nonattainment areas in the OTR will be able to practicably attain the NAAQS earlier than
the dates specified in section 181(a)(1). This is because these areas will need to rely for attainment on control measures
that depend on equipment turnover that will take time to occur. For this reason, EPA's analysis in this SNPRM is based
on the Agency's belief that the serious and severe attainment dates are the dates specified in section 181(a)(1).


</FOOTNOTE>


EPA does not, however, believe it should wait to find the SIPs inadequate insofar as they lack the LEV program. This
is because the LEV program depends on vehicle fleet turnover that will take an unusually long time to generate the needed
emissions reductions. If EPA waits for the states' attainment demonstrations, the opportunity to ensure that necessary
emissions reductions from the LEV program are achieved beginning in 1999 and growing thereafter may be irrevocably
lost. Any delay in beginning the fleet turnover to LEV vehicles in model year 1999 will diminish the emissions benefits
in the years following. It is therefore necessary for the states to act now to adopt OTC LEV, and appropriate for EPA
to make a finding of substantial SIP inadequacy now with respect to that program. 

In sum, EPA is proposing to find now that the OTR states' SIPs are substantially inadequate insofar as they do not contain
the OTC LEV program. This is because EPA believes that the states need to adopt this program now to mitigate pollution
transport adequately by the attainment deadlines for areas in downwind states. 

EPA is proposing to set a one-year deadline under section 110(k)(5) for OTC LEV SIP submissions. Even though section
110(k)(5) authorizes EPA to allow up to 18 months, EPA believes a one-year deadline is appropriate here. EPA expects
the one-year deadline to fall at the end of calendar year 1995. To ensure implementation of the OTC LEV program in model
year 1999, and given the two-year lead-time requirement of section 177, states must adopt the program before January
2, 1996. If states were given more than about one year to adopt the LEV program, they could not be assured of implementing
it for all 1999 model year vehicles. Since EPA is proposing to conclude that 1999 model year implementation is necessary
to achieve the necessary emissions reductions, it is important that the SIP submission deadline fall in time to meet
the two-year lead-time requirement. 




