 

SBDC Services



The specific types of services to be offered are developed in coordination with the SBA district office which has jurisdiction
over a given SBDC. SBDCs emphasize the provision of indepth, high-quality assistance to small business owners or
prospective small business owners in complex areas that require specialized expertise. These areas may include,
but are not limited to: management, marketing, financing, accounting, strategic planning, regulation and taxation,
capital formation, procurement assistance, human resource management, production, operations, economic and
business data analysis, engineering, technology transfer, innovation and research, new product development,
product analysis, plant layout and design, agri-business, computer application, business law information, and
referral (any legal services beyond basic legal information, and referral require the endorsement of the State Bar
Association), exporting, office automation, site selection, or any other areas of assistance required to promote
small business growth, expansion, and productivity within the State. The SBDC shall also ensure that a full range
of business development and technical assistance services are made available to small businesses located in rural
areas.

The degree to which SBDC resources are directed towards specific areas of assistance is determined by local community
needs, SBA priorities and SBDC Program objectives and agreed upon by the SBA district office and the SBDC.

The SBDC must offer quality training to improve the skills and knowledge of existing and prospective small business
owners. As a general guideline, SBDCs should emphasize the provision of training in specialized areas other than
basic small business management subjects. SBDCs should also emphasize training designed to reach particular audiences
such as members of SBA priority and special emphasis groups.



SBDC Program Requirements



The SBDC is responsible to the SBA for ensuring that all programmatic and financial requirements imposed upon them
by statute or agreement are met. The SBDC must assure that quality assistance and training in management and technical
areas are provided to the State small business community through the State SBDC network. As a condition of this agreement,
the SBDC must perform, but not be limited to, the following activities:

(a) the SBDC ensures that services are provided as close as possible to small business population centers. This is
accomplished through the establishment of SBDC subcenters.

(b) the SBDC ensures that lists of local and regional private consultants are maintained at the lead SBDC and each SBDC
subcenter. The SBDC utilizes and provides compensation to qualified small business vendors such as private management
consultants, private consulting engineers, and private testing laboratories.

(c) the SBDC is responsible for the development and expansion of resources within the State, particularly the development
of new resources to assist small businesses that are not presently associated with the SBA district office.

(d) the SBDC ensures that working relationships and open communications exist within the financial and investment
communities, and with legal associations, private consultants, as well as small business groups and associations
to help address the needs of the small business community.

(e) the SBDC ensures that assistance is provided to SBA special emphasis groups throughout the SBDC network. This
assistance shall be provided to veterans, women, exporters, the handicapped, and minorities as well as any other
groups designated a priority by SBA. Services provided to special emphasis groups shall be performed as part of the
Cooperative Agreement.



Advance Understandings



The Lead SBDC and all SBDC subcenters shall operate on a forty (40) hour week basis, or during the normal business hours
of the State or Host Organization, throughout the calendar year.


The amount of time allowed the Lead SBDC and subcenters for staff vacations and holidays shall conform to the policy
of the Host organization.




Dated: June 8, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Erskine B. Bowles,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrator.

</SIGNJOB>
