 

Comments Pertaining to Section 15.33: Species Included in the Approved List for Captive-Bred Species. Deletions
of Species in the Approved List



Animal welfare organizations and one conservation organization commented that Peach-faced lovebird (

Agapornis roseicollis

) and Plum-headed parakeet (

Psittacula cyanocephala

) do not meet the criteria for approval in 15.31(a) and wild-caught birds are in trade. The Service has reviewed
its own and international import trade records for Peach-faced lovebirds and is satisfied that all specimens of the
species known to be in trade are captive-bred. The commenters expressed concern that imports of Peach-faced lovebirds
from South Africa could be wild-caught birds, since the species occurs in the wild there. The Service reviewed the
wildlife import declarations for all Peach-faced lovebirds imported from South Africa to the U.S. from 1988 through
1992 and is satisfied that the birds imported were captive-bred. Virtually all shipments had been certified by the
South African CITES Management Authority as captive-bred. This species meets the criteria for approval in 15.31
and will remain on the approved list of captive-bred species. 

The Service has reviewed import trade records for Plum-headed parakeets and found wild-caught specimens of this
species in trade, although none have been imported into the United States. Therefore, this species does not meet the
criteria for approval in 15.31, and the Service is not including the Plum-headed parakeet in the approved list
of captive-bred species. 

The Government of Australia communicated its concern with listing in the approved list of captive-bred species the
following species: the Port Lincoln parrot (

Barnardius zonarius

), Swift Parrot (

Lathamus discolor

), Green rosella (

Platycercus caledonicus

), Yellow rosella (

Platycercus flaveolus

), and Blue-bonnet parakeet (

Psephotus haematogaster

). They stated that these species are not common in captivity in Australia and that there are problems associated with
the smuggling of wild-caught specimens of these species. The Service proposed these species for listing in its March
17, 1994, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, based on the information available to it at that time, which showed that specimens
imported into the U.S. were captive-bred. Given this new information from Australia, the Service agrees and is not
including these species in the final list of approved captive-bred species. 

Animal welfare organizations and one conservation organization recommended that the Gouldian finch (

Chloebia gouldiae

), Long-tailed grassfinch (

Poephila acuticaudata

), and Double-barred finch (

Poephila bichenovii

) be deleted from the approved list of captive-bred species because of the high mortality these species suffer in transit
and quarantine. Although the Service recognizes the problems with mortality of birds in trade, the statute does not
allow the use of such information in listing captive-bred species on the approved list. The Service is committed,
however, to enforcement of the Humane and Healthful Transport Regulations in 50 CFR Part 14, which apply to these and
all other bird species imported into the United States. 



