 



Issue 2: 

The amendment to section 10(j) of the Act states that experimental populations may only be designated when there is
geographical separation between the experimental population and other existing populations of the species. The
occasional occurrence of lone wolves in the areas of central Idaho and Yellowstone would prohibit the use of the experimental
population designation since there would be no geographic separation between natural occurring and experimental
wolves. Comments also stated that the boundaries of the experimental areas should be adjusted or the reintroduction
program should be delayed, particularly, in central Idaho due to the presence of naturally occurring wolves. 


Service Response: 

For many years, the Service and other agencies have tried to document wolf activity in Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming
(Service 1994a Appendix 12). Since the 1970's, wolf observations particularly from Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho,
have been reported. However, to date the only documented breeding groups of wolves are in northwestern Montana. Based
on scientific inquiry, the Service defines a wolf population as at least two breeding pairs of wild wolves each successfully
raising at least two young each year, for 2 consecutive years, and that a population is composed of breeding groups
of wolves (Service 1994a, Appendix 9). Presently, there are no known breeding pairs of wolves within the experimental
area. Nor does the experimental area contain any portions of home ranges of any breeding pairs of wolves. The Service
finds that there is no geographic overlap between any Montana wolf population home range and the experimental area.
The northern boundary of the Idaho experimental population area was moved further south because, in 1990 and 1992,
there were a few instances when an active breeding group of wolves from Montana were located south of the experimental
boundary recommended in the proposed rule. The rulemaking language now allows revocation of this rule and removal
of all reintroduced wolves, if within 90 days after the initial reintroduction a naturally occurring wolf population
is discovered in the experimental area. Any naturally occurring wolves will be managed as endangered species under
the Act and afforded the same terms and conditions as wolves in Montana. The Service has had a wolf monitoring program
in place in Idaho, Montana and Wyoming for over two years. This system is designed to accept reports from anyone, and
when a report focuses on a particular area a wolf biologist investigates to verify the presence or absence of wolves.
Through this method the Service has identified newly formed packs in northwestern Montana. Within the experimental
area, no confirmation of wolves from provided reports has occurred. 


Issue 3: 

The experimental population rules did not utilize the best scientific and commercial data available to reach decisions,
as required by the Act. 


Service Response: 

The Service contends that this rule and the Secretary's decision to reintroduce wolves used the best scientific data
available and underwent peer review and scientific analysis. The EIS on the impacts of this rule includes several
appendices and a list of persons who contributed their expert opinions or relevant data to the decisionmaking process
(Service 1994a). Professional wildlife biologists and scientific organizations complimented the Service on the
depth and detail of its scientific investigation in regards to the reintroduction of wolves. 


Issue 4: 

The reintroduction plan does not enhance the conservation and recovery of wolves, as required by the Act. Reintroduction,
particularly in central Idaho, should not be conducted or should be delayed for several years while a search for existing
wolves is conducted. 


Service Response: 

For the past 20 years and presently, the Service and others have searched for wolves in the northern Rocky Mountains.
Reviews of correspondence from the past 25 years show the longstanding and widespread view that wolves already occupied
Idaho and the discovery of their presence imminent. Very extensive monitoring within the experimental population
area has not confirmed the presence of wolves. This particular species is not habitat limited and if allowed to get
into the experimental area would reproduce and survive. The translocation of wild wolves from Canada to the Park will
provide the opportunity to start a wolf population. This translocation effort will greatly facilitate recovery
of the gray wolf in the Yellowstone ecosystem. The 1987 Rocky Mountain wolf recovery plan recommended an additional
5 years of monitoring for natural wolf recovery in Idaho. However, the recovery plan provided other options if two
breeding pairs of wolves had not become established in Idaho during the 5 years. Because no breeding pairs have been
located, the draft and final EIS and Record of Decision allow the simultaneous reintroduction of wolves into central
Idaho and the Park in an effort to ensure the viability and conservation of wolves in the Rocky Mountains (Service 1994a,
Appendix 16). 


Issue 5: 

The Service proposed a very liberal experimental rule to accommodate concerns of local residents and the affected
States. However, it did not make allowances for unforeseen circumstances that may impede or prevent wolf population
growth and recovery. Options such as increased management or greater numbers of reintroductions should be allowed
if required. 


Service Response: 

The Service believes that, as proposed, reintroduction and management techniques will result in wolf population
recovery and delisting by about 2002. Rulemaking language was added clarifying that take activities must lead to
eventual recovery of the wolf. Additionally, if there is no progress in achieving wolf population recovery (i.e.,
if wolves in a recovery area do not exhibit positive growth for 2 consecutive years), then factors impacting population
growth will be investigated. Information from the investigation will be made available to the public and appropriate
Federal, State, and tribal agencies. Within a year, the agencies may recommend and implement new management actions
or modifications to their wolf management plans to correct factors negatively impacting wolf recovery. Only as a
last resort would changes or modifications to sections of the experimental rule be made. 





