 







<USDEPT>AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>Housing Guaranty Program; Notice of Investment Opportunity</DOCTITLE>



The purpose of this notice is to provide advance notice to interested firms that Nedcor Bank Limited of South Africa
(``Nedcor'') intends to request proposals for the services of a U.S. financial institution to raise funds in the U.S.
market pursuant to the U.S. Agency for International Development's (``USAID'') Housing Guaranty Program. Nedcor
will seek to borrow US$30 million, or the South African Commercial Rand equivalent thereof (the ``Loan''). Nedcor's
long-term objective is to develop a relationship with a U.S. financial institution that will provide Nedcor with
future access to the U.S. capital market. For the purpose of this particular transaction, Nedcor intends to request
proposals on an expedited basis. Therefore, upon receipt of this notice, interested firms should promptly communicate
with Nedcor's representative, Dr. Brennan Nelson, at the following address:



South Africa Project No. 674HG001, Housing Guaranty Loan No. 674HG001 A01



Postal Address 



Nedcor Bank Unlimited, P.O. Box 1144, Johannesburg 2000, Republic of South Africa, Attn: Dr. Brennan Nelson (Branch
858)



Physical Address 



Nedcor Bank Limited, 100 Main Street, 8th Floor, Johannesburg 2000, Republic of South Africa, Attn: Dr. Brennan Nelson
(Branch 858)




Dr. Nelson will be available, upon issuance of this notice, to answer questions concerning this transaction and the
programs it will support by telephone at (27 11) 6307365; and by facsimile transmission at (27 11) 6307231
or (27 11) 6307584.

Firms interested in responding to this notice must do so by 12:00 noon, Eastern Standard Time, on January 4, 1995, by
submitting their bids to Nedcor at the address specified above. Copies of all bids should be simultaneously sent to
the following: Mr. David Grossman, Assistant Director, Mr. Peter Pirnie, Financial Advisor, Facsimile (preferred
communication): (202) 6632772 and (703) 8754384.

Within 48 hours after the closing time for submission of proposals, Nedcor, with the approval of USAID, will select
the financial institution(s) deemed best qualified to arrange the financing on terms most advantageous to Nedcor.
Thereafter, Nedcor would seek to close the transaction within 30 days after it has notified the successful financial
institution(s) that its proposal has been accepted, but in no event later than 45 days after such notification.



Additional Information



Provided below is a preliminary description of the terms of the financing. Nedcor reserves the right, however, to
change these terms after the selection process based upon advice from the consultations with the successful respondent.



I. Background



The Loan will be guaranteed by the U.S. Government acting through USAID. The Loan will be part of the U.S. Government's
special aid package in support of the democratic transition in South Africa. It will be the first of its kind to a private
sector bank in South Africa. The funds generated by this Loan will be used to provide the initial funding for a home mortgage
program dedicated to servicing the large and immediate needs of South African Black families for housing.

The Loan will be either a fixed-rate or a floating rate, 8-year, non-amortizing (bullet) loan, denominated in either
United States dollars or South African Rand, and will be made available to Nedcor at any of its branches. Restrictions
may be placed on the transferability of the promissory notes evidencing the Loan, in the event such notes are denominated
in Rand. All transactions concerning the Loan must be reported to both Nedcor and USAID.

The Loan will be backed by a full faith and credit guaranty as to payment of both principal and interest of the United
States of America, acting through USAID. The guaranty will be issued pursuant to the authority of Section 222 of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (the ``Act''). In the event the Loan is disbursed in Rand, USAID's liability
under its guaranty of the Rand obligations of Nedcor shall be limited to (1) The Rand equivalent of U.S. $30 million
in principal, plus (2) the Rand equivalent of the total aggregate interest payments due over the life of the loan as
calculated in U.S. dollars, which amounts shall be determined using the closing Rand/U.S. dollar spot rate for Commercial
Rand set by the South African Reserve Bank at the close of business on the date on which the Loan is disbursed.

Investors eligible to receive the USAID guaranty are those specified in Section 238(c) of the Act. They are: (1) U.S.
citizens; (2) domestic U.S. corporations, partnerships, or associations substantially beneficially owned by
U.S. citizens; (3) foreign corporations whose share capital is at least ninety-five percent (95%) owned by U.S. citizens;
and (4) foreign partnerships or associations wholly owned by U.S. citizens.

