 




<USBUREAU>Office of Inspector General</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Performance Standards for State Medicaid Fraud Control Units </DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Office of Inspector General, HHS.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 In accordance with section 1902(a)(61) of the Social Security Act and the authority delegated to the Inspector General,
this notice sets forth standards for assessing the performance of the State Medicaid Fraud Control Units. These standards
will be used in the certification and recertification of each Unit and to determine if a Unit is effectively and efficiently
carrying out its duties and responsibilities. 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 These performance standards are effective on September 26, 1994.




</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:






Paul F. Conroy, Office of Investigations, (202) 6193210 

Joel Schaer, Legislation, Regulations and Public Affairs Staff, (202) 6190089



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:


 
I. Background 



Since the enactment of the Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Fraud and Abuse Amendments of 1977, authorizing the establishment
and funding for Medicaid Fraud Control Units (MFCUs), 42 States have created such fraud control units to investigate
and prosecute Medicaid provider fraud and patient abuse and neglect in Medicaid funded facilities. 

A MFCU must be a single, identifiable entity of the State government composed of (i) one or more attorneys experienced
in investigating or prosecuting civil fraud or criminal cases who are capable of giving informed advice on applicable
law and procedures and providing effective prosecution or liaison with other prosecutors; (ii) one or more experienced
auditors capable of supervising the review of financial records and advising or assisting in the investigation of
alleged fraud; and (iii) a senior investigator with substantial experience in commercial or financial investigations
who is capable of supervising and directing the investigative activities of the unit. While the preference of the
enabling legislation has been for the unit to investigate and prosecute its own cases on a Statewide basis, the legislative
history recognizes that not all States are lawfully able to establish the MFCU to do so. 

The State Medicaid agency is required to enter into an agreement with the MFCU to refer all suspected cases of provider
fraud to the unit, and to comply with the unit's requests for provider records or computerized data that is kept by the
Medicaid agency. To ensure that Medicaid overpayments identified by a MFCU in the course of its investigations are
recovered, each MFCU is required either to undertake civil recovery actions or have procedures to refer overpayments
for collection to other appropriate State agencies.

The HHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) is delegated the authority to certify and recertify the MFCUs to ensure that
the units fully comply with the governing statute and with Federal regulations set forth in 42 CFR part 1007. As part
of its recertification process, the OIG reviews the State fraud units' applications for recertification and may
conduct on-site visits to the units to observe their operations. The OIG also collects and analyzes statistical data
on the number and type of cases under investigation, the number of convictions obtained, and the amount of recoveries.




II. Use Of Performance Standards 



Section 13625 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, Public Law 10366, amended section 1902 of the
Social Security Act by adding a new paragraph (a)(61) that establishes a Medicaid State plan requirement that, effective
January 1, 1995, a State must operate a MFCU in accordance with standards to be established by the Secretary. 

The OIG intends to use these performance standards in the certification and recertification of a Unit, as well as for
assessing the effectiveness of a Unit during on-site reviews. 



III. Standards For Assessing The MFCUS 



In cooperation with the Units themselves, represented by a working group from the National Association of Medicaid
Fraud Control Units, the OIG has developed twelve performance standards to be used in evaluating a Unit's performance.
Each of the current Unit directors has concurred with the standards and accompanying requirements or indicators
set forth below. 




Performance Standards





1. A Unit will be in conformance with all applicable statutes, regulations and policy directives

. 

In meeting this standard, the Unit must meet, but is not limited to, the following 
requirements_

A. The Unit professional staff must consist of permanent employees working full-time on Medicaid fraud and patient
abuse matters. 

B. The Unit must be separate and distinct from the single State Medicaid agency. 

C. The Unit must have prosecutorial authority or an approved formal procedure for referring cases to a prosecutor.


D. The Unit must submit annual reports, with appropriate certifications, on a timely basis. 

E. The Unit must submit quarterly reports on a timely basis. 

F. The Unit must comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Equal Employment Opportunity requirements,
the Drug Free Workplace requirements, Federal lobbying restrictions, and other such rules that are made conditions
of the grant. 



2. A Unit should maintain staff levels in accordance with staffing allocations approved in its budget

. 

In meeting this standard, the following performance indicators will be 
considered_


</SUPPLEM>
