 



Enhanced 911

: A telephone network feature that automatically provides emergency response agencies with telephone directory
number and location information on calls placed to the national emergency number, 911.



Enhanced 911 compatibility

: The ability to relay a number associated with each served emergency response location.



Enhanced 911 emergency services trunk

: Any 2-wire or 4-wire telephone connection that provide access to Enhanced 911 service.



* * * * *





Restriction

: The blocking of specific dial codes and sequences during call initiation.




* * * * *



4. Section 68.106 is proposed to be amended by adding paragraph (f) to read as follows:



68.106

Notification to telephone company.



* * * * *




(f) 

Dispersed private telephone system trunk and station number verification for Enhanced 911 purposes.

 Customers who install dispersed private telephone systems after [18 months after effective date of order adopting
rules in this proceeding] shall provide the telephone company with:


(1) The number of trunk connections desired;

(2) The number of stations that may originate emergency calls;

(3) The number of, and identification of emergency response locations that will require number identification;
and

(4) The FCC Registration Number of the equipment being used. The telephone company will provide 10-digit numbers
for the identified emergency response locations.


5. Section 68.228 is proposed to be added to read as follows:



68.228

Enhanced 911 trunk and station number verification.




(a) 

Verification requirements.


(1) General.

 The proper transmission of station number identification (SNI) for the station dialing the emergency number 911
shall be verified as part of initial installation and subsequent changes in emergency response location data.

(2) 

Station number identification.

 The 10-digit station number identification transmitted for 911 calls shall be verified to:


(i) Be in the group of station numbers assigned to the trunk by the telephone company and, (ii) Be assigned to the specific
emergency response location of the corresponding calling station.


(b) 

Verfication personnel.

 Work associated with the verification of Enhanced 911 emergency services trunk operation shall be performed under
the supervision and control of a supervisor as defined in paragraph (c) of this section. The supervisor and installer
may be the same person.


(c) 

Supervision.

 Work by installation personnel shall be performed under the responsible supervision and control of a person who:


(1) Has at least 6 months of on-the-job experience in the installation of telephone terminal equipment;

(2) Has been trained in the operation of Enhanced 911 emergency services trunks and in the performance of operations
needed to verify proper identification procedures and results; 

(3) Or, regardless of compliance with paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section, is a licensed professional engineer
in the jurisdiction in which the installation is performed.


(d) 

Verification procedure.

 The installation supervisor shall provide written notification to the telephone company that the required verification
tests have been performed, including the following information:


(1) The responsible supervisor's full name, address and business telephone number; and


(2) The date when Enhanced 911 trunks will go into service, the date when the verification tests were completed, and
a list of trunk identification numbers and station numbers verified.

(e) 

Verification of changes.

 Addition or deletion of Enhanced 911 data base entries will be cause for verification of operation.



