 

(d) Active duty military personnel who give notice and comply with 3851.6 are not subject to the provisions
of this section. 

38. Section 3851.5 is revised to read as follows: 


3851.5 

Assessment work not required after allowance of mineral entry. 



Performance of annual assessment work and payment of rental or maintenance fees is not required after the date that
the mineral entry has been allowed. 

(a) The assessment year in which the mineral entry is allowed by the issuance of the first half of the mineral entry final
certificate is the first assessment year for which the assessment work and payment of rental or maintenance fees is
no longer required, and assessment work is not required in any assessment year thereafter until a mineral patent issues.


(b) If a mineral entry is canceled in whole or in part, the mining claims and mill sites that are no longer covered by the
mineral entry shall be subject to the assessment work requirement, or the payment of rental or maintenance fees, beginning
in the next assessment year following the assessment year that the mineral entry was canceled.

39. Section 3851.6 is added to read as follows: 



3851.6 

Assessment work not required for active duty military personnel. 



Pursuant to the Soldier's and Sailor's Relief Act (50 U.S.C. appendix 565), a person entering active military service
is exempt from the performance of annual assessment work under this subpart for each assessment year in which the service
person is on active duty. 

(a) To claim the exemption, the person entering active military service shall file, or cause to be filed with the proper
BLM office, a notice of his or her entry into active military service. The notice shall be filed in the assessment year
that the person entered active duty status. 

(b) The filing of the notice exempts the person from performing assessment work or paying the maintenance fees until
6 months have passed from the person's release from active duty status, or until 6 months have passed from release from
a military hospital, whichever is later. 

(c) The performance of assessment work or the payment of maintenance fees shall resume in the assessment year beginning
at least 6 months after the date the person was released from active duty or a military hospital. 

(d) The notice shall be filed as a certified statement pursuant to 3833.17 of this title, and shall list
all mining claims and sites affected by claim name and BLM serial number. 



Subpart 3852_Deferment of Assessment Work 



40. Section 3852.2 is amended by revising the first and second sentences in paragraph (a) to read as follows: 



3852.2 

Filing of petition for deferment, contents. 



(a) In order to obtain a deferment, the claimant shall file with the proper BLM office a petition in duplicate requesting
such a deferment. No particular form of petition is required, but the applicant shall attach to one copy thereof a copy
of the notice to the public required by 30 U.S.C. 28e showing that it has been filed or recorded in the local recording
office in which the notices or certificates of location were filed or recorded.


 * * * * *



40. Section 3852.3 is revised to read as follows: 


3852.3 

Notice of action on petition to be recorded. 



The claimant shall file or record in the local recording office in which he filed or recorded his notice of petition
for deferment a copy of the order or decision of the BLM authorized officer disposing of the petition.




Dated: April 8, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Bob Armstrong,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary of the Interior. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9411346 Filed 51094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431084P
</BILLING>

