 

(c) Deposits into the account may include: 


(1) Funds from non-Federal sources related to activities on or for the Indian forest land of such tribe's reservation;



(2) Donations or contributions; 


(3) Unobligated forestry appropriations for the tribe; 


(4) User fees; and 


(5) Funds transferred under Federal interagency agreements if otherwise authorized by law. 


(d) For purposes of 163.35(c)(3), unobligated forestry appropriations shall consist of those balances which
remain unobligated at the end of the fiscal year(s) for which such funds are appropriated and which are identified
in the finance system by the tribe's organization code, and organization code is a unique number assigned to each tribe
in the finance system. 


(e) Funds in the Indian forest land assistance account plus any interest or other income earned thereon shall remain
available until expended and shall not be available to otherwise offset Federal appropriations for the management
of Indian forest land. 


(f) Funds in the forest land assistance account shall be used only for forest land management activities on the reservation
for which the account is established. 


(g) Funds in a tribe's forest land assistance account shall be expended in accordance with a plan approved by the tribe
and the Secretary. 


(h) In addition to the annual audit performed by the Secretary to oversee trust funds, the Secretary may, where circumstances
warrant, at the request of the tribe, or upon the Secretary's own volition, conduct audits of the forest land assistance
accounts and shall provide the results of such audits to the tribe(s). 



163.36

Tribal forestry program financial support. 




(a) The Secretary shall maintain a program to provide financial support to qualifying tribal forestry programs.
A qualifying tribal forestry program is an organization or entity established by a tribe for purposes of carrying
out forest land management activities. Such financial support shall be made available through the Indian Self-Determination
and Education Assistance Act (Pub. L. 93638, as amended). 


(b) The authorized tribal representatives of any category 1, 2, or 3 reservation with an established tribal forestry
program or with an intent to establish such a program for the purpose of carrying out forest land management activities
may apply and qualify for tribal forestry program financial support. Reservation categories, as determined by the
Secretary, are defined as: 


(1) Category 1 includes major forested reservations comprised of more than 10,000 acres of trust or restricted commercial
timberland or having more than a one million board foot harvest of forest products annually. 


(2) Category 2 includes minor forested reservations comprised of less than 10,000 acres of trust or restricted commercial
timberland and having less than a one million board foot harvest of forest products annually, or whose forest resource
is determined by the Secretary to be of significant commercial timber value. 


(3) Category 3 includes significant woodland reservations comprised of an identifiable trust or restricted forest
area of any size which is lacking a timberland component, and whose forest resource is determined by the Secretary
to be of significant commercial woodland value. 


(c) A group of tribes which has either established or intends to establish a cooperative tribal forestry program to
provide forest land management services to their reservations may apply and qualify for tribal forestry program
financial support. For purposes of financial support under this provision, the cooperative tribal forestry program
and the commercial forest acreage and annual allowable cut which it represents may be considered as a single reservation.



(d) Before the beginning of each Federal fiscal year, tribes applying to qualify for forestry program financial support
shall submit application packages to the Secretary which: 


(1) Document that a tribal forestry program exists or that there is an intent to establish such a program; 


(2) Describe forest land management activities and the time line for implementing such activities which would result
from receiving tribal forestry program financial support; and 


(3) Document commitment to sustained yield management. 


(e) Tribal forestry program financial support shall provide professional and technical services to carry out forest
land management activities and shall be based on levels of funding assistance as follows: 


(1) Level one funding assistance shall be equivalent to a Federal Employee General Pay Schedule GS 9 step 5 position
salary plus an additional forty (40) percent of the annual salary for such a position to pay for fringe benefits and
support costs; 


(2) Level two funding assistance shall be equivalent to an additional Federal Employee General Pay Schedule GS 9 step
5 position salary plus an additional forty (40) percent of the annual salary for such a position to pay for fringe benefits
and support costs; and 




