 

(2) Businesses owned by members of minority groups and/or women. Unless otherwise provided in rules governing specific
services, a business owned by members of minority groups and/or women is one in which minorities and/or women who are
U.S. citizens control the applicant, have at least 50.1 percent equity ownership and, in the case of a corporate applicant,
a 50.1 percent voting interest. For applicants that are partnerships, every general partner either must be a minority
and/or woman (or minorities and/or women) who are U.S. citizens and who individually or together own at least 50.1
percent of the partnership equity, or an entity that is 100 percent owned and controlled by minorities and/or women
who are U.S. citizens. The interests of minorities and women are to be calculated on a fully-diluted basis; agreements
such as stock options and convertible debentures shall be considered to have a present effect on the power to control
an entity and shall be treated as if the rights thereunder already have been fully exercised. However, upon a demonstration
that options or conversion rights held by non-controlling principals will not deprive the minority and female principals
of a substantial financial stake in the venture or impair their rights to control the designated entity, a designated
entity may seek a waiver of the requirement that the equity of the minority and female principals must be calculated
on a fully-diluted basis. The term minority includes individuals of African American, Hispanic-surnamed, American
Eskimo, Aleut, American Indian and Asian American extraction. 

(3) Rural telephone companies. A rural telephone company is any local exchange carrier including affiliates (as
defined in 1.2110(b)(4)), with 100,000 access lines or fewer. 

(4) Affiliate. (i) An individual or entity is an affiliate of an applicant or of a person holding an attributable interest
in an applicant under 24.709 (both referred to herein as ``the applicant'') if such individual or entity_ 

(A) directly or indirectly controls or has the power to control the applicant, or 

(B) is directly or indirectly controlled by the applicant, or 

(C) is directly or indirectly controlled by a third party or parties that also controls or has the power to control the
applicant, or 

(D) has an ``identity of interest'' with the applicant. 

(ii) Nature of 

control 

in determining affiliation. 

(A) Every business concern is considered to have one or more parties who directly or indirectly control or have the
power to control it. Control may be affirmative or negative and it is immaterial whether it is exercised so long as the
power to control exists.

 




Example. 

An applicant owning 50 percent of the voting stock of another concern would have negative power to control such concern
since such party can block any action of the other stockholders. Also, the bylaws of a corporation may permit a stockholder
with less than 50 percent of the voting stock to block any actions taken by the other stockholders in the other entity.
Affiliation exists when the applicant has the power to control a concern while at the same time another person, or persons,
are in control of the concern at the will of the party or parties with the power to control. 


 


(B) Control can arise through stock ownership; occupancy of director, officer or key employee positions; contractual
or other business relations; or combinations of these and other factors. A key employee is an employee who, because
of his/her position in the concern, has a critical influence in or substantive control over the operations or management
of the concern. 

(C) Control can arise through management positions where a concern's voting stock is so widely distributed that no
effective control can be established. 


 




Example. 

In a corporation where the officers and directors own various size blocks of stock totaling 40 percent of the corporation's
voting stock, but no officer or director has a block sufficient to give him or her control or the power to control and
the remaining 60 percent is widely distributed with no individual stockholder having a stock interest greater than
10 percent, management has the power to control. If persons with such management control of the other entity are persons
with attributable interests in the applicant, the other entity will be deemed an affiliate of the applicant. 


 


(iii) Identity of interest between and among persons. Affiliation can arise between or among two or more persons with
an identity of interest, such as members of the same family or persons with common investments. In determining if the
applicant controls or has the power to control a concern, persons with an identity of interest will be treated as though
they were one person. 


 




Example. 

Two shareholders in Corporation Y each have attributable interests in the same PCS application. While neither shareholder
has enough shares to individually control Corporation Y, together they have the power to control Corporation Y. The
two shareholders with these common investments (or identity in interest) are treated as though they are one person
and Corporation Y would be deemed an affiliate of the applicant. 


 


(A) Spousal Affiliation. Both spouses are deemed to own or control or have the power to control interests owned or controlled
by either of them, unless they are subject to a legal separation recognized by a court of competent jurisdiction in
the United States. In calculating their net worth, investors who are legally separated must include their share of
interests in property held jointly with a spouse. 

(B) Kinship Affiliation. Immediate family members will be presumed to own or control or have the power to control interests
owned or controlled by other immediate family members. In this context ``immediate family member'' means father,
mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, brother, sister, father- or mother-in-law, son- or daughter-in-law, brother-
or sister-in-law, step-father or -mother, step-brother or -sister, step-son or -daughter, half brother or sister.
This presumption may be rebutted by showing that the family members are estranged, the family ties are remote, or the
family members are not closely involved with each other in business matters. 


 




Example. 

A owns a controlling interest in Corporation X. A's sister-in-law, B, has an attributable interest in a PCS application.
Because A and B have a presumptive kinship affiliation, A's interest in Corporation Y is attributable to B, and thus
to the applicant, unless B rebuts the presumption with the necessary showing. 


 



