 

Program Authority





Authority:

 49 U.S.C. 1463; 15 U.S.C. 313; 33 U.S.C. 883a. 

et seq.;

 15 U.S.C. 2901; 15 U.S.C. 2921



(CFDA No. 11.431)_Climate and Atmospheric Research



Program Objectives



The long term objective of the Climate and Global Change Program is to provide reliable predictions of climate change
and associated regional implications on time scales ranging from seasons to a century or more. NOAA believes that
these time scales can be studied with an acceptable probability of success and are the most relevant for fundamental
social concerns. Predicting the behavior of the coupled ocean-atmosphere-land surface system will characterize
NOAA's role in a successful national effort to deal with observed or anticipated changes in the global environment.
NOAA has a range of unique facilities and capabilities that can be applied to Climate and Global Change investigations.
Proposals that seek to exploit these resources in collaborative efforts between NOAA and extramural investigators
are encouraged.



Program Priorities



In FY 1995, NOAA will give priority attention to individual proposals in the areas described below. Investigators
are asked to specify clearly which of these areas is being pursued. The names, affiliations and phone numbers of relevant
Climate and Global Change Program Officers are provided. Prospective applicants are encouraged to contact Program
Officers for further information. Proposals should be sent to the NOAA Office of Global Programs rather than to individual
Program Officers.

Atmospheric Chemistry_The Atmospheric Chemistry Project focuses on global monitoring, process-oriented laboratory
and field studies, and theoretical modeling to improve the predictive understanding of atmospheric trace gases
that influence the Earth's chemical and radiative balance. FY 1995 actions in Atmospheric Chemistry will focus on
studies associated with the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) program of the IGBP. Proposals are
solicited for the following: (i) (highest priority) the North Atlantic Regional Study (NARE), with emphasis on intensive
field studies and modeling; (ii) the International Support Activity: intercalibrations/intercomparisons, with
emphasis on the Nonmethane Hydrocarbon Intercomparison Experiment; (iii) the East Asian/North Pacific Regional
Experiment (APARE), with emphasis on coordination of ground-based chemical measurements and diagnostic analyses
and modeling of regional chemical processes. In addition, proposals are solicited for stratospheric/upper tropospheric
ozone research, with an emphasis on the development or deployment of instruments capable of measuring key chemical
compounds from high-altitude jet aircraft. For an information sheet containing further details, contact: Joel
Levy, NOAA/Global Programs, 301/4272089 ext. 756, OMNET: J.Levy, Internet: Levy@ogp.noaa.gov., or Fred
C. Fehsenfeld, NOAA/Aeronomy Laboratory, Boulder, CO; 303/4975819.

Climate Observations_A new FY 1995 Climate and Global Change program element is under consideration at this time.
It will focus on ocean, atmosphere and land surface climate observations, measurement systems, and techniques and
is expected to be a blend of former elements including Operational Measurements (OM), Long-Term Ocean Observations
(LTOO), Measurement Technique Development, and Solar Variability. Funding for new starts in this element
in FY 1995 will be extremely limited, with no more than one or two new projects anticipated in the OM and LTOO areas
and no new projects in Measurement Technique Development or Solar Variability. OM anticipates a tightly focused
program which addresses the development, validation, and implementation of high-quality, climate relevant data
products derived from operational meteorological satellite and in-situ observing systems. Activities in the LTOO
focus will continue to be on observations for climate prediction, primarily at seasonal to interannual time scales.
In parallel with ongoing data collection efforts, LTOO will support design studies and observing system simulation
experiments aimed at assessing the impact of ocean data on climate prediction. Because of the limited FY 1995 funding
expected, investigators considering submitting a proposal are encouraged to contact program officials for preliminary
discussion of ideas, and are urged to submit letters of intent prior to proposal submission. For further information
on OM related projects, contact Bill Murray, NOAA/Global Programs, Silver Spring, MD; 301/4272089 ext. 26.
OMNET; W.Murray, Internet: murray@ogp.noaa.gov and Arnold Gruber, NOAA/NESDIS, Washington, D.C., 20233, 301/7638127,
and for LTOO projects, contact Bill Woodward, NOAA, NOS/OES, Silver Spring, MD.; 301/7132790, OMNET:
W.Woodward, Internet: W.Woodward@omnet.com.

Atlantic Climate Change_The goal of this project is to determine the nature and influence of interactions between
the meridional circulation of the Atlantic Ocean, sea surface temperature and salinity, and the global atmosphere.
Proposals are sought in the following areas: (i) Studies using models or historical data to examine variability in
the climate system resulting from interactions between the global atmosphere and the Atlantic Ocean; (ii) modeling
of the maintenance and variability of the relatively warm upper layer water in the Grand Banks region and the sea surface
temperature field of the tropical Atlantic, and what role these regions may play in the larger scale atmospheric and
oceanic climate system; (iii) use of conceptual and numerical models to synthesize near surface data (e.g. surface
drifters, XBTs and sea level) and data from the full water column (e.g. hydrographic, tracer and other data sets);
(iv) documentation of the general characteristics of decadal/century modes of Atlantic climate variability through
synthesis of information from both instrumental and proxy sources. For further information contact: David Goodrich,
NOAA/Office of Global Programs, Silver Spring, MD; 3014272089 ext. 38, OMNET: D.Goodrich, Internet:
Goodrich@ogp.noaa.gov.

Tracers and World Ocean Circulation Experiment Hydrography_As part of NOAA's contribution to WOCE, proposals are
sought for tracer observations on WOCE hydrographic cruises. Of particular interest are studies employing transient
tracers operating on decadal to centennial time scales, including chlorofluorocarbons, helium-3/tritium, and
carbon isotopes. WOCE-related proposals will be jointly reviewed by NOAA and the National Science Foundation (NSF)
as part of the interagency WOCE Program Announcement. Proposals for this element should be submitted directly to
the NSF Ocean Sciences Division, using NSF format. For further information contact: David Goodrich, NOAA/Global
Programs, Silver Spring, MD; 3014272089 ext. 38, OMNET: D.Goodrich, Internet Goodrich@ogp.noaa.gov.

Ocean-Atmosphere Carbon Exchange Study (OCAES)_As part of NOAA's contribution to the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
(JGOFS) and as a continuing effort aimed at improving our understanding of the role of the ocean in sequestering the
increasing burden of anthropogenically derived carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, proposals are sought for the planning
NOAA research cruises in the Indian Ocean/Arabian Sea (FY 1995) and along 170
&cir; West longitude in the South Pacific Ocean (FY 1996). Proposals addressing the measurement of specific chemical
variables including alkalinity, pH, nutrients, dissolved organic carbon, dissolved organic nitrogen, primary
productivity and carbon isotopes are encouraged. For an information sheet containing further details, contact:
James F. Todd, NOAA/Global Programs, Silver Spring, MD; 3014272089 ext. 32, OMNET:J.Todd, Internet:
Todd@ogp.noaa.gov.

Global Ocean_Atmosphere-Land System (GOALS)_The objectives of the GOALS Program are to understand global climate
variability on seasonal-to-interannual time scales, to determine the extent to which this variability is predictable,
to develop the observational, theoretical, and computational means to predict this variability, and to make experimental
predictions within the limits of proven feasibility. GOALS will broaden the scientific scope of the Tropical Ocean-Global
Atmosphere (TOGA) Program by extending the region of interest to the global climate system, by investigating the
feasibility of predicting regional short-term climate variations throughout the world, and by expanding the observational
and data transmission network as appropriate. GOALS will support research in the areas of monitoring, data management,
empirical studies, modeling and prediction. In this first year, proposals are particularly sought for modeling
and diagnostic studies of the coupled global ocean-atmosphere-land system. A related program, the Pan-American
Climate Studies (PACS) Program, is being formulated to advance seasonal-to-interannual climate prediction over
the Americas and contiguous waters. Proposals for PACS will be solicited under a separate announcement. For further
information contact. Kenneth Mooney, NOAA/Office of Global Programs, Silver Spring MD; 3014272089
ext. 14, OMNET: K.Mooney, Internet: Mooney@ogp.noaa.gov.




