 

I. Background 


A. The Existing Standard 


Standard No. 206, 

Door Locks and Door Retention Components

, specifies performance requirements for side door locks and side door retention components, including latches,
hinges, and other supporting means. The requirements are intended to minimize the likelihood of occupant ejections
from the vehicle in the event of a crash. 

The standard's full requirements apply to side doors other than cargo-type doors and sliding doors; more abbreviated
requirements apply to the latter two types of doors. The standard's full requirements can be summarized as follows.


First, each door latch and striker assembly must have a fully latched position and a secondary latch position. The
secondary position serves as a backup to the primary latched position in the event the primary latch is not properly
engaged and adds an additional level of protection in case the primary latch position fails. 

Second, latches and hinges must withstand specified load requirements. A door latch and striker assembly of a side
door, when in the fully latched position, must not separate when a longitudinal load of 11,000 Newtons (2,500 pounds),
or a transverse load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds), is applied to the latch (``Longitudinal'' loads are parallel
to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and are applied perpendicular to the face of the latch. ``Transverse''
loads are perpendicular to the vehicle centerline and are applied in the direction in which the door opens). Reduced
load requirements are specified for the secondary latched position. Also, a door latch must not disengage from the
fully latched position when specified inertia loads are applied to the door latch system (Inertia is the property
of matter that requires that a load be exerted on a body to accelerate it. An inertial load is calculated by multiplying
the mass of a body by its acceleration). Door hinges must not separate when specified longitudinal and transverse
loads are applied to the hinge system. 

Third, side doors must be equipped with a locking mechanism with an operating means in the interior of the vehicle.
For side front door locks, the outside door handle must be inoperative when the locking mechanism is engaged. For side
rear door locks, both the outside and inside door handles must be inoperative when the locking mechanism is engaged.


Standard No. 206 specifies test procedures for many of its performance requirements. The standard incorporates
test procedures set forth in two Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) recommended practices: SAE J839b, Passenger
Car Side Door Latch Systems, and SAE J934, Vehicle Passenger Door Hinge Systems. 


