 

The issuance of a permit does not authorize any injury to persons or property or invasion of other private rights, nor
does it relieve the permittee of its obligation to comply with any other applicable Federal, State, and local laws
and regulations.



Section B. Operation and Maintenance of Pollution Controls



1. Proper Operation and Maintenance

 see 40 CFR 122.41 (e).

2. 

Need to Halt or Reduce Not a Defense 

see 40 CFR 122.41 (c).

3. 

Duty to Mitigate 

see 40 CFR 122.41 (d).

4. 

Bypass 

see 40 CFR 122.41 (m).

5. 

Upset 

see 40 CFR 122.41 (n).



Section C. Monitoring and Records



1. 

Monitoring and Records 

see 40 CFR 122.41 (j).

2. 

Inspection and Entry 

see 40 CFR 122.41 (i).



Section D. Reporting Requirements



1. 

Reporting Requirements 

see 40 CFR 122.41 (l).

2. 

Signatory Requirement 

see 40 CFR 122.41 (k).

3. 

Availability of Reports.

Except for data determined to be confidential under Paragraph A.7. above, all reports prepared in accordance with
the terms of this permit shall be available for public inspection at the offices of the State water pollution control
agency and the Regional Administrator. As required by the CWA, effluent data shall not be considered confidential.
Knowingly making any false statement on any such report may result in the imposition of criminal penalties as provided
for in Section 309 of the CWA.



Section E. Other Conditions



1. Definitions 

for purposes of this permit are as follows:



Administrator 

means the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or an authorized representative.



Applicable standards and limitations 

means all State, interstate, and Federal standards and limitations to which a ``discharge'' or a related activity
is subject to, including water quality standards, standards of performance, toxic effluent standards or prohibitions,
``best management practices,'' and pretreatment standards under sections 301, 302, 303, 304, 306, 307, 308, 403,
and 405 of CWA.



Application 

means the EPA standard national forms for applying for a permit, including any additions, revisions or modifications
to the forms; or forms approved by EPA for use in ``approved States,'' including any approved modifications or revisions.



Average. 

The arithmetic mean of values taken at the frequency required for each parameter over the specified period. For total
and/or fecal coliforms, the average shall be the geometric mean.



Average monthly discharge limitation 

means the highest allowable average of ``daily discharges'' over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.



Average weekly discharge limitation 

means the highest allowable average of ``daily discharges'' over a calendar week, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar week divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that week.



Best Management Practices (BMPs) 

means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the pollution of ``waters of the United States.'' BMPs also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage.



Best Professional Judgement (BPJ) 

means a case-by-case determination of Best Practicable Treatment (BPT), Best Available Treatment (BAT) or other
appropriate standard based on an evaluation of the available technology to achieve a particular pollutant reduction.



Composite Sample

_A sample consisting of a minimum of eight grab samples collected at equal intervals during a 24-hour period (or lesser
period as specified in the section on Monitoring and Reporting) and combined proportional to flow, or a sample continuously
collected proportionally to flow over that same time period.



Continuous Discharge 

means a ``discharge'' which occurs without interruption throughout the operating hours of the facility except for
infrequent shutdowns for maintenance, process changes, or similar activities.



CWA 

or ``The Act'' means the Clean Water Act (formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972) Public Law 92500, as amended by Public Law 95217, Public
Law 95576, Public Law 96483 and Public Law 97117; 33 U.S.C. 1251 

et seq

.



Daily Discharge 

means the discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents
the calendar day for purposes of sampling. For pollutants with limitations expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge
is calculated as the total mass of the pollutant discharged over the day. For pollutants with limitations expressed
in other units of measurements, the daily discharge is calculated as the average measurement of the pollutant over
the day.



Director 

means the person authorized to sign NPDES permits by EPA and/or the State.



Discharge Monitoring Report Form (DMR) 

means the EPA standard national form, including any subsequent additions, revisions, or modifications, for the
reporting of self-monitoring results by permittees. DMRs must be used by ``approved States'' as well as by EPA. EPA
will supply DMRs to any approved State upon request. The EPA national forms may be modified to substitute the State
Agency name, address, logo, and other similar information, as appropriate, in place of EPA's.

Discharge of a pollutant means:

(a) Any addition of any ``pollutant'' or combination of pollutants to ``waters of the United States'' from any ``point
source,'' or 

(b) Any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the ``contiguous zone'' or the ocean
from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation.

This definition includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected
or channelled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a State, municipality, or other
person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances leading
into privately owned treatment works.

This term does not include an addition of pollutants by any ``indirect discharger.''



Effluent limitation 

means any restriction imposed by the Director on quantities, discharge rates, and concentrations of ``pollutants''
which are ``discharged'' from ``point sources'' into ``waters of the United States,'' the waters of the ``contiguous
zone,'' or the ocean.



Effluent limitations guidelines 

means a regulation published by the Administrator under Section 304(b) of CWA to adopt or revise ``effluent limitations.''



EPA 

means the United States ``Environmental Protection Agency.''



Grab Sample

_An individual sample collected in a period of less than 15 minutes.



Hazardous Substance 

means any substance designated under 40 CFR Part 116 pursuant to Section 311 of CWA.



Maximum daily discharge limitation

 means the highest allowable ``daily discharge.''



Municipality 

means a city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body created by of under State
law and having jurisdiction over disposal or sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, or an Indian tribe or an authorized
Indian tribe organization, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of CWA.



National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 

means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing
permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections 307, 402, 318, and 405 of CWA. The
term includes an ``approved program.''



New discharger 

means any building, structure, facility, or installation:

(a) From which there is or may be a ``discharge of pollutants'';


