 

Reliance on These Proposed Regulations 



Taxpayers may rely on these proposed amendments for guidance pending their issuance as final regulations. If future
amendments are more restrictive than these proposed amendments, the future amendments will be applied without retroactive
effect. 



Special Analyses 



It has been determined that this notice of proposed rulemaking is not a significant regulatory action as defined in
Executive Order 12866. Therefore, a regulatory assessment is not required. It has also been determined that section
553(b) of the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 5) and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. chapter
6) do not apply to these regulations and, therefore, a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis is not required. Pursuant
to section 7805(f) of the Code, this notice of proposed rulemaking will be submitted to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy
of the Small Business Administration for comment on their impact on small business. 



Comments and Requests for Public Hearing 



Before these proposed regulations are adopted as final regulations, consideration will be given to any written comments
(a signed original and eight (8) copies) that are submitted timely to the IRS. All comments will be available for public
inspection and copying. A public hearing may be scheduled if requested in writing by a person that timely submits written
comments. If a public hearing is scheduled, notice of the date, time, and place for the hearing will be published in
the 

Federal Register

.



Drafting Information



The principal author of these proposed regulations is Charles T. Deliee, Office of the Associate Chief Counsel (Employee
Benefits and Exempt Organizations), IRS. However, personnel from other offices of the IRS and Treasury Department
participated in their development. 



List of Subjects in 26 CFR 1.611 through 1.2814 



Income taxes, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



Proposed Amendments to the Regulations 



Accordingly, 26 CFR part 1 is proposed to be amended as follows: 



Paragraph 1.

 The authority for part 1 continues to read in part as follows:

 




Authority:

 26 U.S.C. 7805***








Par. 2. 

In 1.836, is amended as follows: 

1. Paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) are revised. 

2. Paragraph (a)(5) is added. 

3. The revisions and addition read as follows: 



1.836 



Deduction by employer. 



(a) 

Allowance of deduction_

(1) 

General Rule.

 In the case of a transfer of property in connection with the performance of services, or a compensatory cancellation
of a nonlapse restriction described in section 83(d) and 1.835, a deduction is allowable under section
162 or 212 to the person for whom the services were performed. The amount of the deduction is equal to the amount included
as compensation in the gross income of the service provider under section 83(a), (b), or (d)(2), but only to the extent
the amount meets the requirements of section 162 or 212 and the regulations thereunder. The deduction is allowed only
for the taxable year of that person in which or with which ends the taxable year of the service provider in which the amount
is included as compensation. For purposes of this paragraph, any amount excluded from gross income under section
79 or section 101(b) or subchapter N is considered to have been included in gross income. 

(2) 

Special Rule.

 For purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the service provider is deemed to have included the amount as compensation
in gross income if the person for whom the services were performed satisfies in a timely manner all requirements of
section 6041 or section 6041A, and the regulations thereunder, with respect to that amount of compensation. For purposes
of the preceding sentence, whether a person for whom services were performed satisfies all requirements of section
6041 or section 6041A, and the regulations thereunder, is determined without regard to 1.60413(c)
(exception for payments to corporations). In the case of a disqualifying disposition of stock described in section
421(b), an employer that otherwise satisfies all requirements of section 6041 and the regulations thereunder will
be considered to have done so timely if Form W2 or Form W2c, as appropriate, is furnished to the employee
or former employee, and is filed with the Federal Government, on or before the date on which the employer files the tax
return claiming the deduction relating to the disqualifying disposition. 



* * * * *



(5) 

Effective Date. 

Paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section apply to deductions for taxable years beginning on or after January 1,
1995. However, taxpayers may also apply paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section when claiming deductions for
taxable years beginning before that date if the claims are not barred by the statute of limitations. Paragraphs (a)(3)
and (a)(4) of this section are effective as set forth in 1.838(b).


* * * * *


<SIGNER>
Margaret Milner Richardson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Commissioner of Internal Revenue.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9429701 Filed 12294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 483001P
</BILLING>


