 


&bull;All other severity and scope levels 



_If the severity level is 1 and the scope is 2, 3, or 
4, the State must (and HCFA does) require a plan of 
correction and may impose one or more remedies specified at 
488.206. 



_If the severity level is 2 and the scope level is 1 or 
2, the State must (and HCFA does) impose one or more of the 
remedies specified at 488.206 paired with a plan of 
correction. 



_If the severity level is 2 and the scope level is 3 or 
4 in quality of care, the State must (and HCFA does) impose 
one or more of the remedies specified at 488.206 paired 
with a plan of correction. The State would be required to 
notify the attending physician of each resident to which 
such finding is made, as well as any State board responsible 
for the licensing of the facility administrator. 




13. Procedures for the Imposition of Remedies Notice 





HCFA or the State would give the facility notice of 
intent to impose a remedy. At 488.202(f), we proposed 
that HCFA or the State give the facility notice of the 
remedy at least 2 days but not more than 4 days before the 
effective date of the remedy in immediate jeopardy 
situations, and at least 15 days before the effective date 
of the remedy when there is no immediate jeopardy. 
Therefore, in practice, in immediate jeopardy situations, 
the remedy could be imposed anytime after the minimum 2 day 
notification period, but not later than the 10th day after 
the last day of survey. This would allow up to 5 days for 
HCFA or the State to send the notice and an additional 2 to 
4 days before the remedy is imposed. 




14. Hearings: Medicare and Medicaid Consistency 





We proposed revising 431.153 (Evidentiary hearing) to 
provide that States must impose remedies, with the exception 
of civil money penalties, against providers of services at 
the time that they identify the existence of violations of 
Federal requirements, notwithstanding any other provision of 
State law. We intended that, under this provision, 
sanctions available under the program would become effective 
immediately after the identification of program violations 
and notification to the provider of the deficiencies and the 
impending sanction(s). 



We also proposed to delete 442.40 (Availability of 
FFP during appeals). This section has enabled States to 
continue to receive FFP, under certain circumstances, for 
facilities whose provider agreement has been terminated, for 
up to 120 days after the effective date of the termination 
if a required administrative hearing decision has not been 
reached. In light of our objective to be more aggressive in 
the enforcement of nursing home requirements by requiring 
that States provide only post-action hearings, just as is 
done under Medicare, we see 442.40 as plainly inconsistent 
with this objective. 




15. Continuation of Payment Pending Remedies 





At 488.232, we proposed that HCFA may continue 
payments to a facility with deficiencies if the following 
criteria are met: 
&bull;The State finds that it is more appropriate to impose 
alternative remedies than to terminate the facility; 
&bull;The State has submitted a plan of correction approved 
by HCFA; and 
&bull;The facility in the case of a Medicare SNF or the State 
in the case of a Medicaid NF agrees to repay the Federal 
government payments received if corrective action is not 
taken in accordance with the approved plan of correction. 



We also proposed that HCFA or the State may terminate 
the SNF or NF agreement before the end of the 6-month 
correction period if these criteria are not met. We said 
that, if any of these criteria are not met or agreed to by 
either the State or the facility, the facility would receive 
no Medicare or Federal Medicaid payments, as applicable, 
from the date of the determination of noncompliance by 
either HCFA or the State.


