 

Appendix A To Part 2542_Certification 
Regarding Debarment, Suspension, And Other Responsibility 
Matters_Primarily Covered Transactions 



Instructions for Certification 



1. By signing and submitting this proposal, the 
prospective primary participant is providing the certification set out below. 

2. The inability of a person to provide the 
certification required below will not necessarily result in 
denial of participation in this covered transaction. The 
prospective participant shall submit an explanation of why it cannot provide the certification set 
out below. The certification or explanation will be 
considered in connection with the department or agency's 
determination whether to enter into this transaction. 
However, failure of the prospective primary participant to furnish a certification or an 
explanation shall disqualify such person from participation 
in this transaction. 

3. The certification in this clause is a material 
representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when 
the department or agency determined to enter into this transaction. 
If it is later determined that the prospective primary 
participant knowingly rendered an erroneous certification, in 
addition to other remedies available to the Federal 
Government, the department or agency may terminate this transaction for cause or 
default. 

4. The prospective primary participant shall provide 
immediate written notice to the department or agency to whom 
this proposal is submitted if at any time the prospective 
primary participant learns that its certification was erroneous when 
submitted or has become erroneous by reason of changed 
circumstances. 

5. The terms ``covered transaction,'' ``debarred,'' 
``suspended,'' ``ineligible,'' ``lower tier covered transaction,'' 
``participant,'' ``person,'' ``primary covered transaction,'' ``principal,'' ``proposal,'' and 
``voluntarily excluded,'' as used in this clause, have the 
meanings set out in the Definitions and Coverage sections of 
the rules implementing Executive Order 12549. You may 
contact the department or agency to which this proposal is being submitted for 
assistance in obtaining a copy of those regulations. 

6. The prospective primary participant agrees by 
submitting this proposal that, should the proposed covered 
transaction be entered into, it shall not knowingly enter into any lower tier covered transaction 
with a person who is debarred, suspended, declared 
ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from participation in 
this covered transaction, unless authorized by the department 
or agency entering into this transaction. 

7. The prospective primary participant further agrees by 
submitting this proposal that it will include the clause 
titled ``Certification Regarding Debarment, Suspension, 
Ineligibility and Voluntary Exclusion_Lower Tier Covered 
Transaction,'' provided by the department or agency entering into 
this covered transaction, without modification, in all lower 
tier covered transactions and in all solicitations for lower 
tier covered transactions. 

8. A participant in a covered transaction may rely upon a certification of a prospective participant in a 
lower tier covered transaction that it is not debarred, 
suspended, ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from the 
covered transaction, unless it knows that the certification 
is erroneous. A participant may decide the method and frequency by which it 
determines the eligibility of its principals. Each 
participant may, but is not required to, check the 
Nonprocurement List. 

9. Nothing contained in the foregoing shall be 
construed to require establishment of a system of records in order to render in good faith 
the certification required by this clause. The knowledge and 
information of a participant is not required to exceed that 
which is normally possessed by a prudent person in the 
ordinary course of business dealings. 

10. Except for transactions authorized under paragraph 6 
of these instructions, if a participant in a covered 
transaction knowingly enters into a lower tier covered 
transaction with a person who is suspended, debarred, 
ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from participation in this transaction, in 
addition to other remedies available to the Federal 
Government, the department or agency may terminate this 
transaction for cause or default. 



Certification Regarding Debarment, Suspension, and Other Responsibility Matters_Primary Covered Transactions




(1) The prospective primary participant certifies to the 
best of its knowledge and belief, that it and its 
principals: 

(a) Are not presently debarred, suspended, proposed for 
debarment, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from covered transactions 
by any Federal department or agency; 

(b) Have not within a three-year period preceding this 
proposal been convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered 
against them for commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with obtaining, attempting to 
obtain, or performing a public (Federal, State or local) 
transaction or contract under a public transaction; violation 
of Federal or State antitrust statutes or commission of 
embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, 
making false statements, or receiving stolen property; 

(c) Are not presently indicted for or otherwise 
criminally or civilly charged by a governmental entity 
(Federal, State or local) with commission of any of the offenses enumerated in paragraph (1)(b) of 
this certification; and 

(d) Have not within a three-year period preceding this 
application/proposal has one or more public transactions 
(Federal, State or local) terminated for cause or default. 

(2) Where the prospective primary participant is unable 
to certify to any of the statements in this certification, 
such prospective participant shall attach an explanation to 
this proposal. 





