 

(4) Average degree of eggshell thinning with an objective of shells averaging not more than 10 percent thinner than
pre-DDT era eggs. 




The Alaska Recovery Plan based reclassification criteria upon these objectives. It was suggested that these objectives
should be met for 5 years before downlisting to threatened status, and the parameters should remain constant or improve
during the ensuing 5 years before delisting. 

Recovery plans and objectives are expected to guide and measure recovery, but are intended to be flexible enough to
adjust to new information. Research conducted since the Alaska Recovery Plan was written in 1982 has shown that some
of the recovery objectives were based upon incorrect assumptions. A discussion of the basis of each objective, the
current status of arctic peregrines as measured against the objectives, and a review of recent information pertaining
to the objectives follows: 




(1) The objective of 36 pairs occupying territories in the two study areas was based on historical data and assumed
that there were 51 available territories and 70 percent of these would be occupied in a fully recovered population
(70 percent &times; 51 = 36). The plan suggested that 36 or more pairs should occupy territories for 10 or more years
before delisting. Thirty-six pairs occupied the areas for the first time in 1984, and the number has increased each
year since then. Seventy-seven pairs were present in the study areas in 1993, the tenth consecutive year in which this
objective was met. The number of pairs now occupying breeding territories (77) greatly exceeds the original estimate
of the number of available territories (51). 

(2) The objective of 1.4 young per pair was based upon early studies of arctic peregrine falcons. Productivity exceeded
1.4 young per pair for the first time since the pesticide-era in 1982, and averaged about 1.6 young per pair for the 12-year
period of 19821993. 

(3) The objective of DDE residues in eggs averaging less than 5 ppm for 10 or more years was based upon the assumption
that arctic peregrine falcons would not reproduce normally as long as residues exceeded this measure (this assumption
was based upon the observation that peregrine falcons in the Aleutian Islands reproduced normally in the early 1970's
when residues in eggs averaged 5 ppm). Average DDE residues declined below 5 ppm in arctic peregrine falcons in Alaska
between 1984 and 1988, but it is unclear exactly when this threshold was crossed. It is therefore uncertain if the objective
has been met for at least 10 years. 

However, it is now apparent that this objective was inappropriate; normal reproduction was occurring for several
years before the average concentration declined to 5 ppm and may have occurred while residues exceeded 10 ppm. The
exact relationship between DDE residues in eggs and reproductive success remains unknown. The Service now believes
that it is most appropriate to gauge ``acceptable'' contaminant exposure by reproductive success. Because reproductive
success has been sufficient to allow population growth since the late 1970's and the objective for the production
of young (1.4 young per pair) has been met or exceeded for 12 years, the Service considers the desired objective for
exposure to organochlorines to have been met. 

(4) The criterion requiring eggshells to average less than 10 percent thinner than pre-DDT era shells was based upon
the observation that Peale's peregrine falcons in the Aleutian Islands reproduced normally with shells 8 percent
thinner than normal in the early 1970's. This assumed that peregrine falcons could not reproduce normally if shells
were more than 10 percent thinner than normal. Subsequent field work has shown this to be incorrect. Although the degree
of thinning has gradually decreased over time, shells collected in arctic Alaska still average approximately 12.5
percent thinner than pre-DDT era shells. Reproduction, however, has been sufficient to fuel population growth since
the late 1970's, and productivity has met or exceeded the stated objective for 12 years. The Service considers, therefore,
that the basic goal that eggshell thinning not significantly affect reproduction, population growth, or recovery
for at least 10 years, has been met. 




In summary, the Alaska Recovery Plan identified four parameters to be measured in two study areas in arctic Alaska
to monitor population health and recovery. Objectives were established for measuring recovery and indicating when
downlisting and delisting were appropriate. The plan suggested that the four objectives were to be met or exceeded
for 5 years prior to downlisting to threatened status and an additional 5 years prior to delisting. Two of the four objectives
have been met for the 10-year interval suggested as a prerequisite for delisting. However, knowledge gained subsequent
to the writing of the recovery plan indicates that the two objectives that have not been met were based upon incorrect
assumptions. The Service concludes, based upon current information, that the basic goals underlying all four objectives
have been reached_the number of pairs occupying territories in two study areas surpassed the objective for the tenth
consecutive year in 1993; productivity surpassed the objective for the twelfth year in 1993; DDE residues in eggs
have not prevented population growth and recovery since the late 1970's; and eggshell thinning has not inhibited
population growth and recovery since the late 1970's. 



Summary of Comments and Recommendations 



