 

This document proposes to retain 201.86 in its present form because neither the PS Act nor 201.86
of the regulations authorize or restrict the inspection of brands. Section 201.86 provides the mechanism for collecting
fees authorized by the PS Act for inspecting brands at stockyards. Restrictions on the collection of fees are
imposed by the statute and not the regulation and it is not permissible to change by regulation that which is prohibited
by statute. 
Three comments concerning 201.94 were received from livestock producer associations. This regulation requires
those persons subject to the PS Act, upon proper request and within a reasonable time, to provide business information
to authorized representatives of the Secretary, in writing or otherwise and under oath. Two comments recommended
the regulation be amended to require that businesses over a certain size be required to provide to the Agency certain
contract and other business information. One comment supported the regulation in its present form. The Agency has
concluded that the current requirements of 201.94, coupled with the provisions of the PS Act, are adequate
to provide sufficient access, at this time, to business information of larger firms. 
Three comments were received concerning 201.96. This regulation provides assurances to persons under investigation
that their business records will be treated confidentially and employees of the United States cannot make unauthorized
disclosures of those records. Comments were received from a livestock producer association, a trade association,
and an individual representing livestock marketing interests. Two comments recommended amending this regulation
to provide for a penalty. One comment supported the regulation in its present form. Section 10 of the Federal Trade
Commission Act, which has been made a part of the PS Act by incorporation (7 U.S.C. 222), provides penalties for
unauthorized disclosures. In addition, PSA considers the criminal penalties provided by the Trade Secrets
Act, 18 U.S.C. 205, adequate deterrent to the unauthorized disclosure of business records and, therefore, no changes
are proposed. 
Three comments were received concerning 203.5. This statement of general policy informs market agencies
selling on commission that PSA regards the payment of business expenses of buyers attending their livestock
sales as violative of the PS Act. Comments were received from a livestock producer association, a trade association,
and an individual representing livestock marketing interests. Two comments recommended that practices addressed
in this statement be prohibited only when they result in anticompetitive behavior. One comment supported the statement
in its present form. PSA believes that this statement reflects the correct formulation of its policy toward
such activities and the legal effect of that policy and that, therefore, no changes are appropriate. 
The proposed change in 201.61 does not impose or change any recordkeeping or information collection requirements.
Existing requirements in this regulation have been previously approved by OMB under control number 05900001.

As provided by the Regulatory Flexibility Act, it is hereby certified that this proposed amended rule will not have
a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities and a statement explaining the reasons for
the certification is set forth in the following paragraph and is being provided to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of
the Small Business Administration. 
While this proposed amended rule impacts small entities, it will not have a significant economic impact on any entity,
large or small. The primary effect of this rule is to remove restrictions on purchases by dealers from consignments
of a market agency that provides clearing services to that dealer. 
This rule has been determined to be not significant for purposes of E.O. 12866 and therefore has not been reviewed by
OMB. 
This amendment does not impose any new paperwork requirement and does not have Federalism implications under the
criteria of E.O. 12612. 
This proposed amendment has been reviewed under E.O. 12778, Civil Justice Reform, and is not intended to have retroactive
effect. This amendment will not preempt State or local laws, regulations, or policies unless they present an irreconcilable
conflict with this amendment. Prior to judicial challenge of the amendment to rule, a party must first be found by the
Secretary to be in violation of the PS Act and in violation of the accompanying regulation. Second, the party
must appeal that finding and the validity of the regulation to the Secretary in the course of the administrative proceeding.
Only after taking these steps, may the party challenge the regulation in a court of competent jurisdiction. 


List of Subjects in 9 CFR Part 201 


Accounts and records, Brand inspection, Buyers expenses, Definitions, Industry rules, Jurisdiction, Purchases
from consignment, Proceeds of sale, Rates and charges, Stockyard services, Tariffs, Trade practices. 



Done at Washington, DC this 17th day of May 1994. 

 


<SIGNER>
Calvin W. Watkins, 
</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Administrator, Packers and Stockyards Administration.

 



For the reasons set forth in the preamble, the Packers and Stockyards Administration proposes to amend 9 CFR part 201
as follows: 
1. The authority citation for part 201 continues to read as follows: 





Authority:

 7 U.S.C. 204, 228; 7 CFR 2.17(e), 2.56. 



2. Remove 201.5. 
3. Remove 201.6. 
4. Revise 201.61(a) to read as follows: 


201.61 

Market agencies selling or purchasing livestock on commission; relationships with dealers. 


(a) 

Market agencies selling on commission. 

No market agency selling consigned livestock shall enter into any agreement, relationship or association with dealers
or other buyers which has a tendency to lessen the loyalty of the market agency to its consignors or impair the quality
of the market agency's selling services. No market agency selling livestock on commission shall provide clearing
services for any independent dealer who purchases livestock from consignment to such market agency without disclosing,
on the account of sale to the consignor, the name of the buyer and the nature of the financial relationship between the
buyer and the market agency. 


* * * * * 


(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 05900001.) 




</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412588 Filed 52394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3410KDP
</BILLING>


