 



Eligibility:

 Eligible applicants include States, political subdivisions of states and nonprofit private agencies. Therefore,
State mental health authorities, as well as one or more of public organizations in a State, such as units of State and
local governments, and nonprofit organizations such as community-based organizations, universities, colleges
and hospitals may be direct applicants. 
Entities may apply for either and/or both types of awards (Demonstration Site and/or Coordination Center). 


Availability of Funds:

 It is estimated that approximately $2.3 million will be available to support approximately four to five awards to
Demonstration Sites and a Coordinating Center under this RFA in FY 95. For each of the 5 years, an average of approximately
$300,000 per year will be available for the Coordinating Center and an average of $400,000 to $500,000 for each of the
Demonstration Sites for each year. It is anticipated that in years one and five, funding of the Coordinating Center
will be higher than in years two through four. Funding for Demonstration Sites will be lower in years one and five, and
higher in years two through four. Actual funding levels will depend upon the availability of appropriated funds.




(

Note:

 CMHS is required by the Public Health Service Act to make available 15 percent of the funds appropriated under Section
520A for projects in rural areas.)

 



Period of Support:

 Support may be requested for a period of up to 5 years. Annual awards will be made subject to continued availability
of funds and progress achieved. 


Applications Receipt Date and Review Schedule:

 The schedule for receipt and review of applications under this announcement is as follows: 



<TABLE>






1Receipt date 

1IRG review 

1Council review 

1Earliest start date 




Jan. 10, 1995 
March 1995 
May 1995 
June 1995.


</TABLE>
 



Consequences of Late Submission:

 Applications received after the above receipt date will not be accepted and will be returned to the applicant without
review. 
The DRG system requires that applications must be received by the published application receipt date(s). However,
an application received after the deadline may be acceptable if it carries a legible proof-of-mailing date assigned
by the carrier and the proof-of-mailing date is not later than one week prior to the deadline date. Private metered
postmarks are not accepted as proof of timely mailing. If the receipt date falls on a weekend, it will be extended to
the following Monday; if the date falls on a national holiday, it will be extended to the following work day. 





