 

(c) See subpart E of this part for requirements concerning program year for units of general local government that
are part of a consortium. 


91.15 

Submission date. 


(a) 

General. 

(1) In order to facilitate continuity in its program and to provide accountability to citizens, each jurisdiction
should submit its consolidated plan to HUD at least 45 days before the start of its program year. (But see 92.52(b)
with respect to newly eligible jurisdictions under the HOME program.) With the exception of the August 16 date noted
in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, HUD may grant a jurisdiction an extension of the submission deadline for good
cause. 
(2) In no event will HUD accept a submission earlier than November 15 or later than August 16 of the Federal fiscal year
for which the grant funds are appropriated. (Failure to submit the plan by August 16 will automatically result in a
loss of the CDBG funds to which the jurisdiction would otherwise be entitled.) 
(b) 

Annual submission.

 The portions of the document that must be submitted on an annual basis are the action plan and the certifications. 


Subpart B_Citizen Participation and Consultation 


91.100 

Consultation. 


(a) 

General. 

When preparing the plan, the jurisdiction shall consult with other public and private agencies that provide assisted
housing, health services, and social services (including those focusing on services to children, elderly persons,
persons with disabilities_including HIV/AIDS, homeless persons) during preparation of the plan. When preparing
the portion of its plan concerning lead-based paint hazards, the jurisdiction shall consult with State or local health
and child welfare agencies and examine health department data on the addresses of housing units in which children
have been identified as lead poisoned. When preparing the description of priority nonhousing community development
needs, a unit of general local government must notify adjacent units of general local government. The jurisdiction
should also consult with adjacent units of general local government, particularly for problems and solutions that
go beyond a single jurisdiction. When preparing its method of distribution of assistance under the CDBG program,
a State must consult with local governments in nonentitlement areas of the State. 
(b) 

HOPWA.

 The largest city in each metropolitan area that is eligible to receive a HOPWA formula allocation must consult broadly
to develop a metropolitan-wide strategy for addressing the needs of persons with HIV/AIDS and their families living
throughout the metropolitan area. 




