 

(d) 

Exception. 

A bank shall not place in its public file any information 
required under paragraph (c) of this section for a particular year if, given 
special circumstances such as a small number of loans made within a small 
number of designated income geographies or to a small number of designated 
borrowers, the information could reasonably be expected to disclose the identity 
of the borrower. 
(e) 

HMDA statement. 

Each bank required to report home mortgage loan 
data pursuant to the HMDA shall include in its public file a copy of its HMDA 
Disclosure Statement provided by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination 
Council for each of the prior two calendar years. The statement shall be placed 
in the main office public file within three business days and in the branch office 
public files within 10 business days of the bank's receipt of the statement. 
(f) 

Small bank file. 

(1) A small bank shall include in its public file the 
bank's loan-to-deposit ratio computed at the end of the most recent calendar 
year. A bank may include additional data on its loan-to-deposit ratio at its 
option. 
(2) A small bank that elects to be evaluated under the lending, investment 
and service tests (as described in 25.22 through 25.24 of this part) shall 
include in its public file the information specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section. 
(g) 

Strategic plan. 

Each bank that has been approved to be assessed under 
a strategic plan as described in 25.27 of this part shall include in its public 
file a copy of that plan. Information submitted to the OCC on a confidential 
basis in conjunction with the plan does not have to be included in the public 
file. 
(h) 

Less than satisfactory rating. 

Each bank that received a less than 
satisfactory rating during its most recent examination shall include in its public 
file a description of its current efforts to improve its performance in helping to 
meet the credit needs of its entire community. This description shall be updated 
quarterly. 
(i) 

Location of public file. 

Each bank shall maintain its public file as 
follows: 
(1) The main office shall have a copy of the complete public file; 
(2) At least one branch in each service area shall have a copy of the bank's 
HMDA Disclosure Statements and all materials in the public file relating to the 
service area in which the branch is located; and 
(3) If a member of the public requests to review a bank's public file at a 
branch that does not have a copy, the bank shall make a complete copy of the 
file for that service area available for review at the branch within 5 business 
days at no cost. 
(j) 

Copies. 

Each bank shall provide copies of the information in its public 
file to members of the public upon request. A bank may charge a reasonable 
fee not to exceed the cost of reproduction and mailing (if applicable). 


25.44 

Public notice by banks. 


(a) 

CRA notice for banks. 

Each bank shall provide in the public lobby of 
its main office and each of its branches the public notice set forth in Appendix 
B of this part. Bracketed material shall be used only by banks having more 
than one service area. 


