 

(v) Adequate maintenance procedures shall be implemented to keep the equipment in good condition. 

(5) HUD may reserve the right to transfer the title to the Federal Government or to a third party named by the Federal
Government when such third party is otherwise eligible under existing statutes. Such transfer shall be subject to
the following standards. 

(i) The equipment shall be appropriately identified in the award or otherwise made known to the recipient in writing.


(ii) HUD shall issue disposition instructions within 120 calendar days after receipt of a final inventory. The final
inventory shall list all equipment acquired with grant funds and federally-owned equipment. If HUD fails to issue
disposition instructions within the 120 calendar day period, the recipient shall apply the standards of this section,
as appropriate. 

(iii) When HUD exercises its right to take title, the equipment shall be subject to the provisions for federally-owned
equipment. 

(f) 

Intangible property. 

(1) The recipient may copyright any work that is subject to copyright and was developed, or for which ownership was
purchased, under an award. HUD reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish,
or otherwise use the work for Federal purposes, and to authorize others to do so. 

(2) Recipients are subject to applicable regulations governing patents and inventions, including government-wide
regulations issued by the Department of Commerce at 37 CFR part 401, ``Rights to Inventions Made by Nonprofit Organizations
and Small Business Firms Under Government Grants, Contracts and Cooperative Agreements.'' 

(3) Unless waived by HUD, the Federal Government has the right to paragraphs (f)(3)(i) and (f)(3)(ii) of this section.


(i) Obtain, reproduce, publish or otherwise use the data first produced under an award. 

(ii) Authorize others to receive, reproduce, publish, or otherwise use such data for Federal purposes. 

(4) Title to intangible property and debt instruments acquired under an award or subaward vests upon acquisition
in the recipient. The recipient shall use that property for the originally-authorized purpose. 

(g) 

Property trust relationship. 

Real property, equipment, intangible property and debt instruments that are acquired or improved with Federal funds
shall be held in trust by the recipient as trustee for the beneficiaries of the project or program under which the property
was acquired or improved. HUD may require recipients to record liens or other appropriate notices of record to indicate
that personal or real property has been acquired or improved with Federal funds and that use and disposition conditions
apply to the property. 



84.84

 Procurement standards. 



(a) 

Purpose of procurement standards. 

Paragraphs (b) through (i) of this section set forth standards for use by recipients in establishing procedures for
the procurement of supplies and other expendable property, equipment, real property and other services with Federal
funds. These standards are furnished to ensure that such materials and services are obtained in an effective manner
and in compliance with the provisions of applicable Federal statutes and executive orders. No additional procurement
standards or requirements shall be imposed by HUD upon recipients, unless specifically required by Federal statute
or executive order or approved by OMB. 

(b) 

Recipient responsibilities. 

The standards contained in this section do not relieve the recipient of the contractual responsibilities arising
under its contract(s). The recipient is the responsible authority, without recourse to HUD, regarding the settlement
and satisfaction of all contractual and administrative issues arising out of procurements entered into in support
of an award or other agreement. This includes disputes, claims, protests of award, source evaluation or other matters
of a contractual nature. Matters concerning violation of statute are to be referred to such Federal, State or local
authority as may have proper jurisdiction. 

(c) 

Codes of conduct. 

The recipient shall maintain written standards of conduct governing the performance of its employees engaged in
the award and administration of contracts. No employee, officer, or agent shall participate in the selection, award,
or administration of a contract supported by Federal funds if a real or apparent conflict of interest would be involved.
Such a conflict would arise when the employee, officer, or agent, any member of his or her immediate family, his or her
partner, or an organization which employs or is about to employ any of the parties indicated herein, has a financial
or other interest in the firm selected for an award. The officers, employees, and agents of the recipient shall neither
solicit nor accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors, or parties to subagreements.
However, recipients may set standards for situations in which the financial interest is not substantial or the gift
is an unsolicited item of nominal value. The standards of conduct shall provide for disciplinary actions to be applied
for violations of such standards by officers, employees, or agents of the recipient. 

(d) 

Competition. 

All procurement transactions shall be conducted in a manner to provide, to the maximum extent practical, open and
free competition. The recipient shall be alert to organizational conflicts of interest as well as noncompetitive
practices among contractors that may restrict or eliminate competition or otherwise restrain trade. In order to
ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair competitive advantage, contractors that develop
or draft specifications, requirements, statements of work, invitations for bids and/or requests for proposals
shall be excluded from competing for such procurements. Awards shall be made to the bidder or offeror whose bid or offer
is responsive to the solicitation and is most advantageous to the recipient, price, quality and other factors considered.
The other factors shall include the bidder's or offeror's compliance with Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development
Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u), hereafter referred to as ``Section 3.'' Section 3 provides that, to the greatest extent
feasible, and consistent with existing Federal, State, and local laws, and regulations, economic opportunities
generated by certain HUD financial assistance shall be directed to low- and very low-income persons. Solicitations
shall clearly set forth all requirements that the bidder or offeror shall fulfill in order for the bid or offer to be
evaluated by the recipient. Any and all bids or offers may be rejected when it is in the recipient's interest to do so.


(e) 

Procurement procedures. 

(1) All recipients shall establish written procurement procedures. These procedures shall provide for, at a minimum,
that paragraphs (e)(1)(i), (e)(1)(ii) and (e)(1)(iii) of this section apply. 

(i) Recipients avoid purchasing unnecessary items. 

(ii) Where appropriate, an analysis is made of lease and purchase alternatives to determine which would be the most
economical and practical procurement for the recipient. 

(iii) Solicitations for goods and services provide for all of the following. 

(A) A clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for the material, product or service to be procured.
In competitive procurements, such a description shall not contain features which unduly restrict competition.


(B) Requirements which the bidder/offeror must fulfill and all other factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.


(C) A description, whenever practicable, of technical requirements in terms of functions to be performed or performance
required, including the range of acceptable characteristics or minimum acceptable standards. 

(D) The specific features of ``brand name or equal'' descriptions that bidders are required to meet when such items
are included in the solicitation. 

(E) The acceptance, to the extent practicable and economically feasible, of products and services dimensioned in
the metric system of measurement. 



