 

(A) receives Federal funds under any of the following grant programs:

(1) Section 329 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 254b (relating to grants for migrant health centers);

(2) Section 330 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 254c (relating to grants for community health centers);

(3) Section 340 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 256 (relating to grants for health services for the homeless); and 

(4) Section 340A of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 256a (relating to grants for health services for residents of public housing);
and

(B) meets the following requirements:

(1) has implemented appropriate policies and procedures to reduce the risk of malpractice and the risk of lawsuits
arising out of any health or health-related functions performed by the entity;

(2) has reviewed and verified the professional credentials, references, claims history, fitness, progressional
review organization findings, and license status of its physicians and other licensed or certified health care practitioners,
and, where necessary, has obtained the permission from these individuals to gain access to this information;

(3) has no history of claims having been filed against the United States as a result of the application of section 224
to the entity of its officers, employees, of contractors as provided for under this section, or, is such a history exists,
has fully cooperated with the Attorney General in defending against any such claims and either has taken, or will take,
any necessary corrective steps to assure against such claims in the future; and

(4) has fully cooperated with the Attorney General in providing information relating to an estimate described under
section 224(k) of the Act.

Proposed 6.5 provides that an entity will be deemed to be an entity described in section 224(g) as of the effective
date of the notice which it receives from the Department of Health and Human Services that it has been deemed to be an
entity as described for purposes of the Act. Each notice shall be effective only as to acts and omissions occurring
on and after the date specified in the notice and prior to January 1, 1996, the statutory sunset date for this program.
(Proposed 6.6(a).)

In some cases, grantees contract with other entities (as opposed to individual contractors_see section III below)
for the provision of health services. The typical situation is a subgrant or contract for the provision of the full
range of health services. For example, the legislative history of Pub. L. 102501 describes the case of a grantee
in the Los Angeles area which itself has no clinical staff, but which contracts with three primary care clinics for
the actual delivery of services. If one (or more) of these clinics provides the full range of services mandated under
section 330 to its own medically undeserved population, in accordance with other applicable requirements under
section 330, it would be eligible for a determination by the Secretary that it too is a covered entity. (H.R. Rep. No.
102823, Part 2, p. 7, 102d Cong. 2d Sess., Sept. 14, 1992.) Proposed 6.3(b) provides that the Secretary
will identify those contracting entities that will be subject to coverage under section 224(g) in notices issued
pursuant to 6.5.



III. Covered Individuals



In addition to the entity itself, section 224(g) provides that certain individuals may be covered under the FTCA.
Officers and employees are subject to coverage, as well as certain contractors.

Public Law 102501 provides that an individual may be considered to be a contractor of an entity described in
Pub. L. 102501 only if_

(A) the individual normally performs on average at least 321/2 hours of service per week for the entity for the period
of the contract; or

(B) in the case of an individual who normally performs on average less than 321/2 hours of services per week for the entity
for the period of the contract and is a licensed or certified provider of obstetrical services_

(1) the individual's medical malpractice liability insurance coverage does not extend to services performed by
the individual for the entity under the contract; or

(2) the Secretary finds that patients to whom the entity furnishes services will be deprived of obstetrical services
if such individual is not considered a contractor of the entity for purposes of paragraph (1).

Coverage of individuals, whether employees of contractors, does not extend to acts or omissions that are not related
to the grant supported activity. The covered entity itself (assuming it meets the statutory requirements for FTCA
coverage) will be covered for claims against it, even if an individual health care practitioner is not covered in a
particular case. Thus, for example, if a contractor works fewer than 321/2 hours and is not a provider of obstetrical
services, the contractor would not be covered for services related to the grant, but the grantee itself would be covered.



