 

OSHA responded in 1990, by proposing a new provision to require employers to notify OSHA in writing prior to engaging
in demolition, renovation, and removal operations which are not small-scale, short-term operations. OSHA's proposed
notice requirement shared many core elements with EPA's then current and proposed notification requirements under
NESHAPS. OSHA noted that ``(t)he proposed notification is modeled after the notification requirement concerning
asbestos abatement projects that occur in conjunction with building demolition and renovation operations. OSHA
noted further that ``(e)mployers can satisfy the OSHA (proposed) notification requirement simply by forwarding
a copy of the EPA form to the OSHA area office when complying with EPA's asbestos NESHAP.'' (55 FR at 29731). Both EPA's
and OSHA's proposed, notification requirements would exempt less extensive operations. In OSHA's case, the exemption
would have applied to small-scale, short-duration operations as otherwise defined in the standard. EPA's cutoffs
are annual amounts: 260 linear feet on pipes and 160 square feet on other facility components. OSHA noted that many
asbestos jobs would meet the notification requirements of both agencies, however there would be an indeterminate,
yet significant number for which EPA notification would not be called for, but OSHA's proposed requirement would
apply.

Most public comment opposed the requirement. The major objection was the burden on the employer from completing and
mailing the notification form. Further, some commenters questioned the overall usefulness of the notification
requirement in promoting compliance (See comments of Shipbuilder's Council of America Ex. 72.) BCTD continued
to argue for extensive reporting requirements for the reasons stated above. A few other commenters supported its
position. (Ex. 75, 76, 734, 764, 795, 7118, 7132, 7149, 141,
144).

OSHA has carefully reviewed all the comments. Based on the review and subsequent developments, the final regulation
scales down OSHA's proposed notice requirements. OSHA is now requiring advance notification of Class I (mainly large-scale
removals) only when the employer intends to utilize controls other than a negative pressure enclosure which meets
the requirements of paragraph (g) of this standard, and in some circumstances, where modifications of glove bag systems,
glove box systems and other control systems described in paragraph (g) are made.

There are a number of reasons for OSHA's decisions. OSHA believes that the potential benefits in direct risk reduction
from a separate OSHA reporting requirement are unlikely. There are already extensive EPA and state reporting requirements
which OSHA requirements would partly duplicate. The EPA and state requirements already create any incentive to comply
that such reports could create. Similar OSHA reports would not increase this benefit. Information which may be useful
to OSHA in targeting inspections can be retrieved by information-sharing with the EPA while avoiding overlapping
reports. OSHA notes that the Paperwork Reduction Act requires that federal agencies avoid clearly duplicative reporting
requirements. Various comments challenge the value of duplicative requirements (e.g., Ex. 717, 720,
722, 728, 739, 746, 747, 750, 754, 772, 774, 776,
777, 778, 779, 781, 786, 787, 788, 789, 7102, 7103,
7108, 7112, 7125, 7133, 142, 147). Thus, although OSHA's and EPA's reporting requirements
are only partially duplicative, these considerations have influenced OSHA's decision not to require extensive
pre-job reporting. OSHA is concerned that in reviewing the volume of reports which may be spawned by a separate OSHA
requirement which exceeded the EPA requirements would strain OSHA area offices enforcement resources and drain
such resources from other enforcement efforts. However, OSHA finds that advance reporting is appropriate where
information is related to new or modified control methods for Class I work. In such cases, heightened attention to
the data supporting their use will result from the requirement to send them to OSHA.

BCTD's contrary view that compliance would be enhanced was based in part on its contractor's report, submitted after
the 1984 hearing. The report estimated that an advance reporting requirement would reduce ``the number of workers
with TWA exposures over 0.1 f/cc'' up to 30% in drywall removal and demolition, and lesser amounts in other construction
work. These estimates were based on the opinions of a seven person ``focus group'' which included three representatives
of member unions of BCTD. No methodology was presented for deriving these quantitative estimates, and no supporting
data has been submitted in either rulemaking (see brief Ex. 143 at 198). The Court referred to the report in its decision
as uncontradicted, but that was because it was submitted late in the rulemaking procedures.

The Agency believes based on its experience that these estimates of specific quantifiable benefits are speculative.
But more importantly, the now-existing EPA and state reporting requirements and OSHA's use of that data for targeting
inspections will achieve those benefits without duplicative reporting requirements. Further, OSHA made various
changes to the final standard which will also achieve some of these benefits. These include the expanded provisions
on hazard communication, which will alert employees in all asbestos renovation, removal and maintenance work that
presumed asbestos containing material is present; that require competent persons to evaluate the work site before
work is begun, by informing employers that OSHA is setting up information sharing systems with EPA to access employer
notices sent to that Agency, and that require employers who use new and modified control systems to notify OSHA.

Help for OSHA in targeting inspections from the submission of advance reports is the other claimed benefit from a reporting
requirement. Some participants claimed that because pre-job reporting was helpful to EPA in targeting its inspections
for compliance with NESHAP requirements, an OSHA pre-job reporting would similarly benefit this Agency. EPA did
not testify at the hearing, but available information shows that its reporting system provides useful information
to that Agency's enforcement program. NESHAPS reporting is made mostly to 45 state agencies, delegated by EPA to implement
the asbestos NESHAP. Reporting in EPA Region II, is directly to the Regional Office. These reports are the source of
two data bases: the National Asbestos Registry System (NARS), which develops a historical record of asbestos contractors,
updated quarterly: and the ACTS system, which is a local data base on the compliance history of each contractor. OSHA
is informed that ACTS is a tool that delegated agencies may use for day-to-day tracking of asbestos activities. EPA's
evaluation of the reports submitted to it and other information used in its NESHAP enforcement effort constitute
a valuable resource for OSHA.






