 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Defense Nuclear Agency</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>32 CFR Part 318</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[DNA Instruction 5400.11A]</RINDOCK>


Privacy Program


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Defense Nuclear Agency, DoD.

</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

In accordance with the Privacy Act of 1974, Defense Nuclear Agency (DNA) is adopting a change to exempt a new system
of records, HDNA 011, entitled Inspector General Investigation Files, from certain provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552a.
The exemption is intended to increase the value of the system of records for law enforcement purposes, to comply with
prohibitions against the disclosure of certain kinds of information, and to protect the privacy of individuals identified
in the system of records. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE: 

December 19, 1994. 



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Mrs. Sandy Barker at (703) 3257681.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Executive Order 12866. 

The Director, Administration and Management, Office of the Secretary of Defense has determined that this Privacy
Act rule for the Department of Defense does not constitute `significant regulatory action.' Analysis of the rule
indicates that it does not have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more; does not create a serious inconsistency
or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; does not materially alter the budgetary
impact of entitlement, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the right and obligations of recipients thereof; does
not raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles
set forth in Executive Order 12866 (1993). 






Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980. 

The Director, Administration and Management, Office of the Secretary of Defense certifies that this Privacy Act
rule for the Department of Defense does not have significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities
because it is concerned only with the administration of Privacy Act systems of records within the Department of Defense.






Paperwork Reduction Act. 

The Director, Administration and Management, Office of the Secretary of Defense, certifies that this Privacy Act
rule for the Department of Defense imposes no information requirements beyond the Department of Defense and that
the information collected within the Department of Defense is necessary and consistent with 5 U.S.C. 552a, known
as the Privacy Act of 1974.




The DNA Inspector General's Office performs as one of its principal functions under the Inspector General Act of 1978,
as amended by the Inspector General Act Amendment of 1988 (Pub. L. 95452, as amended, 5 U.S.C. App.3) (IG Act),
investigations into and enforcement actions concerned with suspected violations. The DNA OIG is responsible for
promoting economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the administration of DNA programs and operations and to detect
and prevent fraud, waste and abuse in such programs and operations.




The (k)(2) exemption reflects recognition that certain records in the system may be deemed to require protection
from disclosure in order to protect confidential sources mentioned in the files and avoid compromising, impeding,
or interfering with investigative and enforcement proceedings. The system would thus be exempt from sections 5 U.S.C.
552a(c)(3); (d)(1) through (d)(4); (e)(1); (e)(4)(G), (H), and (I); and (f). The proposed rule was published on August
15, 1994, at 59 FR 41739. No comments were received, therefore, the DNA is adopting the changes.




List of Subjects in 32 CFR Part 318




Privacy.




Accordingly, the Defense Nuclear Agency amends 32 CFR part 318 as follows:




1.The authority citation for 32 CFR part 318 continues to read as follows:






Authority: 

Pub. L. 93597, 88 Stat. 1896 (5 U.S.C. 552a)




2.Section 318.5 is revised as follows:


318.5 

Exemptions.




(a) 

Exemption for classified material. 

All systems of records maintained by the Defense Nuclear Agency shall be exempt under section (k)(1) of 5 U.S.C. 552a,
to the extent that the systems contain any information properly classified under E.O. 12356 and that is required by
that E.O. to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign policy. This exemption is applicable to parts
of all systems of records including those not otherwise specifically designated for exemptions herein which contain
isolated items of properly classified information.




(b) 

System identifier and name. 

HDNA 007, Security Operations.
(1) 

Exemption. 

Portions of this system of records may be exempt from the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552a(c)(3); (d); (e)(4)(G), (H), (I);
and (f). 
(2) 

Authority. 

5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5).
(3) 

Reasons. 

To protect the identity of a source who furnished information to the Government under an express promise that the identity
of the source would be held in confidence, or, prior to September 27, 1975, under an implied promise that identity of
the source would be held in confidence.


 

(c) 

System identifier and name: 

HDNA 011, entitled Inspector General Investigation Files.
(1) 

Exemption. 

Portions of this system of records maybe exempt from the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552a(c)(3); (d)(1) through (4); (e)(1);
(e)(4)(G), (H), and (I); and (f).
(2) 

Authority: 

5 U.S.C. 552a (k)(2).




(3) 

Reasons. 

From subsection (c)(3) because it will enable DNA to conduct certain investigations and relay law enforcement information
without compromise of the information, protection of investigative techniques and efforts employed, and identities
of confidential sources who might not otherwise come forward and who furnished information under an express promise
that the sources' identity would be held in confidence (or prior to the effective date of the Act, under an implied promise.)
From subsection (d)(1) through (d)(4) and (f) because providing access to records of a civil investigation and the
right to contest the contents of those records and force changes to be made to the information contained therein would
seriously interfere with and thwart the orderly and unbiased conduct of the investigation and impede case preparation.
Providing access rights normally afforded under the Privacy Act would provide the subject with valuable information
that would allow interference with or compromise of witnesses or render witnesses reluctant to cooperate; lead to
suppression, alteration, or destruction of evidence; and result in the secreting of or other disposition of assets
that would make them difficult or impossible to reach in order to satisfy any Government claim growing out of the investigation
or proceeding. From subsection (e)(1), (e)(4)(G), (H), and (I) because it will provide protection against notification
of investigatory material including certain reciprocal investigations and counterintelligence information,
which might alert a subject to the fact that an investigation of that individual is taking place, and the disclosure
of which would weaken the on-going investigation, reveal investigatory techniques, and place confidential informants
in jeopardy who furnished information under an express promise that the sources' identity would be held in confidence
(or prior to the effective date of the Act, under an implied promise).




Dated: December 9, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
L. M. Bynum, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Alternate OSD Federal Register Liaison Officer, Department of Defense. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9431034 Filed 121694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 500004F
</BILLING>

