 

(4) Contact with the Department of Energy on all atomic energy matters that the Department of Defense determines to
be related to the military applications of nuclear weapons or nuclear energy, including the development, manufacture,
use, storage, retirement, and disposal of nuclear weapons, the allocation of special nuclear material for military
research, and the control of information relating to the manufacture or utilization of nuclear weapons.

(g) Develop systems and standards for the administration and management of the approved plans and programs for atomic
energy; chemical and biological defense; chemical and biological medical defense; smoke and obscurants; safety,
surety, and security of the current chemical weapons stockpile; destruction of U.S. chemical weapons; CB arms control
activities and counter proliferation; and review and evaluate programs for carrying out approved policies and standards.

(h) Promote coordination, cooperation, and mutual understanding on atomic energy; chemical and biological defense;
chemical and biological medical defense; smoke and obscurants; safety, surety, and security of the current chemical
weapons stockpile; destruction of U.S. chemical weapons; CB arms control activities; plans and programs; and counter
proliferation policies, within the Department of Defense and between the Department of Defense and other Federal
Agencies.

(i) Participate in those DoD planning, programming, and budgeting activities that relate to the responsibilities
and functions specified in this part.

(j) Serve on boards, committees, and other groups concerned with atomic energy; chemical and biological defense;
chemical and biological medical defense; smoke and obscurants; safety, surety, and security of the current chemical
weapons stockpile; destruction of U.S. chemical weapons; CB arms control activities; plans and programs; and counter
proliferation. Also represent the Secretary of Defense on these matters outside the Department of Defense.

(k) Serve as an advisor to the Defense Acquisition Board (DAB) for review of systems that include nuclear components
or warheads, and for systems required to operate in nuclear, chemical and/or biological environments and for counter
proliferation programs. Serve also as the advisor to the DAB for chemical and biological defense programs, and the
chemical demilitarization program.

(l) Develop policies and procedures for:

(1) Transmission of information to the Senate and House Armed Services Committees, as required by the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended, and coordinate such information through the USD(AT); the Director, Defense Research
and Engineering; and other cognizant officials and agencies.

(2) Development of information, data, and reports for chemical and biological defense, chemical demilitarization,
and chemical and biological arms control requirements.

(3) Coordination of the congressionally required Annual Report on Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Readiness
Training, and Status of Fielded Equipment and co-chair the steering committee for development of the report.

(4) Nuclear weapon accident and/or incident response, and coordinate exercises testing them.

(m) Serve as the DoD principal point of contact for cooperation with other nations on the military applications of
atomic energy in accordance with articles 91a, 123a, 144b, and 144c of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, in
coordination with other cognizant officials and agencies.

(n) Advise the USD(AT) on arms control treaty compliance and/or verification matters relating to nuclear weapon
and effects technology, testing and development and the nuclear weapon stockpile.

(o) Serve as chairperson of the Defense Nuclear Agency Coordinating Committee.

(p) Chair the OSD Chemical and Biological Defense Matters Steering Committee, and provide oversight of the DoD Biological
Defense Program in coordination with the Army Acquisition Executive.

(q) Manage execution and implementation of concluded Cooperative Threat Reduction assistance projects with the
new independent states of the former Soviet Union.

(r) Provide OSD representation on the following Joint Service Chemical and Biological Defense and Chemical Demilitarization
committees:

(1) Joint Service Agreement, Joint Service Review Group.

(2) Joint Panel of Chemical and Biological Defense.

(3) Joint Service Coordination Committee.

(4) Chemical Demilitarization Army Systems Acquisition Review Council (Voting Member).

(s) Perform such other functions as the Secretary of Defense and USD(AT) may assign.



379.4 

Relationships.



(a) In the performance of assigned functions and responsibilities, the ATSD(AE) shall:

(1) Report directly to the USD(AT).

(2) Exercise authority, direction, and control over:

(i) The Defense Nuclear Agency.

(ii) The On-Site Inspection Agency.

(3) Coordinate and exchange information with other DoD organizations having collateral or related functions.

(4) Use existing facilities and services of the Department of Defense and other Federal Agencies, whenever practicable,
to achieve maximum efficiency and economy.

(5) Communicate with other Government Agencies, representatives of the legislative branch, and members of the public,
as appropriate, in carrying out assigned functions.

(b) The DoD Chemical and Biological Defense Steering Committee shall advise the ATSD(AE) on such chemical and biological
defense matters as the ATSD(AE) deems appropriate and necessary.

(c) Other OSD officials and heads of the DoD Components shall coordinate with the ATSD(AE) on all matters related to
the responsibilities and functions cited in 379.3.

(d) The DoD Board of Directors for Defense Conversion within the former Soviet Union shall advise the ATSD(AE) on defense
conversion matters as the ATSD(AE) deems necessary.



379.5 

Authorities.



The ATSD(AE) is hereby delegated authority to:

(a) Issue DoD Instructions, DoD Publications, and one-time directive-type memoranda, consistent with DoD 5025.1M,
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>
 which carry out policies approved by the Secretary of Defense, in assigned fields of responsibility. Instructions
to the Military Departments shall be issued through the Secretaries of those Departments. Instructions to the Unified
Combatant Commands shall be communicated through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
See footnote 1 to 379.3(f)

</FOOTNOTE>


(b) Obtain reports, information, advice, and assistance, consistent with DoD Directive 8910.1,
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 as deemed necessary.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
See footnote 1 to 379.3(f)

</FOOTNOTE>


(c) Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components. Communications to Commanders of the Unified Combatant
Commands shall be through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.




Dated: June 23, 1994.



<SIGNER>
L.M. Bynum,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Alternate OSD Federal Register Liaison Officer, Department of Defense.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9415701 Filed 62994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 500004M
</BILLING>


