 

The proposal stated that a facility which was directly and solely owned by, leased by or donated by a credit union and
had credit union employees regularly on site who accept payment on shares and disburse loans was clearly a home or branch
office. One commenter objected to the requirement that a branch office have a paid employee working in it. This commenter
believed this section needed to be modified to include credit union volunteers. 

One commenter believed that in order to facilitate growth among credit unions, NCUA should reconsider its position
that ``the addition of a new select group alone is not enough to justify a proposed home or branch office.'' 

One commenter believed the definition of branches should be expanded to more closely identify and define the difference
between an ``open branch'' and a ``closed branch.'' This commenter stated that an open branch should be identified
as one where members from any company or group could have free access and that a closed branch should be identified as
one that is located within a sponsor's facility that is accessible only to employees of that group. This commenter
believed that taking on additional small employee groups using a close branch as the base in determining the 25 mile
radius should not be permitted. 



B. NCUA Board Decision



The NCUA Board is not prepared to jettison the ``operational area'' limitation or to make substantial changes in how
that limitation is defined. The requirement has served credit unions well and remains vital. Some of the wording in
the final IRPS has been changed to make the concept more adaptable to the variety of credit union service outlets, however.
``Home or branch office'' has been changed to ``service facility,'' for example, and the requirement to have an ``employee''
on site has been changed to ``representative'' to accommodate the possibility of volunteers.

However, the final IRPS does not include provisions for a ``public interest'' field of membership expansion. Moreover,
the Board does not believe that technology has reached the point where access to a facility where business can be transacted
by interaction with another person is unimportant. Therefore, the operational area requirement will continue to
be linked to the credit union's ability to provide service by such means. Finally, the Board cannot, without substantially
more experience, allow ``shared service centers'' and other similar kinds of group service arrangements to be considered
``service facilities'' for select group expansion purposes; the effects of such a change are too unclear at this point.
The final IRPS therefore excludes from the definition of a ``shared facility'' locations at which service is provided
to a significant number of different credit unions' members.



VII. Community Charters 



A. Comments



Two commenters believed the proposal did not address the concerns of community credit unions. The proposal clarified
that a community credit union's operational (service) area was to be defined by its boundaries. Four commenters agreed
with this clarification. Four commenters believed that the authority to add new groups outside community boundaries
should be extended to all community charters where continued viability is threatened by a major corporate or military
restructuring. These commenters believed there was no reason to treat a ``converting to'' community charter any
differently from existing community charters when in both cases the threat is viability caused by similar events.
Eight commenters believed any community credit union should have the option to add select employee groups to its field
of membership if it has the financial ability to do so and NCUA determines that no other credit union in the area could
serve the group. Four commenters suggested allowing community credit unions to merge with multiple group or associational
credit unions while still continuing to serve the former fields of membership of both credit unions.

Four commenters believed NCUA should provide for the chartering of community credit unions in two non-adjacent communities.
These commenters believed the granting of community charter status in one area should not prevent the credit union
from continuing to serve and admit new members from existing select employee groups in a second area, or obtaining
a dual community charter. 

One commenter believed NCUA should make it easier to expand geographic boundaries of community credit unions by eliminating
the requirement of showing a ``commingling of the two communities.'' This commenter believed this requirement was
no longer realistic because electronic transactions have taken over in the marketplace.



B. NCUA Board Decision



The Board believes the final policy statement addresses the needs of community charters. In response to the advent
of new technologies in communication and the evolving character of communities, the Board has slightly revised the
definition of a community common bond. A community charter must continue to be limited to ``a well-defined neighborhood,
community, or rural district.'' However, a community will be defined as a single, well-defined area where residents
interact. To meet this definition, the Board has established the following common bond requirements for a community
charter: the geographic area's boundaries must be clearly defined; and the applicant for a new charter or an expansion
must establish that the area is recognized as a ``distinct neighborhood, community or rural district.'' This new
policy eliminates the commingling requirement while still requiring the members to interact. The final policy also
clarifies that the community credit union's operational (service) area is defined by its boundaries.



