 


(2) 

Maximum living allowance. 

With the exception of a 
professional corps described in 2522.110(a)(3), the AmeriCorps living allowances may not exceed 200 
percent of the average annual subsistence allowance provided to 
VISTA volunteers under section 105 of the Domestic Volunteer 
Service Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4955). A professional corps 
AmeriCorps program may provide a stipend in excess of the 
maximum, subject to the following conditions: (i) Corporation assistance may not be used to pay for any 
portion of the allowance; and 



(ii) The program must be operated directly by the applicant, 
selected on a competitive basis by submitting an application 
directly to the Corporation, and may not be included in a State's 
application for the AmeriCorps program funds distributed by 
formula, or competition described in 2521.30 (a)(2) and (a)(3) 
of this chapter. 



(3) 

Living allowances for part-time participants. 

Programs 
may, but are not required to, provide living allowances to 
individuals participating on a part-time basis (or a reduced term 
of part-time service authorized under 2522.220(a)(3). Such 
living allowances should be prorated to the living allowance 
authorized in paragraph (b)(1) of this section and will comply 
with such restrictions therein. 



(4) 

Waiver or reduction of living allowance. 

The Corporation 
may, at its discretion, waive or reduce the living allowance 
requirements if a program can demonstrate to the satisfaction of 
the Corporation that such requirements are inconsistent with the 
objectives of the program, and that participants will be able to 
meet the necessary and reasonable costs of living (including 
food, housing, and transportation) in the area in which the 
program is located. 



(5) 

Limitation on Federal share. 

The Federal share, including Corporation and other Federal funds, 
of the total amount provided to an AmeriCorps participant for a 
living allowance is limited as follows: (i) In no case may the Federal share exceed 85% of the 
minimum required living allowance enumerated in paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section. 



(ii) For professional corps described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) 
of this section, Corporation and other Federal funds may be used 
to pay for no portion of the living allowance. 



(iii) If the minimum living allowance requirements has been 
waived or reduced pursuant to paragraph (b)(4) of this section 
and the amount of the living allowance provided to a participant 
has been reduced correspondingly_



(A) In general, the Federal share may not exceed 85% of the 
reduced living allowance; however, 



(B) If a participant is serving in a program that provides 
room or board, the Corporation will consider on a case-by-case 
basis allowing the portion of that living allowance that may be 
paid using Corporation and other Federal funds to be between 85% 
and 100%. 


2522.250

What other benefits do AmeriCorps participants 
serving in approved AmeriCorps positions receive? 





(a) 

Child Care. 

Grantees must provide child care through an 
eligible provider or a child care allowance in an amount 
determined by the Corporation to those full-time participants who 
need child care in order to participate. 



(1) 

Need. 

A participant is considered to need child care in 
order to participate in the program if he or she: (i) Is the parent or legal guardian of, or is acting in loco 
parentis for, a child under 13 who resides with the participant; 



(ii) Has a family income that does not exceed 75 percent of 
the State's median income for a family of the same size; 



(iii) At the time of acceptance into the program, is not 
currently receiving child care assistance from another source, 
including a parent or guardian, which would continue to be 
provided while the participant serves in the program; and 



(iv) Certifies that he or she needs child care in order to 
participate in the program. 



(2) 

Provider eligibility. 

Eligible child care providers are 
those who are eligible child care providers as defined in the 
Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
9858n(5)).



(3) 

Child care allowance. 

The amount of the child care 
allowance will be determined by the Corporation based on payment 
rates for the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 
(42 U.S.C. 9858c(4)(A)). 



(4) 

Corporation share. 

The Corporation will pay 100 percent 
of the child care allowance, or, if the program provides child 
care through an eligible provider, the actual cost of the care or 
the amount of the allowance, whichever is less. 



(b) 

Health care. 

(1) Grantees must provide to all eligible 
participants who meet the requirements of paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section health care coverage that_



(i) Provides the minimum benefits determined by the 
Corporation; 



(ii) Provides the alternative minimum benefits determined by 
the Corporation; or 



(iii) Does not provide all of either the minimum or the 
alternative minimum benefits but that has a fair market value 
equal to or greater than the fair market value of a policy that 
provides the minimum benefits. 



(2) 

Participant eligibility. 

A full-time participant is 
eligible for health care benefits if he or she is not otherwise 
covered by a health benefits package providing minimum benefits 
established by the Corporation at the time he or she is accepted 
into a program. If, as a result of participation, or if, during 
the term of service, a participant demonstrates loss of coverage 
through no deliberate act of his or her own, such as parental or 
spousal job loss or disqualification from Medicaid, the 
participant will be eligible for health care benefits. 



(3) 

Corporation share. 

(i) Except as provided in paragraph 
(b)(3)(ii) of this section, the Corporation will pay up to 85% of 
the cost of health care coverage that includes the minimum or 
alternative minimum benefits and is not excessive in cost. 



(ii) The Corporation will pay no share of the cost of a 
policy that does not provide the minimum or alternative minimum 
benefits described in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii) of this 
section. 




Subpart C_Application Requirements 


2522.300

What are the application requirements for AmeriCorps 
program grants?


