 

G. The holder has the responsibility of inspecting the site, authorized rights-of-way, and adjoining areas for dangerous
trees, hanging limbs, and other evidence of hazardous conditions which could affect the improvements and or pose
a risk of injury to individuals. After securing permission from the authorized officer, the holder shall remove such
hazards.

H. In case of change of permanent address or change in ownership of the recreation residence, the holder shall immediately
notify the authorized officer.



V. Liabilities



A. This permit is subject to all valid existing rights and claims outstanding in third parties. The United States is
not liable to the holder for the exercise of any such right or claim.

B. The holder shall hold harmless the United States from any liability from damage to life or property arising from
the holder's occupancy or use of National Forest lands under this permit.

C. The holder shall be liable for any damage suffered by the United States resulting from or related to use of this permit,
including damages to National Forest resources and costs of fire suppression. Without limiting available civil
and criminal remedies which may be available to the United States, all timber cut, destroyed, or injured without authorization
shall be paid for at stumpage rates which apply to the unauthorized cutting of timber in the State wherein the timber
is located.



VI. Fees



A. Fee Requirement: This special use authorization shall require payment in advance of an annual rental fee.

B. Appraisals:

1. Appraisals to ascertain the fair market value of the 

lot

 will be conducted by the Forest Service at least every 20 years. The next appraisal will be implemented in *

XXXX

 (insert year).

2. Appraisals will be conducted and reviewed in a manner consistent with the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal
Practice, from which the appraisal standards have been developed, giving accurate and careful consideration to
all market forces and factors which tend to influence the value of the 

lot

.

3. If dissatisfied with an appraisal utilized by the Forest Service in ascertaining the permit fee, the holder may
employ another qualified appraiser at the holder's expense. The authorized officer will give full and complete consideration
to both appraisals provided the holder's appraisal meets Forest Service standards. If the two appraisals disagree
in value by more than 10 percent, the two appraisers will be asked to try and reconcile or reduce their differences.
If the appraisers cannot agree, the Authorized Officer will utilize either or both appraisals to determine the fee.
When requested by the holder, a third appraisal may be obtained with the cost shared equally by the holder and the Forest
Service. This third appraisal must meet the same standards of the first and second appraisals and may or may not be accepted
by the authorized officer.


