 

Empowerment Zone/Enterprise Community Program Attachment to SF 83_Supporting Statement



A. Justification



1. The statute requires that data demonstrating eligibility must be submitted as part of the nomination for Empowerment
Zone/Enterprise Community designation, as well as the Strategic Plan addressing problems in the nominated area
which will serve as the basis for designation by the appropriate Secretary. In addition the statute requires that
the nomination for designation include benchmarks established by the nominee for measuring the success of the nominees
plan implementation. Modification of the boundaries of the zone or lack of progress in achieving the benchmarks set
forth in the strategic plan is indicated in the statute as grounds for a revokation by the appropriate Secretary of
the designation. Therefore, we will ask for periodic (annual) reports from the designated Empowerment Zones and
Enterprise Communities in which they indicate how they are progressing against the benchmarks they established.
We do not have a specific form which must be used to make this report.

a. Nomination.

(A) Eligibility factors include documentation of specific levels of poverty by census tract, pervasive poverty
and general distress. In addition, parameters of geographic size and population are included.

(B) The statute provides that in making designations, the Secretary will consider the effectiveness of the strategic
plan, the effectiveness of the assurances provided and the other criteria which may be specified by the appropriate
Secretary.

b. Periodic (annual) performance reports. As indicated above this report will be submitted by the designated Empowerment
Zones and Enterprise Communities to show their progress in achieving the benchmarks set forth in their strategic
plans. The appropriate Secretary will use the information submitted to evaluate the success of the Empowerment Zones
and Enterprise Communities as indicated in the statute.

2. Purpose and use of the information.

The nominations will be used by HUD and USDA to evaluate the eligibility of the nominated areas and make designations
of Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities in accordance with the designation criteria set forth in the statute.


The period reports will be used as required by the statute to determine the success of each designee in meeting its established
benchmarks and in evaluating the program as a whole.

3. Use of information technology to reduce burden_not applicable.

4. Effort to identify duplication.

These requirements are the minimum necessary to meet the requirements of the statute and put the Program into effect.

5. Availability of similar information.

While available information can be used to prepare the nomination and develop the strategic plan, the statute requires
that the nominee develop this information for an area it selects.

6. Small business involvement_not applicable.

7. Consequence of less frequent information collection.

We judge periodic reports to be the minimum needed to administer the program in conformance with the statute.

8. Inconsistency with 5 CFR 1320.6_not applicable.

9. Persons consulted.

HUD and USDA have worked together to prepare joint applications for the Program. The following agencies were consulted
during the preparation and development of the program:




Commerce Department_Larry Parks 

Education Department_Mike Smith 

Housing and Human Services_David Ellwood

Justice_Eleanor Acheson

Labor_Larry Katz

OMB_Chris Edley

ONDCP_Ed Jurith

SBA_Erskine Bolles

Transportation_Ann Bormolini

Treasury_Maurice Foley

CEA_Joe Stiglitz

DPC_Bruce Reed

NEC_Paul Dimond

V.P._Kumiki Gibson




10. Assurance of confidentiality_not applicable.

11. Questions of a sensitive nature_not applicable.

12. Cost estimates.



<TABLE>




1

1Number of respondents
1&times;

1Estimated hours
1&times;

1Average hourly rates
1=

1Cost





Grantees (state  local governments):



Nomination
300 
 
50 
 
$10.00 
 
$150,000
Reports
104 
 
16 
 
10.00 
 
16,640
n,n,n,n,n,n,n,s 


Total cost to nominees  designees 
 
 
 
 
 
 
166,640


Federal Government:


Nomination 
300 
 
80 
 
$18.00 
 
$432,000
Reports 
104 
 
40 
 
18.00 
 
74,880
n,n,n,n,n,n,n,s


Total cost to federal government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
506,880


</TABLE>





These figures are based on an estimate of the number of applications expected and the assumption that HUD and USDA will
designate the full EZs and ECs authorized in the statute. These figures were then multiplied by the number of hours
estimated for preparation or review for each requirement.





