 




<RINDOCK>[OPPTS211035A; FRL47669]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>TSCA Section 21 Petition; Response to Citizens' Petition </DOCTITLE>





<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Response to citizens' petition.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 On December 16, 1993, the Board of Supervisors of the County of Imperial, California, petitioned EPA under section
21 of the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), to issue a test rule under section 4 of TSCA to require monitoring of the
New River for chemical pollutants and subsequent health and environmental effects testing of the identified chemicals,
in addition to other requested actions. This Notice announces EPA's response to Imperial County's petition. 



</SUMMARY>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Michelle Price, Environmental Assistance Division (7408), Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics, Environmental
Protection Agency, Rm. EB67, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460, (202) 2603790. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 


I. Summary of Petition and Response 


On December 16, 1993, EPA received a petition under section 21 of TSCA from the Board of Supervisors of the County of
Imperial, California. The petitioner has requested that EPA take the following actions: Require monitoring of the
New River to determine the presence and level of contaminants under section 4 of TSCA; require health and environmental
effects testing of detected chemicals under section 4 of TSCA; and take appropriate action under TSCA or other Federal
laws to protect human health and the environment, based on the results of the testing. The petitioner requests the
actions because the Board believes there are insufficient monitoring data on the chemicals in the River as well as
insufficient health and environmental effects data on those chemicals. 
The petitioner alleges that there may be a serious health risk to the citizens of Imperial County, California resulting
from toxic chemicals and pathogens present in the New River. The petitioner also alleges that the presence of these
chemicals and pathogens results from discharges by facilities located in Mexico in the vicinity of the City of Mexicali.
The petitioner argues that discharges of a chemical into the New River in Mexico, where the river-borne chemical subsequently
crosses the U.S. border, constitute ``import'' into the U.S. under TSCA. The petitioner also argues that manufacturers
and processors of the pollutants in Mexico should bear the burden of conducting the testing. 
In addition to the request for action under section 21 of TSCA, the petitioner states that the poor and predominantly
Hispanic citizens of Imperial County who live and work along the New River, as a matter of environmental equity, are
entitled to the same rigorous enforcement of environmental laws regarding water quality as citizens in other areas
of the United States. Imperial County also requested that EPA raise the need for a solution to the New River problem
with Mexican officials through mechanisms under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). 
The County Board has simultaneously petitioned the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) for
a health assessment of the New River under section 104 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
and Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. section 9601, 

et. seq.

 
EPA believes that additional monitoring of the New River is necessary to adequately characterize the chemical contamination
in the River, and that obtaining such information is an important step in addressing New River pollution. To expedite
EPA's review of the New River situation, EPA will fund work with the California Regional Water Quality Control Board
(CRWQCB) to develop the monitoring data that, along with other currently available information, will allow EPA to
determine with a reasonable level of confidence the identities and amounts of chemical pollutants in the New River
and whether additional testing is necessary. A more detailed discussion of the proposed monitoring activities is
located in Unit IV.A. of this Notice. 
In light of its decision to fund the CRWQCB monitoring, EPA has determined that the imposition of a test rule to require
monitoring of the River is unnecessary. The Agency will obtain the data requested by the petition by more expeditious
means. Promulgating a test rule could require several years due to the notice-and-comment procedures required for
agency rulemaking and the complexity of the New River situation. 
With regard to the petitioner's request to impose testing to evaluate the ecological and health risks of the River
pollutants, the Agency has decided that it is not currently in a position to conclude that the requisite section 4 criteria
have been met. This is true even for the pollutants identified in the petition or in existing monitoring data. EPA believes
it will be better able to evaluate whether it is necessary and appropriate to promulgate a section 4 test rule for ecological
and health effects testing after the Agency has received and evaluated up-to-date monitoring information on the
identities, levels and environmental partitioning of pollutants in the River. A more detailed discussion of this
issue is contained in Unit III. of this Notice. 
EPA is also continuing and/or taking a number of additional initiatives as described in Unit IV. of this Notice. These
activities are aimed at addressing the pollution problems in the New River that appear to result from both international
pollution coming from Mexico and pollution contributions from Imperial County. 


II. Background 


A. Statutory Requirements 


Section 21 of TSCA provides that any person may petition EPA to initiate proceedings for the issuance of rules under
sections 4, 6, and 8 of TSCA. 
A section 21 petition must set forth the facts which the petitioner believes establish the need for the rules requested.
EPA is required to grant or deny the petition within 90 days. If EPA grants the petition, the Agency must promptly commence
an appropriate proceeding. If EPA denies the petition, the Agency must publish its reasons in the 

Federal Register

. 
Within 60 days of denial, the petitioner may commence a civil action in a U.S. district court to compel the initiation
of the rulemaking requested in its petition. The court must, for a petition for a new rule, provide the opportunity
for the petition to be considered de novo. 
After hearing the evidence, the court can order EPA to initiate the action requested if the petitioner has demonstrated,
by a preponderance of the evidence, support for particular conclusions described in section 21. 
In a challenge to an EPA denial of a section 21 petition requesting a section 4 rule, the petitioner would have to demonstrate
by a preponderance of the evidence that information available to the Agency is insufficient to permit a reasoned evaluation
of the effects of a chemical, that the chemical either may present an unreasonable risk or will be produced in substantial
amounts and may result in significant or substantial human exposure or substantial environmental release, and that
testing is necessary to characterize the risks. 
Section 21 does not provide specific direction as to how the Agency should evaluate a citizen's petition, but merely
states that EPA must grant or deny within 90 days. However, there are standards under section 4 for issuing regulations,
and in determining whether to grant or deny, EPA must consider whether the requirements for section 4 rulemaking can
be met. 
Under section 4 of TSCA, EPA may issue rules to require chemical manufacturers and processors to test the chemical
substances and mixtures that they produce. To issue a section 4 rule on a chemical, EPA must find either that activities
involving the chemical may present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment, or that the chemical
is or will be produced in substantial quantities and that there is or will be significant or substantial human exposure
to the chemical or that the chemical is or will be released to the environment in substantial quantities. In addition,
EPA must find that existing data are insufficient to determine or predict the effects of the chemical and that testing
is necessary to develop that data. EPA must be able to make all of the above findings to issue a test rule; if EPA believes
on the basis of the information obtained from the petition, and from its investigation during the 90day review
period, that it cannot make all of the necessary findings, EPA will deny the section 21 petition. 
One of the criteria most relevant to this petition is whether testing is necessary. Section 4 expands the concept of
sufficiency provided in the section 21 standards established for the purposes of district court review, requiring
that EPA find that testing is necessary to develop the data needed to evaluate a chemical before it may issue a test rule.
In making this finding, EPA considers whether there are other means of obtaining data without resorting to a test rule.

The relief available under section 21 is limited to the initiation of a proceeding to issue, amend, or appeal a rule
under either section 4, 6, or 8, or an order under section 5(e) or 6(b)(2). Consequently, some of the remedies requested
in the petition are not within the scope of actions available through a section 21 petition. 


B. Description of the New River Problem 


The population of Mexicali, Mexico, and Calexico, U.S., like other major sister cities in the border area has grown
rapidly in the last 50 years, and has paralleled the expansion of the industrial base of Mexicali. The rapid population
growth in Mexicali and all along the border, coupled with rapid urban growth and unanticipated land use, has resulted
in serious problems. One of these problems has been severe pressures on the urban infrastructure (e.g., wastewater
treatment and collection systems). 
Mexicali's existing wastewater treatment systems are inadequate for the existing volume of wastewater being generated.
Since the existing treatment systems are overloaded, it is likely that the influent to the systems is not receiving
sufficient treatment. In addition, Mexicali's rapid growth has resulted in communities which are not yet connected
to the treatment system. In 1990, this uncollected sewage averaged about 13 million gallons per day (mgd) and, after
recent improvements to the Mexicali system by the Mexican government, the uncollected flow is about 8 mgd. These flows
also end up in the New River. Once the New River crosses the international boundary, it flows through Imperial County,
where it is augmented by more agricultural drainage, to the Salton Sea which is also located in Imperial County. 
In addition to agricultural drainage and domestic sewage, industrial wastewater reaches the New River in Mexico,
either via discharge to the sewer system or direct discharge to the River. Mexican law requires that industries treat
their waste, prior to discharge, to minimize impacts to the sewer system and to receiving waters. However, monitoring
data from both the International Boundary and Water Commission (IBWC), the binational commission responsible for
border sanitation issues, and the CRWQCB have indicated the significant presence of industrial waste in the River.
Studies by CRWQCB, throughout the 1980's consistently found trace organics and trace metals in fish, water, and sediment
samples. Reports describe the River as very discolored, often with a foam layer, and not swimmable or fishable. CRWQCB
continued to monitor the River from 19901993. These monitoring data and visual observations show the flow
crossing the international boundary has generally been less than in the previous decade, observations of foam are
less frequent, but trace organics and metals are still detected, and the River at the international boundary is still
not considered fishable or swimmable. 
Pesticide runoff from Mexico into the New River is not well documented, although the petition implies that this is
a problem. CRWCQB monitoring data indicate that although some DDT, DDT breakdown products, and toxaphene are emanating
via the New River flow from Mexico, the primary contribution originates from normal agricultural practices within
the Imperial Valley. Although no longer used in Imperial Valley, DDT, toxaphene, and possibly other pesticide residues
remain on cropland from former years of usage and enter drainageways, including the New River, via tailwater runoff
during cropland irrigation. Due to historical use of DDT and toxaphene, this phenomenon is common throughout the
southwestern U.S. 
Both the U.S. and Mexican governments have recognized the seriousness of the contamination problem of the New River,
as evidenced by the Integrated Environmental Plan for the Mexican-U.S. Border Area which was released in 1992. The
IBWC, with assistance from EPA, the California State Water Resource Control Board, and the CRWQCB, have negotiated
binational agreements to address the New River problem. Although some steps have been taken, the problem of partially
treated and untreated wastewater in the New River continues to exist. 
All references for the information contained in this Unit (II.B.) can be found in the administrative record under
the following heading, ``Memorandum on References for the Description of the New River Problem.'' 


III. EPA Analysis of Approaches to Obtaining Information on Condition of the New River 


EPA acknowledges that the New River appears to have serious pollution problems that have resulted from pollution
coming across the border from Mexico and from within Imperial County, California. EPA recognizes that it is important
to continue to work with Mexico to try to resolve border pollution problems as well as continuing to work with the State
of California and Imperial County to resolve pollution problems on the U.S. side of the border. As demonstrated in
the EPA activities described below, EPA considers clean-up of the New River a high priority and is pursuing solutions
to the problem domestically as well as internationally. 
EPA believes that additional monitoring of the New River is necessary to adequately characterize the chemical contamination
in the River, and that obtaining such information is an important step in addressing New River pollution. EPA does
not believe that initiating a section 4 test rule under TSCA is the best or most expeditious way to obtain the information
necessary to characterize the chemical contamination in the River. First, it could take EPA several years to initiate
and complete a test rule, and the complex legal and policy issues involved in this rulemaking could further delay the
process. Consequently EPA would not receive the monitoring information for several years which would result in a
large gap in the monitoring data available to the Agency on the condition of the New River. Second, if monitoring is
delayed because it must occur through implementation of a test rule, EPA would not be able to track the planned improvements
in the Mexicali treatment facilities or identify possible currently unknown risks that immediate monitoring would
enable the Agency to identify. Finally, a test rule may not cover all of the parameters of concern to the petitioner
because of the limited scope of TSCA. For instance, EPA may not be able to require testing for E. coli, where it may be
difficult to identify manufacturers, importers, and/or processors who would be subject to a rule. 
Consequently, EPA will fund work with the CRWQCB to develop the monitoring data that, along with other currently available
information, will allow the Agency to determine with a reasonable level of confidence the identities and amounts
of chemical pollutants in the New River and whether additional testing is necessary. The petitioner submitted a monitoring
proposal developed by the CRWQCB, similar to monitoring being considered by EPA. EPA will work with the CRWQCB to ensure
that the monitoring proposal covers the parameters of concern to EPA, the CRWQCB, and the petitioner. Once the monitoring
information is available, EPA, in conjunction with ATSDR, will determine what further steps are necessary and appropriate
to address the concerns about the New River raised by the petitioner. 
Because the additional monitoring sought by the petitioner is available more expeditiously through other mechanisms,
the Agency has concluded that it is unnecessary at this time to initiate a section 4 test rule as requested by Imperial
County. The potential risks that might be posed by the pollution in the New River merit a more expeditious response
than would be possible by initiating a regulatory proceeding as requested by the petitioner. 
With regard to the petitioner's request to impose testing to evaluate the ecological and health risks of the River
pollutants, the Agency has decided that it is not currently in a position to conclude that the requisite section 4 criteria
have been met. This is true even for the pollutants identified in the petition or in existing monitoring data. Much
of the available information is several years old, and may not reflect a current profile of the River and its pollutants.
In addition, much of the previous sampling was conducted throughout the length of the River, and as a result, the Agency
cannot definitively determine the identity and extent of any pollutants entering the River from Mexico. Also, certain
kinds of information that would be valuable to the Agency's assessment (e.g., sediment contamination levels) are
either missing or very limited. EPA believes it will be better able to evaluate whether it is necessary and appropriate
to promulgate a section 4 test rule for ecological and health effects testing after the Agency has received and evaluated
up-to-date monitoring information on the identities, levels, and environmental partitioning of pollutants in
the River. Moreover, EPA will be better able to coordinate with ATSDR on data needs for any health assessment it conducts
once the Agency has a clearer picture of the condition of the New River--a picture that will be greatly enhanced by the
additional monitoring data from the EPA-initiated tests. In the meantime, EPA will work with ATSDR to evaluate available
health and ecological effects data to determine whether there are data gaps which need to be filled. 
In summary, the Agency recognizes that the New River may be a significant source of human exposure to an unquantified
mixture of industrial and chemical pollutants. Moreover, EPA shares Imperial County's concerns and agrees that
efforts to better characterize the pollutants in the River, and their potential health effects should be continued
and expanded. EPA believes it is prudent to minimize human exposure to these chemicals where reasonable, and has initiated
or will initiate in the near future, actions that will significantly further this goal. Finally, as a matter of policy,
the Agency believes that efforts on the part of domestic and foreign manufacturers to reduce and pretreat their industrial
discharge should be strongly encouraged. 

IV. Specific Actions to Address the New River Problem 


The actions that follow listed under Units A., B., and C. are not actions contemplated as a result of EPA receiving the
petition. They are specific actions planned by EPA through the 1983 La Paz binational workgroup structure and by EPA
unilaterally through its program offices. 


A. Monitoring and Other Testing 


EPA will provide financial assistance to the CRWQCB, by the fall of 1994, to implement their monitoring proposal for
the New River watershed. This monitoring proposal was submitted to EPA as part of the petition, and was submitted to
EPA's Region 9 office by CRWQCB prior to receipt of the petition. The petitioner has indicated that the CRWQCB monitoring
proposal is along the lines contemplated by the petitioner. Prior to funding, EPA and the CRWQCB will verify that the
comprehensive monitoring study incorporates the parameters of concern mentioned in the petition, including pesticides.

The U.S. and Mexico will discuss a proposed program for monitoring contaminants of domestic, industrial, and agricultural
origin in the Colorado River for implementation in 1994. 
EPA will provide financial assistance for a study of the New River that addresses organic chemical contamination
of the New River as it flows to the Salton Sea using monitoring data and water quality modelling to determine the fate
of organic pollutants in the River. 
EPA will coordinate with ATSDR as they conduct any activities to assess the New River. EPA will work to provide, collect,
or develop additional necessary information, such as exposure or hazard information, to determine the health and
environmental risks from the New River. In the event ATSDR decides not to undertake any action in response to the CERCLA
104 petition it has received, EPA will continue to independently assess the hazards and risks associated with the
New River. 


B. Wastewater Treatment 


EPA is pursuing specific authorization for Border-area projects from the ``Hardship Communities'' funds set aside
in EPA's FY 94 appropriation, which will include funding for the U.S. share of costs to start the New River project described
in the IBWC's Minute 288. EPA will also explore additional funding mechanisms, such as the Border Environment Cooperation
Commission (BECC) and the North American Development Bank (NADBank), which are currently under development in both
the U.S. and Mexican financial communities. 
The U.S. section of the IBWC has responded to Mexico's submittal of the proposed wastewater treatment facilities
it plans to construct. The U.S. section has requested that Mexico submit a more detailed facility plan on projects
that include funding by the U.S. 
The U.S. and Mexico, in accordance with IBWC Minute 288, will undertake the following actions: Review and approve
the specific projects; complete final design of the Mexicali II wastewater treatment plant; define the terms of financial
participation for the U.S.; and agree on arrangements for the IBWC to design, construct, operate, and maintain the
system. 
EPA and the State of California have offered and provided technical assistance to IBWC and to Mexico in planning and
designing the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for Mexicali. EPA will continue to offer similar assistance.

EPA is designing an industrial wastewater pretreatment training course for Mexican officials. This pilot training
course will be taught in the Nogales, Sonora, area. Efforts will be made to subsequently target the training in Mexicali.
EPA will also encourage those Mexican officials who attend the course in Nogales to share their knowledge with State
of Baja California and City of Mexicali officials. 


C. Pesticides 


EPA has been informed that the CRWQCB has requested that the Imperial Irrigation District (IID) put together a list
of Best Management Practices (BMP) for the control of agricultural pollutants. The IID has responded with a letter
which describes their plan for developing BMP and a Drain Water Quality Improvement Plan by January 1996. CRWQCB will
work with the County to implement these plans. 
EPA will provide bilingual training and outreach programs on border pesticide-related issues. This training will
be designed to promote the safe and appropriate use of pesticides in order to prevent future pesticide contamination
in these areas. Funds will be provided to and utilized by the California Department of Pesticide Regulation and the
Texas Department of Agriculture to develop and conduct bilingual pesticide training for pesticide applicators
and outreach to the affected border communities along the Imperial Valley-Mexicali and the Lower Rio Grande Valley
(Texas-Tamaulipas) border areas. 


D. Information Collection 


EPA has taken three interim actions to collect information on the nature of the pollutants: Sending a letter to the
U.S. section of the IBWC on January 18, 1994, to ask them to request information from the Mexican section of the IBWC;
sending a letter to Mexico's Secretariat for Social Development (SEDESOL) on January 25, 1994; and issuing a 

Federal Register

 Notice on January 26, 1994 (59 FR 3687). The U.S. section of the IBWC has requested information from the Mexican section
of the IBWC. 
In the letters and the 

Federal Register

 Notice, EPA requested any information Mexican authorities and the public may have regarding New River pollution.
In the letters to the IBWC and SEDESOL, EPA also proposed contacting U.S. parent companies of maquiladoras operating
in Mexicali and requesting information on releases to the New River. A maquiladora is a foreign owned industry operating
in Mexico which can import raw materials into Mexico without tariffs and must export all products, including hazardous
waste generated, back to the country of origin. If Mexico agrees that this action is appropriate, EPA will contact
the companies and provide any information received to ATSDR or other appropriate parties. EPA will do the same with
any information received from the IBWC or in response to the 

Federal Register

 Notice. 


E. California Action 


EPA has been informed that the State of California has requested that California-based parent companies of maquiladoras
located along the California/Mexico border voluntarily provide Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) reports for those
facilities. The California Environmental Protection Agency has agreed to provide EPA with copies of those reports
and EPA will use those data, to the extent they can be verified, to determine possible pollutants entering the New River.



F. Additional Action 


Notwithstanding the Agency's response to this petition, EPA may decide additional action is necessary, under TSCA
or other Federal laws, to address the apparent pollution problems in the New River. EPA will make this decision by evaluating
the results of any ATSDR activities, through review of the monitoring data or any other data gathered through EPA activities,
and through review of the issues raised in a second TSCA section 21 petition on the New River that EPA received on February
23, 1994. This petition was submitted by the Environmental Health Coalition, the Comite Ciudadano Pro Restauracion
del Canon del Padre y Servicios Comunitarios, and the Southwest Network for Environmental and Economic Justice.
This new petition builds upon the Imperial County petition and requests additional actions by EPA. See Unit VIII of
this Notice for more information on this second petition. 


V. Environmental Justice 


To the greatest extent practicable and permitted by law, EPA will ensure that environmental justice concerns are
considered in any decision to take additional action under TSCA or other Federal laws, to address the apparent pollution
problems in the New River. EPA will also ensure that any action taken with respect to the New River is consistent with
the directives embodied in President Clinton's February 11, 1994 Environmental Justice Executive Order. 


VI. North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation 


The petitioner requested EPA to pursue available remedies under the NAFTA to address the issue of pollution entering
Imperial County from Mexico via the New River. The NAFTA-related approaches available to Mexico and the United States
for dealing with transboundary pollution are provided by the North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation
and the U.S.-Mexico agreement establishing the BECC and the NADBank, rather than the NAFTA itself. 
EPA and other agencies of the U.S. Government have just begun the process of implementing the North American Agreement
on Environmental Cooperation. Many provisions of the Agreement under which the U.S. Government could potentially
take action in an effort to improve the water quality of the New River as it enters the United States from Mexico are of
limited utility at the present time because they require the participation of institutions that are not yet fully
established, such as the Secretariate and the Council of Ministers acting within the North American Commission on
Environmental Cooperation. 
In addition, several of the provisions of the Agreement relating to transboundary pollution are linked to the date
on which the Agreement entered into force _ January 1, 1994. In particular, action under Articles 22 through 36 of the
Agreement relating to allegations by one Party of another Party's ``persistent pattern of non-enforcement'' of
environmental law, is limited at the present time because the term ``persistent pattern'' is defined by Article 45
of the Agreement as ``a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction beginning after the date of entry into force
of [the] Agreement.'' Therefore, it would be extremely difficult if not impossible for the U.S. Government to demonstrate
a persistent pattern of nonenforcement under the Agreement with respect to pollution of the New River in Mexico because
any allegations would be limited to events since January 1, 1994. 
Given the current limitations on action under the North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation, other
cooperative environmental agreements between the U.S. and Mexico may be more useful to address expeditiously pollution
of the New River. Accordingly, EPA, as the U.S. National Coordinator under the 1983 U.S.-Mexico Agreement of Cooperation
for the Protection and Improvement of the Environment in the Border Area (the ``La Paz Agreement''), has requested
from the Mexican Government any information that it may have relating to pollution of the New River in Mexico from chemical
substances or mixtures. A similar request has been made of the Mexican section of the IBWC by the U.S. section of the
IBWC. EPA has also determined that the La Paz Agreement, in conjunction with domestic statutes, would provide sufficient
legal authority to undertake testing of the New River for chemical and other pollutants on both sides of the border,
in cooperation with the Government of Mexico. 
However, a remedy may be available to the petitioner (as opposed to the U.S. Government acting in behalf of the petitioner)
under Article 6 of the North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation. Under that Article, the petitioner
can request Mexico to investigate possible violations of Mexico's environmental law that may be resulting in contamination
of the New River. Mexico, as the requested Party, must give such requests ``due consideration in accordance with law.''


VII. Public Record 


EPA has established a public record of those documents the Agency considered in reviewing this petition. The record
consists of documents located in the file designated by Docket Number OPPTS211035A and Administrative Record
Number 2194001, located at the TSCA Nonconfidential Information Center (NCIC). This Docket is available for inspection
from 12 noon to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, except legal holidays, in TSCA NCIC, Rm. EG102, 401 M St., SW.,
Washington, DC 20460. The public record consists of all documents in the OPPTS-211035A file and all documents cited
in the documents in that file. 


VIII. New TSCA Section 21 Petition 


On February 23, 1994, EPA received a second TSCA section 21 petition on the New River. This petition was submitted by
the Environmental Health Coalition, the Comite Ciudadano Pro Restauracion del Canon del Padre y Servicios Comunitarios,
and the Southwest Network for Environmental and Economic Justice. This second petition reasserts and incorporates
by reference the facts alleged in the Imperial County Board of Supervisors petition, particularly the introduction,
and sections III and IV. EPA will address all of the issues raised in the new petition by May 24, 1994. EPA will consider
the actions described in this petition response, as well as the need for expanded action by EPA, in the response to the
second petition. 



List of Subjects 


Environmental protection. 




Dated: March 16, 1994. 

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Lynn R. Goldman,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Administrator for Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946833 Filed 32294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>

