 

The four crustaceans in these small habitat patches are vulnerable to random fluctuations or variation (stochasticity)
due to annual weather patterns and availability of food and other environmental factors superimposed on the cumulative
threats described throughout this rule. The populations of the four species are isolated from other conspecific
populations and are distributed in discontinuous vernal pool systems. Such populations are vulnerable to stochastic
extinction. The breeding of closely related individuals may cause genetic problems in small populations of the four
species, particularly in the expression of deleterious genes (known as inbreeding depression). Individuals and
populations possessing deleterious genetic material are less able to cope with environmental conditions and adapt
to environmental changes, even relatively minor ones. Further, small populations are subject to the effects of genetic
drift (the random loss of genetic variability). The phenomenon also reduces the ability of individuals and populations
to respond successfully to environmental stresses. Overall, these genetic factors could influence the survivability
of isolated populations of each of the three fairy shrimp and the vernal pool tadpole shrimp.

The Service has carefully assessed the best scientific and commercial information regarding past, present, and
future threats faced by these species in determining to issue this final rule. Based on this evaluation, the preferred
action is to list the Conservancy fairy shrimp, longhorn fairy shrimp, and the vernal pool tadpole shrimp as endangered;
and the vernal pool fairy shrimp as threatened. The three fairy shrimp and the vernal pool tadpole shrimp are imperiled
by rapid urbanization, conversion of land to agricultural use, off-road vehicle use, and changes in hydrologic patterns
in areas they occupy. Only a small proportion of the pools are permanently protected from these threats. Numerous
ongoing and proposed development projects pose an imminent threat to the three fairy shrimp and the vernal pool tadpole
shrimp. Extraordinary increases in human populations and associated pressures from urban development have rendered
existing regulatory mechanisms inadequate. Stochastic events, which commonly affect small isolated populations,
also may result in extirpation of some populations of these species. Four of the six known populations of the Conservancy
fairy shrimp are imperiled. There are threats to the four known populations of the longhorn fairy shrimp. Twenty-eight
of the 32 known populations of the vernal pool fairy shrimp are under threat. Fourteen of the 18 known populations of
the vernal pool tadpole shrimp are imperiled. Because the Conservancy fairy shrimp, longhorn fairy shrimp, and the
vernal pool tadpole shrimp are in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of their ranges, these
species fit the definition of endangered as defined in the Act. Because the vernal pool fairy shrimp is likely to become
an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range, this species
fits the definition of threatened as defined in the Act.

The Service considers the change in the listing status from endangered to threatened of the vernal pool fairy shrimp
to be warranted based on two factors. Since the proposed rule was published, data gathered by Sugnet and Associates
(1993b) and information otherwise available to the Service indicate that the geographic extent and number of populations
and subpopulations of this species are larger than was originally known. The distribution of the species is not so
fragmented as to reduce the likelihood of recolonization. As mentioned previously in this final rule, recolonization
following stochastic local extinctions is probably a determining factor for the long-term persistence of this species.




