 





(1) 

Applicability.

 The requirements of paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(9) of this section shall apply to any person who sells, supplies,
offers for sale, or manufactures consumer products for use in California.

(2) 

Definitions.

 For the purposes of paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(9) of this section, the following definitions shall apply. All
terms not defined herein shall have the meaning given them in 52.2950.



Aerosol cooking spray

 means any aerosol product designed either to reduce sticking on cooking and baking surfaces or to be applied on food,
or both.



Aerosol product

 means a pressurized spray system that dispenses product ingredients by means of a propellant or mechanically induced
force. Aerosol Product does not include pump sprays.



Agricultural use

 means the use of any pesticide or method or device for the control of pests in connection with the commercial production,
storage or processing of any animal or plant crop. Agricultural Use does not include the sale or use of pesticides in
properly labeled packages or containers which are intended for: Home use; Use in structural pest control; or Industrial
or Institutional use. For the purposes of this definition only: Home use means use in a household or its immediate environment.
Structural pest control means a use requiring a license under Chapter 14 (commencing with Section 8500), Division
3, of the Business and Professions Code. Industrial use means use for or in a manufacturing, mining, or chemical process
or use in the operation of factories, processing plants, and similar sites. Institutional use means use within the
confines of, or on property necessary for the operation of buildings such as hospitals, schools, libraries, auditoriums,
and office complexes.



Air freshener

 means any consumer product including, but not limited to, sprays, wicks, powders, and crystals, designed for the
purpose of masking odors, or freshening, cleaning, scenting, or deodorizing the air. Air Freshener includes dual/purpose
air freshener/disinfectant products. Air Freshener does not include products that are used on the human body, or
products that function primarily as cleaning products as indicated on a product label or advertisement.



All other carbon-containing compounds

 means all other compounds which contain at least one carbon atom and are not a Table B or a LVP compound.



All other forms

 means all consumer product forms for which no form-specific VOC standard is specified. Unless specified otherwise
by the applicable VOC standard, all other forms include, but are not limited to, solids, liquids, wicks, powders,
crystals, and cloth or paper wipes (towelettes).



Architectural coating

 means a coating applied to stationary structures and their appurtenances, to mobile homes, to pavements, or to curbs.



ASTM

 means the American Society for Testing and Materials.



Automotive brake cleaner

 means a cleaning product designed to remove oil, grease, brake fluid, brake pad material or dirt from motor vehicle
brake mechanisms.



Automotive windshield washer fluid

 means any liquid designed for use in a motor vehicle windshield washer fluid system either as an anti-freeze or for
the purpose of cleaning, washing, or wetting the windshield(s). Automotive Windshield Washer Fluid does not include
any fluid which is placed in a new motor vehicle at the time the vehicle is manufactured.



Bathroom and tile cleaner

 means a product designed to clean tile or surfaces in bathrooms. Bathroom and Tile Cleaner does not include products
specifically designed to clean toilet bowls or toilet tanks.



California sales

 means the sales (net pounds of product, less packaging and container, per year) in California for either the calendar
year immediately prior to the year that the registration is due or, if that data is not available, any consecutive 12
month period commencing no earlier than 2 years prior to the due date of the registration. If direct sales data for California
is not available, sales may be estimated by prorating national or regional sales data by population.



Carburetor-choke cleaner

 means a product designed to remove dirt and other contaminants from a carburetor. Carburetor-Choke Cleaner does
not include products designed to be introduced directly into the fuel lines or fuel storage tank prior to introduction
into the carburetor.






