 

(v) Additives produced exclusively for use in 

#

1 diesel fuel shall be tested in the diesel base fuel specified in 79.55(c), even though that base fuel is formulated
with 

#

2 diesel fuel. If a manufacturer is concerned that emissions generated from this combination of fuel and additive
are subject to artifacts due to this blending, then that manufacturer may submit a request for a modification in test
procedure requirements to the EPA. Any such request must include supporting test results and suggested test modifications.

(vi) Bulk additives which are used intermittently for the direct purpose of conditioning or treating a fuel during
storage or transport, or for treating or maintaining the storage, pipeline, and/or other components of the fuel distribution
system itself and not the vehicle/engine for which the fuel is ultimately intended, shall, for purposes of this program,
be added to the base fuel at the maximum concentration recommended by the additive manufacturer for treatment of the
fuel or distribution system component. However, if the additive manufacturer believes that this treatment rate
will cause adverse effects to the test engine and/or that the engine's emissions may be subject to artifacts due to
overuse of the additive, then the manufacturer may submit a request to EPA for modification of this requirement and
related test procedures. Such request must include objective evidence that the modification(s) are needed, along
with data demonstrating the maximum concentration of the additive which may actually reach the fuel tanks of vehicles
in use.

(2) EPA shall use emissions speciation and health effects data generated in the analysis of the applicable base fuel
as control data for comparison with data generated for the additive/base fuel mixture.

(i) The base fuel control data may be:

(A) Generated internally as an experimental control in conjunction with testing done in compliance with registration
requirements for a specific additive; or

(B) Generated externally in the course of testing different additive(s) belonging to the same fuel family, or in the
testing of a base fuel serving as representative of the baseline group for the respective fuel family pursuant to 79.56(e)(4)(i).

(ii) Control data generated using test equipment (including vehicle model and/or engine, or Evaporative Emissions
Generator specifications, as appropriate) and protocols identical or nearly identical to those used in emissions
and health effects testing of the subject additive/base fuel mixture would be most relevant for comparison purposes.

(iii) If an additive manufacturer chooses the same vehicle/engine to independently test the base fuel as an experimental
control prior to testing the additive/base fuel mixture, then the test vehicle/engine shall undergo two mileage
accumulation periods, pursuant to 79.57(c). The initial mileage accumulation period shall be performed
using the base fuel alone. After base fuel testing, and prior to testing of the additive/base fuel mixture, a second
mileage accumulation period shall be performed using the additive/base fuel mixture. The procedures outlined in
this paragraph shall not preclude a manufacturer from testing a base fuel and the manufacturer's additive/base fuel
mixture separately in identical, or nearly identical, vehicles/engines.

(i) 

Multiple Test Potential for Non-Baseline Products.

 (1) When the composition information reported in the registration application or basic registration data for a gasoline
or diesel product meets criteria for classification as a non-baseline product (pursuant to 79.56(e)(3)(i)(B)
or 79.56(e)(3)(ii)(B)), then the manufacturer is responsible for testing (or participating in group testing)
of a separate formulation for each reported oxygenating compound, specified class of oxygenating compounds, or
other substance which defines a separate non-baseline fuel/additive group pursuant to 79.56(e)(4)(ii)(A)
or (B). For each such substance, testing shall be performed on a mixture of the relevant substance in the appropriate
base fuel, formulated according to the specifications for the corresponding group representatives in 79.56(e)(4)(ii).

(2) When the composition information reported in the registration application or basic registration data for a non-
baseline gasoline product contains a range of total oxygenate concentration-in-use which encompasses gasoline
formulations with less than 1.5 weight percent oxygen as well as gasoline formulations with 1.5 weight percent oxygen
or more, then the manufacturer is required to test (or participate in applicable group testing of) a baseline gasoline
formulation as well as one or more non-baseline gasoline formulations as described in paragraph (h)(1) of this section.

(3) When the composition information reported in the registration application or basic registration data for a non-
baseline diesel product contains a range of total oxygenate concentration-in-use which encompasses diesel formulations
with less than 1.0 weight percent oxygen as well as diesel formulations with 1.0 weight percent oxygen or more, then
the manufacturer is required to test (or participate in applicable group testing) of a baseline diesel formulation
as well as one or more non-baseline diesel formulations as described in paragraph (h)(1) of this section.

(j) 

Multiple Test Potential for Atypical Fuel Formulations.

 When the composition information reported in the registration application or basic registration data for a fuel
product includes more than one atypical bulk additive product (pursuant to 79.56(e)(2)(iii)), and when these
additives belong to different fuel/additive groups (pursuant to 79.56(e)(4)(iii)), then:






