 

D. Extraordinary Circumstances Exceptions Payments 
(412.348(e)) 


Currently, 412.348(e) provides that a hospital may 
request an additional payment during the capital transition 
period if the hospital incurs an unanticipated capital 
expenditure in excess of $5 million (net of insurance 
proceeds) due to extraordinary circumstances beyond the 
hospital's control. Extraordinary circumstances include but 
are not limited to a flood, fire, or earthquake. A hospital 
must apply to the HCFA regional office, for a determination 
by the HCFA Administrator, within 180 days of the 
extraordinary circumstance that caused the unexpected 
expenditures in order to qualify for exceptions payments. 
We propose to revise 412.348 to clarify our policy and 
reconcile conflicts between the regulation text and the 
language and intent of the preamble to the August 30, 1991 
final rule that implemented prospective payment system for 
capital-related costs (56 FR 43411). 
With respect to current 412.348(e)(1), we intend to 
clarify that the minimum expenditure criteria that the 
hospital must meet in order to qualify for payments is the 
net amount of proceeds expected to be recovered by the 
hospital in connection with the event from any other source 
including, but not limited to, insurance, litigation, or 
other government relief funding. In the August 30, 1991 
final rule, in response to a comment concerning the 
exceptions process, we indicated that we intended to provide 
for an additional payment when a hospital has extraordinary 
circumstances that result in unanticipated capital spending 
of at least $5 million. We then stated that in determining 
whether this threshold was met, we would take into account 
any insurance proceeds received by the hospital in 
connection with the extraordinary circumstances. However, 
we inadvertently failed to list other sources that may 
reduce the unanticipated capital-related expense to the 
hospital. Later in that response we noted that HCFA's 
decision will be contingent on a final determination of the 
associated costs for the unanticipated circumstance and we 
provided an example of how the extraordinary circumstance 
exception policy would be applied. In that example we noted 
that the hospital must provide evidence of the extent to 
which the loss will be covered by insurance proceeds or 
other sources. In the regulations text, we reflected our 
intention to establish the threshold net of insurance but 
did not include the other comparable sources, such as court 
awards for damages, or other governmental relief funds. 
The purpose of establishing this exception was to 
protect hospitals during the transition period from out-of-pocket expenditures at a level that could put severe

financial strain on them. Thus, we clearly did not intend 
to replace or supplement other payment sources that have an 
obligation to pay or provide special authorization for 
funding in these same circumstances. As a result, we intend 
to revise current 412.348(e)(1) to conform with the 
example provided in the August 30, 1991 final rule 
concerning application of the extraordinary circumstances 
exception policy and, specifically, documentation of 
evidence of the extent of net loss. 
We also propose to correct the provision in current 
412.348(e)(2) regarding the level at which the 
determination of a hospital's eligibility for an 
extraordinary circumstance exception payment is made. 
Although the determination authority was reserved to the 
HCFA Administrator, we believe that the appropriate official 
to make this decision is the Director of the Office of 
Payment Policy, Bureau of Policy Development, Health Care 
Financing Administration. This change is warranted because 
it is inappropriate that the HCFA Administrator make a 
decision that he or she may be called on to review if a 
hospital requests an administrative appeal of an adverse 
decision on its exceptions application. As the director of 
the HCFA component that determines policy on hospital 
payment in general and exceptions payment policy in 
particular, the Director of the Office of Payment Policy is 
ideally suited to make the determination on an exceptions 
request. The determination is subject to the appeal 
procedures of subpart R of 42 CFR part 405 when the provider 
receives the NPR for the cost reporting period for which the 
provider is seeking additional payments. 


E. Funding of Depreciation (413.134 and 413.153) 


Section 1861(v)(1)(A) of the Act gives the Secretary 
broad latitude to prescribe regulations concerning Medicare 
payments to providers on a reasonable cost basis. Under 
this authority, 413.134(e) provides that, although we do 
not require the funding of depreciation, we strongly 
recommend it as a means of conserving funds for the 
replacement of depreciable assets. 


1. Offset of Investment Income 


To encourage the funding of depreciation, we have 
specified at 413.134(e)(1) and 413.153(b)(2)(iii) that 
investment income earned on funded depreciation will not be 
used to reduce allowable interest expense. Further, 
413.134(e) stipulates that additions to the funded 
depreciation account must remain in the account for at least 
6 months to be considered valid funding transactions and be 
eligible for the benefits of a funded depreciation account. 





