 

Evidence submitted during the rulemaking consisted of testimony and studies which in the view of some participants
showed lung function decrement and resulting excess disease among workers exposed at low levels. For example BCTD
witness Dr. Christine Oliver described various studies and concluded: 




Pleural plaques *** were a predictor for increased mortality from lung cancer and malignant mesothelioma
in subsequent years *** pleural plaques have also been shown to be associated with decrement in lung
function *** At the very least, pleural plaques are a marker for exposure, sufficient to increase
risk for lung cancer and for malignant mesothelioma, and they have also been associated with loss of lung function
(Tr. 10356). 




Dr. Oliver recommended medical surveillance of those exposed to asbestos in their capacity as custodians in buildings.




The studies considered by Dr. Oliver consisted of one involving 120 Boston public school custodians (Tr. 1026) which
she conducted and found pleural plaques in 33% (N=40) of the group. Further she noted that in 21% (of the 40, or 12 individuals)
there was no known exposure to asbestos outside work as school custodian. In 18% of the group and 17 % of those with no
outside exposure to asbestos, she observed a restrictive pulmonary defect, significantly associated with duration
of employment as school custodian. Other studies described by Dr. Oliver, in the docket include: a study of 666 New
York school custodians, reporting only x-ray data (Ex. 47). For all groups of workers, the lung abnormality seen on
x-ray was associated with duration of work as custodian: a study of 1,117 insulation workers (likely to have had extensive
asbestos exposure) by Dr. Irving Selikoff, in which workers were followed for up to 27 years prospectively, in which
pleural plaques were found and which were concluded to be predictive of lung cancer mortality (Tr. 1036 and Ex. 124A):
a study, by Balmes (Ex. 124 DD, Tr. 1036, Ex. 1374) of approximately 900 school district employees in California
were determined as likely to have been exposed to asbestos. The authors concluded, ``More than 11 percent of workers
known to have sustained exposure to ACM in school building, without history of exposure to asbestos prior to school
district employment, and with at least 10 years of employment with the district had radiographic evidence of parenchymal
asbestosis and/or asbestos-related pleural thickening'' (Ex. 1374, p. 547). After adjusting for smoking
and age, the relative risk was 1.3 times greater for those with 10 years or more employment compared with those who had
just begun working for the school district. 

In addition to the occurrence of pleural plaques which are viewed as presenting an independent material impairment
of health due to low level asbestos exposures, Dr. Oliver cited other studies which correlated low level asbestos
exposure with mesothelioma. Thus, a study by Dr. H. Anderson (Tr. 1032 and Ex. 124 EE, Ex. 1374 using information
on mesothelioma cases from a Wisconsin Cancer Registry, analyzed 359 deaths from 1959 to 1989. Using death certificate
occupational information, the researchers hypothesized 41 as likely to have been exposed to asbestos in buildings.
For 10 (34%), no other likely source of asbestos exposure was identified. The paper concluded that ``individuals
occupationally exposed to in-place ACBM are at risk for the subsequent development of mesothelioma'' (Ex. 1374,
p. 570). 

SBA submitted a critique of these studies which they commissioned by Drs. H. Weill and J. Hughes (Ex. 122). They suggested
potential biases in these studies, that Dr. Oliver's study subjects were volunteers, the study had a low participation
rate, they had used a non-standard classification system, and did not adequately account for age in relating restriction
to lung function. These reviewers concluded that spirometric functional measurements were not related to the presence
of plaques and that reduced lung volume could result from other factors. Drs. Weill and Hughes also examined the other
studies, and argued that Dr. Selikoff's were ``fatally flawed'' due to the potential for development of unmeasured
changes during the 27 year period of follow-up, and that both the Anderson and Balmes studies failed to adequately
adjust for age, smoking and other direct asbestos exposures. Other reports cited by BCTD were dismissed because of
potential sources of bias. 


