 

B. Health and Welfare Effects of HC Emissions 


The focus of today's action is reduction of HC emission as a 
part of the solution to the ozone nonattainment problem. 
However, direct health effects are also a reason for concern due 
to direct human exposure to emissions from small SI engines 
during operation of equipment using such engines. Of specific 
concern is the emission of air toxics. In some applications, the 
operator must be adjacent to the exhaust outlet and is in the 
direct path of the exhaust as it leaves the engine. Today's 
regulations should be effective in reducing air toxics such as 
benzene and 1,3-butadiene. 
Based on data from the Nonroad Study, the exhaust and 
crankcase emissions from a 2.9 kW lawnmower with a 4-stroke 
engine contain 3.5 grams of benzene per hour. Exhaust emission 
of a 2.9 kW, 2-stroke lawnmower contains 17 grams of benzene per 
hour. A small, 2.2 kW chainsaw emits 28.2 grams of benzene per 
hour, compared to a large, 4.5 kW chainsaw that emits 40.8 grams 
per hour. 
Also, according to data from the Nonroad Study, 1,3- 
butadiene content in exhaust and crankcase emissions from a 2.9 
kW, 4-stroke lawnmower is approximately 1.5 grams per hour. For a 
2.9 kW, 2-stroke lawnmower, 1,3-butadiene content in exhaust is 
7.0 grams per hour. Butadiene emitted from a small, 2.2 kW 
chainsaw is approximately 12.2 grams per hour, and is 17.7 grams 
per hour from a large 4.5 kW chainsaw. 
Benzene is a clear, colorless aromatic hydrocarbon which is 
both volatile and flammable. Benzene is present in both exhaust 
and evaporative emissions. Health effects caused by benzene 
emissions differ based on concentration and duration of exposure. 
1,3-butadiene is a colorless, flammable gas at room 
temperature. This suspected human carcinogen is insoluble in 
water and its two conjugated double bonds make it highly 
reactive. 1,3Butadiene is formed in internal combustion engine 
exhaust by the incomplete combustion of the fuel and is assumed 
not present in evaporative and refueling emissions. 
Since air toxic levels generally decrease in proportion to 
overall emissions once emission control technology is applied, 
the amount of benzene and 1,3-butadiene produced by new small SI 
engines should diminish after this rule becomes effective. 
Consequently, exposure to air toxics from new small SI engines 
will be reduced, as will associated health effects. 
There is little data on direct health effects of small SI 
engine emissions. No study has been conducted involving the 
health effects of air toxic emissions specifically from small SI 
engines. The Agency requests additional information on this 
topic. 


C. Health and Welfare Effects of CO Emissions 


Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless, odorless gas which can 
be emitted into ambient air as a result of both natural processes 
and human activity. Although CO exists as a trace element in the 
troposphere, much of human exposure resulting in elevated levels 
of carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) in the blood is due to incomplete 
fossil fuel combustion, as occurs in small SI engines. 
The concentration and direct health effect of CO exposure 
are especially important in small SI engines because the operator 
of a small SI engine application is typically near the equipment 
as it functions. In some applications, the operator must be 
adjacent to the exhaust outlet and is in the direct path of the 
exhaust as it leaves the engine. According to numbers published 
in the Nonroad Study, a 4-stroke, 2.9 kW lawnmower engine emits 
1051.1 g/hr CO, while a 2-stroke, 2.9 kW engine emits 1188.4 g/hr 
CO. 
Although no studies measuring the human health effects of CO 
emanating from small SI engine exhaust have been conducted, ample 
research results are available concerning general health effects 
of exposure to CO. The toxicity of CO effects on blood and 
tissues, and how these effects manifest themselves as organ 
function changes have been topics of substantial research 
efforts. However, most of these involved higher, more constant 
exposure concentration levels of CO than are likely to be 
produced under normal operations of these small SI engines. Such 
studies provided information for establishing the National 
Ambient Air Quality Standard for CO. The current primary and 
secondary NAAQS for CO are 9 parts per million for the one-hour 
average and 35 parts per million for the eight-hour average. 


D. Roles of HC and NO

X

 in Ozone Formation 



Both HC and NO

X

 contribute to the formation of tropospheric 
ozone through a complex series of reactions. In general, the 
ratio between the ambient concentrations of HC and NO

X

 in a 
localized area is an indicator of the likely effectiveness of HC 
and/or NO

X

 reductions as ozone control measures. If the level of 
HC is high relative to the level of NO

X

 (that is, in a ratio of 
20 to one), ozone formation is limited by the amount of NO

X

 
present, making reduction of NO

X

 emission an effective strategy 
for reducing ozone levels. Alternatively, if the level of HC is 
low relative to the level of NO

X

 (that is, in a ratio of eight to 
one), efforts to control HC would be expected to be a more 
effective means of reducing ozone concentration. In a recent 
report, researchers emphasize that both HC and NO

X

 controls are 
needed in most areas of the United States.
<FOOTCITE>10</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
10

</FOOTNAME>
National Research Council, Rethinking the Ozone Problem in Urban and Regional Air Pollution, National Academy Press,
1991.
</FOOTNOTE>


E. Health and Welfare Effects of Tropospheric Ozone 


EPA's primary reason for controlling emissions from small 
SI engines is the role of HC in forming ozone. Of the major air 
pollutants for which NAAQS have been designated under the CAA, 
the most widespread problem continues to be ozone, which is the 
most prevalent photochemical oxidant and an important component 
of smog. Ozone is a product of the atmospheric chemical 
reactions involving oxides of nitrogen and other compounds. 
These reactions occur as atmospheric oxygen and sunlight interact 
with hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen from both mobile and 
stationary sources. 
A critical part of this problem is the formation of ozone 
both in and downwind of large urban areas. Under certain weather 
conditions, the combination of NO

X

 and HC can result in urban and 
rural areas exceeding the national ambient ozone standard by a 
factor of three. The ozone NAAQS represents the maximum level 
considered protective of public health by the EPA. 



