 


&bull;Transportation fuel (including potential alternative fuel) industry; and
&bull;Public interest groups, including environmental, safety, consumer and low income groups and those representing
the driving public.



This list of interests is illustrative, and is not meant to imply that each named interest will be represented by any
specific number of Advisory Committee members.


We invite suggestions for members of the Advisory Committee. In making a suggestion, please indicate the interest
or interests proposed to be represented. Suggestions may be in the form of groups or individuals, although names of
specific individuals are preferred. Proposed members of the Advisory Committee should be prepared to devote significant
time to the project and to engage in meaningful consultation and negotiation.


Operation of the Advisory Committee


The Advisory Committee will be expected to meet approximately eight times over a period of one year. Meetings are expected
to be two days in duration. Although most meetings will be held in Washington, DC, one to two meetings may be held in other
locations to maximize public participation. Meetings will be open to the public. To maximize the opportunities for
participation by those representing the public, the federal government may pay travel expenses, including per diem
in lieu of subsistence, of Advisory Committee members representing not-for-profit entities and state or local governments
who would not otherwise be able to participate. On-line facilities will be used to enhance the operation of the Advisory
Committee, to broaden opportunities for public participation, and to reduce costs. The Advisory Committee and steering
committee will be able to work with an interagency analytical support team led by the CEA.
The Advisory Committee will issue an interim report within six months of the date of its first meeting. This report
shall advise the President, through the steering committee, of the Advisory Committee's proceedings. The Committee
shall submit its final report to the President, through the steering committee, within on year of the date of its first
meeting, unless this period is extended by the President.


Advisory Committee Charter


Following is the charter that has been adopted for the Advisory Committee.


Charter_Advisory Committee on Personal Motor Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Reductions


1. Committee's Official Designation


Advisory Committee on Personal Motor Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Reductions (the ``Advisory Committee'' or ``Committee'').


2. Authority


Presidential Review Directive NEC1, concerning the implementation of a process to develop measures to significantly
reduce greenhouse gas emissions from personal motor vehicles.


3. Objectives and Scope of Activities


The Climate Change Action Plan directed the National Economic Council (NEC), the Office of Environmental Policy
(OEP), and the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) to co-chair a process to develop measures to significantly
reduce greenhouse gas emissions from personal motor vehicles, including cars and light trucks. This process, called
the Personal Motor Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Reduction Project, will be directed by a steering committee responsible
for making recommendations to the President at the close of the project. The steering committee will consist of representatives
of the NEC, OEP, OSTP, Department of Transportation, Department of Energy, Environmental Protection Agency, Office
of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisors. A representative of the Office of the Vice President will
participate in meetings of the steering committee. As set forth in section 4 of this Charter, the Advisory Committee
shall provide to the President, through the steering committee, advice and recommendations concerning cost-effective
groups of policies that would, if adopted, return total greenhouse gas emissions from use of personal motor vehicles
to their 1990 levels by the years 2005, 2015 and 2025 (and then stabilize or continue to reduce such emissions).





