 

FSIS also proposed that processors who apply these substances to cuts of fresh beef and lamb be required to follow an
approved PQC program as set forth in 9 CFR 318.4(d). Neither processing of such products nor distribution of such products
in commerce would be permitted until such PQC programs are approved and utilized according to the requirements set
forth in 9 CFR 318.4(e). All such PQC programs would cover certain critical control points, including: (1) The condition
of the meat before treatment (it must be fresh or previously frozen and maintained in a wholesome condition, evidenced
by time and temperature records from the point of slaughter), (2) solution formulation control, (3) single application
control, (4) finished product ingredient analysis monitoring, and (5) integrity of the packaging during storage,
transportation, and distribution. This would ensure that these substances applied to the surface of the meat cuts
to delay discoloration would not be applied in excessive amounts; therefore, the discoloration of the cuts would
occur before the onset of microbiological spoilage.
Cuts of fresh pork treated with ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, sodium ascorbate, sodium citrate, and citric acid
are currently required by 9 CFR 317.8(b)(37) to be labeled with a statement identifying these substances by their
common and usual name and the purpose for which they are used; e.g., ``Sprayed with a solution of water, ascorbic acid
and citric acid to maintain color.'' This statement is required to be shown on the label in a prominent manner, contiguous
to the product name, in letters of the same style and type and not less than one-fourth the size of the largest letter
in the product name. After reassessing its overall policy regarding prominent labeling, FSIS set forth in the proposed
rule that 9 CFR 317.8(b)(37) requiring qualifying statements on fresh pork cuts would be removed and reserved.
In addition, on November 4, 1992, the Agency published in the 

Federal Register

 a proposed rule (57 FR 52596) to eliminate those prominent disclosure requirements for product name qualifiers where
the inclusion of a substance does not significantly alter the basic identity of the finished product or where the prominently
disclosed information can be found in the ingredients statement. Such rule, in part, would eliminate product name
qualifiers on fresh pork cuts treated with ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, sodium ascorbate, sodium citrate, and
citric acid. FSIS is considering the publication of a final rule on prominent labeling which would become effective
in the near future. FSIS believes that such action would not deprive consumers of informative labeling because all
substances used in the preparation of a product are required to be listed in the ingredients statement (9 CFR 317.2(f)(1)).
However, as indicated in the proposed rule on ascorbic acid and other substances, FSIS is removing and reserving 9
CFR 318.7(b)(37). Therefore, as of the effective date of this final rule, qualifying statements, which identify
the presence of ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, sodium ascorbate, sodium citrate, and citric acid on fresh port cuts,
are no longer required on the labeling of fresh pork cuts which contain such substances.
FSIS also stated in the preamble to the proposed rule that 9 CFR 317.8(b)(6) prohibits the word ``fresh'' on labels
to designate product which has been salted for preservation. Therefore, FSIS would not allow the word ``fresh'' to
be used on the labels of products treated with ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, sodium ascorbate, sodium citrate,
and citric acid.
FSIS proposed to amend the table of approved substances in 9 CFR 318.7 by revising the current entry for the Class of
substance titled ``Miscellaneous,'' under the Substance column for ``Ascorbic, erythorbic acid, citric acid,
sodium ascorbate, and sodium citrate'' to include such use on fresh beef and lamb cuts, along with the existing use
on fresh pork cuts. In addition, FSIS proposed that the entry be revised to clarify the permitted use and levels of such
substances on fresh pork cuts. The Agency also proposed to revise the purpose of these substances from ``to maintain
color'' to ``to delay discoloration'' for clarification.


Discussion of Comments


FSIS received three comments in response to the proposed rule. The comments were submitted by a consultant and two
food manufacturers. The commenters fully supported the proposed rule.
After review of the comments and other information, the Administrator has determined that the application of ascorbic
acid, erythorbic acid, citric acid, sodium ascorbate, and sodium citrate to the surface of fresh beef and lamb cuts,
as permitted in the rule, will not render the products in which they are used adulterated or misbranded or otherwise
not in compliance with the Federal Meat Inspection Act. The Administrator has further determined that these substances
will be functional and suitable for the products and will be permitted for use on the surface of fresh beef and lamb cuts
as the lowest level necessary to accomplish the stated technical effect.


List of Subjects


9 CFR Part 317


Meat inspection, Food labeling.


9 CFR Part 318


Meat inspection, Food additives.


Final Rule


For reasons discussed in the preamble, FSIS is amending 9 CFR parts 317 and 318 of the Federal meat inspection regulations
as follows:


