 

The CMPC protein price proposal was supported at the hearing 
by other hearing participants, including National Farmers 
Organization (NFO), Kraft, Inc., Galloway Co., Wisconsin Cheese 
Makers Association (WCMA), National Cheese Institute (NCI), 
Farmers Union Milk Marketing Cooperative (FUMMC), and the Trade 
Association of Proprietary Plants (TAPP). A witness for NCI 
explained that if the protein price is set at too high a level, 
cheese manufacturers would experience a declining gross margin as 
the price for protein increases above the return the plant can 
obtain from additional protein. He explained that this would be 
the case with the protein price as proposed by NAJ, but not with 
the NCI and CMPC proposed protein price. 
Other witnesses supporting a lower protein price than that 
proposed by NAJ explained that protein should not be priced at a 
high level because the higher price may disadvantage handlers who 
do not manufacture cheese. They testified that the higher 
protein price would not be recoverable in certain products such 
as nonfat dry milk, condensed milk, or certain Class II products, 
and that even though the lower protein price still may not be 
recoverable, it offers the best alternative. 
The Galloway witness stated that if a multiple component 
pricing plan that derives a protein price from a cheese market 
value were adopted, the protein price should represent a minimum 
value, should be based on the barrel cheese market, and should 
not include a value for whey protein concentrate. He argued that 
such a price would have the impact of minimizing the difference 
between the protein and other solids prices. 
The TAPP/FUMMC witness testified that protein should be 
priced at a level somewhat below its full value in cheddar cheese 
and whey for several reasons. He said that too high a protein 
price could invite the use of non-dairy protein, whey solids, and 
casein, and thereby cause an increase in the production of 
imitation cheese. He also said that since some Class II and III 
products do not recoup as much value from high protein milk as 
cheese and cottage cheese, the protein price should be set at a 
level less than its full value for cheese. The witness expressed 
concern that too high a protein price could result in a zero 
value for the residual component, or other solids. According to 
the witness, a zero value for the residual would fail to reflect 
a realistic value, and would not cover a make allowance. 
In the post-hearing brief filed by NAJ, the position of 
using a ``justifiably high'' protein price to send a signal to 
producers that protein is the most valuable component in milk was 
reiterated. In post hearing briefs filed by CMPC, NFO, Kraft, 
NCI, TAPP and FUMMC, Anderson-Erickson (A-E), and AMPI North 
Central Region, the computation of the protein price as proposed 
by CMPC was supported. The reasons given in testimony for using 
a lower protein price than that proposed by NAJ were reiterated 
in briefs. In addition, A-E, Kraft and AMPI North Central Region 
argued that the difference between the barrel cheese price and 
the block cheese price is due to the cost of packaging and other 
nonmilk factors, and therefore the barrel cheese price should be 
used for determining the protein price. 
In pure economic terms the price of a product represents the 
supply and demand for that product as affected by place, form, 
and time. The problem with determining a price for protein 
contained in milk is that the protein is not marketed as a 
separate unique product, but is marketed as an integral part of 
both fluid and manufactured dairy products. Therefore, in 
determining an appropriate protein price, the value of protein in 
dairy products is determined by using the value of a product 
whose yield is a function of the protein content of the milk. At 
this point in time no attempt is made to reflect the protein 
content of milk in the value of milk used for fluid use. For 
this reason, the component pricing plan recommended in this 
decision does not apply to milk used for Class I purposes. 




