 



(vi) Did the employer have strategies like those known to be implemented by others like it?; and 

(vii) Did the APO at the work location increase a reasonable amount compared to other employers with similar work location
characteristics and employee populations? 

(m) 

Extensions. 

(1) Deadline extensions.

 An employer that, for reasons beyond its control, is unable to meet a deadline established in this section may petition
the Administrator for an extension of the deadline. All requests shall be submitted in writing and signed by the highest
ranking responsible officer at the site. The Administrator will strive to rule on extensions of scheduled deadlines
within 30 days from receipt of the request. Extensions may be considered for hardship circumstances or other unusual
circumstances that may make it impossible to meet the deadlines established in this section. Requests for deadline
extensions must be filed in the following manner. 

(i) A request for an extension of the deadline to register as an employer shall be submitted not less than 45 days in advance
of the deadline for registration. 

(ii) A request for extension of the deadline to submit a plan or APO survey report shall be submitted not less than 90
days in advance of the deadline. 



52.3000 

General permit requirements (Sacramento). 



(a) 

Purpose.

 This section provides an orderly procedure for the review of new sources of air pollution and the orderly review of
the modification of existing sources through the issuance of permits. 

(b) 

Definitions.

 When used in this section, 52.3001, New Source Review, and 52.3002, Emissions Reduction Credit Authorization,
the following terms have the meanings given below. 



Actual emissions

 means measured, or estimated if measurement is not possible, emissions which most accurately represent the emissions
from an emissions unit. Fugitive emissions associated with the emissions unit shall be included in the actual emissions
of the emissions unit. 



Actual emissions reductions

 means reductions of emissions from an emissions unit. Actual emission reductions shall be calculated pursuant to
paragraphs (d)(12) and (13) of 52.3001, New Source Review, and authorized pursuant to section 52.3002,
Emissions Reduction Credit Authorization, and shall meet all of the following criteria: 

(1) The emissions reductions shall be real, enforceable, quantifiable, and permanent. 

(2) The emissions reductions shall be surplus emissions reductions in excess of any emissions reduction which is:


(i) Required or encumbered by any laws, rules, regulations, agreements, or orders; or 

(ii) Attributed to a control measure noticed for workshop in the district, or proposed or contained in a State Implementation
Plan or Federal Implementation Plan; or 

(iii) Proposed or contained in the district air quality attainment plan for attaining the annual reductions required
by the Clean Air Act. 

(3) Emission reductions attributed to a proposed control measure contained in the District Air Quality Attainment
Plan (AQAP) may be re-eligible as an offset emission reduction only if such measure has been removed from the AQAP during
the next AQAP update. 

(4) Source shutdowns and curtailments may not be given emission reduction credit in the case of non-attainment pollutants,
including precursors, if the shutdown or curtailment occurred prior to the date of application unless: 

(i) The crediting of shutdown emissions complies with the most recent emission trading policy of the EPA, and

(ii) The proposed new source or modification is a replacement, and the shutdown or curtailment occurred after August
7, 1977, and 

(iii) The shutdown or curtailment was claimed by the affected facility as a credit within 180 days of the last date of
operation, or 

(iv) The district has met statutory planning mandates and air quality improvement milestones. 



Actual interruptions of electrical power

 means when electrical service is interrupted by an unforeseeable event. 



Actual operating days

 means any day of operation which results in the emission of an affected pollutant from the emissions unit. 



Administrative permit amendment

 means an amendment to an Authority to Construct which: 

(1) Corrects a typographical error; or 



