 

(4) Training records. The employer shall maintain all employee training records for one 1 year beyond the last date
of employment by that employer.
(5) Data to Rebut PACM:
(i) Where the building owner and employer have relied on data to demonstrate that PACM is not asbestos-containing,
such data shall be maintained for as long as they are relied upon to rebut the presumption.
(ii) [Reserved]
(6) Records of Required Notification.
(i) Where the building/vessel owner has communicated and received information concerning the identity, location
and quantity of ACM and PACM, written records of such notifications and their content shall be maintained by the owner
for the duration of ownership and shall be transferred to successive owners of such buildings/facilities/vessels.
(ii) [Reserved]
(7) Availability. (i) The employer, upon written request, shall make all records required to be maintained by this
section available to the Assistant Secretary and the Director for examination and copying.
(ii) The employer, upon request, shall make any exposure records required by paragraphs (f) and (n) of this section
available for examination and copying to affected employees, former employees, designated representatives, and
the Assistant Secretary, in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.20(a) through (e) and (g) through (i).
(iii) The employer, upon request, shall make employee medical records required by paragraphs (m) and (n) of this section
available for examination and copying to the subject employee, anyone having the specific written consent of the
subject employee, and the Assistant Secretary, in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.20.
(8) Transfer of records. (i) The employer shall comply with the requirements concerning transfer of records set forth
in 29 CFR 1910.20 (h).
(ii) Whenever the employer ceases to do business and there is no successor employer to receive and retain the records
for the prescribed period, the employer shall notify the Director at least 90 days prior to disposal and, upon request,
transmit them to the Director.
(o) 

Qualified person.

 (1) 

General.

 On all shipyard worksites covered by this standard, the employer shall designate a qualified person, having the qualifications
and authorities for ensuring worker safety and health required by Subpart C, General Safety and Health Provisions
for Construction (29 CFR 1926.20 through 1926.32).
(2) 

Required Inspections by the Qualified Person.

 1926.20(b)(2) which requires health and safety prevention programs to provide for frequent and regular inspections
of the job sites, materials, and equipment to be made by qualified persons, is incorporated.
(3) 

Additional Inspections.

 In addition, the qualified person shall make frequent and regular inspections of the job sites, in order to perform
the duties set out in paragraph (p)(3)(i) and (ii) of this section. For Class I jobs, on-site inspections shall be made
at least once during each work shift, and at any time at employee request. For Class II and III jobs, on-site inspections
shall be made at intervals sufficient to assess whether conditions have changed, and at any reasonable time at employee
request.
(i) On all worksites where employees are engaged in Class I or II asbestos work, the qualified person designated in
accordance with paragraph (g)(1) of this section shall perform or supervise the following duties, as applicable:
(A) Set up the regulated area, enclosure, or other containment;
(B) Ensure (by on-site inspection) the integrity of the enclosure or containment;
(C) Set up procedures to control entry to and exit from the enclosure and/or area;
(D) Supervise all employee exposure monitoring required by this section and ensure that it is conducted as required
by paragraph (f) of this section;
(E) Ensure that employees working within the enclosure and/or using glove bags wear protective clothing and respirators
as required by paragraphs (h) and (i) of this section;
(F) Ensure through on-site supervision, that employees set up and remove engineering controls, use work practices
and personal protective equipment in compliance with all requirements;
(G) Ensure that employees use the hygiene facilities and observe the decontamination procedures specified in paragraph
(j) of this section;
(H) Ensure that though on-site inspection engineering controls are functioning properly and employees are using
proper work practices; and
(I) Ensure that notification requirements in paragraph (f)(6) of this section are met.
(4) Training for the competent person;
(i) For Class I and II asbestos work the qualified person shall be trained in all aspects of asbestos removal and handling,
including: abatement, installation, removal and handling; the contents of this standard; the identification of
asbestos; removal procedures, where appropriate; and other practices for reducing the hazard. Such training shall
be obtained in a comprehensive course for supervisors, such as a course conducted by an EPA or state-approved training
provider, certified by the EPA or a state, or an course equivalent in stringency, content, and length.


