 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>Drug Enforcement Administration</DOCTITLE>




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 943]</RINDOCK>



The Medicine Shoppe Denial of Application



On September 16, 1993, the Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of Diversion Control, Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA), issued an Order to Show Cause to The Medicine Shoppe (Respondent), of Newnan, Georgia, proposing to deny its
application for a DEA Certificate of Registration as a retail pharmacy. The Order to Show Cause alleged that Respondent's
registration would be inconsistent with the public interest as that term is used in 21 U.S.C. 823(f). Specifically,
the Order to Show Cause alleged that: Vincent Ehule (Mr. Ehule) was the majority stockholder and president of Respondent's
predecessor pharmacy, Real Vitality, Inc., d/b/a All In One Stop Pharmacy (All In One Stop Pharmacy); Yvonne Ehule,
Mr. Ehule's wife was the minority stockholder of All In One Stop Pharmacy; in 1992, DEA commenced an investigation
of All In One Stop Pharmacy, including an audit for the period September 1990 to September 1992, which revealed substantial
shortages of Schedule III and IV controlled substances; the investigation also revealed that Mr. Ehule had no initial
inventory and that he dispensed large quantities of controlled substances pursuant to prescriptions which he knew,
or should have known, were fraudulent; by letter dated November 11, 1992, Mr. Ehule notified DEA that All In One Stop
Pharmacy changed its location to 97 Temple Avenue, Newnan, Georgia, and was renamed The Medicine Shoppe (Respondent);
in this same letter Mr. Ehule requested a transfer of his registration under the same corporate ownership, i.e. Real
Vitality, Inc.; in response to this letter, DEA indicated that it would initiate proceedings to deny the modification
and revoke All In One Stop Pharmacy's DEA registration; and subsequently DEA received an application for registration
from Yvonne Ehule on behalf of Respondent, dated July 30, 1993.

The Order to Show Cause was sent to Respondent by registered mail. Respondent timely requested a hearing. After the
Government filed its Prehearing Statement, Respondent waived the hearing but requested that Respondent's statements
in its request for a hearing be considered in rendering a final decision regarding its application for a new registration.
Based upon 1301.54(c), Respondent is deemed to have waived its opportunity for a hearing. Accordingly, the Deputy
Administrator now enters his final order in this matter without a hearing and based upon the investigative file and
the material submitted in Respondent's request for hearing. 21 CFR 1301.57.

Respondent's predecessor, Real Vitality, Inc., d/b/a All In One Stop Pharmacy, possessed DEA Certificate of Registration,
BR2400339. In May of 1992, an investigation of All In One Stop Pharmacy commenced when DEA investigators obtained
information from informants that Mr. Ehule, the majority owner and the head pharmacist of All In One Stop Pharmacy,
dispensed controlled substances to customers without a valid prescription and that Mr. Ehule dispensed controlled
substances in excess of what was legitimately prescribed. As a result, DEA investigators executed an administrative
inspection warrant at All In One Stop Pharmacy on September 18, 1992. The inspection revealed that All In One Stop Pharmacy
had no initial or biennial controlled substance inventories.

In addition, a review of the controlled substance prescriptions at All In One Stop Pharmacy revealed that 12 prescriptions
were not dated; 11 had no patient address indicated; 15 had no practitioner's signature; 88 failed to record the practitioner's
address; 37 did not have DEA registrations numbers; 78 Schedule III and IV controlled substance prescriptions were
interspersed among non-controlled prescriptions and were not stamped with letter ``C''; 19 original prescriptions
did indicate the date of dispensing; 6 refills were also not dated dispensed; 66 prescriptions had no initials of the
dispensing pharmacist; 137 refills were not initialed by the dispensing pharmacist; one prescription for a Schedule
III controlled substance had an annotation that it had been refilled eleven times and four of those refills were for
100 dosage units more than authorized by the original prescription; and three other prescriptions were filled more
than five times within a six month period.

An accountability audit of All In One Stop Pharmacy's controlled substances for the period of August 27, 1990 through
September 18, 1992, was conducted. The audit revealed shortages of controlled substances including approximately:
6,500 dosage units of Schedule II controlled substances; 2,450 dosage units of Schedule IV controlled substances;
and 27 ounces of Schedule III liquid form controlled substances.

During the inspection, Mr. Ehule explained to the investigators that controlled substance invoices were interspersed
with non-controlled substance purchases and that he did not believe he had all the controlled substance invoices
for the last two years. The DEA investigators had to assume a zero beginning inventory because Mr. Ehule did not have
a current biennial inventory. In light of the zero beginning inventory and the fact that All In One Stop Pharmacy did
not have records of all purchases of controlled substances during the audit period, the shortages, in all likelihood,
were understated.

After conducting the audit, DEA investigators interviewed over 30 practitioners whose names appeared on the 172
prescriptions removed from All In One Stop Pharmacy during the administrative inspection. Based upon these interviews,
the investigators found that only 55 of these controlled substance prescriptions were authorized. Many prescriptions
had been refilled without any authorization and had been refilled in excess of what was authorized. In some cases the
prescriptions were filled with a higher strength of the controlled substance than originally prescribed. Other
prescriptions were filled with completely different controlled substances than what were authorized on the prescriptions.


