 

Because the promulgation of specific abuse factors in the proposed regulations related largely to the disclosure
requirement, the final regulations do not retain the specific abuse factors. The elimination of the abuse factors
also addresses commentators' concerns that these factors could have been viewed as creating a presumption that an
option to which a factor applied was issued or transferred for an abusive principal purpose. 

Instead of providing specific abuse factors that are evidence of an abusive principal purpose, the final regulations
merely identify a series of factors that exemplify circumstances that may be probative under the ownership, control,
and income tests. The weight given to these factors depends on the facts and circumstances. The presence or absence
of any of these factors does not create a presumption. 

Among the factors that are relevant in applying all three tests are any business purposes for the issuance, transfer,
or structure of an option, the likelihood of exercise of the option (taking into account, for example, any contingencies
to its exercise), transactions related to the issuance or transfer of the option, and the consequences of treating
the option as exercised. An option is not treated as exercised under any of the tests, however, if a principal purpose
of its issuance, transfer, or structuring is to avoid an ownership change by having it treated as exercised. 

The final regulations also provide examples of additional factors that are taken into account in applying each of
the separate tests. Among the additional factors that are taken into account in applying the ownership test are the
relationship between the exercise price of the option and the value of the underlying stock at the time of the issuance
or transfer of the option, whether the option provides its holder with the right to participate in the management of
the loss corporation or with other rights that ordinarily would be afforded to owners of the underlying stock, and
the existence of reciprocal put and call options. The ability of the holder of an option with a fixed exercise price
to share in future appreciation of the underlying stock is also a relevant factor, but is not sufficient, by itself,
for the option to be treated as exercised. Conversely, the fact that the holder of such an option does not bear the risk
of loss due to declines in value of the underlying stock does not preclude the option from satisfying the ownership
test. 

Among the additional factors that are taken into account in applying the control test are the economic interests in
the loss corporation of the option holder or related persons and the influence of those persons over the management
of the loss corporation. 

Among the additional factors that are taken into account in applying the income test are whether, in connection with
the issuance or transfer of the option, the loss corporation engages in income acceleration transactions or the holder
of the option or a related person purchases stock from, or makes a capital contribution or loan to, the loss corporation
that can reasonably be expected to avoid or ameliorate the impact of an ownership change. Examples of income acceleration
transactions are those outside the ordinary course of the loss corporation's business that accelerate income or
gain into the period prior to the exercise of the option or defer deductions to the period after the exercise of the option.


Commentators on the proposed regulations asked for clarification of the definition of ``capital contribution''
and guidance on the relevance of capital contributions in determining whether an option is treated as exercised.
The final regulations address these comments in two respects. First, as noted above, the final regulations eliminate
the abuse factors of the proposed regulations, including the factor related to capital contributions. Therefore,
although a capital contribution or similar transaction made in connection with the issuance or transfer of an option
is relevant in applying the income test, it cannot be viewed as giving rise to a presumption that the option satisfies
the test. In addition, the final regulations provide further guidance regarding the relevance of a capital contribution
or similar transaction. The final regulations provide that a capital contribution or similar transaction is more
probative toward an option satisfying the income test the larger the amount received by the loss corporation in the
transaction or related transactions. Further, such a transaction is generally not taken into account in applying
the income test if it is made to enable the loss corporation to continue the basic operations of its business for such
purposes as meeting the monthly payroll or funding other operating expenses. 


