 




<DOCTITLE>National Cancer Institute; Opportunity for a Cooperative Research Agreement (CRADA) for the Scientific and Commercial
Development of Monoclonal Antibodies to a Tumor-Specific Growth Factor for the Diagnosis and Prognosis of Premalignant
Lesions and Cancer</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 National Institutes of Health, PHS, DHHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The National Cancer Institute (NCI) seeks a pharmaceutical or biotechnology company that can effectively pursue
the scientific and commercial generation and development of a panel of monoclonal antibodies against an epidermal
growth factor (EGF)-related peptide, cripto-1 (CR1). The project is of scientific importance because CR1
is a protein that exhibits structural homology to the EGF/transforming growth factor 




 (TGF




) gene family peptides. As such, CR1 might function as a growth factor or growth inhibitor. Therefore, CR1
may be important as an autocrine or paracrine modulator in such processes as tumor cell growth, wound repair, neovascularization,
and inflammation.



NCI has successfully isolated and cloned the gene that encodes CR1, an EGF-related peptide growth factor that
does not function through the EGF receptor. The NCI has also obtained a rabbit anti-peptide polyclonal antibody that
can detect the expression of CR1 in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded human tissue sections. CR1
has been shown to be preferentially and differentially expressed in several different human premalignant lesions
and cancers. The selected sponsor will purify a recombinant CR1 protein and use this material as an immunogen
to generate anti-CR1 monoclonal antibodies for use in the diagnosis and prognosis of human cancers.



</SUMMARY>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Inquiries and proposals regarding this opportunity should be addressed to either Michael Christini or Mark Noel
(Tel

#

 3014960477 Fax

#

 3014022117), Office of Technology Development, National Cancer Institute, Bldg. 31, Room 4A49, NIH,
9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892.



</ADDRESS>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Proposals must be received at the above address by 5 P.M. September 9, 1994.



</DATE>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The NCI is seeking a pharmaceutical or biotechnology company which, after obtaining a license in accordance with
the requirements of the regulations governing the transfer of Government-developed agents (37 CFR part 404), can
purify a recombinant CR1 protein for which patents are pending or have been issued and to utilize this purified
recombinant CR1 protein as an immunogen to generate a panel of mouse monoclonal antibodies. The immunoreactive
CR1 protein has been detected by immunoperoxidase staining using a rabbit anti-peptide polyclonal CR1
antibody in a majority of human colon cancers, breast cancers, gastric cancers and pancreatic cancers. Little or
no staining was detected in surrounding, noninvolved colon, breast or gastric epithelial cells. In addition, a majority
of premalignant colonic adenomas, breast ductal carcinomas 

in situ

 and gastric intestinal metaplasia express immunoreactive CR1.



A recombinant CR1 protein has been generated using a yeast expression vector in 

Pichia pastoris

 and a partially purified protein obtained. This protein as well as synthetic, refolded peptides that correspond
to the EGF-like domain in CR1 are mitogenic for human breast cancer cells yet fail to bind to the EGF receptor
or other type I receptor tyrosine kinases. Expression of CR1 antisense mRNA using a recombinant, replication
defective retroviral expression vector in colon cancer cells that expresses CR1 inhibits the growth of these
cells 

in vivo

 in nude mice. In order to utilize the diagnostic and therapeutic potentials of CR1, it will be necessary to purify
a significant amount of the recombinant CR1 protein to more fully define its biological properties and to identify
the receptor through which it functions. In addition, mouse monoclonal antibodies against the purified CR1
recombinant protein will expedite screening studies for CR1 expression in other human premalignant lesions
and cancers and should exhibit more specificity and sensitivity for the detection of CR1 in tissues by immunocytochemistry
(ICC) or in tissue extracts or serum samples by ELISA.

The role of the National Cancer Institute, the Division of Cancer Biology, Diagnosis and Centers includes:

1. NCI will provide expression vectors that encode CR1 and can be used to produce CR1 in 

E. coli.

2. NCI will provide expression vectors that encode CR1 in yeast Pichia pastoris 

containing several milligrams of recombinant CR1 protein.

3. NCI will provide a rabbit polyclonal anti-CR1 antibody for monitoring CR1 recovery during the purification
from the yeast conditioned medium.

4. NCI will assay the purified recombinant CR1 protein for bioactivity.

5. NCI will screen anti-CR1 monoclonal antibodies for reactivity by Western blot analysis against native
CR1 protein from CR1 positive human embryonal carcinoma or colon carcinoma cells.

The role of the successful corporate partner will include:

1. Obtain background license in appropriate fields of use to the relevant Government patent rights.

2. Purify to homogeneity 3050 milligrams of CR1 from 

Pichia pastoris 

conditioned medium.

3. Provide the purified recombinant CR1 protein.

4. Utilize the purified recombinant CR1 protein to generate mouse anti-CR1 monoclonal antibodies.

5. Screen anti-CR1 monoclonal antibodies for specificity, reactivity, and sensitivity towards recombinant
CR1 protein.

6. Ascertain whether monoclonal anti-CR1 antibodies can detect native CR1 protein in CR1 positive
human colorectal or embryonal carcinoma cells by radioimmunoprecipitation analysis and by ELISA.

7. Determine whether anti-CR1 antibodies can be used for ICC on formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissues
known for CR1 expression.

8. Provide funds to support a postdoctoral fellow and associated expenses.

Criteria for choosing the collaborating company will include:

1. Ability to obtain background license to relevant patent rights.

2. Experience in producing and purifying recombinant proteins, particularly growth factors or cytokines.

3. Experience in generating and screening monoclonal antibodies.

4. Willingness to cooperate with the NCI in the collection and evaluation of data.

5. Willingness to cost share in laboratory studies.

6. An agreement to be bound by the DHHS rules involving the use of human and animal subjects, and human tissue.

7. Provisions for equitable distribution of patent rights to any inventions. Generally the rights of ownership are
retained by the organization which is the employer of the free license to the Government (when a company employee is
the sole inventor) or (2) an exclusive or nonexclusive license to the company on terms that are appropriate (when the
Government employee is the sole inventor).




Dated: August 8, 1994.


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Barbara M. McGarey,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Director, Office of Technology Transfer.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9419943 Filed 81594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 414001P
</BILLING>


