 

Mr. Robert Laffel, Eugene District Manager, 86000 Franklin Blvd., Eugene, Oregon 97405, (503) 4656952. 
Ms. Carol S. Fleischman, Spokane District Manager, Crescent Court, suite 500, 707 Main, Spokane, Washington 99201,
(509) 3533279. 




<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The Administrative Record, available for public review, contains background on BPA's Billing Credits Policy and
a Record of Decision for the Wauna Cogeneration Project and environmental considerations. 


I. Background 


BPA is a self-financing power marketing agency with the United States Department of Energy. BPA was established by
the Bonneville Project Act of 1937, 16 U.S.C. 832 

et seq

., to market wholesale power from Bonneville Dam and to construct power lines for the transmission of this power to
load centers in the Northwest. BPA sells wholesale electric power and energy to 126 utilities, 13 direct service industrial
customers and several government agencies. 
The Pacific Northwest Electric Power Planning and Conservation Act (Northwest Power Act) directs BPA to serve the
net power requirements of any electric utility requesting service, and to serve existing DSIs in the Pacific Northwest.
16 U.S.C. 839c(b)(1) and (d). Although BPA cannot own or construct electric generating facilities, the Northwest
Power Act directs BPA to acquire rights to the output or capability of electric power resources to serve increased
customer requirements. See 16 U.S.C. 839d(h). Billing Credits may be adjustments to customers' power bills or equivalent
cash payments. Resources eligible for Billing Credits include conservation and generation. 
Specific requirements for resources and the amount BPA can pay for these resources are outlined in the Northwest Power
Act and BPA's Billing Credits Policy. 
BPA's Billing Credits Policy interprets the Billing Credits provisions in the Northwest Power Act, prescribes criteria
for customer and resource eligibility, and establishes procedures for granting Billing Credits. 


II. Description of the Generation Proposal 


BPA proposes to issue the Billing Credits as a method to facilitate Project construction pending the issuance of a
ruling by the Internal Revenue Service under section 9(f) of the Northwest Power Act relating to the portion of the
Project's output that will be furnished to nongovernmental persons and the extent to which the private business use
test of section 141(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, will be met. Upon issuance of a ruling favorable
to EWEB, the Billing Credits will terminate in favor of a negotiated Power Purchase Agreement with similar terms and
conditions for all parties. 
This project meets the qualifications for Billing Credits, and BPA has completed its obligations under the National
Environmental Policy Act. EWEB will comply with all applicable environmental requirements in the construction
of the project and during the operation phase. 


III. Methodology for Determining Generation Billing Credits 


The payment for Billing Credits for EWEB will be calculated and paid monthly as follows: 
EWEB is a Computed Requirements Customer under its Power Sales Contract with BPA, the monthly Billing Credits will
be the lesser of the Adjusted Alternative Cost or Net Cost multiplied by the monthly amounts of Assured Energy Capability
of the Billing Credits Resource, less the amount of Priority Firm Rate dollars EWEB avoids paying as a result of the
Billing Credits Resource. There is no annual true-up because EWEB is required to maintain the Assured Energy Capability
for the Billing Credits Resource, as it must do for all its firm resources under the Power Sales Contract. 


IV. Materials Available 


Copies of the Billing Credits Policy and the Administrative Record are available from BPA's Public Involvement Office.
Refer to the ``For Further Information Contact'' section of this notice. 



Issued in Portland, Oregon, on March 24, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Randall W. Hardy,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrator. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948361 Filed 4694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 645001P
</BILLING>


