 

&bull;

Option for Minority or Woman-Owned Applicants

. If the control group (considering entirely of women and/or minorities) owns at least 50.1 percent of the equity and,
for corporations, at least 50.1 percent of the voting stock, then the gross revenues, total assets and personal net
worth of any other investor are not considered unless the investor holds more than 49.9 percent of the applicant's
passive equity (which, for corporations, includes as much as 5 percent of the voting stock).

&bull;

Affiliates. 

The gross revenues, assets and personal net worth of outside interests held by the applicant (and the attributable
investors in the applicant) are counted toward the financial caps if the applicant (or the attributable investors
in the applicant) control or have power to control the outside interests or if the applicant (or the attributable investors
in the applicant) is under the control of the outside interests. The financial interests of spouses are also attributed
to each other.



2. Definition of Women and/or Minority-Owned Business



116. The points below summarize the two structural options available to firms that wish to qualify for the special
provisions adopted for businesses owned by minorities and women. These options will be discussed in more detail in
the text that follows.



50.1% Equity Option



If women and/or minority principals control the applicant and own at least:

&bull;50.1 percent of the equity

&bull;and 50.1 percent of the voting stock, in the case of corporations

&bull;Then any other investor may hold:

&bull;not more than 49.9 percent of the passive equity (which, for corporations, includes as much as 5 percent of the
voting stock).



25% Equity Option



If women and/or minority principals control the applicant and own at least:

&bull;25 percent of the equity

&bull;and 50.1 percent of the voting stock, in the case of corporations

&bull;Then any other investor may hold:

&bull;less than 25 percent of the passive equity (for corporations, any other investor also may hold not more than
5 percent of the voting stock).

117. We also have imposed numerous strict requirements to deter shams and fronts and to prevent abuse of the incentives
for designated entities. The Commission intends to enforce vigorously each of these requirements. All licensees
in the entrepreneurs' blocks are prohibited from voluntarily assigning or transferring their licenses for three
years after grant of the application and for the next two years may assign or transfer licenses only to other entities
that satisfy the financial criteria to bid in the entrepreneurs' blocks. Furthermore, a business that seeks to acquire
a license from an entity paying in installments during the license period will be required, as a condition of the grant,
to pay according to the installment payment terms for which it qualifies, unless they are more favorable in which case
the existing terms apply. If the purchaser is not qualified for any installment payment plan, we will require payment
of the unpaid balance in full before the sale will be approved. We also adopt rules to ensure that the value of the bidding
credit is returned to the government in the event of a transfer of control or assignment of the license to an entity not
qualifying for bidding credits or not qualifying for as high a bidding credit as the seller. In addition, we impose
a one-year holding period on licenses received through the benefit of a tax certificate. We will also random audits
to ensure that designated entities 

de facto

 and 

de jure

 control. These steps and our eligibility and affiliation rules will help to ensure that the measures we adopt are utilized
only by 

bona fide

 eligible entities and to deter winning bidders seeking only to make a quick profit on the sale of PCS licenses. Ultimately,
we believe that we will best fulfill our statutory mandate by creating powerful incentives for 

bona fide

 designated entities to attract the capital necessary to compete both in auctions for broadband PCS and in the provision
of service, and be requiring a strict holding period to ensure that the public receives the benefit of this diverse
ownership.



