 



Response:

 We base our revisions to the medically needy budget period on section 1102 of the Act, which gives the Secretary general
authority to adopt rules necessary for the efficient operation of the Medicaid program, and section 1902(a)(17)
of the Act, which authorizes us to prescribe standards for determining eligibility for Medicaid consistent with
the objectives of the program and is also the authority for the medically needy spenddown program. We also base our
revisions on section 1902(a)(34) of the Act, which mandates and describes the 3-month retroactive period for an individual
who was (or upon application would have been) eligible for such medical assistance at the time care and service were
furnished in the retroactive period. If a State uses a 6-month budget period, when it looks at the eligibility of an
individual had he or she applied at a particular time, it would look at 6 months' worth of income. The regulation permits
States to view section 1902(a)(34) of the Act in this manner, rather than considering the retroactive period as a special
and discrete period. 



Comment:

 Some commenters opposed this provision because, in their view, combining the retroactive and prospective eligibility
periods violates comparability requirements between the medically needy and categorically needy in section 1902(a)(17)
of the Act, since the combined eligibility period affects only the medically needy. 



Response:

 We disagree with the commenters' views. We believe that comparability requirements are not violated because the
Act contains different requirements for categorically and medically needy groups. This position was upheld by the
Supreme Court in the 

Atkins 

v. 

Rivera 

decision (477 U.S. 154 (1986)). The Court found that the length of the medically needy budget period (or spenddown
period) was not required by comparability to be the same as the budget period used for the categorically needy.


Comment: 

Some commenters argued that combining the retroactive period with the prospective period results in a potentially
longer budget period, which means that individuals must incur medical expenses over a longer period of time. Few providers
are willing to extend credit over, for example, a 6-month period. 



Response:

 The proposed combined budget period can be no longer than the prospective period allowed under the existing requirements
specified in 435.831 and 436.831. Presently, the prospective period may be no more than 6 months in length.
The proposal, depending on State choices, may result in a combined budget period of 2 to 6 months. Thus, the combined
budget period can be no longer than the maximum (6 month) period permitted under existing regulations. 



Comment:

 Several commenters asked how States would apply this provision when a prospective budget period would not apply.
For instance, if an individual dies after filing an application for Medicaid, and has unpaid medical bills in the 3-month
period before the application was filed, there is no prospective period. 



Response:

 When there is no prospective period because the individual dies before the prospective period could begin, eligibility
would be determined for the three month retroactive period only. This is consistent with our policy for terminating
a wholly prospective budget period when a recipient dies. In cases where an individual dies after the prospective
period has begun and the State has elected to combine the retroactive and prospective period, the combined period
would terminate with the death of the recipient. In still other cases where the individual, though alive, seeks eligibility
only for the retroactive period in a State that has elected to combine the retroactive and prospective period, the
combined period would still be used to determine eligibility. States, under policies of general applicability,
may treat the entire retroactive period as one budget period or divide the retroactive period into monthly budget
periods. Any portion of the retroactive period may be added to the first prospective period for a combined period not
to exceed 6 months.

