 

(ii) The Department reserves the right at any time to review and make determinations regarding the accuracy of the
identification of the project as an elderly project. The Department can make such determinations as a result of ongoing
monitoring activities, or the conduct of complaint investigations under the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 through
3619), or compliance reviews and complaint investigations under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29
U.S.C. 794) and other applicable statutes. 

(b) 

Determining projects eligible for preference for occupancy by elderly families.

 (1) 

Evidence supporting project eligibility.

 Evidence that a project assisted under this part (or portion of a project) was originally designed primarily for occupancy
by elderly families, and is therefore eligible for the election of occupancy preference provided by this section,
shall consist of at least one item from the sources (``primary'' sources) listed in paragraph (b)(1)(i), or at least
two items from the sources (``secondary'' sources) listed in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section: 

(i) 

Primary sources.

 Identification of the project (or portion of a project) as serving elderly (seniors) families in at least one primary
source such as: the application in response to the notice of funding availability; the terms of the notice of funding
availability under which the application was solicited; the regulatory agreement; the loan commitment; the bid
invitation; the owner's management plan, or any underwriting or financial document collected at or before loan closing;


or

 

(ii) 

Secondary sources.

 Two or more sources of evidence such as: lease records from the earliest two years of occupancy for which records are
available showing that occupancy has been restricted primarily to households where the head, spouse or sole member
is 62 years of age or older; evidence that services for elderly persons have been provided, such as services funded
by the Older Americans Act, transportation to senior citizen centers, or programs coordinated with the Area Agency
on Aging; project unit mix with more than fifty percent of efficiency and one-bedroom units [a secondary source particularly
relevant to distinguishing elderly projects under the previous section 3(b) definition (in which disabled families
were included in the definition of ``elderly families'') from non-elderly projects and which in combination with
other factors (such as the number of accessible units) may be useful in distinguishing projects for seniors from those
serving the broader definition of ``elderly families'' which includes disabled families]; or any other relevant
type of historical data, unless clearly contradicted by other comparable evidence. 

(2) 

Sources in conflict.

 If a primary source establishes a design contrary to that established by the primary source upon which the owner would
base support that the project is an eligible project (as defined in this section), the owner cannot make the election
of preferences for elderly families as provided by this section based upon primary sources alone. In any case where
primary sources do not provide 

clear evidence 

of original design of the project for occupancy primarily by elderly families, including those cases where primary
sources conflict, secondary sources may be used to establish the use for which the project was originally designed.


(c) 

Reservation of units in elderly projects for non-elderly disabled families.

 The owner of an elderly project is required to reserve, at a minimum, the number of units specified in paragraph (c)(1)
of this section for occupancy by non-elderly disabled families. 

(1) 

Minimum number of units to be reserved for non-elderly disabled families.

 The number of units in an elderly project required to be reserved for occupancy by non-elderly disabled families,
shall be, at a minimum, the lesser of: 

(i) The number of units equivalent to the higher of_ 

(A) The percentage of units assisted under this part in the elderly project that were occupied by non-elderly disabled
families on October 28, 1992; and 

(B) The percentage of units assisted under this part in the elderly project that were occupied by non-elderly disabled
families upon January 1, 1992; 

or

 

(ii) 10 percent of the number of units assisted under this part in the eligible project. 

(2) 

Option to reserve greater number of units for non-elderly disabled families.

 The owner, at the owner's option, and at any time, may reserve a greater number of units for non-elderly disabled families
than that provided for in paragraph (c)(1) of this section. The option to provide a greater number of units to non-elderly
disabled families will not obligate the owner to always provide that greater number to non-elderly disabled families.
The number of units required to be provided to non-elderly disabled families at any time in an elderly project is that
number determined under paragraph (c)(1) of this section. 

(d) 

Secondary preferences.

 An owner of an elderly project also may elect to establish secondary preferences in accordance with the provisions
of this paragraph (d) of this section. 
(1) 

Preference for near-elderly disabled families in units reserved for elderly families. 

If the owner of an elderly project determines, in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section, that there are an insufficient
number of elderly families who have applied for occupancy to fill all the vacant units in the elderly project reserved
for elderly families (that is, all units except those reserved for the non-elderly disabled families as provided
in paragraph (c) of this section), the owner may give preference for occupancy of such units to disabled families who
are near-elderly families. 

(2) 

Preference for near-elderly disabled families in units reserved for non-elderly disabled families.

 If the owner of an elderly project determines, in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section, that there are an insufficient
number of non-elderly disabled families to fill all the vacant units in the elderly project reserved for non-elderly
disabled families as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the owner may give preference for occupancy of these
units to disabled families who are near-elderly families. 




