 

Certain specified recombinant DNA molecules that ``consist entirely of DNA 
segments from different species that exchange DNA by known physiological 
processes, though one or more of the segments may be a synthetic equivalent are exempt from these NIH Guidelines (see
Section IIIE5). Institutional Biosafety Committee registration is not required for these exempt
experiments. A list of such exchangers will be prepared and periodically revised by the NIH Director with advice from
the RAC after appropriate notice and opportunity for public comment (see Section IVC1b(1)(c)).
See Appendices AI through AVI for a list of natural exchangers that are exempt from the NIH Guidelines.''
Section IIIE5 describes recombinant DNA molecules that are: (1) composed entirely of DNA segments
from one or more of the organisms within a sublist, and (2) to be propagated in any of the organisms within a sublist (see
Classification of Bergey's Manual of Determinative Bacteriology; 8th edition, R. E. Buchanan and N. E. Gibbons,
editors, Williams and Wilkins Company; Baltimore, Maryland 1984). Although these experiments are exempt, it is
recommended that they be performed at the appropriate biosafety level for the host or recombinant organism (see Biosafety
in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, 3rd edition, May 1993, U.S. DHHS, Public Health Service, Centers
for Disease Control, Atlanta, Georgia, and NIH Office of Biosafety, Bethesda, Maryland). 



Appendix AI. Sublist A 


Genus 

Escherichia 
Genus Shigella 
Genus Salmonella

_including Arizona 
Genus 

Enterobacter 
Genus Citrobacter

_including 

Levinea 
Genus Klebsiella_

including 

oxytoca 
Genus Erwinia 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas putida, Pseudomonas fluorescens, and Pseudomonas mendocina 
Serratia marcescens 
Yersinia enterocolitica 



Appendix AII. Sublist B 


Bacillus subtilis 
Bacillus licheniformis 
Bacillus pumilus 
Bacillus globigii 
Bacillus niger 
Bacillus nato 
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 
Bacillus aterrimus 



Appendix AIII. Sublist C 



Streptomyces aureofaciens 
Streptomyces rimosus 
Streptomyces coelicolor 



Appendix AIV. Sublist D 


Streptomyces griseus 
Streptomyces cyaneus 
Streptomyces venezuelae 



Appendix AV. Sublist E 



One way transfer of Streptococcus mutans 

or 

Streptococcus lactis 

DNA into 

Streptococcus sanguis 



Appendix AVI. Sublist F 



Streptococcus sanguis 
Streptococcus pneumoniae 
Streptococcus faecalis 
Streptococcus pyogenes 
Streptococcus mutans 



Appendix B. Classification of Etiologic Agents and Oncogenic 
Viruses on the Basis of Hazard (See Appendix BVIA). 


Appendix BI. Class 1 Agents 



All bacterial, parasitic, fungal, viral, rickettsial, and chlamydial agents not included in higher classes shall
be considered Class 1 agents. 



Appendix BII. Class 2 Agents 

Appendix BIIA. Class 2 Bacterial Agents 



Acinetobacter calcoaceticus 
Actinobacillus_

all species 


Aeromonas hydrophila 



