 

6. Critical Control Points 


Consistent with the HACCP principles identified by NACMCF, 
FDA is proposing to require in 123.6(b)(2) that critical 
control points be identified for each of the hazards that the 
processor or importer has identified. Hazards may be caused by 
improper processing or by events outside the processor's or 
importer's direct control. To control the latter type of hazard, 
that is, environmental hazards and hazards that may be caused by 
poor handling prior to receipt of fish or fishery products by the 
processor or importer, the point of receipt by the processor or 
importer represents a critical control point. As indicated 
previously in this preamble, the processor or importer may need 
to ensure that it obtains imported shipments or raw materials 
only from harvesters, transporters, and others who can 
demonstrate that they also have exercised appropriate controls. 
The hazards that may be caused by both improper processing and 
events outside the plant are controlled by the critical limits, 
monitoring, control procedures, and recordkeeping that are done 
as part of HACCP. 


7. Critical Limits 


In 123.6(b)(3), consistent with NACMCF principles, FDA is 
proposing that processors and importers identify critical limits 
in the plan that must be met at each critical control point. 
Critical limits must be met to ensure that the relevant hazard is 
avoided. Thus, some critical limits can be set to reflect 
regulatory levels established by FDA in the form of action 
levels, regulatory limits, and tolerances for such contaminants 
as pesticides, histamine, and other contaminants. FDA intends to 
compile all such levels in the guidance document described 
earlier. 
Other critical limits can be set in consultation with 
outside experts, in keeping with the longstanding practice for 
low acid canned foods. For example, as explained later in this 
preamble with respect to cooked, ready-to-eat products, there 
exist a range of possible cooking time-temperature combinations 
that will deactivate pathogens during the cooking step, depending 
on the type of equipment being used by the processor and the size 
and species of fish being cooked. The existence of a range of 
effective cooking time-temperature combinations convinced FDA 
not to establish specific cooking time-temperatures for industry 
in the regulations for low acid canned foods. Rather, FDA 
decided to rely on outside experts and on research within the 
scientific community to establish cooking times and temperatures 
for these products. FDA is not proposing specific cooking time-temperature requirements for most seafood products
(although FDA 
is providing guidance on time, temperature, and salinity 
parameters for smoked and smoke-flavored fish, as is fully 
explained in Appendix 1 to this document) for the same reason. 


8. Monitoring and Control Procedures 


Proposed 123.6(b)(4) requires that the processor or 
importer identify in the HACCP plan the procedures that it will 
use to control and monitor each critical control point. 
Monitoring steps are necessary to ensure that the critical 
control point is in fact under control and to produce an accurate 
record of what has occurred at the critical control point (Ref. 
34, p. 197). Among the procedures that are to be used under 
proposed 123.6(b)(4) is monitoring of the consumer complaints 
received by the processor. While the goal of an HACCP system is 
to prevent all likely hazards from occurring, no system is 
foolproof. Consumer complaints may be the first alert that a 
processor has that deviations are occurring that are not being 
prevented or uncovered by the processor's HACCP controls. FDA 
has tentatively concluded, therefore, that each HACCP system 
should take advantage of consumer complaints as they relate to 
the operation of critical control points. 
Proposed 123.6(b)(4) also requires that procedures for 
controlling and monitoring critical control points must include 
calibration of process control instruments and validation of 
software for computer control systems, as appropriate. For a 
processor's preventive controls to work, the instruments and 
equipment that it relies upon in monitoring critical control 
points, such as thermometers, temperature-recording devices, and 
computer software, must be accurate and reliable. FDA has 
tentatively concluded that the best way to ensure such accuracy 
and reliability is to require that the processor's monitoring 
procedures include steps necessary to verify the reliability of 
these instruments and devices. 




