 

906.17 

Records, reports, and audits. 



The PHA shall be responsible for the maintenance of records (including sale and financial records, which must include
information on the racial and ethnic characteristics of the purchasers) for all activities incident to implementation
of the HUD-approved homeownership plan. Until all planned sales of individual dwellings have been completed, the
PHA shall submit to HUD annual sales reports, in a form prescribed by HUD. The receipt, retention, and expenditure
of the sale proceeds shall be covered in the regular independent audits of the PHA's public housing operations, and
any supplementary audits that HUD may find necessary for monitoring. Where another entity is responsible for sale
of individual units, pursuant to 906.7(b), the PHA must ensure that the entity's responsibilities include
proper recordkeeping and accountability to the PHA, sufficient to enable the PHA to monitor compliance with the approved
homeownership plan, to prepare its reports to HUD, and to meet its audit responsibilities. All books and records shall
be subject to inspection and audit by HUD and the General Accounting Office (GAO).




(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 25770201)



906.18 

Submission and review of homeownership plan. 



Whether to develop and submit a proposed homeownership plan is a matter within the discretion of each PHA. A PHA may
initiate a proposal at any time, according to the following procedures: 

(a) 

Preliminary consultation with HUD staff

. Before submission of a proposed plan, the PHA shall consult informally with the appropriate HUD Field Office to assess
feasibility and the particulars to be addressed by the plan. 

(b) 

Submission to HUD. 

The PHA shall submit the proposed plan, together with supporting documentation, in a format prescribed by HUD, to
the appropriate HUD Field Office. 

(c) 

Conditional approval. 

Conditional approval may be given, at HUD discretion, where HUD determines that to be justified. For example, conditional
HUD approval might be a necessary precondition for the PHA to obtain the funding commitments required to satisfy the
requirements for final HUD approval of a complete homeownership plan. Where conditional approval is granted, HUD
will specify the conditions in writing. 



(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 25770201) 



906.19 

HUD approval and PHAHUD implementing agreement. 



Upon HUD notification to the PHA that the homeownership plan is approvable (in final form that satisfies all applicable
requirements of this part), the PHA and HUD will execute a written implementing agreement, in a form prescribed by
HUD, to evidence HUD approval and authorization for implementation. The plan itself, as approved by HUD, shall be
incorporated in the implementing agreement. Any of the items of supporting documentation may also be incorporated,
if agreeable to the PHA and HUD. The PHA shall be obligated to carry out the approved homeownership plan and other provisions
of the implementing agreement without modification, except with written approval by HUD.




(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 25770201) 



906.20 

Content of homeownership plan. 



The homeownership plan must address the following matters, as applicable to the particular factual situation: 

(a) 

Property description. 

A description of the property, including identification of the development and the specific dwellings to be sold.


(b) 

Repair or rehabilitation. 

If applicable, a plan for any repair or rehabilitation required under 906.6, based on the assessment of the
physical condition of the property that is included in the supporting documentation. 

(c) 

Purchaser eligibility and selection. 

The standards and procedures to be used for homeownership applications and the eligibility and selection of purchasers,
consistent with the requirements of 906.8. If the homeownership plan allows application for purchase of vacant
units by families who are not presently public housing or Section 8 residents and not already on the PHA's waiting lists
for those programs, the plan must include an affirmative fair housing marketing strategy for such families, including
specific steps to inform them of their eligibility to apply, and to solicit applications from those in the housing
market who are least likely to apply for the program without special outreach. 

(d) 

Sale and financing. 

Terms and conditions of sale and financing (see, particularly, 906.11 through 906.14). 

(e) 

Future consultation with residents. 

A plan for consultation with residents during the implementation stage (See 906.5). If appropriate, this
may be combined with the plan for counseling. 

(f) 

Counseling. 

Counseling, training, and technical assistance to be provided in accordance with 906.9. 

(g) 

Sale via resident-controlled entity. 

If the plan contemplates sale to residents via an entity other than the PHA, a description of that entity's responsibilities
and information demonstrating that the requirements of 906.7(b) have been met or will be met in a timely fashion.


(h) 

Nonpurchasing residents. 

If applicable, a plan for nonpurchasing residents, in accordance with 906.10. 

(i) 

Sale proceeds. 

An estimate of the sale proceeds and an explanation of how they will be used, in accordance with 906.15. 

(j) 

Replacement housing. 

A replacement housing plan, in accordance with 906.16. 



