 

(ii) Access may not be more restrictive or less favorable than the access the employing entity provides to other offerors
of options included in the health benefits plan, whether or not those offerors elect to avail themselves of that access.


(b) 

Review of HMO offering materials.

 (1) The HMO must give the employing entity or designee opportunity to review, revise, and approve HMO educational
and offering materials before distribution. 

(2) Revisions must be limited to correcting factual errors and misleading or ambiguous statements, unless_

(i) The HMO and the employing entity agree otherwise; or 

(ii) Other revisions are required by law. 

(3) The employing entity or designee must complete revision of the materials promptly so as not to delay or otherwise
interfere with their use during the group enrollment period. 

(c) 

Group enrollment period; prohibition of restrictions; effective date of HMO coverage

_(1) 

Prohibition of restrictions.

 If an employing entity or designee includes the option of enrollment in a qualified HMO in the health benefits plan
offered to its eligible employees, it must provide a group enrollment period before the effective date of HMO coverage.
The employing entity may not impose waiting periods as a condition of enrollment in the HMO or of transfer from HMO to
non-HMO coverage, or exclusions, or limitations based on health status. 

(2) 

Effective date of coverage.

 Unless otherwise agreed to by the employing entity, or designee, and the HMO, coverage under the HMO contract for employees
selecting the HMO option begins on the day the non-HMO contract expires or is renewed without lapse. 

(3) 

Coordination of benefits.

 Nothing in this subpart precludes the uniform application of coordination of benefits agreements between the HMOs
and the other carriers that are included in the health benefits plan. 

(d) 

Continued eligibility for ``free-standing'' health benefits

_(1) 

Basic requirement.

 At the request of a qualified HMO, the employing entity or its designee must provide that employees selecting the option
of HMO membership will not, because of this selection, lose their eligibility for free-standing dental, optical,
or prescription drug benefits for which they were previously eligible or would be eligible if selecting a non-HMO
option and that are not included in the services provided by the HMO to its enrollees as part of the HMO prepaid benefit
package. 

(2) 

``Free-standing'' defined.

 For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``free-standing'' refers to a benefit which_

(i) Is not integrated or incorporated into a basic health benefits package or major medical plan, and 

(ii) Is_

(A) Offered by a carrier other than the one offering the basic health benefits package or major medical plan; or 

(B) Subject to a premium separate from the premium for the basic health benefits package or major medical plan. 

(3) 

Examples of the employing entity's obligation with respect to the continued eligibility.

 (i) The health benefits plan includes a free-standing dental benefit. The HMO does not offer any dental coverage as
part of its health services provided to members on a prepaid basis. The employing entity must provide that employees
who select the HMO option continue to be eligible for dental coverage. (If the dental coverage is not optional for employees
selecting the non-HMO option, nothing in this regulation requires that the coverage be made optional for employees
selecting the HMO option. Conversely, if this coverage is optional for employees selecting the non-HMO option, nothing
in this regulation requires that the coverage be mandatory for employees selecting the non-HMO option.) 




-

