 

The Mariana fruit bat is found on all the major islands in the Marianas. Only the Guam population is listed as endangered,
although populations on Saipan, Tinian, and Aguijan are considered category 1 candidate species, and the populations
on Rota and the islands north of Saipan are considered category 2 candidate species (56 FR 225). Category 1 includes
taxa for which information in the Service's possession is sufficient to support a proposal to list. Category 2 includes
species for which information in the Service's possession indicates that listing is possibly appropriate, but is
insufficient to support a proposal to list as endangered or threatened at this time. On Guam, the Mariana fruit bat
was historically found throughout native forests. By the 1980's, population numbers on Guam had dropped, and the
species was restricted to forests on the northern tip of the island (USFWS 1990b), although there are occasional reports
of bats from southern Guam around Fena Reservoir. Various species of Pacific fruit bats generally use a variety of
forest types, including agricultural forest in close proximity to residential areas. Adequate protection from
poaching has not been possible on Guam and bats have been extirpated from residential areas on the island. This activity
continues despite the fact that it has been illegal to hunt fruit bat species on Guam since 1966.

The Micronesian kingfisher, a subspecies endemic to Guam, was at one time found throughout most of Guam's forests
(Jenkins 1983). Up to 3,000 might have survived in the wild when the species was listed in 1984, but the kingfisher declined
rapidly and is extirpated from the wild today. A captive population has been established and is maintained at several
mainland zoos including the Bronx, Philadelphia, and National Zoos. Once the brown tree snake is brought under control,
it is hoped that the Guam Micronesian kingfisher can be reintroduced in the wild using the progeny produced by these
captive flocks.

Three of the six forest species, all endemic to Guam, have not been observed in the wild for several years and are believed
to be extinct: the little Mariana fruit bat, Guam broadbill, and the Guam bridled white-eye. No records of the little
Mariana fruit bat exist after 1968. In 1983, the Guam broadbill was restricted to a small area at the north end of the
island and the population was estimated to be under 100 individuals. Two sightings of individuals were made in 1984:
One in March in Northwest Field, and one in August adjacent to the Navy golf course in Barrigada (USFWS 1990a). A single
broadbill was possibly heard in the Naval Communications area in 1988 (U.S. Navy 1989). Since then, the broadbill
has virtually disappeared from the island. Fewer than 50 bridled white-eyes were thought to survive in 1983. The last
individual was observed in June of that year (Beck 1984).

The areas for which the Service proposed critical habitat designation are those identified as ``high priority essential
habitat'' and ``essential habitat'' in the two recovery plans for these species (USFWS 1990a and USFWS 1990b). The
total acreage of the proposed areas is approximately 16,893 acres (6,837 hectares (ha)) in northern Guam and 7,669
acres (3,104 ha) in southern Guam, for a total of 24,562 acres (9,944 ha) island wide. About 83 percent of the land within
the proposed critical habitat of the six forest species on Guam is in Federal ownership and is predominantly under
the jurisdiction of either the U.S. Navy or the U.S. Air Force. Approximately 14.5 percent is owned by the Government
of Guam, while the remaining 3.5 percent is in private ownership. 

Certain forest areas on Guam must be given special management if the remaining forest species are to survive. They
consist of relatively contiguous tracts of forest types, including mature limestone forests, mixed woodlands,
second growth stands, coastal strand forests, coconut forests, and ravine forests. All are habitat types favored
by Guam forest species. When isolated from excessive human disturbance, such forest types fulfill the habitat requirements
of the Mariana crow and Mariana fruit bat in providing relatively large, contiguous tracts of forest with a minimum
of human disturbance. The Service believes that the Guam Micronesian kingfisher could be reintroduced to these protected
areas as well.

Protection of these areas would allow for the continued survival of the species that are either currently restricted
to a small fraction of their former historical range or extirpated from the wild in Guam. A key management consideration
common to all of Guam's native terrestrial species is control of the introduced brown tree snake, which was a major
factor in the population declines of these species. Conservation of these species will be substantially enhanced
through protection and management of key portions of their historic range.

The endangered species problems on Guam are complex, and the Service believes that a cooperative, proactive approach
to species and habitat management will yield the best chances for survival and recovery of these species in the wild.
The Government of Guam and the Federal government share common goals for the recovery of endangered and threatened
species, protection of native flora and fauna, conservation of unique ecosystems, and maintenance of native biological
diversity. The Government of Guam and the Federal government must continue cooperative efforts to develop and implement
programs for the recovery of endangered and threatened species, and to protect key habitats in perpetuity with the
common goal of reversing the wildlife extinction crisis facing Guam.

To meet these shared goals and to more effectively manage the essential habitat needed for the recovery of all of Guam's
endangered species, the Service established the Guam National Wildlife Refuge on certain lands and waters of Guam
to be managed in a coordinated manner by the Service, Government of Guam, U.S. Navy, and U.S. Air Force. The purposes
for establishing this refuge are: (1) To protect and restore essential habitats and provide for recovery actions
for Guam's endangered and threatened species; (2) to conserve migratory species and their habitats; (3) to protect
and manage other native wildlife and their habitats; (4) to control predation of native species, particularly by
the brown tree snake; (5) to complement ongoing Government of Guam and Department of Defense (DOD) programs in natural
resource management, conservation, law enforcement, research, and education; (6) to provide opportunities for
public education, enjoyment of wildlife, cultural use of resources, and scientific research; and (7) to maintain
the scenic values of the protected areas. The Guam National Wildlife Refuge is established as an overlay refuge on
22,477 acres, through a memorandum of understanding and managed through cooperative agreements among the U.S. Navy,
U.S. Air Force, and Service. The Service owns an additional 371 acres in fee title. Of these lands, 21,204 acres were
proposed as critical habitat in the 1991 proposal.



Summary of Comments and Recommendations



