 

This joint CDC/HUD grant program will provide financial assistance and support to State and local government agencies
to develop and implement a comprehensive neighborhood-based, holistic approach to ensure lead hazard control in
a small, well defined neighborhood with a high percentage of high risk housing. These ``Primary Prevention'' demonstration
projects are intended to bring together representatives from public health, the medical community, housing and
rehabilitation, Community-based/Neighborhood-based Organizations (CBOs), business and labor interests, and
other organizations interested in developing or expanding neighborhood-based lead poisoning primary prevention
projects in targeted communities. The goal of these projects will be to develop or enhance neighborhood-based efforts
to prevent and eliminate lead exposure for children living in high-risk neighborhoods.


Essential Components of the Primary Prevention Project Include


1. Identifying a high-risk neighborhood.
2. Establishing, expanding, or improving environmental investigations to identify sources of lead for children
in the selected neighborhood.
3. Characterizing and prioritizing lead hazards in neighborhoods.
4. Ensuring/providing effective rapid reduction, control, and abatement of lead hazards throughout the neighborhood.
Priority for activities should be given to reducing and controlling lead hazards posing an immediate threat to children.
5. Planning hazard reduction, control, and abatement activities to take advantage of economies of scale for labor
and materials.
6. Utilizing ``opportunity points'' when environmental intervention is especially convenient and/or timely (e.g.,
unit turnover, planned weatherization, remodeling, or renovation).
7. Ensuring/providing interim lead-safe housing for families during hazard reduction.
8. Enhancing primary prevention knowledge and skills for residents, owners, landlords, etc., in high-risk neighborhoods
through training and other methods. This includes planning and implementing a neighborhood education campaign.
9. Building coalitions and ensuring neighborhood participation in all components of this project, including the
planning process.
10. Training of staff and neighborhood residents to plan, implement, maintain, and evaluate all aspects of the primary
prevention strategy.


Program Requirements


The following are requirements for the Primary Prevention Projects:
A. A full-time director/coordinator with authority and responsibility to carry out the requirements of this primary
prevention program. There must be sufficient grantee capability to plan, implement, coordinate, and maintain all
aspects of the primary prevention strategy.
B. A plan to identify lead hazards in the neighborhood in a systematic manner and to oversee the safe and effective lead
hazard reduction and control.
C. A plan to ensure that primary prevention activities are also directed at neighborhood properties not specifically
eligible under the definition of ``priority housing''.
D. A plan to identify and ensure participation of neighborhood groups that have an interest in providing lead-safe
housing, and a lead-safe neighborhood.
E. Assurances of compliance with HUD/EPA or other appropriate certification and training requirements, as well
as other regulations relating to hazard reduction and worker safety.
F. Information which describes why a certain neighborhood was selected for this primary prevention activity, including
information on housing conditions, income, other socioeconomic factors, and previous surveys or screening activities
for childhood lead poisoning prevention. The selected neighborhood must be a defined geographic area of contiguous
blocks.
G. Assurances and documentation that activities, services, and educational materials provided by the program are
endorsed by neighborhood leaders or representatives of the intended target neighborhood.
H. A comprehensive plan for program evaluation. Applicants should develop plans for evaluating program activities
in two ways: Process Evaluations should be included for each component of the Program Plan. Process Evaluations should
determine whether program activities were actually carried out as planned. An overall Outcome Evaluation for the
program should be described separately. The Outcome Evaluation should be designed to measure, to the extent feasible,
the impact of the program on the neighborhood environment and health status of children.


Evaluation Criteria


CDC will use the following evaluation criteria to rate and rank applications received in response to this Program
Announcement. The review of applications will be conducted by an objective review committee who will review the quality
of the application based on the strength and completeness of the plan submitted. The budget justification will be
used to assess how well the technical plan is likely to be carried out using the available resources. The total number
possible for the rating factors is 100 points.


1. 

Strategy and Technical Approach 

(25 total points)


The quality of the technical approach in carrying out the proposed activities. The Strategy and Technical Approach
should include:
(a) Description of the proposed neighborhood and the need for program activities. (10 points)
(b) Plan for including neighborhood residents in planning, developing and implementing program activities. In
addition, there should be:



&bull;Plan for conducting a neighborhood-wide assessment to identify and control lead hazards. (5 points)


