 

(2) One comment recommended that the number of categories for recording of the contents of garbage be reduced.

Categories are necessary because the discharge regulations in 151.51 through 151.77 are based on garbage
contents. However, upon review of the various regulations, it was determined that none of the regulations applicable
to vessels made a distinction between ground and unground victual waste. [Section 151.73 for platforms refers to
ground victual wastes, but this is the only category allowed to be discharged from a platform.] Therefore, 151.55(c)(6)
has been changed to combine ground and unground victual waste into a single category. The word ``victual'' replaces
``food'', as used in the proposed rule, because it is a defined word used throughout part 151. [See 151.05.]

(3) One comment stated that a single book should be developed to record the discharge of oil, noxious liquid substances,
and garbage.

This rule allows ship operators to use such a book at their option. To require such a book is unnecessarily restrictive.



IV. Cost to Industry



(1) One comment stated that the estimate used in the draft Regulatory Evaluation of two minutes to sort garbage and
record its disposal was too short a time.

The two minute estimate was intended only to cover the recording of the disposal of garbage, not the sorting as well.
The sorting of garbage for disposal is an action that already must be undertaken to comply with the discharge restrictions
of 151.51 through 151.77, regardless of whether or not a ship is required to record that disposal. Sorting
was not considered when determining the two minute estimate. Nevertheless, the Coast Guard has reevaluated the time
necessary to determine and record the amount and type of garbage being discharged and has found that five minutes per
entry is a more reasonable estimate.

(2) One comment was received from an association representing the towing industry stating that the Coast Guard's
estimate of the number of coastal towing boats that would be subject to this rule was incorrect. Rather than the number
23, as used in the draft Regulatory Evaluation, they stated that the correct number was closer to 350.

The Regulatory Evaluation has been changed accordingly. In preparing the draft Regulatory Evaluation, the wrong
number was inadvertently transposed and misstated. The Coast Guard agrees with the number provided by the comment.



Regulatory Evaluation



This rule is not a significant regulatory action under section 3(f) of Executive Order 12866 and does not require an
assessment of potential costs and benefits under section 6(a)(3) of that order. It is not significant under the ``Department
of Transportation Regulatory Policies and Procedures'' (44 FR 11040; February 26, 1979). A final Regulatory Evaluation
has been prepared and is available in the docket for inspection or copying where indicated under 

ADDRESSES

. The following is a summary of the Evaluation.

The total annual projected cost to industry of requiring that refuse records be maintained is estimated to be $12,370,915.54.
The increase in this total, as compared to that in the draft Regulatory Evaluation, is due to the increase in the estimated
recording time from two to five minutes. The total annual projected cost does not reflect the potential reduction
in reporting time for ships discharging at shore facilities or incinerating on board. In the final rule, ship operators
who discharge on shore or who incinerate on board no longer need to categorize the contents of their garbage. Nor does
the projected cost reflect the potential reduction in reporting time resulting from the deletion of the requirement
that the ship's distance from shore be precisely calculated. In the final rule, the distance may be estimated.

The Coast Guard based the implementation costs of these regulations on the following categories of U.S. ships: freight
and tank vessels, tug and tow vessels, small fishing vessels (less than 300 gross tons), large fishing vessels (300
gross tons or more), passenger vessels, cruise vessels, vessels engaged in offshore oil and gas operations, research
and other miscellaneous classes of vessels, and manned fixed and floating platforms. The annual cost for a ship to
comply with these regulations was calculated by multiplying the time it would take to complete a refuse record entry
(five minutes), by the number of discharges per day (one), by the average wage per minute of the deck officer, chief
steward, or operator aboard each category of ship, and by the average number of discharges per year for each category
of ship.

The annual cost per ship in each category is estimated to be: freight or tank vessel: $2,145.79; tug or tow vessel: $804.67;
small fishing vessel: $468.48; large fishing vessel: $585.21; passenger vessel: $804.67; cruise vessel: $6,437.37;
offshore oil or mineral vessel: $890.01; research or other miscellaneous class of vessel: $420.62; and manned fixed
or floating platform: $128.01.

The estimated numbers of vessels affected in each category are: 586 freight and tank vessels, 350 tug and tow vessels,
16,948 small fishing vessels, 224 large fishing vessels, 2,870 passenger vessels, 4 cruise vessels, 276 offshore
oil and mineral vessels, 124 research and other miscellaneous classes of vessels, and 1,000 manned fixed and floating
platforms.






