 

&bull;Sediment Quality Criteria for the Protection of Benthic Organisms: Fluoranthene (EPA822R93012).



&bull;Sediment Quality Criteria for the Protection of Benthic Organisms: 
Phenanthrene (EPA822R93014). 


&bull;Technical Basis for Deriving Sediment Quality Criteria for Nonionic Organic Contaminants for the Protection
of Benthic Organisms by Using Equilibrium Partitioning (EPA822R93011). 


&bull;Guidelines for Deriving Site-Specific Sediment Quality Criteria for the Protection of Benthic Organisms
(EPA822R93017). 



Background Information 



Toxic contaminants in bottom sediments of the nation's lakes, rivers, wetlands, and coastal waters create the potential
for continued environmental impact even where water column contaminant levels comply with established water quality
criteria. In addition, contaminated sediments can have impacts on water quality even when additional pollutants
are no longer being added by any other source. It is intended that sediment quality criteria be protective of benthic
organisms and be used to: Assess the extent of sediment contamination, aid in implementing measures that limit or
prevent additional contamination, and identify when appropriate remediation activities are needed. 

Section 304 (a)(1) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1314(a)(1)), directs EPA to develop and publish criteria reflecting
the latest scientific knowledge on the identifiable effects of pollutants on public health and welfare, aquatic
life, wildlife and recreation. EPA has periodically issued ambient water quality criteria guidance, beginning
with the publication of ``Water Quality Criteria 1972''. All criteria guidance through late 1986 was summarized
in an EPA document entitled ``Quality Criteria for Water, 1986.'' EPA has subsequently published, from time to time,
new ambient water quality criteria guidance for additional pollutants or revised existing criteria guidance. 


EPA's criteria documents are intended to provide a comprehensive toxicological evaluation of each chemical addressed
therein, based on available information. For toxic pollutants, the documents tabulate the numeric acute and chronic
toxicity information for aquatic life and, where sufficient information is available, derive the numeric criteria
maximum concentrations (acute criteria) and the numeric criteria continuous concentrations (chronic criteria)
that the Agency recommends to protect aquatic life resources. The documents also provide recommended criteria to
protect human health. EPA has published numeric aquatic life criteria for 30 priority pollutants and human health
criteria for 91 priority pollutants. Aquatic life criteria address potential water column impacts only. 

EPA is now proposing sediment quality criteria for five priority pollutant chemicals (endrin, dieldrin, fluoranthene,
phenanthrene, and acenaphthene) that EPA has determined are present in the sediment of the Nation's waters and cause
or have the potential to cause adverse effects to the water column and benthic assemblages and their hierarchical
foodchains including humans. Pursuant to Section 104 of the Clean Water Act, the Agency has conducted research, experiments
and demonstrations and has studied the effects of contaminated sediment on freshwater, marine, and estuarine aquatic
life. EPA used this information to develop the proposed sediment quality criteria, which represent EPA's first effort
to develop sediment quality criteria. These five chemicals were selected because of their known toxicity, hydrophobicity,
and persistence. 


EPA developed the proposed sediment quality criteria using a methodology called the Equilibrium Partitioning Approach
which was selected after considering a variety of approaches that could be used to assess sediment contamination.
Technical reviews of the methodology and supporting science was conducted by the EPA Science Advisory Board (SAB)
in February 1989 and June 1992. 
Data collected in support of the ambient aquatic life water quality criteria or an equivalent data base were also used
to derive the proposed sediment quality criteria. Sediment criteria concentrations are expressed as micrograms
chemical per gram organic carbon and apply to sediments with >/=0.2% organic carbon. 




Dated: April 20, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Robert Perciasepe, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Administrator for Water. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9410055 Filed 42594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>


