 




<RINDOCK>[Fact Finding Investigation No. 22]</RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Possible Rate Malpractices in Specified United States_Foreign Trade; Order </DOCTITLE>




The Federal Maritime Commission has reason to believe that persons participating in the trades between ports and
points in the United States and ports and points in Europe, the Far East, South America, Central America or the Caribbean
(``the specified Trades'') may have obtained, or attempted to obtain, transportation of property by water at less
or different compensation than the rates and charges shown in applicable tariffs or service contracts. The various
unfair devices or means which may have been used include rebates, concessions, absorptions and allowances other
than those set forth in applicable tariffs, misdeclarations and other similar practices, in violation of the prohibitions
of section 10(a)(1) of the Shipping Act of 1984 (``1984 Act''), 46 U.S.C. app. 1709(a)(1). 

The Commission also has reason to believe that common carriers operating in the United States foreign commerce in
the specified Trades, directly or indirectly, may have provided, or allowed other persons to obtain transportation
of property at less or different compensation than the rates and charges shown in applicable tariffs or service contracts.
These actions may have been accomplished by failure to file a common carrier tariff and by various unfair devices or
means, such as rebates, concessions, absorptions and allowances other than those set forth in applicable tariffs
and through misdeclarations and other similar practices, in violation of the prohibitions of sections 8 and 10(b)
of the 1984 Act, 46 U.S.C. app. 1707 and 1709(b). 

If established, such violations are subject to civil penalties not to exceed $25,000 for each violation willfully
and knowingly committed, pursuant to section 13(a) of the 1984 Act, 46 U.S.C. app. 1712(a). Additionally, carriers
who rebate or commit other rate malpractices in contravention of their tariffs or service contracts may have their
tariffs or their participation in conference tariffs suspended by the Commission pursuant to section 13(b)(1) of
the 1984 Act, 46 U.S.C. app. 1712(b)(1). 

In order to ensure the proper and effective administration and enforcement of the shipping statutes, the Commission
is instituting a nonadjudicatory investigation to determine whether sufficient evidence exists to warrant informal
compromise procedures or formal investigation and assessment proceedings for violations of the 1984 Act with regard
to the transportation of property in the specified Trades. 

The Commission presently has in effect Fact Finding Investigation No. 16, 

Possible Malpractices in the Trans-Atlantic Trades 

(``FFI No. 16''), and Fact Finding Investigation No. 18, 

Rebates and Other Malpractices in the Trans-Pacific Trades 

(``FFI No. 18''). Because the purpose and scope of FFI No. 16 and FFI No. 18 are included within the nonadjudicatory
fact finding investigation instituted by this Order, FFI No. 16 and FFI No. 18 will be terminated by separate Orders
at such time as final reports are submitted by the Investigative Officers and accepted by the Commission. Any outstanding
subpoenas or investigative activities of FFI No. 16 and FFI No. 18 remain in force and are incorporated in this newly
instituted fact finding investigation. 

Therefore, it is ordered, That pursuant to sections 8, 10, 11 and 12 of the Shipping Act of 1984, 46 U.S.C. app. 1707,
1709, 1710 and 1711, and Part 502, Subpart R of Title 46 of the Code of Federal Regulations, 46 CFR 502.281, et seq., a
nonadjudicatory investigation is hereby instituted into the practices of common carriers and other persons with
respect to untariffed transportation activity and the possible payment of rebates and any other devices or means
of providing, or allowing persons to obtain, transportation of property at less or different compensation than the
rates and charges shown in applicable tariffs or service contacts, in the trades between United States ports and points
and ports and points in Europe, the Far East, South America, Central America or the Caribbean; 

It is further ordered, That the Investigative Officers shall be Wm. Jarrel Smith, Jr., Vern W. Hill, Peter J. King,
Charles L. Haslup, III, and Joseph B. Slunt of the Commission. The Investigative Officers shall be assisted by staff
members as may be assigned by the Commission's Managing Director and shall have full authority to hold public or non-public
sessions, to resort to all compulsory process authorized by law (including the issuance of subpoenas ad testificandum
and duces tecum), to administer oaths and to perform such other duties as may be necessary in accordance with the laws
of the United States and the regulations of the Commission; 

It is further ordered, That the Investigative Officers shall issue a joint report of activities, findings and recommendations
no later than one year after publication of this Order in the Federal Register, and at least yearly thereafter, such
reports to remain confidential unless and until the Commission rules otherwise; 

It is further ordered, That at such time as FFI No. 16 and FFI No. 18 are terminated by Order of the Commission, any subpoena
or investigative activity in FFI No. 16 and FFI No. 18 outstanding at the time of termination shall be continued in force
and is incorporated herein; 

It is further ordered, That this proceeding will remain in effect until discontinued by further Order of the Commission;
and 

It is further ordered, That notice of this Order be published in the 

Federal Register

. 





By the Commission.



<SIGNER>
Joseph C. Polking,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9419664 Filed 81194; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 673001M
</BILLING>





