 

(A) Normal turnover in existing projects; 

(B) Existing housing stock that previously was not available to or considered for non-elderly disabled families.
Examples are dwellings in general occupancy (family) projects that are reconfigured to meet the dwelling size needs
of the non-elderly disabled families, or were previously occupied by elderly families who will relocate to the designated
project for elderly families, or were previously vacant because there had not been a demand for dwellings of that size
in that location; 

(C) Housing for which the PHA has received preliminary notification that it will obtain; and 

(D) Housing for which the PHA plans to apply during the period covered by the allocation plan, and which it has a reasonable
expectation of obtaining. 

(v) Where a project is being designated for elderly families, explain how the PHA plans to secure the required additional
housing resources. In the case of housing for which the PHA plans to apply, the PHA must provide sufficient information
about the housing resource and its application to establish that the PHA can reasonably expect to obtain the housing.


(vi) Describe incentives, if any, that the PHA intends to offer to: 

(A) Families who are members of the group for whom a project was designated to achieve voluntary transfers 

to 

the designated project; and 

(B) Families who are not members of the group for whom a project was designated to achieve voluntary transfers 

from 

the project proposed to be designated; 

(d) 

Criteria for allocation plan approval. 

HUD shall approve an initial allocation plan, or updated allocation plan, if HUD determines that: 

(1) The information contained in the plan is complete and accurate (a plan that is incomplete, i.e., missing required
statements or items, will be disapproved), and the projections are reasonable; 

(2) Implementation of the plan will not result in a substantial increase in the vacancy rates in the designated project;


(3) Implementation of the plan will not result in a substantial increase in delaying or denying housing assistance
to families on the PHA's waiting list because of designating projects; 

(4) The plan for securing sufficient additional housing resources for non-elderly disabled persons can reasonably
be achieved; and 

(5) The plan conforms to the requirements of this part. 

(e) 

Allocation plan approval or disapproval._

(1) 

Written notification. 

HUD shall notify each PHA, in writing, of approval or disapproval of the initial or updated allocation plan. 

(2) 

Timing of notification. 

An allocation plan shall be considered to be approved by HUD if HUD fails to provide the PHA with notification of approval
or disapproval of the plan, as required by paragraph (e)(1) of this section, within: 

(i) 90 days after the date of submission of an allocation plan that contains comments, as provided in paragraph (c)(2)
of this section; or 

(ii) 45 days after the date of submission of all other plans, including 

(A) Initial plans for which no comments were received; 

(B) Updated plans, as provided in paragraph (f) of this section; and 

(C) Revised initial plans or revised updated plans, as provided in paragraph (e)(4) of this section. 

(3) 

Approval limited solely to approval of designated housing. 

HUD's approval of an initial plan or updated allocation plan under this section may not be construed to constitute
approval of any request for assistance for major reconstruction of obsolete projects, assistance for development
or acquisition of public housing, or assistance under 24 CFR part 890 (supportive housing for persons with disabilities).


(4) 

Resubmission following disapproval. 

If HUD disapproves an initial allocation plan, a PHA shall have a period of not less than 45 days or more than 90 days following
notification of disapproval as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, to submit amendments to the plan, or
to submit a revised plan. 


(f) 

Biennial update of plan._

(1) 

General. 

Each PHA that owns or operates a public housing project that is designated for occupancy under this part shall update
its allocation plan not less than once every two years, from the date of HUD approval of the initial allocation plan.
A PHA that wishes to amend or revise its plan later than 90 days after HUD disapproval must begin the hearing and consultation
process again. 

(2) 

Failure to submit updated plan. 

If the PHA fails to submit the updated plan as required by this paragraph (f), the Secretary may revoke the designation
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (f)(4)(ii) of this section. 

(3) 

Contents of updated plan. 

The updated allocation plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 

(i) The most recent update of the allocation plan data, and projections for the next two years; 

(ii) An assessment of the accuracy of the projections contained in previous plans and in the updated allocation plan;


(iii) The number of times a vacancy was filled in accordance with 945.303(c); 

(iv) A discussion of the impact of the designation on the designated project and the other public housing projects
operated by the PHA, using the data obtained from the system developed in 945.203(c), including 

(A) The number of times there was a substantial increase in delaying housing assistance to families on the PHA's waiting
list because projects were designated; and 

(B) The number of times there was a substantial increase in denying housing assistance to families on the PHA's waiting
list because projects were designated; 

(v) A plan for adjusting the allocation of designated units, if necessary. 






