 




<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Investigational New Drugs; Procedure to Monitor Clinical Hold Process; Meeting of Review Committee and Request
for Submissions</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing a meeting of the clinical hold review committee, which reviews
the clinical holds that the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) has placed on certain investigational
new drug trials. The committee was established as a 1-year experiment in August 1991. The committee met quarterly
through 1992 and currently meets semiannually as a regular program. The committee last met in April 1994. FDA is inviting
any interested drug company to use the confidential mechanism to submit to the committee for its review the name and
number of any investigational new drug trial placed on clinical hold during the past 12 months that the company wants
the committee to review.

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 The meeting will be held in October 1994. Drug companies may submit review requests for the October meeting before
October 17, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit clinical hold review requests to Amanda B. Pedersen, FDA Chief Mediator and Ombudsman, Office of the Commissioner
(HF7), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 14105, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, 3014431306.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Deborah Wolf, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (HFD362), Food and Drug Administration, 7500 Standish
Pl., Rockville, MD 20855, 3015941046.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 FDA regulations at part 312 (21 CFR part 312) provide procedures that govern the use of investigational new drugs in
human subjects. These regulations require that the sponsor of a clinical investigation submit an investigational
new drug application (IND) to FDA outlining the proposed use of the investigational drug. The IND must contain the
study protocol, a summary of human and animal experience with the drug, and information about the drug's chemistry
and pharmacology. FDA reviews an IND to help ensure the safety and rights of subjects and to help ensure that the quality
of any scientific evaluation of drugs is adequate to permit an evaluation of the drug's efficacy and safety. An investigational
new drug for which an IND is in effect is exempt from the premarketing approval requirements that are otherwise applicable
and may be shipped lawfully for the purpose of conducting clinical investigations of that drug.


If FDA determines that a proposed or ongoing study may pose significant risks for human subjects or is otherwise seriously
deficient, as discussed in the investigational new drug regulations, it may impose a clinical hold on the study. The
clinical hold is one of FDA's primary mechanisms for protecting subjects who are involved in investigational new
drug trials. A clinical hold is an order that FDA issues to a sponsor to delay a proposed investigation or to suspend
an ongoing investigation. The clinical hold may be placed on one or more of the investigations covered by an IND. When
a proposed study is placed on clinical hold, subjects may not be given the investigational drug as part of that study.
When an ongoing study is placed on clinical hold, no new subjects may be recruited to the study and placed on the investigational
drug, and patients already in the study should stop receiving therapy involving the investigational drug unless
FDA specifically permits it. 
FDA regulations at 21 CFR 312.42 describe the grounds for the imposition of a clinical hold. When FDA concludes that
there is a deficiency in a proposed or ongoing clinical trial that may be grounds for the imposition of a hold order,
ordinarily FDA will attempt to resolve the matter through informal discussions with the sponsor. If that attempt
is unsuccessful, the agency may order a clinical hold. In CDER, a clinical hold is ordered by or on behalf of the director
of the division that is responsible for review of the IND. The order identifies the studies under the IND to which the
hold applies and explains the basis for the action. The hold order may be made by telephone or other means of rapid communication,
or in writing. Within 30 days of the imposition of the clinical hold, the division director provides the sponsor with
a written explanation of the basis for the hold. Any sponsor who has not received a written explanation within 30 days
should notify the division and request that it be issued. In addition to providing a statement of reasons, this ensures
that the hold is recorded in CDER's management information system. 
The clinical hold order specifies whether the sponsor may resume the affected investigation without prior notification
by FDA once the deficiency has been corrected. If the order does not permit the resumption, an investigation may resume
only after the division director or his or her designee has notified the sponsor that the investigation may proceed.
Resumption may be authorized by telephone or other means of rapid communication. If all investigations covered by
an IND remain on clinical hold for 1 year or longer, FDA may place the IND on inactive status. 
FDA regulations at 21 CFR 312.48 provide dispute resolution mechanisms through which sponsors may request reconsideration
of clinical hold orders. The regulations encourage the sponsor to attempt to resolve disputes directly with the review
staff responsible for the review of the IND. If necessary, a sponsor may request a meeting with the review staff and
management to discuss the hold.
Over the years, drug sponsors have expressed a number of concerns about the clinical hold process, including concerns
about the scientific and procedural adequacy of some agency actions. FDA undertook several initiatives to evaluate
the consistency and fairness of the Center's practices in imposing clinical holds. First, CDER completed a center-wide
review of clinical holds recorded in the management information system. While some differences in practice and procedure
were discerned among divisions, it appeared that the procedures specified in the regulations were, in general, being
followed, and that holds were scientifically supportable.
Second, FDA established a committee in CDER to review selected clinical holds for scientific and procedural quality.
The committee held pilot meetings in 1991 and 1992. The trial phase of the committee review process confirmed the agency's
view that the divisions in CDER impose clinical holds in a matter that is generally consistent with FDA's procedural
requirements and that holds are imposed on scientifically supportable grounds. 
The clinical hold committee review process is now a regular, ongoing program. The review procedure of the committee
is designed to afford an opportunity for a sponsor who does not wish to seek formal reconsideration of a pending hold
to have that hold considered ``anonymously.'' The committee consists of senior managers in CDER, a senior official
from the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, and FDA's Chief Mediator and Ombudsman. The committee now
meets semiannually. The committee last met in April 1994. 
Clinical holds to be reviewed will be chosen randomly. In addition, the committee will review holds proposed for review
by drug sponsors. In general, a drug sponsor should consider requesting review when it disagrees with the agency's
scientific or procedural basis for the decision. 
Requests for committee review of a clinical hold should be submitted to FDA's Chief Mediator and Ombudsman, who is
responsible for selecting clinical holds for review. The committee and CDER staff, with the exception of the Chief
Mediator and Ombudsman, are never advised, either in the review process or thereafter, which of the holds were randomly
chosen and which were submitted by sponsors. The committee will evaluate the selected clinical holds for scientific
content and consistency with agency regulations and CDER policy.
The meetings of the review committee are closed to the public because committee discussions deal with confidential
commercial information. Summaries of the committee deliberations, excluding confidential commercial information,
will be available from the Chief Mediator and Ombudsman. If the status of a clinical hold changes following the committee's
review, the appropriate division will notify the sponsor.
FDA invites drug companies to submit to the FDA Chief Mediator and Ombudsman the name and IND number of any investigational
new drug trial that was placed on clinical hold during the past 12 months that they want the committee to review at its
October meeting. Submissions should be made by October 17, 1994, to Amanda B. Pedersen, FDA Chief Mediator and Ombudsman
(address above.) 




Dated: September 9, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
William K. Hubbard,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Interim Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9422897 Filed 91594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

