 

This project will collect, analyze, and compare selected provisions of State firearms codes, particularly as they
pertain to juveniles. The purpose is to develop a body of information about key provisions of State firearms codes.
The results of this study will assist in formulating laws, policies, and programs to reduce firearms-related violence.
The product to be developed is a guide to selected State firearm provisions. This study, and the development of a model
juvenile handgun law, are mandated by the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994. In order to immediately
begin collecting study data to assist in developing the model law, $52,500 was transferred to the Bureau of Justice
Assistance for an award to the National Criminal Justice Association for the purpose of collecting, examining, and
analyzing existing and proposed State firearms codes. The Crime Act requires the Attorney General, through the Administrator
and the National Institute for Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, to develop a Constitutional and enforceable
model juvenile handgun law. This model law will guide the States in their development of laws concerning juvenile
handgun possession. The model law will be stated in a format designed to enable States to determine which provisions
are best suited to their individual needs. This effort will be assisted by the National Criminal Justice Association
under a grant in the amount of $123,000. No additional applications will be solicited in fiscal year 1995.


Multipurpose Educational Curriculum for Young Victims_$75,000.


Funds for this program will be transferred to the Office for Victims of Crime. The project will develop curriculum
and training materials for use by school personnel, youth groups, and victim services providers to teach adolescents
about the impact of crime on victims, about available victim assistance resources, and about strategies for providing
effective peer support for young victims of crime. The program is expected to enhance victim service provider outreach
activities targeting youth at risk and promote violence prevention.


San Francisco Culture of Peace Project_$458,000


This program, which expands a 1994 AmeriCorps Summer of Safety Program, would place 50 participants in community
service activities through the following four existing violence-prevention community collaborations targeting
Latino, African-American, and Asian youth at high-risk of gang involvement: (1) Violence Prevention Initiative_located
in the Mission District, the neighborhood with the highest incidence of youth violence in the city; (2) Prevention
and Leadership Alternatives for Youth_located in three contiguous neighborhoods: Bayview-Hunters Point, Visitation
Valley, and OMI; (3) North of Market Planning Coalition_focuses on alcohol-related violence in the Tenderloin District;
and (4) Urban Service Schools Project_focuses on violence-prevention curricula in elementary schools.


Gangs and Delinquency Research_$800,000


In fiscal year 1994, OJJDP channeled its gang-related activities into the Comprehensive Gang Program, made possible
by an increased Part D appropriation. The National Gang Assessment and Resource Center, funded under the fiscal year
1994 Program Plan, will provide a national baseline study of the presence and characteristics of violent gangs. This
year, OJJDP proposes to supplement this baseline study with two studies designed to develop detailed information
on various aspects of gangs in gang-plagued cities identified in the basline studies. The main purpose of these supplemental
studies is to examine gang behavior as a subset of overall delinquency. Specific issues to be examined include assessing
the relationship of gang participation to other forms of delinquency and violence associated with gang membership
and determining the proportion of violent youth crime accounted for by youth gangs. Proposals are encouraged that
incorporate gang studies into ongoing studies of large samples of juveniles.
OJJDP will provide a maximum of two awards in amounts of up to $400,000 each under this program.


