 

(1) 

Ineligible contractors.

 The provisions of 24 CFR part 24 relating to the employment, engagement of services, awarding of contracts, or funding
of any contractors or subcontractors during any period of debarment, suspension, or placement in ineligibility
status. 
(2) 

Flood insurance.

 No building proposed for acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, or improvement to be assisted under
this program may be located in an area that has been identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as
having special flood hazards, unless the community in which the area is situated is participating in the National
Flood Insurance Program and the regulations thereunder (44 CFR parts 5979), or less than a year has passed since
FEMA notification regarding such hazards, and the grantee ensures that flood insurance on the structure is obtained
in compliance with section 102(a) of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.). 
(3) 

Lead-based paint.

 The requirements, as applicable, of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 48214846),
and implementing regulations at 24 CFR parts 35, 965 and 968. 
(4) 

Applicability of OMB Circulars.

 The policies, guidelines, and requirements of OMB Circular Nos. A110 and A122 with respect to the acceptance
and use of assistance by private nonprofit organizations. 
(5) 

Relocation and Real Property Acquisition.

 The Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 and HUD Handbook 1378, Tenant
Assistance, Relocation and Real Property Acquisition, apply to the acquisition of real property for an assisted
project and the displacement of any person (family, individual, business, nonprofit organization, or farm) as a
direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for the project. 


B. Environmental Review 


A finding of no significant impact with respect to the environment has been made in accordance with HUD regulations
in 24 CFR part 50 that implement section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. (42 U.S.C. 4332).
The finding of no significant impact is available for public inspection and copying Monday through Friday during
regular business hours at the Office of the Rules Docket Clerk, Office of General Counsel, Room 10276, Department
of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20410. 


C. Executive Order 12612, Federalism 


The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under section 6(a) of Executive Order 12612, Federalism, has determined
that the policies contained in this notice will not have substantial direct effects on States or their political subdivisions,
or the relationship between the Federal government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities
among the various levels of government. As a result, the notice is not subject to review under the Order. The notice
announces the availability of funds to provide families living in public or Indian housing with better access to education
and job opportunities to achieve self-sufficiency and independence. 


D. Executive Order 12606, the Family 


The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under Executive Order 12606, The Family, has determined that this
notice has potential for a significant impact on family formation, maintenance, and general well-being. The purpose
of the notice is to provide funding to assist families living in public or Indian housing with better access to education
and job opportunities to achieve self-sufficiency and independence, and, thus, could benefit families significantly.
However, because the impact on families is beneficial, no further review is considered necessary. 




