 

Instructions for the SF 424



This is a standard form used by applicants as a required facesheet for preapplications and applications submitted
for Federal assistance. It will be used by Federal agencies to obtain applicant certification that States which have
established a review and comment procedure in response to Executive Order 12372 and have selected the program to be
included in their process, have been given an opportunity to review the applicant's submission. 



Item and Entry



1. Self-explanatory.

2. Date application submitted to Federal agency (or State if applicable) and applicant's control number (if applicable).

3. State use only (if applicable).

4. If this application is to continue or revise an existing award, enter present Federal identifier number. If for
a new project, leave blank. 

5. Legal name of applicant, name of primary organizational unit which will undertake the assistance activity, complete
address of the applicant, and name and telephone number of the person to contact on matters related to this application.


6. Enter Employer Identification Number (EIN) as assigned by the Internal Revenue Service.

7. Enter the appropriate letter in the space provided.

8. Check appropriate box and enter appropriate letter(s) in the space(s) provided:




_``New'' means a new assistance award.

_``Continuation'' means an extension for an additional funding/budget period for a project with a projected completion
date. 

_``Revision'' means any change in the Federal Government's financial obligation or contingent liability from an
existing obligation.




9. Name of Federal agency from which assistance is being requested with this application. 

10. Use the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance number and title of the program under which assistance is requested.


11. Enter a brief descriptive title of the project. If more than one program is involved, you should append an explanation
on a separate sheet. If appropriate (e.g., construction or real property projects), attach a map showing project
location. For preapplications, use a separate sheet to provide a summary description of this project.

12. List only the largest political entities affected (e.g., State, counties, cities). 

13. Self-explanatory.

14. List the applicant's Congressional District and any District(s) affected by the program or project. 

15. Amount requested or to be contributed during the first funding/budget period by each contributor. Value of in-kind
contributions should be included on appropriate lines as applicable. If the action will result in a dollar change
to an existing award, indicate 

only 

the amount of the change. For decreases, enclose the amounts in parentheses. If both basic and supplemental amounts
are included, show breakdown on an attached sheet. For multiple program funding, use totals and show breakdown using
same categories as item 15. 

16. Applicants should contact the State Single Point of Contact (SPOC) for Federal Executive Order 12372 to determine
whether the application is subject to the State intergovernmental review process. 

17. This question applies to the applicant organization, not the person who signs as the authorized representative.
Categories of debt include delinquent audit disallowances, loans and taxes. 

18. To be signed by the authorized representative of the applicant. A copy of the governing body's authorization for
you to sign this application as official representative must be on file in the applicant's office. (Certain Federal
agencies may require that this authorization be submitted as part of the application.)




<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 418401P
</BILLING>






<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEN07AP94.001


</IMPORT>





<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEN07AP94.002




</IMPORT>



<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 418401C
</BILLING>




