 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


Under the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA_21 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

) and the Poultry Products Inspection Act (PPIA_21 U.S.C. 451 

et seq.

), the Secretary of Agriculture is responsible for carrying out inspection programs for assuring that meat, meat
food, and poultry products prepared for distribution in commerce are safe, not adulterated, and properly marked,
labeled, and packaged. The Secretary is required to staff the programs with persons appointed for the purpose of conducting
ante-mortem and post-mortem inspection of livestock and poultry; inspection of facilities, equipment, and sanitation
at official establishments; and inspection of further processing of meat and poultry. Under regulations implementing
the FMIA and PPIA, persons authorized to conduct inspection in meat and poultry slaughtering and further processing
establishments are provided with appropriate identification. 
The Federal meat inspection regulations have long required the use of a numbered official badge to identify each Federal
meat inspector who is entitled to enter the premises of official establishments to conduct inspection. Since the
merger of the meat and poultry inspection programs in the early 1970's, the badge has also been used to identify poultry
inspectors carrying out mandatory inspection under the PPIA. 
The poultry products inspection regulations currently require that inspectors have with them at all times the ``means
of identification'' furnished to them by the Department. The regulations have also required that ``licenses'' be
issued to persons carrying out Federal poultry inspection under agreements with State or other agencies. These requirements
originated in the era when the inspection of poultry for condition and wholesomeness was one of the Department's voluntary
inspection and certification programs. 
USDA administered voluntary poultry inspection in cooperation with State and other agencies, with poultry processing
establishments paying fees for the service. For much of this work, the Department entered into cooperative agreements
with State agencies whose USDA-licensed personnel operated under USDA supervision. 
After the PPIA was enacted and Federal inspection of poultry products prepared for distribution in commerce became
mandatory, the need for cooperative agreements was reduced. Even so, the mandatory poultry products inspection
regulations that were promulgated in February 1958 (23 FR 731) to implement the PPIA carried over from the earlier
regulations provisions allowing the Secretary to authorize ``licensed'' Federal or State employees to conduct
Federal poultry inspection. Such authorized State personnel have performed Federal inspection according to Federal-State
agreements concluded under the Talmadge-Aiken Act of 1962 (7 U.S.C. 450). 
Before the meat and poultry inspection programs were merged, poultry inspectors who were USDA employees used Department
identification cards as their means of identification. Employees of cooperating Federal or State agencies who were
authorized to conduct Federal poultry inspection were issued license cards. The license cards for the State employees
thus served the same purpose as USDA identification cards of Federal poultry inspectors and the badges of Federal
meat inspectors. 
In May 1972, FSIS amended the poultry products inspection regulations to implement the Wholesome Poultry Products
Act of 1968. The amendments reflected the organizational merger of poultry and meat inspection. Since that time,
poultry inspection has been administered in the same way as meat inspection. The same method of credentialling_the
badge_is used for both meat and poultry inspectors; State employees performing Federal inspection under ``Talmadge-Aiken''
agreements also are issued Federal inspection badges. 


The Final Rule 


Therefore, the Agency is removing and reserving section 381.30 of the poultry products inspection regulations to
delete the requirement for issuance of a license to non-USDA employees who are authorized to conduct Federal poultry
inspection. Section 381.31, which governs conditions for expiration, suspension, and revocation of licenses,
is also being deleted. The suspension and revocation provisions of this section have not been invoked since the merger
of the meat and poultry inspection programs. The qualifications and conditions of service of non-USDA employees
who are authorized to conduct Federal poultry inspection are contained in the agreements between FSIS and cooperating
agencies. Finally, the Agency is revising section 381.33, concerning identification of inspectors, to require
the use of the numbered official inspection badge for such identification. 


Executive Order 12866 


This rule has been determined to be not significant for the purposes of Executive Order 12866 and therefore has not
been reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget. 


Executive Order 12778 


This final rule has been reviewed pursuant to Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. This rule: (1) preempts
all State and local laws and regulations that are inconsistent with this rule; (2) has no retroactive effect; and (3)
does not require administrative proceedings before parties may file suit in court challenging this rule. 


Effect on Small Entities 


The Acting Administrator, FSIS, has determined that this action will not have a significant impact on a substantial
number of small entities under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

). 


Administrative Procedure Act 


Because this amendment is an amendment of Agency procedure, with nugatory public impact, this rulemaking is exempted
under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA_5 U.S.C. 553(b)(3)(A)) from the requirement for notice and opportunity
for public comment. Similarly, because this amendment concerns only Agency procedure and is without measurable
public impact, this rulemaking is exempt for good cause from the APA requirement that a substantive rule be published
30 days prior to its effective date (5 U.S.C. 553(d)). 


List of Subjects in 9 CFR Part 381 


Government employees, Poultry and poultry products.



For the reasons set out in the preamble, 9 CFR part 381 is amended as follows: 


PART 381_MANDATORY POULTRY PRODUCTS INSPECTION 


1. The authority citation for part 381 continues to read as follows:





Authority:

 7 U.S.C. 138F; 7 U.S.C. 450; 21 U.S.C. 451470; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.55.



2. Sections 381.30 and 381.31 are removed and reserved and section 381.33 is revised to read as follows: 


381.33 

Identification. 


Each inspector will be furnished with a numbered official inspection badge, which shall remain in his or her possession
at all times, and which shall be worn in such manner and at such times as the Administrator may prescribe. This badge
shall be sufficient identification to entitle the inspector to admittance at all regular entrances and to all parts
of the establishment and premises to which the inspector is assigned.



Done at Washington, DC, on August 11, 1994. 

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Patricia Jensen, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Inspection Services. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9420184 Filed 81694; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3410DMP
</BILLING>



