 

Awards under this program shall be subject to all Federal laws, and Federal and Departmental regulations, policies,
and procedures applicable to Federal financial assistance awards. 



Outstanding Account Receivable


No award of Federal funds shall be made to an applicant who has an outstanding delinquent Federal debt until either
the delinquent account is paid in full, a repayment schedule is established and at least one payment is received, or
other arrangements satisfactory to the Department of Commerce are made.



Name Check Policy


All non-profit and for-profit applicants are subject to a name check review process. Name checks are intended to reveal
if any key individuals associated with the applicant have been convicted of or are presently facing criminal charges
such as fraud, theft, perjury, or other matters which significantly reflect on the applicant's management, honesty
or financial integrity. 



Award Termination


The Departmental Grants Officer may terminate any grant/cooperative agreement in whole or in part at any time before
the date of completion whenever it is determined that the award recipient has failed to comply with the conditions
of the grant/cooperative agreement. Examples of some of the conditions which can cause termination are unsatisfactory
performance of MBDC work requirements, and reporting inaccurate or inflated claims of client assistance. Such inaccurate
or inflated claims may be deemed illegal and punishable by law. 



False Statements


A false statement on an application for Federal financial assistance is grounds for denial or termination of funds,
and grounds for possible punishment by a fine or imprisonment as provided in 18 U.S.C. 1001.



Primary Applicant Certifications


All primary applicants must submit a completed Form CD511, ``Certifications Regarding Debarment, Suspension
and Other Responsibility Matters; Drug-Free Workplace Requirements and Lobbying.'' 



Nonprocurement Debarment and Suspension


Prospective participants (as defined at 15 CFR part 26, section 105) are subject to 15 CFR Part 26, ``Nonprocurement
Debarment and Suspension'' and the related section of the certification form prescribed above applies. 



Drug Free Workplace


Grantees (as defined at 15 CFR part 26, 26.605) are subject to 15 CFR part 26, subpart F, ``Governmentwide Requirements
for Drug-Free Workplace (Grants)'' and the related section of the certification form prescribed above applies.



Anti-Lobbying


Persons (as defined at 15 CFR part 28, 26.105) are subject to the lobbying provisions of 31 U.S.C. 1352, ``Limitation
on use of appropriated funds to influence certain Federal contracting and financial transactions,'' and the lobbying
section of the certification form prescribed above applies to applications/bids for grants, cooperative agreements,
and contracts for more than $100,000. 



Anti-Lobbying Disclosures


Any applicant that has paid or will pay for lobbying using any funds must submit an SFLLL, ``Disclosure of Lobbying
Activities,'' as required under 15 CFR part 28, appendix B. 



Lower Tier Certifications


Recipients shall require applications/bidders for subgrants, contracts, subcontracts, or other lower tier covered
transactions at any tier under the award to submit, if applicable, a completed Form CD512, ``Certifications
Regarding Debarment, Suspension, Ineligibility and Voluntary Exclusion-Lower Tier Covered Transactions and
Lobbying'' and disclosure form, SFLLL, ``Disclosure of Lobbying Activities.'' Form CD512 is intended
for the use of recipients and should not be transmitted to DOC. SFLLL submitted by any tier recipient or subrecipient
should be submitted to DOC in accordance with the instructions contained in the award document.




11.800 Minority Business Development (Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance). 




Dated: January 7, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Xavier Mena, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Regional Director, San Francisco Regional Office.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94960 Filed 11394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 351021M
</BILLING>


