 

Options for Retrieval 


Waste can be retrieved by hydraulic sluicing, pneumatic or mechanical systems. Hydraulic sluicing injects liquid
into the tank to dislodge and mobilize or dissolve the waste. Pumps transfer the liquid and slurry out of the tank. Mechanical
or pneumatic systems are placed in contact with the waste. This equipment conditions the waste and transfers it out
of the tank. The retrieved waste is transferred to the pretreatment process. 



Options for Pretreatment 



Pretreatment is performed to separate the waste into its high-activity and low-activity components. One option
is to perform no pretreatment. Another option is to limit the volume of waste going to a geologic repository by pretreating
waste to accomplish some level of high- and low-activity waste separation. Two bounding alternatives for pretreating
tank wastes have been identified, corresponding to the reasonable limits of waste pretreatment (such as evaporation,
acid digestion, nuclide separation, ion exchange) to concentrate the radionuclides in a smaller volume. For purposes
of this discussion, these bounds are referred to as ``minimal'' and ``extensive'' pretreatment. The pretreatment
bounds may also influence the relative volumes of high- and low-activity wastes to be stabilized and stored/disposed
of. The pretreated waste would be transferred to the waste immobilization process. 

Minimal pretreatment would use sludge washing to separate the waste into a smaller volume fraction of high-activity
waste (containing the majority of radionuclide activity), and a larger volume fraction of low-activity waste. The
low-activity waste might be subjected to an evaporation step to reduce the volume resulting from the sludge washing
process. 

Extensive pretreatment would use advanced solvent extraction methods to provide the maximum level of radionuclide
partitioning. Hazardous nitrates, metals, and other selected chemicals would be removed from the low-activity
waste stream, and the volume of the high-activity waste fraction would be minimized. 



Options for Immobilization 



The immobilization would stabilize the waste coming from the pretreatment process. Both the low-activity waste
stream and the high-activity waste stream would be stabilized. The stabilized waste would be transferred to storage
or disposal. 

High-activity waste stabilization options include vitrification, ceramic forms and calcination. After stabilizing,
the high-activity waste fraction would comply with any likely waste form criteria for geologic repository acceptance
and transportation. 

Low-activity waste stabilization options include vitrification, glass cullet in a sulfur cement and cement polymer-based
grout. 
The current plan provides that the encapsulated cesium and strontium would meet the waste form criteria for geologic
repository acceptance and transportation. The first option is overpacking the capsules. If the repository waste
form criteria cannot be achieved by overpacking, the capsules would be stabilized the same as the high-activity waste
fraction above (e.g., vitrification, ceramic or calcination). 



Options for Disposal/Storage 



The disposal options include disposal onsite, disposal offsite and interim storage pending disposal. 

High-activity waste disposal options include emplacement of the stabilized waste in an offsite geologic repository
or in interim storage onsite pending availability of an offsite geologic repository. 

Low-activity waste disposal options depend on the stabilized waste form and include: Burial in onsite landfills
in containers; burial in onsite vaults; burial onsite in steel culverts with liners and leachate collection; and
soil melt slurry injection to a landfill. Some of these options would accommodate retrievability if desired. 



No Action Alternative 



The no action alternative for TWRS would be continued storage of tank wastes and encapsulated cesium and strontium
without preparation for disposal. However, the no action alternative includes continued maintenance, monitoring,
and safety upgrades. No action also includes maintaining the low-activity waste grouting facility in a standby condition
in case its operation is necessary before new DSTs are available to provide tank space to resolve safety issues. The
no-disposal action alternative was analyzed in the HDW EIS and the DOE intends to update the HDW EIS analyses in the
TWRS EIS. The no action alternative is included to comply with the CEQ regulations (40 CFR 1502.14(d)) for consideration
of a no action alternative. 



Interim Actions



DOE plans to complete the TWRS EIS by approximately October 1996. DOE may need to undertake interim actions while the
TWRS EIS is being prepared. Any interim actions undertaken would have to be independently justified because, for
example, they are activities needed to maintain the current waste management system; collect data and resolve urgent
pretreatment issues; or protect workers, the public and the environment. Any interim actions would be actions on
which decisions were needed prior to the scheduled completion of the TWRS EIS. None of the interim actions would prejudice
the ultimate decision to be made on the basis of the TWRS EIS because they would be needed regardless of which alternatives
are selected in that EIS. As described previously in this notice, DOE has already identified the construction of new
tank capacity needed to resolve tank safety issues (identified in the TPA as the Multi-function Waste Tank Facility)
as an interim action, and is planning to prepare a separate EIS for that project. DOE plans to complete the new tanks
EIS by September 1994 to support a near-term TPA milestone. 


