 

3. Waste Determination Procedures



A determination of the volatile organic concentration of a hazardous waste is required by the subpart CC standards
only when a hazardous waste is to be placed in a tank, surface impoundment, or container subject to the rule that does
not use air emission controls in accordance with the requirements of the rule. A TSDF owner or operator is not required
to determine the volatile organic concentration of the waste if it is placed in a tank, surface impoundment, or container
using the required air emission controls.

When the hazardous waste is generated as part of a continuous process, the owner or operator is required to perform
an initial waste determination of the average volatile organic concentration of the waste stream before the first
time any portion of the material in the waste stream is placed in a waste management unit subject to the rule, and thereafter
update the information used for the waste determination at least once every 12 months following the date of the initial
waste determination. When the hazardous waste is generated as part of a batch process that is performed repeatedly
but not necessarily continuously, the owner or operator is required to perform an initial waste determination of
the average volatile organic concentration for one or more representative waste batches generated by the process
before the first time any portion of the material in the these waste batches is placed in a waste management unit subject
to the rule, and thereafter update the information used for the waste determination at least once every 12 months following
the date of the initial waste determination. For either case, the owner or operator is required to perform a new waste
determination whenever changes to the process generating the hazardous waste are reasonably likely to cause the
average volatile organic concentration to increase to a level at or above 100 ppmw. If an average volatile organic
concentration is used, an initial waste determination must be performed for each averaging period.

Waste determinations should be performed for any waste that is generated as a part of an unplanned event or is generated
as a part of an event that is not included in the normal operating conditions for the source or process generating the
hazardous waste. Examples of an unplanned event include malfunctions that affect the operation of the process or
that alter the composition of the waste or product. Examples of events that are not normal operating conditions include
maintenance activities and equipment cleaning. Normal operating conditions for the source or process generating
the waste include cyclic process operations such as start-up and shutdown.

For processes that have variations in normal operating conditions such that the waste volatile organic concentration
may exceed 100 ppmw, but for which the average waste volatile organic concentration for the averaging period is below
100 ppmw, documentation must be retained in the facility operating record that specifies the following information:
(1) The maximum and minimum waste volatile organic concentration values that will occur for that averaging period;
(2) the circumstances under which a waste volatile organic concentration above 100 ppmw would occur, and; (3) the
calculations and waste determination procedures used as the basis for the determination of the average volatile
organic concentration. For a given averaging period, if there are no deviations from the operating circumstances
or from the maximum or minimum waste volatile organic concentrations specified in the operating plan, then no additional
waste determinations would be required after the initial waste determination for that averaging period.

The subpart CC standards include provisions that allow a TSDF owner or operator to use either direct measurement or
knowledge of the waste to determine the volatile organic concentration of a hazardous waste. The following paragraphs
describe these two options available to the owner or operator for performing a waste determination.

a. 

Direct measurement.

 When the hazardous waste is generated on a continuous basis, the averaging period to be used for determining the volatile
organic concentration on a mass-weighted average basis must be designated and recorded. This averaging period can
represent any time interval that the hazardous waste flows until such time that a new waste determination must be performed
pursuant to the requirements of the rule. However, this averaging period cannot exceed 1 year. A sufficient number
of samples, but no less than four, must be collected to represent the complete range of organic compositions and organic
quantities that occur in the hazardous waste stream during the entire averaging period due to normal variations in
the operating conditions for the source or process generating the hazardous waste.

When the hazardous waste is generated as part of a batch process that is performed repeatedly but not necessarily continuously,
samples are collected from one or more representative waste batches generated by the process. The volatile organic
concentration for the waste is calculated as a mass-weighted average based on the analysis results for all of the waste
samples collected for these waste batches. A sufficient number of samples, but no less than four, must be collected
to represent the organic composition for each representative batch.

Each sample of the hazardous waste is to be collected in accordance with the requirements specified in ``Test Methods
for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication No. SW846, third edition, November
1986, as amended by Update I, November 15, 1992. Sufficient information must be recorded to document the waste quantity
and the operating conditions for the source, process, or waste management unit generating the hazardous waste represented
by each sample collected.

Each of the collected waste samples is to be prepared and analyzed in accordance with the requirements of Method 25D
in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A. The volatile organic concentration for a hazardous waste on a mass-weighted average
basis is then calculated by entering the analysis results for all of the collected waste samples into an equation specified
in the rule.



