 

H. 

Product Name and Labeling.

 The majority of the commenters (primarily food manufacturers) stated that FSIS should continue with its current
labeling policy regarding mechanically separated poultry that allows the declaration of mechanically separated
poultry as ``(Kind)'' or ``(Kind) meat'' when used as an ingredient in a poultry or meat food product. The commenters
suggested that any changes in the current policy will have a severe economic impact on both the poultry and meat industries.
Many of the commenters stated that, ``since there are no health or safety issues regarding the use of mechanically
separated poultry, nutrition labeling satisfies the remaining issue of the consumer's right to know'' that mechanically
separated poultry is in the foods they consume. Therefore, the majority of commenters supported continuance of the
current policy regarding the product name and labeling of mechanically separated poultry (e.g., as ``chicken''
or ``turkey meat''). On the other hand, a few commenters stated that meat and poultry products should be labeled the
same as Mechanically Separated (Species) (MS(S)). 


 FSIS must decide whether, under its statutory authorities, consumers would be protected from misbranded and improperly
labeled poultry and meat food products without the separate declaration of mechanically separated poultry by a regulated
term. The intent of nutrition labeling is to assist consumers in making sound choices in terms of nutrients in the diet.
FSIS believes that nutrition labeling provides some of the information about a food that is important to the consumer
in planning a healthful diet; however, it does fully inform the consumer about the ingredients used to formulate a
food product. Rather, it is the ingredients statement on the label of a product that is the labeling feature that informs
the consumer of the ingredients used to formulate a poultry or meat food product. Therefore, FSIS believes that nutrition
labeling, coupled with an ingredients statement that accurately reflects the ingredients that are used to formulate
a product, is necessary to protect the consumer from misbranded meat and poultry products, i.e., improperly labeled
meat and poultry products. 


 FSIS evaluated the comments that opposed the establishment of a labeling requirement for mechanically separated
poultry 
based on the ``adverse economic impact'' of identifying this 
product by a specific product name in the ingredients statements of products in which it is used as an ingredient, i.e.,
as ``Mechanically Separated (Kind).'' The comments opposing the declaration of mechanically separated poultry
by a specific name associated with a standard did not fully elaborate why consumers would be concerned about its presence
in the products they consume. It was suggested by a few commenters that the name suggested in the tentative position
presented by FSIS was pejorative and that consumers would think that the product they had purchased previously was
now formulated with another ingredient, and would not purchase the product again because it was different or inferior.
However, FSIS believes that such a labeling requirement is necessary in order to fulfill its statutory responsibility
to protect consumers by assuring that the labels of poultry and meat food products are not false or misleading. FSIS
also believes that its continued support of the tentative position stated in the March 1994 ANPR to establish a standardized
name for mechanically separated poultry would be consistent with past Court decisions and regulatory actions regarding
MS(S), a similar product made from livestock, which was determined to be materially different than ``meat.'' Consumers
had the opportunity to provide views on the importance of knowing that MS(S) is an ingredient in their food during rulemaking

actions on MS(S). FSIS' 1982 final rulemaking on MS(S) (47 FR 28214) indicates that material differences in the consistency
and composition of MS(S) place it outside the scope of the product traditionally defined as meat (9 CFR 301.2 (rr)),
and that its differences are such that it should be defined as a distinctive standardized product. Thus, MS(S) must
be identified as a distinct meat food product, e.g., ``mechanically separated pork (or beef),'' and labeled as such
on the products in which it is used as an ingredient (9 CFR 317.2(c) and (f), 319.1, and 319.5) in order to assure that
the labeling of such products is accurate and not misleading. 


 Currently, products that contain mechanically separated poultry are marketed using trade names that identify any
poultry ingredient they are made up of only by the kind name of the poultry used (e.g., ``Chicken Nuggets'' and ``Turkey
Franks''). FSIS believes that it is appropriate to allow these products to continue to be marketed under such names.
These names have a long and uniform history of use. Revocation of these familiar trade names may be a disservice to consumers
if they are mislead to believe that the products they have been purchasing have changed. Although these products contain
tissues other than whole skeletal muscle tissue, FSIS does not believe that consumers will be mislead by trade names
which only include the name of the kind of poultry from which the poultry ingredients are mechanically separated since
any mechanically separated poultry ingredients will be clearly identified as ``mechanically separated (kind)''
in the ingredients statement. FSIS believes that the ingredients statement is the appropriate labeling feature
to inform consumers of the ingredients used to formulate a product. However, FSIS welcomes comments on the names under
which products containing mechanically separated poultry are marketed. 





