 

Both the proposed and pulpwood logging standards contained provisions requiring that safety boots or shoes (excluding
low cut shoes) meet ANSI Safety Standards for Men's Safety-Toe Footwear. The proposal also would have allowed heavy
duty logging style boots with lug or calk soles to be worn when they are appropriate for the job, the terrain, the timber
type and weather conditions. Several State logging standards also require that employees wear logging boots (Ex.
217, 219, 220, 222, 223, 38K). 
While there was considerable comment on the proposed safety boot requirement, commenters generally supported the
need for a safety boot provision (Ex. 511, 517, 519, 524, 527, 528, 529,
533, 543, 550, 551, 554, 555, 563, 567, Tr. W1 63, 110, W2 115,
139). OSHA received the most comment on the issue of who must provide and pay for the safety boots. That issue has been
discussed at length above in the Major Issues section. 
OSHA also received considerable comment opposing the incorporation of the ANSI Z41.1 standard on safety shoes (Tr.
W1 147148). Commenters from cold climate areas, such as Alaska, northern Washington, Idaho and Montana, opposed
the proposed requirement because they contended that the steel toes transmit the warmth produced by their feet, thereby
encouraging the onset of frostbite. 
For several reasons, OSHA has used performance criteria rather than incorporating by reference any foot protection
standard. First, the ANSI standard permits low-cut shoes that do not cover the ankle or provide ankle support. Second,
the ANSI foot protection standard is a testing rule for steel toes of safety shoes. While falling objects may pose a
hazard for logging employees, the greater hazard is penetration of the boot by a chain saw. The ANSI standard does not
address this hazard and it does not provide adequate protection to the entire foot, which is necessary. In addition,
as discussed above, steel-toed boots may cause problems for loggers working in extreme cold. OSHA received comment
about efforts to develop, manufacture and market protective footwear with fiberglass rather than steel toes, but
there is no accepted standard yet. Third, the ANSI standard does not address hazards that are unique to the logging
industry, such as wet conditions and penetration of the boot by a chain saw. Fourth, there is no evidence in the record
of any other consensus standard regarding logging boots. OSHA is aware of efforts by various organizations and associations,
in conjunction with the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM), to develop test standards for personal
protective equipment that is intended to apply directly to loggers and the logging industry. These standards would
be similar to the various Canadian PPE standards developed by the Safety and Engineering Program Laboratory Services
(IRRST) (Ex. 572). 
Instead, the Agency has specified that logging boots that meet certain performance criteria must be worn by each employee.
OSHA has reviewed the rulemaking record and determined some of the most important performance characteristics that
are needed in order to deal with particular hazards that are present in logging operations (e.g., steep and uneven
terrain, wet and cold weather, chain-saw kickback). For example, two hearing participants testified that logging
boots must provide ankle support for the employee (Tr. W1 147, OR 222). Coverage and support of the ankle is necessary
to protect against lacerations and to prevent ankle injury when navigating the rugged terrain that characterizes
much of the logging environment. One commenter also said that logging boots must be waterproof or water repellent
so that the logger would not be exposed to getting trench foot or immersion foot (Tr. W1 147). Finally, commenters said
logging boots must provide protection against penetration by a chain saw if contact is made with the boot (Tr. W1 148,
195, W2 139). 
Several commenters also supported the proposed provision allowing lug or calk-soled boots to be used (Ex. 519,
528, 529). These commenters said that working conditions varied too greatly to require the use of one
type of boot sole for all logging regions. For example, one commenter said that calk boots are considered essential
for safe and secure walking on steep western forest terrain (Ex. 528). Another commenter stated that there
are situations in the south where smooth soled boots are adequate (Ex. 529). In addition, this commenter said
that there are conditions when calk boots might pose a greater danger, such as a machine operator who is continuously
mounting and dismounting a machine via steel platform steps where the calk boots could result in slipping or falling.
As a result, this commenter said that calk and sharp-soled boots should be limited to those situations when the type
of logging operation, terrain, timber size or weather conditions make their use appropriate. The U.S. Department
of the Interior also commented that calk-soled boots may contribute to certain types of logging injuries, such as
knee injuries (Ex. 550). Based on these comments, OSHA specifically allows sharp, calk-soled boots or other
slip-resistant type boots to be worn, provided the employer can demonstrate such boots are needed for the employee's
job, the terrain, the timber type or the weather conditions. 





