 

For this test, align the fiber at 45
&cir; to the polarization 
directions in order to maximize the contribution to each of the 
optical axes. The colors seen are called retardation colors. 
They arise from the recombination of light which has traveled 
through the two separate directions of the crystal. One of the 
rays is retarded behind the other since the light in that 
direction travels slower. On recombination, some of the colors 
which make up white light are enhanced by constructive 
interference and some are suppressed by destructive interference. 
The result is a color dependent on the difference between the 
indices and the thickness of the crystal. The proper colors, 
thicknesses, and retardations are shown on a Michel-Levy chart. 
The three items, retardation, thickness and birefringence are 
related by the following relationship: 








R = t(n

g

_

a

) 

R = retardation, t = crystal thickness in 

m

m, and 



a,g

 = indices of refraction. 

 


Examination of the equation for asbestos minerals reveals that 
the visible colors for almost all common asbestos minerals and 
fiber sizes are shades of gray and black. The eye is relatively 
poor at discriminating different shades of gray. It is very good 
at discriminating different colors. In order to compensate for 
the low retardation, a compensator is added to the light train 
between the polarization elements. The compensator used for this 
test is a gypsum plate of known thickness and birefringence. 
Such a compensator when oriented at 45
&cir; to the polarizer 
direction, provides a retardation of 530 nm of the 530 nm 
wavelength color. This enhances the red color and gives the 
background a characteristic red to red-magenta color. If this 
``full-wave'' compensator is in place when the asbestos preparation 
is inserted into the light train, the colors seen on the fibers 
are quite different. Gypsum, like asbestos has a fast axis and a 
slow axis. When a fiber is aligned with its fast axis in the 
same direction as the fast axis of the gypsum plate, the ray 
vibrating in the slow direction is retarded by both the asbestos 
and the gypsum. This results in a higher retardation than would 
be present for either of the two minerals. The color seen is a 
second order blue. When the fiber is rotated 90
&cir; using the 
rotating stage, the slow direction of the fiber is now aligned 
with the fast direction of the gypsum and the fast direction of 
the fiber is aligned with the slow direction of the gypsum. 
Thus, one ray vibrates faster in the fast direction of the 
gypsum, and slower in the slow direction of the fiber; the other 
ray will vibrate slower in the slow direction of the gypsum and 
faster in the fast direction of the fiber. In this case, the 
effect is subtractive and the color seen is a first order yellow. 
As long as the fiber thickness does not add appreciably to the 
color, the same basic colors will be seen for all asbestos types 
except crocidolite. In crocidolite the colors will be weaker, 
may be in the opposite directions, and will be altered by the 
blue absorption color natural to crocidolite. Hundreds of other 
materials will give the same colors as asbestos, and therefore, 
this test is not definitive for asbestos. The test is useful in 
discriminating against fiberglass or other amorphous fibers such 
as some synthetic fibers. Certain synthetic fibers will show 
retardation colors different than asbestos; however, there are 
some forms of polyethylene and aramid which will show morphology 
and retardation colors similar to asbestos minerals. This test 
must be supplemented with a positive identification test when 
birefringent fibers are present which can not be excluded by 
morphology. This test is relatively ineffective for use on 
fibers less than 1 

m

m in diameter. For positive confirmation TEM 
or SEM should be used if no larger bundles or fibers are visible. 



4.6. Dispersion Staining 



Dispersion microscopy or dispersion staining is the method of 
choice for the identification of asbestos in bulk materials. 
Becke line analysis is used by some laboratories and yields the 
same results as does dispersion staining for asbestos and can be 
used in lieu of dispersion staining. Dispersion staining is 
performed on the same platform as the phase-polar analysis with 
the analyzer and compensator removed. One polarizing element 
remains to define the direction of the light so that the 
different indices of refraction of the fibers may be separately 
determined. Dispersion microscopy is a dark-field technique when 
used for asbestos. Particles are imaged with scattered light. 
Light which is unscattered is blocked from reaching the eye 
either by the back field image mask in a McCrone objective or a 
back field image mask in the phase condenser. The most 
convenient method is to use the rotating phase condenser to move 
an oversized phase ring into place. The ideal size for this ring 
is for the central disk to be just larger than the objective 
entry aperture as viewed in the back focal plane. The larger the 
disk, the less scattered light reaches the eye. This will have 
the effect of diminishing the intensity of dispersion color and 
will shift the actual color seen. The colors seen vary even on 
microscopes from the same manufacturer. This is due to the 
different bands of wavelength exclusion by different mask sizes. 
The mask may either reside in the condenser or in the objective 
back focal plane. It is imperative that the analyst determine by 
experimentation with asbestos standards what the appropriate 
colors should be for each asbestos type. The colors depend also 
on the temperature of the preparation and the exact chemistry of 
the asbestos. Therefore, some slight differences from the 
standards should be allowed. This is not a serious problem for 
commercial asbestos uses. This technique is used for 
identification of the indices of refraction for fibers by 
recognition of color. There is no direct numerical readout of 
the index of refraction. Correlation of color to actual index of 
refraction is possible by referral to published conversion 
tables. This is not necessary for the analysis of asbestos. 
Recognition of appropriate colors along with the proper 
morphology are deemed sufficient to identify the commercial 
asbestos minerals. Other techniques including SEM, TEM, and XRD 
may be required to provide additional information in order to 
identify other types of asbestos. 

Make a preparation in the suspected matching high dispersion 
oil, e.g., n=1.550 for chrysotile. Perform the preliminary 
tests to determine whether the fibers are birefringent or not. 
Take note of the morphological character. Wavy fibers are 
indicative of chrysotile while long, straight, thin, frayed 
fibers are indicative of amphibole asbestos. This can aid in the 
selection of the appropriate matching oil. The microscope is set 
up and the polarization direction is noted as in Section 4.4. 
Align a fiber with the polarization direction. Note the color. 
This is the color parallel to the polarizer. Then rotate the 
fiber rotating the stage 90
&cir; so that the polarization direction 
is across the fiber. This is the perpendicular position. Again 
note the color. Both colors must be consistent with standard 
asbestos minerals in the correct direction for a positive 
identification of asbestos. If only one of the colors is correct 
while the other is not, the identification is not positive. If 
the colors in both directions are bluish-white, the analyst has 
chosen a matching index oil which is higher than the correct 
matching oil, e.g. the analyst has used n = 1.620 where 
chrysotile is present. The next lower oil (Section 3.5.) should 
be used to prepare another specimen. If the color in both 
directions is yellow-white to straw-yellow-white, this indicates 
that the index of the oil is lower than the index of the fiber, 
e.g. the preparation is in n = 1.550 while anthophyllite is 
present. Select the next higher oil (Section 3.5.) and prepare 
another slide. Continue in this fashion until a positive 
identification of all asbestos species present has been made or 
all possible asbestos species have been ruled out by negative 
results in this test. Certain plant fibers can have similar 
dispersion colors as asbestos. Take care to note and evaluate 
the morphology of the fibers or remove the plant fibers in pre-preparation. Coating material on the fibers such as
carbonate or 
vinyl may destroy the dispersion color. Usually, there will be 
some outcropping of fiber which will show the colors sufficient 
for identification. When this is not the case, treat the sample 
as described in Section 3.3. and then perform dispersion 
staining. Some samples will yield to Becke line analysis if they 
are coated or electron microscopy can be used for identification. 



5. References 




5.1. Crane, D.T.,

 Asbestos in Air,

 OSHA method ID160, Revised 
November 1992. 

5.2. Ford, W.E.,

 Dana's Textbook of Mineralogy

; Fourth Ed.; John 
Wiley and Son, New York, 1950, p. vii. 

5.3. Selikoff,.I.J., Lee, D.H.K.,

 Asbestos and Disease,

 Academic 
Press, New York, 1978, pp. 3, 20. 

5.4.

 Women Inspectors of Factories.

 Annual Report for 1898, H.M. 
Statistical Office, London, p. 170 (1898). 



