 

Finally, it is clear that some in the credit union community have misunderstood why the NCUA Board proposed requiring
listing of subsidiary entities included in a common bond. The agency is in the process of establishing a field of membership
database for internal monitoring of overlaps. Federal credit union listing of all subgroups would greatly enhance
the reliability and overall usefulness of the database. But the NCUA Board sees no need to impose this requirement
on a federal credit union which finds that process overly burdensome, and the final IRPS has deleted this portion of
the proposal. Such a credit union should understand, however, that if a specific group is not mentioned in its charter,
and the group in good faith states in a request for service from another credit union that it does not have credit union
service available (as often happens with new subsidiaries of sponsoring groups), an overlap may inadvertently be
permitted without full consideration for the overlapped credit union's interests. If the overlap is discovered
after the other credit union has begun service, it is likely that, in the interests of the group and the other credit
union, NCUA will permit the overlap to continue.



B. Associational Common Bonds



1. Comments



The proposal clarified that a federal credit union seeking to include an association in its field of membership may
only include natural persons who pay dues and have voting rights or hold office in the association. Eight commenters
supported this change. Twenty-one commenters opposed the proposal. In general, these commenters believed that
not all natural person associations require a member to pay dues. A few commenters stated that the proposal would harm
church associations that have members that do not pay dues. Four commenters stated the proposal would harm low-income
cooperatives. One commenter stated that the collection of dues for an associational group may be entirely irrelevant
to the group's purpose or mission. One commenter stated that this requirement can not be reasonably monitored by a
federal credit union.

The proposal also clarified that a federal credit union's field of membership has to be updated and approved by NCUA
when an association changed its bylaws to modify the scope of those eligible for membership. Six commenters approved
of this clarification. One commenter stated that without this limitation an associational credit union would be
allowed to change to an open field of membership. Thirteen commenters disapproved of the clarification. Six of these
commenters believed that if an association changed its bylaws frequently it could cause an administrative nightmare
for the credit union and NCUA if the charter had to be amended every time the bylaws changed. One commenter believed
the main concern should be whether the association in question was a viable functioning organization. This commenter
believed that an association with membership qualification requirements, bylaws and meetings should be defined
as a functioning organization.

The proposal removed the requirement that students must join the credit union prior to family members becoming eligible.
Five commenters agreed with this change.

One commenter stated that the final IRPS should be modified to allow for inclusion of an entire association in a federal
credit union at a higher level if that level provided broad based services which were not available at a lower level.



2. NCUA Board Decision



The NCUA Board agrees that the dues-paying and voting rights requirements of the proposal could be unfair to some bona
fide associations. The final IRPS lists these elements as factors to be considered, not as requirements.

The Board has also attempted to clarify in the final IRPS the ambiguities noted by some of the commenters.

The Board does not agree, however, that it should alter its present policy in favor of service to associations at the
lowest possible level, or that it is appropriate to allow associations to modify portions of their bylaws which dramatically
change the make-up of membership without agency review. The final IRPS maintains these provisions as in the proposal.




VI. Select Group Addition Issues



