 



Estimated financial assistance. 

(1) The estimated amount of assistance that a student has been or will be awarded for a period of enrollment, beginning
on or after July 1, 1993, for which the loan is sought, from Federal, State, institutional, or other scholarship, grant,
financial need-based employment, or loan programs, including but not limited to_



(i) Veterans' educational benefits paid under Chapters 30, 31, 32, and 35 of Title 38 of the United States Code; 

(ii) Educational benefits paid under Chapters 106 and 107 of Title 10 of the United States Code (Selected Reserve Educational
Assistance Program); 

(iii) Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) scholarships and subsistence allowances awarded under Chapter 2 of
Title 10 and Chapter 2 of Title 37 of the United States Code; 

(iv) Benefits paid under Pub. L. 97376, section 156: Restored Entitlement Program for Survivors (or Quayle
benefits); 

(v) Benefits paid under Pub. L. 96342, section 903: Educational Assistance Pilot Program; 

(vi) Any educational benefits paid because of enrollment in a postsecondary education institution; 

(vii) The estimated amount of other Federal student financial aid, including, but not limited to, a Stafford loan,
Pell Grant and, to the extent funding is available and according to the school's award packaging policy, campus-based
aid the student is expected to receive; 

(viii) In the case of a PLUS loan, the estimated amount of other Federal student financial aid, including but not limited
to, a Stafford loan, Pell Grant and campus-based aid that the student has been or will be awarded. 

(2) The estimated amount of assistance does not include_

(i) Those amounts used to replace the expected family contribution, including_

(A) Nonsubsidized Stafford loan amounts for which interest benefits are not payable; 

(B) SLS and PLUS loan amounts; or 

(C) Private and state-sponsored loan programs; and 

(ii) Perkins loan and College Work-Study funds that the school determines the student has declined. 



* * * * * 





Grace period.

 *** For an SLS borrower who also has a Federal Stafford loan on which the borrower has not yet entered
repayment, the grace period is an equivalent period after the borrower ceases to be enrolled as at least a half-time
student at an eligible institution. 



* * * * * 





Lender.

 *** 

(2) With respect to a National or State chartered bank, a mutual savings bank, a savings and loan association, a stock
savings bank, or a credit union_

(i) The phrase ``subject to examination and supervision'' in section 435(d) of the Act means ``subject to examination
and supervision in its capacity as a lender''; 

(ii) The phrase ``does not have as its primary consumer credit function the making or holding of loans made to students
under this part'' in section 435(d) of the Act means that the lender does not, or in the case of a bank holding company,
the company's wholly-owned subsidiaries as a group do not at any time, hold FFEL Program loans that total more than
one-half of the lender's or subsidiaries' combined consumer credit loan portfolio, including home mortgages held
by the lender or its subsidiaries. 

(3) A bank that is subject to examination and supervision by an agency of the United States, making student loans as
a trustee, may be an eligible lender if it makes loans under an express trust, operated as a lender in the FFEL programs
prior to January 1, 1975, and met the requirements of this paragraph prior to July 23, 1992. 



* * * * * 





Nonsubsidized Stafford loan. 

A Stafford loan made prior to October 1, 1992 that does not qualify for interest benefits under 682.301(b) or
special allowance payments under 682.302. 



* * * * * 





Repayment period. 

(1) For a Stafford loan, the period beginning on the date following the expiration of the grace period and ending no
later than 10 years from the date the first payment of principal is due from the borrower, exclusive of any period of
deferment or forbearance. 

(2) For unsubsidized Stafford loans, the period that begins on the day after the expiration of the applicable grace
period that follows after the student ceases to be enrolled on at least a half-time basis and ending no later than 10
years from that date, exclusive of any period of deferment or forbearance. However, payments of interest are the responsibility
of the borrower during the in-school and grace period, but may be capitalized by the lender. 

(3) For SLS loans, the period that begins on the date the loan is disbursed, or if the loan is disbursed in more than one
installment, on the date the last disbursement is made and ending no later than 10 years from that date, exclusive of
any period of deferment or forbearance. The first payment of principal is due within 60 days after the loan is fully
disbursed unless a borrower who is also a Stafford loan borrower but who, has not yet entered repayment on the Stafford
loan requests that commencement of repayment on the SLS loan be delayed until the borrower's grace period on the Stafford
loan expires. Interest on the loan accrues and is due and payable from the date of the first disbursement of the loan.
The borrower is responsible for paying interest on the loan during the grace period and periods of deferment, but the
interest may be capitalized by the lender. 

(4) For Federal PLUS loans, the period that begins on the date the loan is disbursed, or if the loan is disbursed in more
than one installment, on the date the last disbursement is made and ending no later than 10 years from that date, exclusive
of any period of deferment or forbearance. Interest on the loan accrues and is due and payable from the date of the first
disbursement of the loan. 




