 

(iv) charges attributable to the failure of the vessel to present before the canceling date including, but not limited
to inspection, fumigation, and carrying charges, will be for the account of the ocean carrier.
(v) ocean freight is earned under a charter party when the vessel and cargo arrive at the first port of discharge, Provided,
That if a force majeure as described in paragraph (f)(3) below prevents the vessels arrival at the first port of discharge,
95% of the ocean freight is payable or, if the charter party provides for completing additional requirements after
discharge such as bagging, stacking, or inland transportation, 85% of the ocean freight is payable, at the time the
General Sales Manager determines that such force majeure was the cause of nonarrival; and
(vi) when the ocean carrier offers delivery to destination ports on U.S.-flag vessels, but foreign-flag vessels
are used for any part of the voyage to the destination port, without first obtaining the approval of the Cooperating
Sponsor, KCCO, and any other approval that may be required by the Program Agreement, the ocean freight rate will be
reduced to the lowest responsive foreign-flag vessel rate offered in response to the same invitation for bids and
the carrier agrees to pay CCC the difference between the contracted ocean freight rate and the freight rate offered
by such foreign-flag vessel.
(f) 

Freight Payment by CCC.

 When the Program Agreement provides that CCC will pay any portion of the ocean freight:
(1) 100% of the ocean freight is payable upon receipt of the documents specified in paragraph (g) of this section, unless
the charter party or liner booking note provides for completing additional requirements after discharge such as
bagging, stacking, or inland transportation, in which case 85% of the ocean freight is payable. The balance of freight
remaining will be paid upon receipt of notification from the Cooperating Sponsor that the vessel has fulfilled all
the requirements of the charter party or liner booking contract in a successful manner.
(2) Demurrage will not be paid or reimbursed by CCC.
(3) CCC will waive the requirement in paragraph (g) of this section for a notice of arrival if the General Sales Manager
determines upon submission of evidence on the part of the ocean carrier that the vessel is lost or unable to proceed
to destination after completion of loading as a result of one or more of the following causes (force majeure): Damage
caused by perils of the sea or other waters; collisions; wrecks; stranding without the fault of the carrier; jettison;
fire from any cause; Act of God; public enemies or pirates; arrest or restraint of princes, rulers, or peoples without
the fault of the ocean carrier; wars; public disorders; captures; or detention of public authority in the interest
of public safety. If the General sales Manager determines that a force majeure prevents the vessels arrival at the
first port of discharge, 95% of the ocean freight is payable or, if the charter party provides for completing additional
requirements after discharge such as bagging, stacking, or inland transportation, 85% of the ocean freight is payable
upon submission of the documents specified in paragraph (g) of this section, except that the notice of arrival need
not be submitted. The balance of ocean freight shall not be due or payable.
(g) 

Documentation required for payment or reimbursement of freight charges by CCC.
(1) One copy of completed Form CCC512;
(2) Three copies of ``on board'' bills of lading indicating the freight rate and signed by originating carrier;
(3) National Cargo Bureau vessel hold inspection and certificate of loading as applicable;
(4) Two signed copies of liner booking note or charter party covering ocean transportation of cargo;
(5) For charter movements, a notice of arrival at first discharge point, to be submitted by the Cooperating Sponsor;
(6)(i) Request by the Cooperating Sponsor for reimbursement of ocean freight indicating amount due, accompanied
by a certification from the ocean carrier that payment has been made;
(ii) Request for direct payment of ocean freight to the ocean carrier, indicating amount due; or
(iii) Request for direct payment of ocean freight differential to the ocean carrier, accompanied by a certification
from the carrier that payment of the Cooperating Sponsor's portion of the ocean freight has been received.


1499.9

Restrictions on commodity use and distribution.


(a) The Cooperating Sponsor may use the donated commodities only in accordance with the terms of the Program Agreement.
(b) Donated commodities may not be distributed within the importing country on the basis of political affiliation,
geographic location, or the ethnic, tribal or religious identify or affiliations of the potential consumers or recipients.
(c) Donated commodities may not be distributed, handled or allocated by military forces except where such activities
are specifically authorized by CCC.


1499.10

Agreement between Cooperating Sponsor and Recipient Agency(ies).


(a) The Cooperating Sponsor shall, prior to the transfer of any donated commodities, monetized proceeds or program
income, enter into and formally execute an agreement with each recipient agency engaged for the purpose of the distribution
of commodities or for the implementation of any other approved activity. Copies of such agreements shall be provided
to the appropriate Agricultural Counselor or Attache. Such agreements shall include the following terms:


