 

Section 203.5_Disclosure and Reporting 


Paragraph (a)_Reporting to Agency 




Change in reporting deadline.

 Currently, institutions are required to file their HMDA data with supervisory agencies by March 1 following the year
to which the data relate. The Board proposes to change the due date to February 1. 
Statutory amendments contained in the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992, 106 Stat. 3889, provide that
starting with loan and application data for calendar year 1994, the FFIEC shall make ``every effort'' to ensure that
individual lenders' public disclosure statements are available at the lenders' offices before July 1 of the following
year. Similarly, the amendments call for the FFIEC to make both the individual disclosures and the aggregate tables
available at the central depositories before September 1. 
In 1993, the individual lenders' disclosure statements for 1992 lending activity became available to the public
the first week of August, and the disclosure statements and aggregate reports became available at central depositories
the first week of November. This year, the processing schedule calls for disclosures to be available at institutions
in July and at central depositories in October. Thus, progress is being made toward meeting the statutory targets
for earlier availability of HMDA data. But given the high volume of data being processed, the Board believes it is necessary
to move up the date for submitting the raw data to supervisory agencies. 


Reporting in Machine-Readable Format. 

In processing the HMDA data, the Board and the other agencies use various means to identify and correct data errors.
For example, the data are run through computerized edit checks designed to detect errors and omissions in the data
fields. Where these are found, the agencies send the reports back to the institution for correction. 
Lenders whose HMDALAR contains more than 100 line entries are generally expected by the agencies to submit
their data in machine-readable format, such as PC diskette or magnetic tape. The Board and the other agencies have
encouraged lenders to submit their HMDALARs in automated form, and all but one of the agencies provide PC software
that can be used to compile data on diskettes. This software has built-in edit checks for accuracy and is furnished
free of charge. Software packages that are widely available from private vendors also contain the computerized edits
used by the Board. Nonetheless, many lending institutions still submit their HMDA data in paper form, and the agencies
have found that these paper submissions tend to contain a substantially higher number of errors than submissions
in machine-readable form. 
The Board proposes to require that all institutions report HMDA data in machine-readable form and that they edit their
data before submitting it, either using the agency-supplied HMDA software or using the same edits in private vendors'
software. 
The proposed change would help lenders to ensure submission of accurate data. 
The overall accuracy of the data has improved each year since 1990, the first year of expanded reporting under the amendments
in the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, in part because institutions have increasingly
submitted data by diskette, magnetic tape, or Fedline. However, further improvements in data quality are needed,
and the pre-edited reporting of data in machine-readable form would help in bringing about such improvements. Machine-readable
reporting would also assist the agencies in meeting the new public disclosure deadlines, by reducing the time needed
to enter the data from each reporting institution into the HMDA processing database. 
The Board recognizes that some financial institutions subject to HMDA might not have the computer capability to compile
and report their data in machine-readable form. The Board solicits comment, therefore, on whether requiring machine-readable
data submission from all institutions would create a hardship for some, and if so, whether supervisory agencies should
have discretion to grant waivers from this requirement on a case-by-case basis. For example, a waiver might be granted
in a case where an institution does not itself own or have ready access to a personal computer nor have access through
a service provider. 


Paragraph (e)_Notice of Availability 


The Board proposes to make a technical change to 203.5(e) concerning the notice of availability that institutions
are required to post. Pursuant to amendments contained in the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992, lending
institutions must now make available to the public not only their disclosure statements but also their loan/application
registers (after deleting certain data fields). These statutory amendments were incorporated into Regulation
C in March 1993 (see 58 FR 13403, March 11, 1993). 
The proposed change will revise the notice language to reflect that HMDA data in addition to disclosure statements
are available from institutions. 


Appendix A_Form and Instructions for Completion of HMDA Loan/Application Register 


II. Required Format and Reporting Procedures 




Paragraph A.

 The Board proposes to require that all HMDA-covered institutions submit data in machine-readable form, except that
supervisory agencies may have discretion to grant relief from this requirement in cases of hardship. See the discussion
of this proposed change under 203.5(a), above. 


Paragraph E.

 A new paragraph II. E. would be added to the HMDALAR instructions to reflect the proposed requirement that the
HMDALAR be kept current within one month of final action during the year as transactions occur. See the discussion
under 203.4(a), above. 


III. Submission of HMDALAR and Public Release of Data 



