 


e. Implementation Measures 





Under the CWA, the states have a primary role in developing measures implementing water quality criteria. EPA expects
that the State Board would implement these salinity criteria by making appropriate revisions to operational requirements
included in water rights permits issued by the State Board. Consistent with the mandates of section 101(g) of the CWA,
the State Board has full discretion in determining the source of water flows necessary to meet these criteria. EPA
has intentionally drafted its proposed criteria to be measured at or downstream of the confluence of the Sacramento
and San Joaquin Rivers. This allows the State Board maximum latitude in choosing a mix of flow conditions and export
restrictions in both river basins. 



Although the State Board has full discretion to develop an implementation plan for these criteria in the manner it
chooses, EPA and the other federal agencies involved in water resource management issues in the Bay/Delta (USFWS,
NMFS, and USBR) urge the State Board to spread the burden across as broad a spectrum of water users as possible. The economic
analysis prepared in conjunction with this proposal suggests that spreading the burden results in substantially
lower costs than does imposing the burden on a particular geographical area or a narrowly defined group of water users.
This is not just a matter of fairness. The federal agencies' preliminary discussions with water project managers
indicated that increasing the pool of contributors substantially increases the operational flexibility of the
water system, and thereby reduces the total impact of meeting the proposed criteria. For that reason, the federal
agencies hope the State Board will continue the concept it adopted in its proposal for D1630, and will allocate
the burden of meeting these criteria across the broad range of the state's water users. 




2. Fish Migration and Cold-Water Habitat Criteria 




a. Background 





The State's designated uses for the Bay/Delta include Cold Freshwater Habitat to sustain aquatic resources associated
with a coldwater environment, and Fish Migration to protect those fish which migrate through the estuary. The migratory
fish species associated with the cold-water environment in the Bay/Delta are chinook salmon (

Oncorhynchus tshawytscha

) and steelhead trout (

Oncorhynchus mykiss

). 



Currently there are four distinct populations of salmon in the Sacramento/San Joaquin river systems, each named
for the season of their migration upstream as adults. The fall-run population is now the most numerous; in recent years,
typically 90 percent of all Central Valley spawners are fall-run fish. Increased hatchery production of fall-run
fish has resulted in stable spawning returns of fall-run fish passing the Red Bluff Diversion Dam on the Sacramento
River; however, wild fall-run chinook abundance is low and is decreasing. The Sacramento River system still supports
small winter-run, spring-run and late fall-run populations, but these populations have all declined dramatically
in recent years (USFWS 1992a, WRINTUSFWS7). The winter-run population is now listed as threatened
under the ESA. The spring-run population has recently reached low enough levels to be recognized as a species of special
concern by the State of California. 



Steelhead trout are also cold-water migratory fish within the Sacramento River System. They have suffered a 90 percent
decline since the late 1960's, and are supported largely by hatchery production (CDFG 1992a, WRINTDFG14).





