 

The PBGC will determine the feasibility of collection by administrative offset, whether to accept a repayment agreement
in lieu of offset, and how to apply amounts collected by administrative offset on multiple debts as provided in the
Federal Claims Collection Standards (4 CFR 102.3).

(a) 

Feasibility.

 The PBGC will determine whether collection by administrative offset is feasible on a case-by-case basis in the exercise
of sound discretion. In making such determinations, the PBGC will consider:

(1) Whether administrative offset can be accomplished, both practically and legally;

(2) Whether administrative offset is best suited to further and protect all governmental interests;

(3) In appropriate circumstances, the debtor's financial condition; and

(4) Whether offset would tend to interfere substantially with or defeat the purposes of the program authorizing the
payments against which offset is contemplated.

(b) 

Repayment agreements.

 The PBGC will exercise its discretion in determining whether to accept a repayment agreement in lieu of offset, balancing
the Government's interest in collecting the debt against fairness to the debtor. If the debt is delinquent (within
the meaning of 4 CFR 101.2(b)) and the debtor has not disputed its existence or amount, the PBGC will accept a repayment
agreement in lieu of offset only if the debtor is able to establish that offset would result in undue financial hardship
or would be against equity and good conscience.

(c) 

Multiple debts.

 When the PBGC collects multiple debts by administrative offset, it will apply the recovered amounts to those debts
in accordance with the best interests of the United States, as determined by the facts and circumstances of the particular
case, paying special attention to applicable statutes of limitations.



2609.23 

Administrative offset procedures.



(a) 

General.

 Except as otherwise required by law or as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, the PBGC will not effect administrative
offset against a payment to be made to a debtor prior to the completion of the procedures specified in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this section. However, the PBGC will not duplicate any notice or other procedural protection it previously
provided in connection with the same debt under some other statutory or regulatory authority, such as part 2606 of
this subchapter.

(b) 

Notice.

 The PBGC will provide written notice informing the debtor of the following:

(1) The nature and amount of the debt, and the PBGC's intention to collect by offset;

(2) That the debtor may inspect and copy PBGC records pertaining to the debt in accordance with part 2603 or part 2607
of this subchapter, as applicable (access under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) or the Privacy Act (5
U.S.C. 552a), respectively);

(3) How and from whom the debtor may obtain administrative review of a determination of indebtedness;

(4) The facts and circumstances that the PBGC will consider in determining whether to accept a repayment agreement
in lieu of offset; and

(5) If the PBGC has not previously demanded payment of the debt, the date by which payment must be made to avoid further
collection action.

(c) 

Administrative review.

 (1) A debtor may obtain review within the PBGC of a determination of indebtedness by submitting a written request for
review, designated as such, to the PBGC official specified in the notice of indebtedness. Unless another regulation
in this chapter specifies a different period of time, such a request must be submitted within 30 days after the date
of a PBGC notice under paragraph (b) of this section.

(2) A request for review must:

