 


Monday


August 22, 1994





Part III


Nuclear Regulatory Commission





10 CFR Part 20, et al
Radiological Criteria for Decommissioning; Proposed Rule









Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 161/Monday, August 22, 1994/Proposed Rules 




<USDEPT>NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION </USDEPT>



<USDEPT>10 CFR Parts 20, 30, 40, 50, 51, 70, and 72 </USDEPT>





<RINDOCK>RIN 3150AD65 </RINDOCK>



Radiological Criteria for Decommissioning 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed rule. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) is proposing to amend its regulations regarding decommissioning of licensed
facilities to provide specific radiological criteria for the decommissioning of lands and structures. 



The proposed criteria would apply to the decommissioning of all licensed facilities and facilities subject to the
Commission's jurisdiction. The Commission expects to apply these criteria in determining the adequacy of remediation
of residual radioactivity resulting from the possession or use of source, byproduct, and special nuclear material.
For high-level and low-level waste disposal facilities, the criteria would apply only to ancillary surface facilities
that support radioactive waste disposal activities because criteria for closure of the remainder of the facility
and termination of the license are currently specified. For uranium mills, the criteria apply to decommissioning
of the facility but not to soil cleanup and the disposal of uranium mill tailings. The criteria would apply to decommissioning
of nuclear facilities that operate through their normal lifetime, as well as to those that may be shut down prematurely.
However, they would not apply to sites already covered by a decommissioning plan approved by the Commission before
the effective date of this rule, if it is adopted in final form. 

The intent of this rulemaking is to provide a clear and consistent regulatory basis for determining the extent to which
lands and structures must be remediated before a site can be considered decommissioned. The Commission believes
that inclusion of criteria in the regulations would result in more efficient and consistent licensing actions related
to the numerous and frequently complex site remediation and decommissioning activities anticipated in the future.
The Commission has reassessed the basis for the residual contamination levels contained in existing guidance in
light of changes in basic radiation protection standards, improvements in remediation and radiation detection
technologies, decommissioning experience obtained during the past 15 years, and comments received from workshops
held as part of this rulemaking effort. 

The NRC presently allows decommissioning on a site-specific basis using existing guidance. However, the Commission
believes that codifying radiological criteria for decommissioning in the regulations would allow the NRC to more
effectively carry out its function of protecting public health and the environment at decommissioned sites by providing
for more efficient use of NRC and licensee resources, consistent application across all types of licenses, and a predictable
basis for decommissioning planning. In addition it would eliminate protracted delays in decommissioning which
result as licensees wait for NRC to promulgate regulatory criteria before proceeding with decommissioning of their
facilities. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Submit comments December 20, 1994. Comments received after this date will be considered if it is practical to do so,
but the Commission is able to assure consideration only for comments received on or before this date. 



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Send comments to: Secretary, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555. Attn: Docketing and Service
Branch. 



Hand deliver comments to: 11555 Rockville Pike, Rockville, Maryland, between 7:45 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. Federal workdays.


Comments may be submitted electronically, in either ASCII text or Wordperfect format, by calling the NRC Enhanced
Participatory Rulemaking on Radiological Criteria for Decommissioning Electronic Bulletin Board, 18008806091
(58 FR 37760; July 13, 1993). The bulletin board may be accessed using a personal computer, a modem, and most commonly
available communications software packages. Communication software parameters should be set as follows: parity
to none, data bits to 8, and stop bits to 1 (N,8,1). Use ANSI or VT100 terminal emulation. Background documents
on the rulemaking are also available for downloading and viewing on the bulletin board. For 
more information call Ms. Christine Daily, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555. Phone (301)
4156026; FAX (301) 4155385. 

Documents related to this rulemaking may be examined at the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW. (Lower Level),
Washington, DC. Many of these documents may also be viewed and downloaded electronically via the Electronic Bulletin
Board established by NRC for this rulemaking. 

Single copies of the regulatory analysis may be obtained by written request from RPHEB Secretary, Office of Nuclear
Regulatory Research, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555. 

Single copies of the draft generic environmental impact statement (NUREG1496): ``Background as a Residual
Radioactivity Criterion for Decommissioning, Appendix A to the GEIS in Support of Radiological Criteria for Decommissioning
Nuclear Facilities'' (NUREG1501); or the staff's working draft regulatory guidance (NUREG1500)
may be obtained by written request or telefax (3015042260) from: Distribution Services, Printing
and Mail Services Branch, Office of Administration, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555.


The NRC requests public comment on the draft generic environmental impact statement (NUREG1496). Comments
on NUREG1496 may be submitted to: Chief, Rules Review and Directives Branch, Division of Freedom of Information
and Publication Services, Mail Stop T6D59, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555. Hand
deliver comments on NUREG1496 to 11545 Rockville Pike, Maryland between 7:45 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. on Federal
workdays. Comments on NUREG1496 may be submitted electronically as indicated elsewhere under the 

ADDRESSES

 heading. 



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 James C. Malaro, Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555,
telephone (301) 4156201. 

</FURTHER>

