 

B. Minimum Requirements for a Management Program 



(1) There should be a controlled harvest with the methods and seasons determined by the State; 

(2) All hides, meat, and parts should be registered and marked; and 

(3) Harvest level objectives should be determined annually by the State. 

In applying these guidelines, the Service considers the following types of information on the conditions of the population:
(a) A current estimate [if such information is available] of the total number of animals in the pre-harvest population
derived by appropriate scientific censusing methodology; (b) a description of ongoing research being conducted
to assess the distribution, abundance, or general condition of the species in the State with a summarization of results
obtained, including results of any analysis of age structure or reproductive parameters; and (c) an assessment of
long-term population trends of the species in the State and the relationship of these trends to habitat conditions,
management practices, harvest pressure, and/or other factors. 

Information on anticipated harvest to be considered by the Service includes: (a) The number of animals to be harvested
[by county or game management unit, if data are available at these local levels]; (b) the number of alligator hunters
expected to be licensed; and (c) the time of the harvest season. 

In the case of the alligator, as with most other wild animals, the resource is monitored by a variety of techniques that
yield information used in evaluating the condition of a population. As these data are accumulated over time, they
reflect trends and call attention to changes in the populations. Habitat information, indices of population size,
age and sex structure, and harvest information are all used to evaluate population status. Although the Endangered
Species Act Amendments of 1982 provided that population estimates are not to be required for the approval of export
of Appendix II wildlife, if such estimates are provided by the States or are otherwise available, they will be considered
together with information of the types listed above in making findings on nondetriment. 

In addition to considering the effect of trade on species or populations native to the United States that are being
exported, the Scientific Authority will also monitor the status of the American alligator to: (a) Determine whether
treatment of the American alligator remains appropriate; and (b) detect any significant downward trends in the populations
and, where necessary, advise on more restrictive export controls in response to these trends. This monitoring and
assessment will follow the same procedures adopted for other CITES-listed species (see 49 FR 590, January 5, 1984).
The Service will review information on population status and harvest data relevant to the no detriment finding process
from each export-approved State, as appropriate. When indicated by available information and a thorough review
of accumulated data, a determination can then be made about the treatment of this species and whether the management
program needs to be adjusted in a particular State. 

The status of the American alligator has dramatically improved throughout its range since the species was placed
under State and Federal control. One of the primary reasons for this improvement has been the effective management
programs administered by State wildlife agencies. The Service expects these management programs to continue to
be effective in conserving the American alligator in the future. 

The export of American alligators taken in the 1992 through 1994 harvest seasons in certain States was previously
approved by the Service (57 FR 21896). In that rule, the Service found that current information on the population status,
management, and harvest available from the States included in the rule, along with other information collected by
the Service, supported a finding that the export of American alligators taken in accordance with State regulations
in those States and in those harvest seasons would not be detrimental to the survival of the species in those States
approved for export. The Service's previous assessment of the status of the alligator under the Endangered Species
Act was sufficient to support reclassification of the species throughout its range from threatened to threatened
for similarity of appearance. This reclassification was accomplished in different parts of its range as the biological
status of the alligator improved. The following rulemaking documents provide the rationale for the removal of threatened
and endangered listings: 40 FR 44412, September 26, 1975; 42 FR 2071, January 10, 1977; 44 FR 37130, June 25, 1979; 46
FR 40664, August 10, 1981; 48 FR 46332, October 12, 1983; 50 FR 25672, June 20, 1985; and 51 FR 19760, June 2, 1986. 




