 

As a matter of Federal law, these proposed tests (if promulgated) will be potentially available in all States and all
Tribal jurisdictions. EPA cautions owners and operators that wish to use the options in the Federal program that they
should look at the options available under State or Tribal law. If the State or Tribe's rules do not include the option
that the owner or operator wishes to use, the owner or operator would run the risk of being out of compliance with State
or Tribal law. State and Tribal laws for MSWLFs are fully effective even when not approved by EPA. 

In unapproved States or Tribes, if State or Tribal law did not preclude the use of options proposed today (either because
it did not include any financial assurance requirements, included only a general requirement that left the choice
of mechanism to the discretion of the owner or operator, or included mechanisms resembling those proposed today)
an owner or operator would be able to use the corporate test or guarantee described in today's proposal (if promulgated)
to satisfy both State or Tribal and Federal law. 

EPA notes that States or Tribes seeking approval for the financial assurance portion of their MSWLF program or wishing
to modify an already approved program would have flexibility in adopting Federally promulgated standards. The State
or Tribe could simply adopt the Federal standard or could adopt a mechanism that meets the five performance standards
detailed in the October 9, 1991 final criteria rule. In this case, the mechanism could be used by owners or operators
for demonstrating financial responsibility for their MSWLF obligations in that State or Tribe. The five criteria
that the financial mechanism would need to meet are the following: (1) Ensure that the amount of funds assured is sufficient
to cover the costs of closure, post-closure care, and corrective action for known releases when needed; (2) ensure
that funds will be available in a timely fashion when needed; (3) guarantee the availability of the required amount
of coverage from the effective date of these requirements or prior to the initial receipt of waste, whichever is later,
until the owner or operator is released from financial assurance requirements under 253.32 (f), (g),
(h); (4) provide flexibility to the owner or operator for demonstrating compliance with financial assurance requirements;
and (5) be legally valid, binding, and enforceable under State and Federal law. 

As a result, while the Agency is developing financial tests that are designed to meet these performance criteria (the
financial test proposed in this 

Federal Register

 and the financial test proposed on December 27, 1993 (58 FR 68353)), approved States and Tribes could develop their
own financial tests that could be used by owners and operators of MSWLFs within those States and Tribes for demonstrating
financial responsibility as long as those tests are determined to have met the performance standards. (For a discussion
of the effect of EPA's approval of a State or Tribal program on the Federal regulations, 

see 

56 FR 50995.) 

Owners and operators who can use the options in today's proposal under State or Tribal law would be required to maintain
appropriate documentation of the mechanism in the facility's operating record. They would not be required by Federal
law to submit that documentation to the State or Tribe, but only to notify the State or Tribal Director that the required
items have been placed in the operating record. Owners and operators using the financial test or guarantee would also
be required to update all required financial test information on an annual basis, and retain this information in their
operating records. In addition, an owner or operator (or guarantor) that becomes unable to meet the financial test
criteria would be required to notify the State or Tribal Director and establish alternate financial assurance within
specified deadlines. Finally, in order to cancel a guarantee, the guarantor would have to notify both the State or
Tribal Director and the owner or operator at least 120 days prior to cancellation. 

The Agency believes that most Tribes have an accounting structure similar or identical to those of most local governments.
Tribes that meet the requirements of the local government financial test would be eligible to use that financial test
to demonstrate financial responsibility for their subtitle D obligations to the extent that they meet the provisions
of that test. However, the Agency recognizes that there may be Tribes and local government units that use an accounting
system similar or identical to those of most corporations. Those Tribes and local government units would be eligible
to use this proposed corporate financial test to demonstrate financial responsibility for their subtitle D obligations
to the extent that they meet the requirements of this proposal. 




