 

b. Program measures are reasonably consistent with achieving the goals of reducing existing noncompatible land
uses around the airport and preventing the introduction of additional noncompatible land uses;

c. Program measures would not create an undue burden on interstate or foreign commerce, unjustly discriminate against
types or classes of aeronautical uses, violate the terms of airport grant agreements, or intrude into areas preempted
by the Federal Government; and

d. Program measures relating to the use of flight procedures can be implemented within the period covered by the program
without derogating safety, adversely affecting the efficient use and management of the navigable airspace and air
traffic control systems, or adversely affecting other powers and responsibilities of the Administrator prescribed
by law.

Specific limitations with respect to FAA's approval of an airport noise compatibility program are delineated in
FAR part 150, 150.5. Approval is not a determination concerning the acceptability of land uses under Federal,
state, or local law. Approval does not by itself constitute an FAA implementing action. A request for Federal action
or approval to implement specific noise compatibility measures may be required, and an FAA decision on the request
may require an environmental assessment of the proposed action. Approval does not constitute a commitment by the
FAA to financially assist in the implementation of the program nor a determination that all measures covered by the
program are eligible for grant-in-aid funding from the FAA. Where federal funding is sought, requests for project
grants must be submitted to the FAA Minneaposis_Airports District Office in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Winnebago County submitted to the FAA on December 29, 1992 the noise exposure maps, descriptions, and other documentation
produced during the noise compatibility planning study conducted from April 1985 through December 1992. The Wittman
Regional Airport noise exposure maps were determined by FAA to be in compliance with applicable requirements on August
18, 1993. Notice of this determination was published in the 

Federal Register 

on September 9, 1993.

The Wittman Regional Airport study contains a proposed noise compatibility program comprised of actions designed
for phased implementation by airport management and adjacent jurisdictions from the date of study completion to
the year 1997. It was requested that the FAA evaluate and approve this material as a noise compatibility program as
described in section 104(b) of the Act. The FAA began its review of the program on August 18, 1993 and was required by
a provision of the Act to approve or disapprove the program within 180 days (other than the use of new flight procedures
for noise control). Failure to approve or disapprove such program within the 180-day period shall be deemed to be an
approval of such program.

The submitted program contained thirteen (13) proposed actions for noise mitigation on and off the Airport. The FAA
completed its review and determined that the procedural and substantive requirements of the Act and FAR part 150 have
been satisfied. The overall program, therefore, was approved by the Assistant Administrator for Airports effective
February 14, 1994.

Outright approval was granted for all five (5) of the land use program elements. They included dedication of navigational
easements, acquisition of land, recommendations for zoning, programming of public improvements and implementation
of a public information program. The one (1) continuing program measure was also approved. It provided for future
updating of the part 150 study.

The seven (7) noise abatement measures were approved as voluntary measures. They included a runway use program, use
of departure and arrival procedures and a traffic pattern procedure.

These determinations are set forth in detail in a Record of Approval endorsed by the Administrator on February 14,
1994. The Record of Approval, as well as other evaluation materials and the documents comprising the submittal, are
available for review at the FAA office listed above and at the administrative offices of Winnebago County.




Issued in Minneapolis, Minnesota on March 1, 1994.



<SIGNER>
David R. Dyrstad,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Manager, Minneapolis Airports District Office, FAA Great Lakes Region.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946969 Filed 32394; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491013M
</BILLING>


