 


The San Joaquin River system supported both fall and spring runs until the 1940's when Friant Dam was built. The dam
prevented the spring-run fish from reaching cool upstream areas suitable for summer rearing, so the spring-run disappeared
and presently there is only a fall-run population. Recently, the San Joaquin population has been highly variable,
reaching very low levels in times of drought, and responding quickly to higher wet year flows. Inadequate stream flows,
water developments, poor water quality, water diversions, and habitat deterioration have had varying degrees of
impact. Continuing high levels of water diversions from the San Joaquin River and tributaries, and high exports out
of the South Delta, in concert with the recent extended drought have caused major impacts to all San Joaquin tributary
runs. Population levels are extremely low, and the 1991 brood year may only produce a total of 100 to 300 returning adults
in 1994 when these adults return to spawn at the end of their three year life cycle (CDFG 1992c, WRINTDFG25).




Salmon and steelhead populations are subject to increased mortality when exposed to high temperatures and when diverted
out of the main channels of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers into less suitable habitat. Those fish diverted from
the main channels are also subject to increased mortality as water exports at the State and Federal pumping plants
in the south Delta increase. USFWS tagged smolt
<FOOTCITE>9</FOOTCITE>
 studies between 1984 and 1989 found that smolts migrating out of the Sacramento River system in the spring survived
on average approximately 3.4 times better in the Sacramento main channel than in the interior (central) Delta. Results
from studies carried out in the spring of 1985 to 1990 showed on average approximately 2 times better survival in the
main channel of the San Joaquin River than in Old River, a secondary channel. Higher temperatures affect smolt mortality
both in the main channel and in the central Delta. For example, the recent (1992) USFWS results from spring tagged smolt
releases into the central Delta showed that mortality was approximately 21/2 times greater at 67 
&cir;F than at temperatures of 63
&cir; and 64 
&cir;F (USFWS 1992a, WRINTUSFWS7). 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>

9

</FOOTNAME>
A ``smolt'' is a salmon in the process of acclimating to a change from a fresh water environment to a salt water environment.
This occurs when young salmon migrate downstream through the Delta to the ocean. 



</FOOTNOTE>



State and federal legislators have recognized the serious threat to the continued existence of migratory fishes
in the Bay/Delta. In 1988, the California State legislature mandated a restoration goal of doubling natural salmon
and steelhead production by the year 2000, and required development of a plan to meet this goal. Salmon, Steelhead
Trout, and Anadromous Fisheries Program Act; codified at Cal. Fish  Game Code 6900 et seq. (West 1991).
In response to this mandate, California DFG published the Central Valley Salmon and Steelhead Restoration and Enhancement
Plan in 1990 (CDFG 1990a). California DFG recommended that the State Board adopt an objective of maintaining the survival
rate of salmon smolts passing through the estuary at the ``without projects'' historical level, and listed specific
actions for the consideration of the State Board to implement this objective. Also, Congress recently enacted the
Central Valley Project Improvement Act, which requires that a program be developed and implemented to ensure that
natural production of anadromous fish in Central Valley rivers and streams will be ``sustainable at levels at least
twice the average levels attained during the period 19671991.'' 




b. Protection of Bay/Delta Coldwater Habitat and Migration Under the Clean Water Act 





In order to protect fall-run salmon, the 1978 Delta Plan included minimum flow objectives (below those set for striped
bass) and mandated gate closures to help keep fry out of the central Delta when flows were above 12,000 cubic feet per
second (cfs) during the period January 1 to April 15. In addition, gate closures through May, designed to protect striped
bass, have also provided protection for out-migrating salmon smolts. These measures were considered inadequate
by the fisheries agencies (USFWS, NMFS, and California DFG). At the 1987 Water Quality Control Plan hearings, these
agencies recommended flow objectives based on 1940 historical flows (without project levels) that would have significantly
increased protection for fall-run salmon. Similarly, in the 1988 Draft Water Quality Control Plan (SWRCB 1988),
the State Board staff recommended objectives for Sacramento fall-run salmon based on average spring flow conditions
from 1930 to 1987, and for San Joaquin fall-run salmon based on flow conditions from 1953 to 1987. However, this Plan
was not adopted. 



The 1991 Bay/Delta Plan established additional criteria designed to protect salmon. The State Board set new temperature
criteria of 68 
&cir;F at Freeport and Vernalis from April 1 through June 30 and September 1 through November 30 to protect Cold Fresh-Water
Habitat for fall-run salmon. The 1991 Bay/Delta Plan also set a temperature criterion of 66
&cir;F at Freeport from January through March to protect winter-run salmon. EPA disapproved these criteria because
the evidence in the State Board's submittal did not demonstrate that they would be sufficient to protect cold-water
habitat for these species. Based on the supporting evidence in the State Board's submittal and the Central Valley
Salmon and Steelhead Restoration and Enhancement Plan (CDFG 1990a), EPA recommended that the State Board adopt a
65 
&cir;F criterion, or an alternative that is scientifically defensible. EPA also disapproved the State's temperature
criteria because they were subject to ``controllable factors'' (that is, temperature criteria were to be met only
if they could be attained using a limited set of implementation measures). With this limitation such criteria are
unlikely to be protective, especially since the State Board specifically prohibited the use of reservoir releases
to reduce temperatures in the Delta (SWRCB, 1991). 




