 

1. Wastewater Concentration and Flow Determination 


The standards require the use of approved test methods 
and procedures to ensure consistent and verifiable results 
for demonstration that a wastewater stream does not require 
control, or for demonstration that the allowed emission 
levels are achieved when controls are applied. Affected 
wastewater streams are subject to the standards if they meet 
either of the following conditions at the point of 
generation: 
(1) The average flow rate of the affected wastewater 
stream is 1.0 Lpm or greater and the mass-weighted average 
volatile organic concentration is 500 ppmw or greater; or 
(2) The mass-weighted average volatile organic 
concentration of the affected wastewater stream is 10,000 
ppmw or greater, regardless of the stream flow rate. 
Two important parameters must be quantified to 
determine whether an affected stream must be controlled. 
These parameters are the annual wastewater quantity for a 
stream and the volatile organic concentration of the stream 
at the point of generation. 
Several methods can be used to determine wastewater 
quantity. These methods include using knowledge about the 
capacity of the wastewater-generating process or the waste 
management unit, and using measurements that are 
representative of maximum annual wastewater generation 
rates. Knowledge-based methods are allowed to provide 
flexibility and to provide less expensive alternatives than 
actual annual measurement if the appropriate information is 
available. 
For quantifying the volatile organic concentration of 
the wastewater streams, three methods are available: 
(1) Knowledge of the wastewater streams; (2) bench scale or 
pilot scale test data; or (3) physical measurements of 
volatile organic concentration. These methods have been 
allowed to provide flexibility and to provide less expensive 
alternatives than actual measurement if the appropriate 
information is available. 
If the actual volatile organic concentration of the 
wastewater stream is determined through direct measurement, 
the regulation specifies that the procedures of Method 25D 
in appendix A of part 60, ``Determination of the Volatile 
Organic Concentration of Waste Samples,'' which provides a 
relative measure of the emissions potential of the stream, 
be used to analyze the sample. Alternatively, the sample 
may be analyzed to determine the volatile organic 
concentration using any test method or test data that has 
been validated according to the protocols in Method 301 in 
appendix A of part 63. As pointed out in section II of this 
document, there are several issues associated with the use 
of method 25D on which the EPA is soliciting comment. 
Flow rates may be determined using information about 
the maximum annual production capacity of the process unit, 
knowledge of the process, and mass balance information or by 
measuring the flow rate at the point of generation during 
conditions that are representative of average wastewater 
generation rates. 


2. Performance Tests 


The initial performance test requirements of 
section 60.8 of the part 60 General Provisions are not 
required for treatment processes or vent stream control 
devices. Instead, the proposed standards provide 
alternative means of compliance that the EPA considers 
equivalent to the direct measurement of emissions as 
required under 60.8 and less burdensome to the industry. 
The proposed rule includes treatment process 
performance test procedures for the effluent concentration, 
percent reduction, and required mass removal standards. 
These test procedures involve measurements of volatile 
organic concentrations using Method 25D or any other methods 
for which the results are validated using Method 301. 
Performance testing is to be conducted at representative 
inlet flow rates and at volatile organic concentrations 
under which it would be most difficult to determine 
compliance. 
For noncombustion treatment processes complying with 
the percent reduction requirement, the total volatile 
organic mass flow rate entering the treatment process and 
exiting the treatment process shall be determined by 
computing the product of the average flow rate of the 
wastewater stream entering or exiting the treatment process 
and the average total volatile organic concentration of the 
entering or exiting wastewater streams, respectively. The 
flow rate of the entering and exiting wastewater streams 
shall be determined using the inlet and outlet flow meters, 
respectively. 
For combustion treatment processes complying with the 
percent reduction requirement, the total volatile organic 
mass flow rate entering the combustion unit shall be 
determined by computing the product of the average flow rate 
of the wastewater stream entering the combustion unit, as 
determined by the inlet flow meter, and the average total 
volatile organic concentration in the waste stream entering 
the combustion device. The volume exhausted shall be 
determined using Method 2, 2A, 2C, or 2D of 40 CFR part 60, 
appendix A, as appropriate. The average total organic 
concentration in the exhaust downstream of the combustion 
unit shall be determined using Method 18 of appendix A of 
part 60, or any other test method validated according to the 
procedures in Method 301 of appendix A of part 63. 




