 

VI. Regulatory Impact Statement



A. Executive Order 12866 


Executive Order 12866 (E.O. 12866) requires us to prepare an analysis for any document that meets one of the E.O. 12866
criteria for a ``significant regulatory action''; that is, that may_




&bull;Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy,
a sector of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local,
or tribal governments or communities;

&bull;Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; 
&bull;Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and
obligations of recipients thereof; or

&bull;Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles
set forth in E.O. 12866.




In the proposed rule, we determined that a regulatory impact analysis was not required for these rules because they
would not have an annual impact of $100 million or more or meet any of the other threshold criteria. However, we indicated
our intention to include in the final rule a cost and benefit analysis that considers the social benefits to Medicare
beneficiaries who use EPO at home. We asked for specific comments concerning benefits from home administration of
EPO. We listed, as examples of these benefits, savings in travel and transportation costs previously required to
obtain EPO or the ability of the beneficiary to resume employment. We also requested public comment on any benefits
and costs that may be anticipated as a result of this regulation.

No comments were received concerning the benefits of self-administration of EPO or on any portion of the impact analysis.
Thus, we have prepared an analysis based on our review of data available to us and of pertinent literature.

The following chart summarizes home dialysis beneficiary records for the period February 28, 1991 through February
29, 1992. It reflects the most current data on file and also encompasses the time immediately before and after July
1, 1991, the effective data of coverage of home administration of EPO. We identified, as ESRD beneficiaries who are
potentially eligible for home use of EPO, beneficiaries who have completed the necessary home dialysis training
or were home dialysis patients during this period. The chart indicates the number of beneficiaries on home dialysis
and the number receiving EPO therapy as of June 30, 1991. The same information is shown for the billing period November
1, 1991 through January 31, 1992, the most current billing information for home dialysis beneficiaries.



<TABLE>






Home Dialysis Beneficiaries



[February 28, 1991February 29, 1992]


1


1Home Dialysis Beneficiaries


1Self-Adm.*


1Fac/Phy.**


1Not Receiv'g EPO






As of 6/30/91 
38,515 
 
12,733 
25,782

Billing Period 11/1/911/31/92 
38,515 
1,656 
11,890 
24,969


*Self-Adm. stands for self-administered.


**Fac/Phy. stands for facility or physician administered.



</TABLE>



Our records indicate that as of June 30, 1991 there were 38,515 beneficiaries that dialyzed at home. Before coverage
of home administration of EPO, 12,733 of these beneficiaries received EPO in the ESRD facility or in a physician's
office. As a result of coverage of home administration of EPO, 1,656 beneficiaries or 4.3 percent of home dialysis
beneficiaries self-administer EPO. We estimate that this number will increase as more beneficiaries become qualified
to self-administer EPO and realize the benefits of home administration.

In attempting to perform a cost-benefit analysis, we reviewed three published reports and one unpublished report.
We also relied upon billing information submitted by intermediaries. Average expenditure for ESRD beneficiaries
receiving EPO therapy approximate $6,900 exclusive of dialysis treatment. This amount includes the cost of the drug
and other services such as iron treatment and hypertension therapy. The average annual cost for patients not using
EPO approximates $450, exclusive of dialysis treatments, and includes the cost of other services such as blood transfusions
and hepatitis therapy. The annual expenditures for EPO users represent very gross estimates. More definitive cost
data and experience with the administration of EPO is needed in order to permit analysis of actual costs and EPO's relative
effects.

As mentioned earlier in this preamble, use of EPO by chronic renal failure patients reduces or eliminates the need
for blood transfusions. EPO also reduces the recipients' risk of transfusion-related illnesses. The transmission
of non-A, non-B hepatitis is of greatest concern (see ``Recombinant Human Erythropoietin: Factors to Consider in
Cost-Benefit Analysis'', American Journal of Kidney Diseases, Vol. XVII, No. 1, January 1991). Although rare, the
threat of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and hepatitis B should also be considered. For ESRD patients
receiving EPO, the risk of hepatitis infection related to transfusions has been reduced from 13.8 to 4.5 percent because
the patient's need for blood transfusions has been reduced and in some cases eliminated.



