 





Shutdown

 means the period of time a unit is cooled from its 
normal operating temperature to cold or ambient temperature. 




Stack gas oxygen trim system

 means the system of monitors 
that is used to measure stack excess combustion air, typically 
consisting of flue gas oxygen and/or carbon monoxide monitors 
that automatically provide a feedback signal to the combustion 
air controller that maintains the stack excess air at the desired 
level. 




Startup

 means the period of time a unit is heated from cold 
or ambient temperature to its normal operating temperature as 
specified by the manufacturer. 




Unit

 means any boiler, steam generator, or process heater as 
defined in paragraph (v) of this section. 


(3) 

Standards. 


(i) Any owner or operator that operates a unit with an 
annual heat input rate equal to or greater than 1.8 billion 
British thermal units per year (10

9

 Btu/yr) shall: 


(A) Not cause to be discharged into the atmosphere any 
gases that contain NO

X

 emissions in excess of 30 parts per 
million (ppm) corrected to 3 percent volume stack gas O

2

 on a dry 
basis averaged over a period of 15 consecutive minutes. 


(B) Establish a controlled ppm carbon monoxide (CO) 
emission limit that represents good operating and combustion 
practices. No owner or operator shall cause to be discharged 
into the atmosphere any gases that contain CO in excess of the 
lowest of one of the following limits: 


(

1

) 120 percent of the CO ppm level established by an 
initial compliance test in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (v)(7) of this section, or 


(

2

) 400 ppm. 
The owner or operator shall subsequently comply with the limit 
once it is established. The ppm CO emissions shall be corrected 
to 3 percent volume stack gas O

2

 on a dry basis averaged over a 
period of 15 consecutive minutes. 


(C) Demonstrate initial compliance with the NO

X

 and CO 
emission standards specified in paragraphs (v)(3)(i) (A) and (B) 
of this section in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs 
(v)(6)(i)(C) and (v)(7)(i) of this section. 


(D) Demonstrate compliance with the NO

X

 and CO emission 
standards specified in paragraphs (v)(3)(i) (A) and (B) of this 
section in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(v)(7)(i) of this section not less than once every 24 months 
since the previous compliance test. 


(ii) Any owner or operator that operates a unit with an 
annual heat input rate equal to or greater than 0.3&times;10

9

 Btu/yr 
and less than 1.8&times;10

9

 Btu/yr shall comply with one of the 
following: 


(A) The unit shall be tuned once every 6 months or after 
750 hours of operation since the previous tuneup, whichever 
occurs last, but in no case less than once per calendar year. 
The unit shall be tuned in accordance with the procedures 
described in paragraph (v)(7)(ii) of this section; or 


(B) The unit shall be operated in a manner that maintains 
stack gas oxygen concentrations at less than or equal to 3 
percent on a dry basis for any 15 consecutive minute averaging 
period; or 


(C) The unit shall be operated using a stack gas oxygen 
trim system set at 3 percent oxygen for any 15 consecutive minute 
averaging period. The tolerance of the setting shall be 

#5 

percent; or 


(D) Demonstrate compliance with the NO

X

 and CO emission 
standards specified in paragraphs (v)(3)(i) (A) and (B) of this 
section in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs 
(v)(3)(i) (C) and (D) of this section. 


(iii) Any owner or operator of a unit exempt from the 
requirements of paragraph (v)(3)(i) of this section shall 
demonstrate that the unit is exempt by complying with the 
applicable reporting, monitoring, and recordkeeping requirements 
of paragraphs (v)(6)(i)(H), (v)(6)(ii), and (v)(6)(iii) of this 
section, respectively. If the unit is ever operated during any 
rolling 12 calendar month period at a total annual heat input 
rate equal to or greater than 1.8&times;10

9

 Btu/yr, the owner or 
operator shall comply with the requirements of 
paragraph (v)(3)(i) of this section. If the unit is ever 
operated during any rolling 12 calendar month period at a total 
annual heat input rate equal to or greater than 0.3&times;10

9

 Btu/yr 
and less than 1.8&times;10

9

 Btu/yr, the owner or operator shall 
comply with the requirements of paragraph (v)(3)(ii) of this 
section. 



