 



Service Response: 

The Service has not defined critical habitat 
prematurely for the delta smelt because the Act does not require 
completion of an economic analysis before the Service can propose 
critical habitat areas. In a critical habitat rulemaking conducted in 
accordance with the Act and the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), the 
Service defines and proposes critical habitat boundaries, conducts an 
economic impact analysis, takes public comment on the proposed critical 
habitat designation and the economic analysis, makes exclusions, if any, 
to critical habitat boundaries, and promulgates a final rule. The 
Secretary, through the Service, has the discretion to exclude critical 
habitat areas based on economics, in accordance with the section 4(b)(2) 
standard. The section allows the Secretary to exclude any area from 
critical habitat if he determines that the benefits of such exclusion 
outweigh the benefits of specifying such area as part of critical 
habitat, provided that exclusion will not result in extinction of a 
species. The Service has properly conducted critical habitat rulemaking 
for the delta smelt. 
Neither the Act, nor its regulations, require the Service to allow 
public comment on revised critical habitat designations where the 
Secretary has excluded areas of proposed critical habitat. The standard 
rulemaking process requires preparation of a proposed rule followed by a 
final rule. Publishing a draft final rule is not required. The Service 
acknowledges that the public was allowed to comment in the above 
described manner in the critical habitat designation for the Northern 
Spotted Owl, however, the opportunity for public comment was a policy 
decision made specifically for that rulemaking and is not required by 
law. 
The Service has provided ample opportunity for the public to comment 
on the delta smelt critical habitat designation proposals and on the 
economic analysis during prescribed comment periods from October 3 to 
February 3, 1992; March 16 to April 30, 1993, and again from January 27 
to March 11, 1994. Four public hearings also were held to solicit 
comments on the revised proposed critical habitat designation. 


Comment 41: 

One commenter thought the critical habitat designation 
was flawed since the economic analysis could not properly analyze 
economic impacts likely to arise from the proposed designation, because 
the Service failed to present any focused or concrete indication of what 
specific management measures would be pursued. The commenter thought 
the public was not able to effectively comment on the critical habitat 
designation due to this inadequacy. 


Service Response: 

Designating critical habitat does not result in a 
management plan. Specific management measures are identified in a draft 
Recovery Plan that currently is being prepared by the Service, and need 
not be identified in a proposed critical habitat designation. 
As described in the above comment, the Service believes the public 
was given an opportunity to effectively comment on the critical habitat 
designation and the draft economic analysis. The draft RIA was 
available for review and provided sufficient detail so that the public 
could provide meaningful comments. 


Comment 42: 

One commenter believes the critical habitat designation 
is deficient because the Service failed to analyze the potential 
economic impacts of any particular portion of the Delta. 


Service Response: 

Section 4 of the Act requires the Secretary to 
take into consideration ``The economic impact *** of specifying any 
particular area as critical habitat.'' The Service may exclude any area 
from critical habitat if it is determined that the benefits of such 
exclusion outweigh the benefits of specifying such areas as part of 
critical habitat, unless failure to designate such area will result in 
the extinction of the species. 
The Service believes it has adequately analyzed the potential 
economic impacts of the Estuary ``area.'' The Act does not require an 
agency to analyze potential economic impacts for any specific or 
particular ``area.'' An ``area'' is not limited to particular reaches of a 
river, or particular areas of a species' habitat. 


Comment 43: 

The Department of the Army thought the Service did not 
sufficiently analyze the economic impacts of designating critical 
habitat, and did not include adequate economic data. They thought the 
Service should have included channel dredging activities and the 
maintenance of flood control levees in the economic analysis, including 
the economic impacts of potential failure and flooding since maintenance 
might be limited due to critical habitat designation. 


Service Response: 

The Service believes the economic impacts of 
designating critical habitat have been sufficiently addressed, and 
include discussion of dredging and levee maintenance. As discussed in 
the final rule to list the delta smelt, and in the revised proposed rule 
to designate critical habitat for the species, the Service determined 
that the economic impact of restricting activities associated with deep 
water navigation channel dredging were attributable to the jeopardy 
standard imposed by the listing of the delta smelt as a threatened 
species. Hence, the economic impacts of these activities can not be 
associated with designating critical habitat. 
The Service did determine that levee maintenance may adversely 
modify critical habitat without necessarily jeopardizing the delta 
smelt. The economic impacts of restrictions associated with the 
construction and implementation of these projects have been analyzed to 
determine the economic cost or benefit of critical habitat designation. 
Properly scheduling maintenance and construction activities to avoid 
periods critical to a species can allow projects to go forward without 
incurring large economic impacts. 


National Environmental Policy Act 




