 

Attachment III to UIPL 1394 

Draft Language to Implement Section 4(b) of Public Law 103152 



States needing to amend their laws to incorporate the new eligibility criteria established by Public Law 103152,
may wish to use the following draft language. 

(a) 

Eligibility for benefits._

An unemployed individual shall be eligible to receive benefits with respect to any week only if the individual: 



* * * * * 



() participates in reemployment services, such as job search assistance services, if the individual has
been determined to be likely to exhaust regular benefits and need reemployment services pursuant to a profiling system
established by the Commissioner. 



Attachment IV to UIPL 1394 

Technical Amendment Concerning the Unemployment Trust Fund 



(a) 

Text of the Amendment_Section 5 of Public Law 103152.

Sec. 5. Technical Amendment to Unemployment Trust Fund.

Paragraph (1) of section 905(b) of the Social Security Act is amended to read as follows: 

``(b)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (3), the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer (as of the close of each
month) from the employment security administration account to the extended unemployment compensation account
established by subsection (a), an amount (determined by such Secretary) equal to 20 percent of the amount by which_


``(A) The transfers to the employment security administration account pursuant to section 901(b)(2) during such
month, exceed 

``(B) The payments during such month from the employment security administration account pursuant to section 901(b)(3)
and (d). 

If for any such month the payments referred to in subparagraph (B) exceed the transfers referred to in subparagraph
(A), proper adjustments shall be made in the amounts subsequently transferred.'' 

(b) Discussion.

 The legislation proposed which eventually became Public Law 103318 contained a provision which would have
amended section 901(b)(1), SSA, to create new subparagraphs (A) and (B). This provision was not enacted. However,
corresponding amendments to section 905(b) were included in the enacted version of Public Law 103319. As these
amendments referred to non-existent sections, the amendments had no effect. Section 5 of Public Law 103152
amended Section 905(b), SSA, to delete the erroneously enacted language pertaining to the non-existing section.




