 

FSIS is proposing to require that the protein in meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation and recovery systems
have a protein quality value that is a protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score of not less than 40 expressed
as a percent. The protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score would be required to be determined by methods
given in sections 5.4.1, 7.2.1, and 8.00 in the ``Protein Quality Evaluation, Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation
on Protein Quality Evaluation'' which is incorporated by reference in the proposed rule. The proposed protein digestibility-corrected
amino acid score or not less than 40 expressed as a percent is consistent with nutrition labeling requirements for
protein in foods for children older than one but less than four years of age, as provided in 21 CFR 101.9(c)(7), which
FSIS cross-referenced in its final nutrition labeling regulations (58 FR 632) in 9 CFR 317.309(b). FSIS believes
this value protects the young consumer from inadequate nutrition from the use of poor quality protein (i.e., protein
that does not meet the dietary needs for growth) and, in turn, protects people other than young consumers. FSIS also
believes it is appropriate to assure comparability of the meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation systems
with that derived by hand-deboning to maintain the quality and integrity of the meat supply.
FSIS is proposing to permit an alternative measurement to the protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score
method, which requires a digestibility measurement in addition to an amino acid analysis, to control the cost of monitoring
compliance with the protein quality requirement. FSIS is proposing that, for the purpose of measuring the protein
quality of meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems, an alternative measurement
of protein quality would be allowed that is comparable to the protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score.
This measure would be based on a comparison between the ``essential amino acid content of meat'' and ``total amino
acids present in meat,'' i.e., an essential amino acid content of at least 33 percent of the total amino acids present
in the meat. Essential amino acid content includes isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine,
and valine content, and the total amino acids present include isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine,
threonine, valine, tyrosine, arginine, histidine, alanine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, glycine, proline, serine,
and hydroxyproline content. The essential amino acid content would be required to be determined by methods given
in sections 5.4.1, 7.2.1, and 8.00 in the ``Protein Quality Evaluation, Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation
on Protein Quality Evaluation'' which is incorporated by reference in the proposed rule.
FSIS continues to believe that meat found to be in compliance by the proposed amino acid content measurement would
have protein of high quality. This belief is supported by the 198283 evaluation of an Expert Work Group that
was organized by the Department's Agricultural Research Service, in cooperation with the University of Maryland,
to develop recommendations based on available scientific knowledge for consideration in policy decisions regarding
the protein quality of meat, poultry, and their products.
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>
``The Protein Nutritional Quality of Meat and Poultry Products: Scientific Basis for Regulation'' is the final report
of the Expert Working group, with accompanying background papers. C.E. Bodwell, ed., American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 40(3): 671742, supplement, September 1984. A copy of the report is available for public inspection
in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.
</FOOTNOTE>

