 

The definition of the identifying activity level contained in paragraph (a)(8) of the reproposed rule would increase
and change the thresholds contained in the proposed rule from 100,000 shares to 200,000 shares and fair market value
of $2 million, and from a fair market value of $4 million to $10 million. The Commission believes that the addition of
the $2 million fair market value requirement to the fundamental share volume threshold would act as a floor to minimize
the impact of the reproposed rule on those persons that effect transactions in lower priced securities. The Commission
solicits comments on whether this new element of the identifying activity level would be appropriate. The Commission
also solicits comments regarding the effectiveness of the new identifying activity level for minimizing the impact
of the reproposed rule on natural persons that infrequently trade large amounts of publicly traded securities. 

The time period for aggregating transactions also would be changed from a 24 hour period to ``a calendar day where the
account is located.'' The Commission would deem a calendar day to be a 24-hour period starting at 12 a.m. and ending
at 11:59 p.m. An account would be deemed to be located at the principal place of business of the broker-dealer, not where
the customer or registered representative servicing the account is located. Finally, the provisions regarding
program trading are reproposed without changes in paragraphs (a)(9) and (10).

25

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


25

</FOOTNAME>
See Proposing Release, 56 FR 42552, at text accompanying n. 15. 

</FOOTNOTE>


The Commission continues to believe that the capture of significant trading activity concurrently with program
trading activity is essential for accomplishing the purposes of the Market Reform Act. The Commission has balanced
this need against the burden of capturing the information and believes that the reproposed identifying activity
level would strike an appropriate balance. The Commission also believes that the reproposed identifying activity
level would establish a relatively simple and bright-line threshold that would be squarely within the activity-based
mandate of the Market Reform Act. 



2. Aggregation of Accounts and Transactions 



Section 13(h)(3) of the Exchange Act authorizes the Commission to prescribe rules governing the manner in which transactions
and accounts shall be aggregated, including the basis of ownership or control.

26

 The commenters uniformly criticized the proposed rules for aggregation as overly broad and inflexible. Generally,
these criticisms were levied by diversified financial service holding companies whose affiliates, subsidiaries,
and divisions engage in related and unrelated trading activities. As discussed above, much of this criticism emanated
from the definitions of ownership and control. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


26

</FOOTNAME>
See 15 U.S.C. 78m(h)(3) (1990). 

</FOOTNOTE>


These commenters argued that the mandatory nature of the proposed rules would cause overlapping and duplicative
aggregation among the various entities within a holding company structure. The commenters made a variety of recommendations,
including a flexible approach, approaches designed to meet the needs of the specific commenter, an ``acting in concert''
approach, and the elimination of the concept of aggregation. The comments regarding aggregation highlight the complexity
of designing a simple and efficient large trader system that accommodates the different corporate structures and
business practices of large traders. The proposed aggregation requirements, however, were intended to deter non-compliance
by prohibiting a person or group of persons from splitting activity among many broker-dealers, accounts, and transactions
for the purpose of avoiding the identification requirements of the proposed rule. 

a. 

General Description.

 The rules for aggregation have been reorganized into paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of the reproposed rule to distinguish
the requirements for the aggregation of accounts and the aggregation of transactions, respectively. The rules for
the aggregation of transactions found in reproposed paragraph (c)(2) contain only minor changes that reflect the
reorganization of the proposed rules.

27

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


27

</FOOTNAME>
See Proposing Release, 56 FR 42561 (proposed text). 

</FOOTNOTE>


The focus of the reproposed rule would be the ``aggregation of accounts owned or controlled by a person.'' Paragraph
(c)(1)(i) of the reproposed rule would implement a new flexible approach to the aggregation of accounts by permitting,
but not requiring, the aggregation of accounts that are owned or controlled or under common ownership or control of
a person, which independently would be a large trader. Conversely, paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of the reproposed rule would
require aggregation of accounts of a person who independently would not be a large trader. 

In order to assure compliance and deter the use of this flexible approach to circumvent the reproposed rule, new paragraph
(c)(1)(iii) would provide that, under no circumstances, shall a person or group of persons acting in concert toward
a common investment objective be permitted to disaggregate accounts in order to avoid the identification requirements
of the reproposed rule. Finally, reproposed Form 13H and Schedules have been redesigned to explain and facilitate
the various choices that large traders may make with respect to aggregation. 

b. 

Disaggregation.

 The concept of disaggregation would be reorganized into paragraph (c)(3)(i) of the reproposed rule. The reproposed
rule provides that the Commission may require a large trader to disaggregate accounts or transactions in any manner
and authorizes the Commission to require the submission of additional transaction or other information relating
to transactions reported under the reproposed rule. To assure that the Commission's requests for disaggregation
are reasonable, however, the reproposed rule would require the Commission to consider the operational capabilities
of the large trader when making a request for disaggregation. 

The Commission's efforts to assure the credibility of the reproposed system would require the imposition of certain
duties on omnibus large traders. These duties would include supplying information that would facilitate analysis
of market trading activity. The duties would arise from, and pertain to, the disaggregation and identification requirements.

28

 These duties are found in paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of the reproposed rule and would only apply to those large traders that
maintain, or effect transactions through, omnibus accounts carried by a registered broker-dealer. The obligations
imposed on these large traders would be to establish systems and procedures designed to assure compliance with the
disaggregation and identification requirements and, in particular, assure that the information regarding omnibus
accounts, disclosed to the Commission on reproposed Schedules 7b and 8, is accurate and complete. 




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


28

</FOOTNAME>
See 

infra 

Section III.E., for a discussion of the supervisory safe harbor for broker-dealers. 



</FOOTNOTE>

