 

If an area cannot attain by the statutory deadline, then questions 2 and 3 on the waiver policy diagram must be addressed,
and several cases may exist.

2. Do anthropogenic sources of PM10 as a whole contribute significantly to violations in the area?

3. Do nonanthropogenic sources of PM10 as a whole contribute significantly to violations in the area?



Case 

#

1



If anthropogenic sources no longer contribute significantly to violations in the area after the implementation
of RACM, then by default, nonanthropogenic sources must contribute significantly.

25

 In this case, the moderate area attainment date may be waived. The practical effect of waiving the attainment date
for a moderate area is to relieve it from reclassification as serious and, therefore, to relieve it from certain serious
area requirements. Therefore, a moderate area may only qualify for an attainment date waiver if it also qualifies
for a waiver of the serious area requirements (see section V.C., question 3). The State should reevaluate the impact
of anthropogenic sources on the area periodically to determine whether or not they contribute significantly to violations.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


25

</FOOTNAME>
It is likely that Congress intended all areas_even those eligible for waivers_to implement whatever measures were
reasonably available. Therefore, EPA believes the best reading of the statute requires that the emission reductions
attributable to RACM (including RACT) should be considered before evaluating the significance of anthropogenic
contributions.

</FOOTNOTE>


Case 

#

2



If anthropogenic sources still contribute significantly to violations in the area after the implementation of RACM
(i.e., contribute over 5 

m

g/m3 to PM10 concentrations), then the area would be reclassified as serious. Consequently, the serious area
requirements discussed in section IV, above, would have to be implemented in the area. These requirements include,
among other things, the application of BACM (including BACT) on source categories that are still contributing significantly
to violations (see the discussion of BACM in section VI and footnote 33).

Subsequently, the area may qualify for a waiver of the serious area attainment date if it is demonstrated that nonanthropogenic
source contributions (i.e., contributions greater than 150 

m

g/m3) would prevent the area from attaining the NAAQS.



Case 

#

3



If anthropogenic sources contribute significantly to violations, but, nonanthropogenic sources contribute less
than 150 

m

g/m3, then waivers will be granted on a case-by-case basis as discussed above in subsection C., question 4. The eligibility
for and timing of serious area attainment date waivers would depend upon the answers to the last three questions on
the waiver policy diagram.

4. Can the serious area attain by the statutory deadline after implementing the serious area control strategy (i.e.,
BACM, (including BACT)), for significant anthropogenic sources?

If the State can demonstrate that it is possible to attain the NAAQS by the statutory deadline for serious areas through
the implementation of BACM, then a waiver is not appropriate. If attainment by the deadline is not possible, then question
5 must be addressed.

5. Can the area attain with an extension of up to 5 years of the attainment date?

26





<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


26

</FOOTNAME>
The EPA may grant a single extension of the attainment date for serious areas of no more than 5 years under the conditions
of section 188(e) of the Act. Guidance on demonstrating that a State qualifies for an attainment date extension will
be issued in the future.

</FOOTNOTE>


To answer this question, the State must determine if an extension of time will make it technologically and economically
feasible to implement additional control measures that will bring the area into attainment. Again, if it is possible
to attain the NAAQS, then a waiver is not appropriate. If attainment is not possible even with the maximum extension
of the attainment date allowed under section 188(e), then question 6 must be addressed.



