 






<USBUREAU>Food and Nutrition Service</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>7 CFR Part 210 </CFRNO>


Alternate Foods for Meals: Enriched Macaroni Products With Fortified Protein; National School Lunch Program 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Nutrition Service, USDA. 


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This final rule requires the use of the Protein Digestibility- 
Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS) instead of the Protein Efficiency Ratio 
(PER) for evaluating the biological quality of proteins in enriched macaroni 
products with fortified protein. This action is necessary for consistency 
with the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Nutrition Labeling Education Act 
regulations. The PDCAAS is a more accurate, efficient and less costly method 
for measuring protein quality of this food product used in the National School 
Lunch Program (NSLP). This rule also makes clear that enriched macaroni 
products may not be used for infants under one year of age. In addition, this 
rule deletes reference in the NSLP regulations to the FDA Standard of Identity 
(21 CFR 139.117) for enriched macaroni products with fortified protein which 
has been stayed by FDA and clarifies that protein quality is to be determined 
on the dry basis not on the cooked food. This rule also makes a typographical 
correction and in accordance with the Metric Conversion Act of 1975 adds the 
metric equivalent for all weights and measurements. This final rule further 
clarifies that manufacturers of enriched macaroni with fortified protein must 
notify the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) if there is a change in the 
protein content of their product after the original testing. FNS will assume 
the protein content of the product remains the same as that submitted for the 
original testing unless otherwise notified.

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 This final rule is effective on October 7, 1994. The incorporation by reference of the ``Official Methods of 
Analysis of the AOAC International'' (formerly the Association of Analytical 
Chemists) 15th Ed. (1990) and the ``Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert 
Consultation on Protein Quality Evaluation,'' as published by the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health Organization, 
listed in this regulation is approved by the Director of the Federal Register as of October 7, 1994. 



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Ms. Marion Hinners, Section Head, Food Science and Nutrition Section, Nutrition and Technical Services Division,

USDA, (703) 3052556.


 
</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
This rule has been determined to be not significant for purposes of Executive 
Order 12866 and, therefore, has not been reviewed by the Office of Management 
and Budget. 



This rule has been reviewed with regard to the requirements of the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 through 612). The Administrator of FNS has 
certified that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities. There are currently fewer than ten 
companies participating in the Child Nutrition Programs (CNPs) under this 
regulation. In addition, the changes contained in this regulation are 
expected to reduce costs for the manufacturer. 

The Administrator of FNS has determined pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553 (b) and (d) 
that notice and comment on this rule prior to implementation is unnecessary 
and contrary to public interest. The public interest would be better served 
by allowing a more accurate and efficient method for measuring the protein 
quality of foods used in the NSLP. This change will allow food companies to 
minimize costs, thereby allowing them to provide quality products at the 
lowest cost possible. Moreover, receiving prior comment would be unnecessary 
and impracticable in this case for the following reasons. First, requiring 
prior notice and comment would waste valuable government resources. The Food 
Safety and Inspection Service of the Department of Agriculture (USDA) and FDA 
already have received and reviewed comments on this issue in response to 
proposed rules governing nutrition labeling of all regulated products, 
including products covered by this FNS regulation, and have published final 
regulations which accept the PDCAAS method. Second, FNS, with FDA 
concurrence, has already recognized the merits of the PDCAAS method in 
permitting its use for vegetable protein products (VPPs). Third, this rule 
provides affected parties an implementation period of 30 days during which 
either protein quality test may be used for enriched macaroni products. 





</SUPPLEM>
