 

630.401 

Grant of sick leave.



(a) Subject to paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section, an agency shall grant sick leave to an employee when the employee_

(1) Receives medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment;

(2) Is incapacitated for the performance of duties by physical or mental illness, injury, pregnancy, or childbirth;

(3) Provides care for a family member as a result of physical or mental illness; injury; pregnancy; childbirth; or
medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment;

(4) Makes arrangements necessitated by the death of a family member or attends the funeral of a family member; or

(5) Would, as determined by the health authorities having jurisdiction or by a health care provider, jeopardize the
health of others by his or her presence on the job because of exposure to a communicable disease.

(b) The amount of sick leave granted to an employee during any leave year for the purposes described in paragraphs (a)(3)
and (4) of this section many not exceed a total of 104 hours (or, in the case of a part-time employee or an employee with
an uncommon tour of duty, the number of hours of sick leave normally accrued by that employee during a leave year).

(c) To be granted any sick leave for the purposes described in paragraphs (a)(3) or (4) of this section during any leave
year in an amount exceeding a total of 40 hours (or, in the case of a part-time employee or an employee with an uncommon
tour of duty, the average number of hours of work in the employee's scheduled tour of duty each week), the employee concerned
shall retain in his or her sick leave account a balance of at least 80 hours (or, in the case of a part-time employee or
an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, an amount equal to twice the average number of hours of work in the employee's
scheduled tour of duty each week).

(d) When sick leave is granted to an employee under the condition specified in paragraph (c) of this section, the amount
of sick leave retained in the employee's sick leave account shall, in each instance, be at least equal to the minimum
prescribed by paragraph (b) of this section after deducting the amount to be used for the purposes described in paragraphs
(a)(3) and (4) of this section.

(e) If the number of hours in the employee's tour of duty is changed during the leave year, the employee's entitlement
to use sick leave for the purposes described in paragraphs (a)(3) and (4) of this section shall be recalculated based
on the employee's new tour of duty.


4. Section 630.402 is revised to read as follows:



630.402 

Application for sick leave.



An employee shall file a written application for sick leave within such time limits as the agency may require. An employee
shall request advance approval for sick leave for the purpose of receiving medical, dental, or optical examination
or treatment and to the extent possible, for the purposes described in 630.401(a)(3) and (4).




630.403 

Supporting evidence.



An agency may grant sick leave only when supported by evidence administratively acceptable. Regardless of the duration
of the absence, an agency may consider an employee's certification as to the reason for his or her absence as evidence
administratively acceptable. However, for an absence in excess of 3 workdays, of for a lesser period when determined
necessary by an agency, the agency may also require a medical certificate or other administratively acceptable evidence
as to the reason for an absence for any of the purposes described in 630.401(a).

6. Section 630.405 is revised to read as follows:



630.405 

Use of sick leave during annual leave or to become eligible for donated leave.



(a) Subject to 630.401(b) through (e), an agency may grant sick leave during a period of annual leave for any
of the purposes described in 630.401(a).

(b) An employee's entitlement to use sick leave to care for a family member under 630.401 shall be considered
as available paid leave for the purpose of determining an employee's eligibility to become a leave recipient under
the voluntary leave transfer and leave bank program established under subchapters III and IV of title 5, United States
Code, if the medical emergency involves a family member of the employee. This determination shall be made for any application
to be a leave recipient approved on or after December 2, 1994.

(c) In the case of an employee already in a shared leave status on December 2, 1994, under the voluntary leave transfer
or leave bank programs established under subschapters III and IV of title 5, United States Code, any sick leave available
to care for a family member under 630.401 shall be used, if the medical emergency involves a family member of
the employee, before continuing to use transferred annual leave or annual leave withdrawn from a leave bank.

7. Section 630.408 is added to read as follows:



630.408 

Records and reports.



(a) Beginning with leave year 1995, each agency shall maintain records concerning the use of sick leave to care for
a family member or to make arrangements for or attend the funeral of a family member under 630.401(a) (3) and
(4) and shall report such information as may be required by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) for the purpose
of evaluating the use of sick leave.

(b) Beginning with leave year 1995, each agency shall maintain the following information by leave year for each employee
using sick leave for the purpose described in 630.401(a) (3) or (4):




