 

In considering this comment, however, an error was discovered in paragraph (t)(3) of 617.3, which did not give
proper effect to a partial separation on or after August 23, 1988. Therefore, in addition to other changes as discussed
above, paragraph (t)(3) is amended in this final rule to accord with the above response to this comment. For the same
reason a parallel change is made in 617.67(e)(4). 
6. 

TRA weekly and maximum. 

In commenting on the application of amended section 233(a)(2) to the most recent total qualifying separation, in
determining the eligibility period of a worker, the UAW argued that this contrasts with the determination of weekly
and maximum amounts of TRA, which does require the use of ``first qualifying separation.'' The proper use of ``first
qualifying separation'' is restricted to the determination of the weekly and maximum amounts of TRA. 



Department's response. 

The Department agrees that determinations of TRA weekly benefit amounts and maximum benefit amounts, under sections
232(a) and 233(a)(1), will continue to be based on the first total or partial separation, and that this was not changed
by the 1988 Amendments. What this means is that monetary determinations of TRA entitlement may have to be based upon
two separations which occurred in different years. For example, for a period of up to three years or more after August
23, 1988 (the impact date to termination date of a certification plus the time between petition and certification
dates can be a period of up to or in excess of three years), it is possible that a worker will have had a first qualifying
separation before August 23, 1988, and computations under sections 232(a) and 233(a)(1) will be based upon UI entitlement
in the first benefit period following such first separation, whereas the worker's most recent total qualifying separation
will be used to determine the basic TRA eligibility period. This is simply illustrative, however, because in all cases
decided on or after August 23, 1988, the eligibility period under amended section 233(a)(2) will be based upon the
most recent ``total qualifying separation,'' whereas computations of weekly and maximum TRA amounts under sections
232(a) and 233(a)(1) will continue to be based on the first separation with respect to which the worker is entitled
to UI, whether such separation occurred before or after August 23, 1988. This is an additional reason why, for any worker
who is determined to have had a ``total qualifying separation,'' it will be necessary to establish whether the worker
had an earlier first separation under the same certification. 
The definition of ``first qualifying separation'' in paragraph (t)(3) of 617.3 incorrectly relates determinations
of weekly and maximum TRA amounts only to first qualifying separations with respect to which the worker also qualifies
for TRA. This is corrected in the final regulations, and other technical corrections are made to distinguish between
``first separation'' and the meaning of ``first qualifying separation'' for its two purposes; that is, (a) eligibility
period for TRA, and (b) computation of weekly and maximum TRA amounts. 
7. 

Partial separations. 

The Indiana Department of Employment and Training Services (IDETS) commented that, based on its understanding of
617.3(t)(3)(ii) of the proposed rule, and sections 233(a)(1) and 231(a)(3)(A) of the Act, there appears to
be a conflict over whether a partial separation after August 23, 1988, may be used to determine benefit amounts. 


Department's response. 

The IDETS is correct in noting this error in paragraph (t)(3) of 617.3. See the discussion under the preceding
two items. The first separation under a single certification, with respect to which the worker is entitled to UI, must
be used to determine the worker's weekly and maximum amounts of basic TRA, whether such first separation occurs before
or after August 23, 1988. As noted in the preceding two items, 617.3(t) is modified to clarify this and other
points. 
8. 

Advice to workers. 

The Vermont Department of Employment and Training (VDET) commented on 617.4 concerning what constitutes
proper advice and assistance to workers. The VDET stated that the requirement to inform each worker applying for unemployment
insurance ``of the procedures and deadlines for applying for such benefits'' taken literally includes a large number
of applicants who are applying for short term UI benefits and who in no way are likely to be eligible for benefits under
the TAA program. The VDET argues that while it is important that the State agency take the initiative to inform workers
who may be eligible for the benefits, the current language is too rigid, and will only cause confusion among short term
unemployed. The Vermont agency recommended that the requirement be rephrased to require States to develop the means
to identify trade eligible workers who apply for UI and then provide the necessary information to those workers. 


Department's response. 

The Department agrees that State agencies should identify potential trade eligible workers as early as possible
in their benefit period. However, section 239(f) of the Act provides, among other things, that each worker who applies
for unemployment insurance shall be advised of the benefits under the TAA provisions of the Trade Act and the procedures
and deadlines to apply for such benefits. There is no language which would support the limitation suggested by the
VDET. Often temporary layoffs by a firm adversely affected by import competition or other economic conditions become
permanent. The intent of Congress is to ensure that such workers are made aware early in their unemployment experience
of the TAA program, how to apply for benefits, and the services available to them. Many State UI agencies furnish an
information bulletin or brochure to every worker who files a claim for UI. These bulletins or brochures should include
full and correct information on the amended TAA program, and on the benefits and services available to unemployed
workers. The Department is encouraging all State agencies to publish a brochure for handout to workers filing initial
claims for UI. State agencies should revise their previously used brochures to accurately reflect all the changes
made in this final rule, and furnish a copy to each worker who files an initial claim for UI as required by section 239(f)
since August 23, 1988. 




