 

III. Date of Effectiveness of the Proposed Rule Change and Timing for Commission Action







The NASD requests that the Commission find good cause, pursuant to section 19(b)(2) of the Act, for approving the proposed
rule change prior to the 30th day after its publication in the 

Federal Register 

to avoid any interruption of the Service. The current authorization for the Service extends through October 3, 1994.
Hence it is imperative that the Commission approve the instant filing on or before that date. Otherwise, the NASD will
be required to suspend operation of the Service pending Commission action on the proposed extension.



The NASD believes that accelerated approval is appropriate to ensure continuity in the Service's operation pending
a determination on permanent status for the Service, as requested in File No. SRNASD927. Continued
operation of the Service will ensure the availability of an electronic quotation medium to support member firms'
market making in approximately 5,107 OTC Equities and the widespread dissemination of quotation information on
these securities. The Service's operation also expedites price discovery and facilitates the execution of customer
orders at the best available price. From the regulatory standpoint, the NASD's capture of quotation data from participating
market makers supplements the price and volume data reported by member firms pursuant to Part XII of Schedule D to the
NASD By-Laws.





IV. Solicitation of Comments





Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and arguments concerning the foregoing. Persons making
written submissions should file six copies thereof with the Secretary, Securities and Exchange Commission, 450
Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of the submission, all subsequent amendments, all written statements
with respect to the proposed rule change that are filed with the Commission, and all written communications relating
to the proposed rule change between the Commission and any person, other than those that may be withheld from the public
in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552, will be available for inspection and copying in the Commission's
Public Reference Room. Copies of such filing will also be available for inspection and copying at the principal office
of the NASD. All submissions should refer to the file number in the caption above and should be submitted by [insert
date 21 days from the date of publication].




V. Commission's Findings and Order Granting Accelerated Approval






The Commission finds that approval of the proposed rule change is consistent with the Act and the rules and regulations
thereunder, and, in particular, with the requirements of section 15A(b)(11) of the Act, which provides that the rules
of the NASD relating to quotations must be designed to produce fair and informative quotations, prevent fictitious
or misleading quotations, and promote orderly procedures for collecting, distributing, and publishing quotations.



The Commission finds good cause for approving the proposed rule change prior to the 30th day after the date of publishing
notice of the filing thereof. Accelerated approval of the NASD's proposal is appropriate to ensure continuity in
the Service's operation as an electronic quotation medium that supports NASD members' market making in these securities
and that facilities price discovery and the execution of customers' orders at the best available price. Additionally,
continued operation of the Service will materially assist the NASD's surveillance of its members trading in OTC Equities
that are eligible and quoted in the Service, and in non-Tape B securities that are listed on regional exchanges and
quoted in the OTCBB by NASD members.



It is therefore ordered, pursuant to section 19(b)(2) of the Act, that the proposed rule change be, and hereby is, approved
for an interim period through December 31, 1994.





For the Commission, by the Division of Market Regulation, pursuant to delegated authority, 17 CFR 200.303(a)(12).








<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,




</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.




</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9424796 Filed 10594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
&rsquo;
</BILLING>

