 

Based on petitioner's allegations that Grupo Tropicales was selling roses in Argentina at prices below its COP, and
information on the record, the Department had a reasonable basis to suspect or believe that sales were made below cost
and therefore initiated a COP investigation to determine whether Grupo Tropicales had Argentine sales that were
made at prices less than their COP. Although Grupo Tropicales also had third country sales to Germany, we did not initiate
a COP investigation on these sales because they were not included in petitioner's COP allegation (

See 

the September 8, 1994, memorandum from Richard W. Moreland to Barbara R. Stafford).
For a discussion of our COP test methodology, see the ``Home Market Sales'' section above. We made no adjustments to
the COP and CV data submitted by Grupo Tropicales.
In order to calculate FMV, we made company-specific adjustments as described below:


1. Grupo Clavecol


For Grupo Clavecol, we calculated FMV based on delivered prices to unrelated customers in Argentina and Canada.
For third country to purchase price comparisons, we made deductions for foreign inland freight, air freight, and
brokerage and handling, where applicable. Pursuant to section 773(a)(4)(B) of the Act and 19 CFR 353.56(a)(2), we
made circumstance of sale adjustments, where appropriate, for credit expenses. We deducted third country packing
costs and added U.S. packing costs.
For third country to ESP comparisons, we made deductions, where appropriate, for foreign inland freight, air freight
and brokerage and handling. We also deducted the weighted-average Argentine and Canadian indirect selling expenses,
including, where appropriate, inventory carrying costs, up to the amount of the greater of related party commissions
or indirect selling expenses incurred on U.S. sales, in accordance with 19 CFR 353.56(b)(1). We deducted third country
packing costs and added U.S. packing costs.


2. Grupo Sabana


For Grupo Sabana, we calculated FMV based on delivered prices to unrelated customers in Canada.
For third country price to purchase price comparisons, we made deductions for Canadian inland freight, air freight,
Canadian import duties, U.S. brokerage and Colombian inland freight. Pursuant to section 773(a)(4)(B) of the Act
and 19 CFR 353.56(a)(2), we made circumstance of sale adjustments, where appropriate, for credit expenses. We deducted
third country packing costs and added U.S. packing costs.
For third country price to ESP comparisons, we made deductions, where appropriate, for Canadian inland freight,
air freight, Canadian import duties, Canadian brokerage and Colombian inland freight. In addition, we made deductions
for credit and direct selling expenses in Canada. We also deducted the weighted-average Canadian and Colombian indirect
selling expenses, including, where appropriate, inventory carrying costs, up to the amount of the greater of related
party commissions or indirect selling expenses incurred on U.S. sales, in accordance with 19 CFR 353.56(b)(1). We
deducted third country packing costs and added U.S. packing costs.


3. Grupo Tropicales


For Grupo Tropicales, we calculated FMV based on delivered prices to unrelated customers in Argentina and Germany.
For third country price to purchase price comparisons, we made deductions for foreign inland freight. Pursuant to
section 773(a)(4)(B) and 19 CFR 353.56(a)(2), we made circumstance of sale adjustments, where appropriate, for
credit expenses. We deducted third country packing costs and added U.S. packing costs.
For third country price to ESP comparisons, we made deductions, where appropriate, for foreign inland freight. In
addition, we made deductions for credit. We also deducted the weighted-average Argentine and German indirect selling
expenses, including, where appropriate, inventory carrying costs, up to the amount of the indirect selling expenses
incurred on U.S. sales, in accordance with 19 CFR 353.56(b)(1). We deducted third country packing costs and added
U.S. packing costs.


Constructed Value


For three of the 16 respondents, we calculated FMV based directly on CV, in accordance with section 773(e) of the Act,
because these respondents did not have adequate sales in either the home market nor in any third country markets during
the POI. These three companies were: Agrorosas S.A.; Flores Mocari S.A. and Rosex LTDA. We calculated CV based on the
sum of respondent's cost of cultivation, plus general expenses, profit and U.S. packing. For general expenses, we
used the greater of the reported general expenses or the statutory minimum of ten percent of the cost of cultivation.
For profit, we used the greater of the weighted average third country profit during the POI or the statutory minimum
of eight percent of the cost of cultivation and total SGA expenses, in accordance with 19 CFR 353.50(a)(2).
For these respondents, we based the amortization expense upon amounts normally recorded by each company in their
usual record keeping. We rejected adjustments that companies made to the amortization expense solely for purposes
of this investigation. We also made specific adjustments to respondents' CV data as described below:


1. Agrorosas S.A.


For Agrorosas S.A., we did not consider the minor pre-verification correction filed on September 9, 1994 for the preliminary
determination. This data will be fully analyzed for our final determination.


2. Flores Mocari S.A.


For Flores Mocari S.A., we revised the calculation of interest expense to express the expense as a per-unit amount.


3. Rosex LTDA


