 

(2) Claims not over $2,500 generated by AAFES activities will be transmitted to the Army-Air Force Exchange Service,
OSC-FA-CLAIMS, P.O. Box 650405, Dallas, TX 762650405. 
(3) Claims over $100 generated by other nonappropriated fund activities will be transmitted to The Army Central Insurance
Fund, ATTN: CFSC-RM-I, Room 1240, 2461 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, VA 223310508. When transmitting household
goods or hold baggage shipment claims for payment, forward the entire claims file so ACIF can pursue carrier recovery.
Use the ``NF'' claims database transaction code. 
(4) Claims not over $100 generated by other nonappropriated fund activities will be transmitted to that nonappropriated
fund activity responsible for payment from its funds. (See AR 2151, paragraph 1324a.) 
(c) 

Reimbursement to foreign countries. 

Reimbursement to a foreign country of the United States pro rata share of a claim paid under an international agreement
will be made from nonappropriated funds. 
(d) 

Evidence of payment. 

When a claim settled under this section is transmitted to a disbursing office for payment, the approving or settlement
authority will request the appropriate disbursing office to return evidence of the date and amount of payment. 


Claims Involving Persons Other Than NAF Employees 


536.208 

Claims arising from activities of nonappropriated fund 
contractors. 


These claims should be disposed of in a manner similar to that set forth in DA Pam 27162, paragraphs 842,
843, and 847. Post exchange concessionaires are independent contractors and are required to obtain
workmen's compensation coverage under local law for their employees and public liability insurance governing their
operations. If a dispute arises as to whether such insurance is available or applicable, the claim should be forwarded
to Headquarters, AAFES, ATTN: General Counsel, P.O. Box 660202, Dallas, TX 752660202, prior to processing
under the preceding chapters. 


536.209 

Non-NAFI RIMP claims. 


The RIMP is administered by the U.S. Army Community and Family Support Center under the provisions of AR 2151.
Non-NAFI RIMP claims are not cognizable under any other provision of this regulation. However, except as otherwise
provided in this section, Non-NAFI RIMP claims are subject to the same requirements that apply to other tort claims.
USARCS carefully monitors all such claims to ensure proper investigation and resolution. 


536.210 

Claims cognizable. 


(a) Non-NAFI RIMP claims can arise from the activities of_
(1) Members of recreational NAFIs or authorized users of NAF recreational property, while using such property, except
real property, in the manner and for the purposes authorized by DA regulations and the charter, constitution, and
bylaws of the particular NAF activity. This category of persons generally has been limited to members and users of
recreational facilities such as flying clubs organized as NAFIs and craft shops. This category does not include customers
of exchanges, snack bars, motion picture theaters, or similar facilities. Whether a claim based on an act or omission
of a member or authorized user of other types of NAF activities, such as officers' messes, would be cognizable under
this paragraph depends on the facts and circumstances involved, including the degree of participation by the member
or authorized user in the activities of the fund. Claims arising from the use of NAF property, as defined in this paragraph,
are not cognizable under the FTCA or MCA, since the use of such recreational property is by individuals not considered
to be employees of the Army or NAFI acting within the scope of their office or employment. 
(2) Family child care (FCC) providers, authorized members of the provider's household, and approved substitute
providers while care under the FCC program is being provided in the manner prescribed in AR 60810, except as
excluded below. Such claims are generally limited to injuries to or death of children receiving care under the FCC
program which are caused by the negligence of such individuals. Claims arising from the transportation of such children
in motor vehicles and claims involving loss or damage of property are not cognizable. 
(b) Although Non-NAFI RIMP claims do not involve employees of the United States, a claim under this section that is
listed in 536.51 of this part is not payable. For example, a soldier injured on a post golf course when hit by a
golf cart operated by an authorized user is barred by the incident-to-service exclusion from recovering under this
section. 


