 




<DOCTITLE>Advisory Council; Meeting </DOCTITLE>


In accordance with section 10(a)(2) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (Pub. L. 92463), announcement is
made of the following National Advisory bodies scheduled to meet during the month of June 1994: 





Name: 

National Advisory Committee on Rural Health. 


Date and Time: 

June 1315, 1994; 1:30 p.m. 


Place: 

The Des Moines Marriott, 700 Grand Avenue, Des Moines, IA 50309, (515) 2355500. The meeting is open to the public.



Purpose: 

The Committee provides advice and recommendations to the Secretary with respect to the delivery, financing, research,
development and administration of health care services in rural areas. 


Agenda: 

Plenary session on Monday, June 13, will be devoted to ``The Health Care Reform in Rural Areas and Telemedicine.''
Other plenary topics will include discussions and presentations on the changes on farm safety, rural physician recruitment
and placement, and a rural community empowerment project, ``Hometown Health.'' In addition, a presentation regarding
the application of the field of telemedicine in Health Care Reform will be provided at the Iowa Methodist Medical Center.
A trip to the Farm Bureau has been planned for Monday evening. The presentation will cover the Bureau's Farm Safety
Program. 
The Education and Health Services Work Group and the Health Care Financing Work Group will meet between plenary sessions
on developing recommendations and strategies for improving health services delivery in rural areas. 
The meeting will adjourn on Wednesday, June 15, at noon. (Transportation on field trips will not be provided. All sessions
are open to the public.) 
Anyone requiring information regarding the subject Council should contact Jeffery Human, Executive Secretary,
National Advisory Committee on Rural Health, Health Resources and Services Administration, room 905, Parklawn
Building, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20857, Telephone (301) 4430835, FAX (301) 4432803.

Persons interested in attending any portion of the meeting should contact Ms. Arlene Granderson, Director of Operations,
Office of Rural Health Policy, Health Resources and Services Administration, Telephone (301) 4430835. 






Name: 

National Commission on Allied Health 


Date and Time: 

June 2021, 1994, 8:30 a.m. 


Place: 

Stouffer Mayflower Hotel, 1127 Connecticut Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20036. The meeting is open to the public.



Purpose: 

The National Commission on Allied Health shall: (1) Make recommendations to the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate, and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives,
with respect to: (A) The supply and distribution of allied health personnel throughout the United States; (B) current
and future shortages or excesses of allied health personnel, particularly in medically underserved and rural communities;
(C) priority research needs within the allied health professions; (D) appropriate Federal policies relating to
the matters described in subparagraphs (A) through (C), including policies concerning changes in the financing
of undergraduate and graduate allied health programs, changes in the types of allied health education, and the appropriate
Federal role in the development of a research base in the allied health professions; (E) appropriate efforts to be
carried out by health care facilities, schools and programs of allied health, and professional associations with
respect to the matter referred to in subparagraph (A), including efforts for changes in undergraduate and graduate
allied health education programs, and private support for research initiatives; (F) deficiencies and needs for
improvements in existing data bases concerning the supply and distribution of training programs for allied health
in the United States and steps that should be taken to eliminate such deficiencies; and (G) problems, and recommendations
for the resolution of such problems, relating to the roles and functions of professionals within the allied health
fields and other fields such as medicine and dentistry; and (2) encourage entities providing allied health education
to conduct activities to voluntarily achieve the recommendations of the Commission. 


Agenda: 

The agenda includes Opening and Welcome remarks; Introduction of members; Congressional perspective of the Commission;
Public Advisory Committee Overview; Election of the Chairperson; development of subcommittees; presentations
on supply and distribution, shortages and excess and current research activities. 
Anyone requiring information regarding the Committee should contact Mr. Neil H. Sampson, Director, Division of
Associated, Dental, and Public Health, Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and Services Administration,
room 8101, Parklawn Building, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20857, Telephone (301) 4436853.

Agenda Items are subject to change as priorities dictate. 




Dated: May 5, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Jackie E. Baum,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Advisory Committee Management Officer, HRSA.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9411362 Filed 51094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416015P
</BILLING>


