 

11. Also, we do not agree with Joint Commenters that this is the appropriate proceeding to amend the Schedule of Fees
for future years. Such amendments would be premature because we do not now have the information necessary to establish
regulatory fees for FY 1995. As we stated in the 

NPRM

, we intend to commence a separate proceeding in connection with the assessment of fees for FY 1995. We will seek in that
proceeding comment concerning the allocation of costs of our enforcement, policy and rulemaking, information services,
and international services, including any necessary adjustments to the classes of services set forth in section
9(g)'s fee schedule. See 47 U.S.C. 159(i). 


12. Therefore, as we proposed in the 

NPRM

, in order to meet the congressional directive to implement the collection of regulatory fees in Fiscal Year 1994,
we are adopting without modification the Schedule of Regulatory Fees enacted by Congress in section 9(g). See 47 U.S.C.
159(b)(1)(C). The Schedule provides a listing of the specific categories of regulatees in the Private Radio, Mass
Media, Common Carrier and Cable services that are required to pay a regulatory fee. We have incorporated the schedule
into our rules and we have established separate sections of the rules to provide the payment schedules for the Private
Radio Services (1.1152), Mass Media Services (1.1153), Common Carrier Services (1.1154) and
Cable Services (1.1155). In Appendix A of this 

Report and Order,

 we have included guidelines for the payment of fees for each service subject to the regulatory fee requirement. 



B. Exemptions From Regulatory Fees



13. In the 

NPRM

, we proposed to exempt certain discrete categories of regulatees from the requirement of file annual regulatory
fees. Section 9(h) explicitly provides and exemption from the fees for governmental entities, nonprofit entities
and amateur radio licensees. 47 U.S.C. 159(h). We concluded that Congress also intended to exempt all public safety
licensees and noncommercial educational broadcasters from the regulatory fee requirements. In the paragraphs
below, we review each of these categories and consider the comments that address each exemption.



1. Governmental Entities 



14. As provided in section 9(h) and proposed in the 

NPRM

, governmental entities will exempt from the regulatory fee requirement. As proposed, our rule implementing the
governmental exemption will conform to existing 1.1112(f) of the rules, which provides an exemption for governmental
entities from the fee requirements for applications and other filing fees. See 47 CFR 1.1112(f); see 

also 

47 U.S.C. 158(d)(1) (A), (B). Section 1.1112(f) broadly defines the term ``governmental entity'' to include ``any
state, possession, city, county, town, village, municipal corporation or similar political organization or subpart
controlled by publicly elected officials exercising sovereign direction and control over their respective communities
or programs.'' The comments generally support our proposals with regard to the exemption for governmental entities.


15. Cellular Communications of Puerto Rico (CCPR) contends that we should limit the government exemption so that
only usual and customary governmental functions would be exempt. In particular, CCPR argues that the Puerto Rico
Telephone Company (PRTC) which is controlled by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and operates a cellular telephone
system, should be required to pay a regulatory fee to the extent that it engages in for profit or competitive operations.
Further, CCPR argues that exempting PRTC from the regulatory fees for cellular telephone systems would give PRTC
an unfair competitive advantage. In opposition, PRTC argues that Congress did not distinguish between different
activities, and that as a result all of its operations are subject to the governmental exemption. 


