 

9. After the release of the 

Fifth Report and Order, 

we adopted on our own motion an 

Order on Reconsideration, 

which made two changes to our competitive bidding rules for broadband PCS concerning our attribution and affiliation
requirements.
<FOOTCITE>7</FOOTCITE>
 Specifically, we exempted from entrepreneurs' block affiliation rules, entities owned and controlled by Indian
tribes or Alaska Regional or Village Corporations. We also decided to permit nonattributable investors in a corporate
applicant to own up to 15 percent of the corporation's voting stock, provided that the applicant's control group retains
at least 25 percent of the equity and 50.1 percent of the voting stock. We applied this change to investors in both publicly-traded
corporate applicants and applicants that are not publicly traded. Most recently, however, we adopted a 

Fourth Memorandum Opinion and Order 

in this docket, in which we addressed issues raised in petitions for reconsideration of the 

Fifth Report and Order 

that involve our broadband PCS competitive bidding rules governing auction methodology, application and payment
procedures, and regulatory safeguards to prevent anticompetitive practices among bidders.
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>
 In the instant 

Fifth Memorandum Opinion and Order, 

we resolve remaining matters in the petitions for reconsideration concerning our entrepreneurs' block rules, including
our provisions for designated entities.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
7

</FOOTNAME>


See Order on Reconsideration, 

PP Docket No. 93253, FCC 94217 (released Aug. 15, 1994).

</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>


See Fourth Memorandum Opinion and Order 

in PP Docket No. 93253, FCC 94246, 59 Fed. Reg. 53364 (released Oct. 19, 1994). On November 17, 1994, we
released an 

Order, 

which modified certain aspects of our stopping and anti-collusion rules, and preserved the right to change the timing
of the entrepreneurs' block auctions. 

Memorandum Opinion and Order 

in PP Docket No. 93253, FCC 94295 (released Nov. 17, 1994).
</FOOTNOTE>


Concept of Entrepreneurs' Blocks


Authority and Amount of Spectrum


10. In the 

Fifth Report and Order, 

the Commission designated a portion of the broadband PCS spectrum available at auction for qualified entrepreneurs.
<FOOTCITE>9</FOOTCITE>
 Eligible entrepreneurs can bid on BTA licenses in the C (30 MHz) and F (10 MHz) blocks. In addition, entrepreneurs who
fall within one of the four statutory ``designated entity'' categories (

i.e., 

small business, rural telephone companies, and businesses owned by members of minority groups and/or women) are
eligible for additional benefits to enable them to acquire broadband PCS licenses.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
9

</FOOTNAME>


Fifth Report and Order, 

FCC 94178 at 



118129. An applicant's eligibility to participate in the entrepreneurs' blocks is based on its size as measured
by specified financial caps.
</FOOTNOTE>


11. The Association of Independent Designated Entities (AIDE) contends that the Commission exceeded its statutory
authority in establishing the entrepreneurs' block because they potentially benefit entities that fall outside
of the four designated entity groups enumerated by Congress. AIDE maintains that the entrepreneurs' blocks reduce
meaningful opportunities for smaller designated entities to participate in PCS by forcing them to bid against ``entrepreneurs''
that may not qualify as designated entities. AIDE further argues that the Commission impermissibly restricted the
availability of financial incentives to designated entities for use only in Blocks C and F. Instead, AIDE requests
that the Commission make its financial incentives for designated entities available for every auctionable broadband
PCS license. The United States Interactive  Microwave Television Association and the United States Independent
Personal Communication Association (USIMTA/USIPCA) (filing jointly) support the entrepreneurs' block concept,
but encourage the Commission to provide additional broadband PCS spectrum exclusively for designated entities.
Citing Congress' concern about the historical impediments that small, minority and women-owned businesses have
encountered, USIMTA/USIPCA maintain that ``it would not be unreasonable'' to set aside up to one-half of the available
PCS spectrum. Finally, GTE Service Corporation (GTE) requests the Commission eliminate the entrepreneurs' blocks
and instead allow designated entities to ``partner'' with major investors and be eligible for more generous bidding
credits. Additionally, GTE contends that our entrepreneurs' block scheme unduly restricts the ability of cellular
carriers to participate in the provision of PCS. Specifically, GTE contends that this scheme, combined with the PCS-cellular
cross-ownership restrictions, will effectively limit eligibility for many cellular operators to 20 MHz of spectrum
on the D and E blocks.
12. Contrary to AIDE's contention, it is within our statutory authority to establish the entrepreneurs' blocks,
for which parties other than designated entities are eligible to apply for or invest in, and we believe that this scheme
will provide meaningful opportunities for designated entities to participate in the provision of broadband PCS.
Accordingly, we will retain the entrepreneurs' block structure set forth in the 

Fifth Report and Order. 

In establishing a competitive bidding process for the provision of spectrum-based services, Congress gave the Commission
broad authority to adopt bidding procedures and policies, so long as certain objectives are fulfilled. Specifically,
Congress mandated that the Commission ``promot[e] economic opportunity and competition and ensur[e] that new and
innovative technologies are readily accessible to the American people by avoiding excessive concentration of licenses
and by disseminating licenses among a wide variety of applicants, including small businesses, rural telephone companies,
and businesses owned by members of minority groups and women.'' 

See 

47 U.S.C. 309(j)(3)(B). Thus, the language of the statute allows us to consider other entities in order to ensure that
licenses are widely dispersed among a variety of licensees,
<FOOTCITE>10</FOOTCITE>
 so long as we also, among other statutory objectives, ensure that designated entities are given the opportunity to
participate in the provision of broadband PCS. 

See 

47 U.S.C. 309(j)(4)(D).


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
10

</FOOTNAME>
We believe the term ``including'' used in Section 309(j)(3)(B) of the Communications Act is a term of enlargement,
not limitation, intended to convey that other entities are includable together with, rather than excluded from the
categories of designated entities so long as legislative intent is satisfied. 

See 

2A Sutherland, Statutory Construction 47.23 (4th ed. 1984).
</FOOTNOTE>


13. The entrepreneurs' blocks approach adopted in our 

Fifth Report and Order 

achieves the statute's objectives by creating significant opportunities for designated entities and other entrepreneurs
to ensure that licenses are widely disbursed to entities that can rapidly deploy broadband PCS services. We are making
additional changes to our rules (including eliminating the personal net worth cap and liberalizing our affiliation
rules for individual minority investors) to help designated entities overcome particularly intractable historic
difficulties in accessing capital. To satisfy Congress' directive, we established the entrepreneurs' blocks in
conjunction with a package of benefits that are narrowly tailored to provide significant opportunities to designated
entities and those entrepreneurs that lack access to capital.
14. We disagree with USIMTA/USIPCA who requests that the Commission provide additional spectrum for entrepreneurs'
blocks. Our existing allotment, which comprises one-third of the total amount of licensed broadband PCS spectrum,
is sufficient to ensure that designated entities and other entrepreneurs have significant opportunities to participate
in the PCS marketplace. We therefore deny petitioners' various requests for modification to our entrepreneurs'
block provisions.


