 




<DOCTITLE>National Eye Institute; National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases; National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development; Licensing Opportunity and/or Opportunity for a Cooperative Research and
Development Agreement (CRADA) for the Use of Antiflammins </DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 National Institutes of Health, Public Health Service, DHHS. 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.





</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The National Institutes of Health is seeking licensees and/or CRADA partners for the further development and commercialization
of its patent portfolio for antiflammins. The inventions claimed in the following patent applications are available
for either exclusive or non-exclusive licensing (in accordance with 35 U.S.C. 207 and 37 CFR Part 404) and/or further
development under one or more CRADAs in several clinically important applications as described below in the Supplementary
Information:





Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Mukherjee, A. B. (NICHD), Filed 19 Nov 1987 Serial No. 07/122,379, U.S. Patent No. 5,266,562
issued 30 Nov 1993


Method of Treating Ocular Inflammatory Diseases Using Antiflammins, Chan, C. C. (NEI), Filed 7 Jun 1993, Serial No.
08/073,380





To speed the research, development and commercialization of this new class of drugs, the National Institutes of Health
is seeking one or more license agreements and/or CRADAs with pharmaceutical or biotechnology companies in accordance
with the regulations governing the transfer of Government-developed agents. Any proposal to use antiflammins in
the treatment of inflammatory disease processes will be considered. 



</SUMMARY>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 CRADA proposals and questions about this opportunity should be addressed to: Ms. Karen Wright, Office of Technology
Development, National Eye Institute, Building 10, Room 10N202, Bethesda, MD 20892 (301/4969463). CRADA
proposals must be received by the date specified below. 



Licensing proposals and questions about this opportunity should be addressed to: Ms. Carol Lavrich, Office of Technology
Transfer, National Institutes of Health, 6011 Executive Boulevard, Rockville, MD 20852 (301/4967735 ext.
287). Information on the patent and patent applications and pertinent information not yet publicly described can
be obtained under a Confidential Disclosure Agreement. Respondees interested in licensing the invention(s) will
be required to submit an Application for License to Public Health Service Inventions. Respondees interested in submitting
a CRADA proposal should be aware that it may be necessary to secure a license to the above patent rights in order to commercialize
products arising from a CRADA agreement.




</ADDRESS>
<DATE>
DATES:

 There is no deadline by which license applications must be received. CRADA proposals must be received on or before
November 14, 1994.




</DATE>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 Antiflammins are biologically active synthetic oligopeptides, derived from the sequence similarity between lipo-cortin-1
and uteroglobin, an anti-inflammatory protein. These peptides have antiphospholipase A

2

 and immunomodulatory properties. Because of the great therapeutic potential of specific and potent antiflammin
drugs that may be developed, scientists in several Institutes at the National Institutes of Health are examining
the use of antiflammins in the treatment of a variety of inflammatory processes, including acute anterior ocular
inflammation (uveitis), psoriasis, neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and bronchopulmonary dysplasia
(BPD). 



Dr. Chi-Cho Chan and Dr. Scott Whitcup, clinical investigators at the National Eye Institute (NEI), have an IND for
the use of antiflammin 2 in acute anterior uveitis, and seven patients have already been enrolled in a clinical trial.
To date, no toxicity has been observed in patients treated with this drug. The NEI is interested in developing new topical
formulations of antiflammins and the initiation of multi-center randomized clinical trials of antiflammins for
the treatment of anterior uveitis, post-operative ocular inflammation, and allergic conjunctivitis. 

Dr. John diGiovanna, an investigator in the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
(NIAMS), is studying the use of antiflammins to treat psoriasis, a hyperproliferative inflammatory skin disease.
Dr. diGiovanna would like to continue and expand these studies to include other inflammatory skin diseases such as
atopic and contact dermatitis, as well as develop animal and 

in vitro

 models to study the effects of antiflammins on skin. 

</SUPPLEM>
