 

Currently, devices are classified within fifteen radon measurement methods. There are twelve radon measurement
methods for radon gas: Alpha track detection (AT), activated charcoal adsorption (AC), unfiltered track detection
(UT), charcoal liquid scintillation (LS), long-term and short-term electret-ion chamber ((EL) and (ES) respectively),
continuous radon monitoring (CR), grab radon/activated charcoal (GC), grab radon/pump-collapsible bag (GB),
grab radon/scintillation cell (GS), evacuated scintillation cell (SC), and pump-collapsible bag (PB). Currently,
there are three working level radon decay product measurement methods tested in the RMP: grab sampling-working level
(GW), continuous working-level monitoring (CW), and radon progeny integrating sampling unit (RPISU). Additional
methods may be tested in the future as methods and protocols are developed.

As of October 1991, EPA estimated that approximately 600 firms are participating in the RMP program and offering primary
services with about 1,200 devices. There are approximately 1,000 listed secondary firms in the RMP program. The most
recent National Proficiency Report was published in October, 1993. Letters indicating participants' current status
in the program are issued on an ongoing basis.



2. Improvements to the RMP Since the Proposed Rule



Between 1989 and 1991, EPA conducted a major evaluation of the RMP program. The program was also reviewed by EPA's Science
Advisory Board and the General Accounting Office. These reviews have resulted in a number of program improvements,
which include the following. 1. An application may be submitted to EPA at any time rather than in announced testing
``rounds,'' as was done prior to 1990. 2. Organizations offering only secondary measurement services must submit
their own application, and must use RMP-listed organizations and devices for the analysis or reading of the radon
measurement devices used. 3. The passing criteria for radon measurement proficiency tests for primary devices were
made more stringent. Prior to 1991, the average error during performance tests had to be less than or equal to 25%. Now
each device tested must have an error of less than or equal to 25%. EPA also now provides an opportunity to the organization
to retest if the test outcome for any device in a specific measurement method is greater than 25% but less than 50% of
EPA's target value. 4. Proficiency determinations are now based on testing and listing participants for a specific
device within a measurement method. In the past, those participants who successfully tested with a specific device
were sometimes listed for an entire method (a method may include many different devices). 5. All participants are
now required to adhere to a valid Quality Assurance Plan. 6. Specific requirements intended for individuals who provide
radon measurements services to consumers on-site (e.g., in a residence) have been developed by EPA. By April 1993,
organizations that participate in the RMP program must provide on-site measurement services using individuals
who have met the requirements of the individual proficiency component of the RMP program. Organizations who do not
meet this requirement will be removed from listing in the RMP program and its proficiency reports. EPA began a measurement
proficiency examination program in December 1991 as part of a larger effort to ensure the proficiency of individuals
who provide on-site measurement services.



B. Individual Measurement Proficiency and the RMP Exam



EPA established individual proficiency requirements because the quality and reliability of radon measurement
services depend on the ability of individual measurement contractors. Additionally, testing an individual's knowledge
should ensure that he or she is able to provide informed answers to radon questions from the public. 

The ``centerpiece'' of these requirements is the RMP measurement exam. The RMP measurement exam tests an individual's
ability to provide radon measurement services in a residential environment. Other individual proficiency requirements
include: (1) Passing a biennial reexamination; (2) meeting RMP program requirements for using listed devices with
listed organizations; and, (3) maintaining an affiliation with an RMP listed organization. Upon completing the
requirements, participants will be listed in ``The National RMP Program_Individual Proficiency Report.''



C. National Radon Contractor Proficiency (RCP) Program



EPA established the RCP program in the Fall of 1989 as required by Congress under Section 305 of TSCA. The RCP program
was developed to evaluate radon mitigation contractors and provide information on proficient radon mitigation
contractors to the public. Like the RMP, it is a voluntary proficiency program.

Randon mitigation contractors are typically construction and residential service contractors who provide radon
mitigation services to the public. To participate successfully in the program, a radon mitigation contractor must
meet the following requirements: (1) Successfully complete an EPA approved 16-hour hands-on mitigation training
course; (2) pass the national mitigation proficiency exam; (3) conduct business according to EPA's Radon Mitigation
Standards; and (4) pass a re-examination every two years. The names of those applicants who meet program requirements
are listed in the EPA ``National Radon Contractor Proficiency (RCP) Program_Proficiency Report.''

