 

The draft Wainae Plant Cluster Recovery Plan addresses 31 plant taxa that have been listed as endangered under the
Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (Act), in four listing actions between September 1991 and June 1994: 

Abutilon sandwicense, Alsinidendron obovatum, Alsinidendron trinerve, Centaurium sebaeoides

 (`awiwi), 

Chamaesyce celastroides

 var. 

Kaenana 

(`akoko), 

Chamaesyce kuwaleana

 (`akoko), 

Cyanea grimesiana

 ssp. 

obatae

 (haha), 

Cyanea pinnatifida

 (haha), 

Cyanea superba, Diellia falcata, Diellia unisora, Dubautia herbstobatae

 (na'ena'e), 

Gouania meyenii, Gouania vitifolia, Hedyotis degeneri, Hedyotis parvula, Hesperomannia arbuscula, Lipochaeta
lobata

 var. 

leptophylla

 (nehe), 

Lipochaeta tenuifolia

 (nehe), 

Lobelia niihauensis, Neraudia angulata, Nototrichium humile

 (kulu'i), 

Phyllostegia mollis, Sanicula mariversa, Schiedea kaalae, Silene perlmanii, Stenogyne kanehoana, Tetramolopium
filiforme, Tetramolopium lepidotum

 ssp. 

lepidotum Urera kaalae

 (opuhe), and 

Viola chamissoniana

 ssp. 

chamissoniana

 (pamakani). Twenty-six taxa are either endemic to, or have their largest or best known populations in, the Waianae
Mountain Range on the western side of the island of Oahu, Hawaii.

The 31 plant tasa and their habitats have been adversely threatened in various degrees by one or more of the following:
trampling and predation by introduced ungulates (pigs, cattle, goats); habitat degradation and competition for
space, light, water, and nutrients by naturalized, alien vegetation; and habitat loss from fires. A few of these taxa
may have been subjected to overcollection and are subject to trampling by human beings along trails. Because of the
small number of extant individuals and severely restricted distributions, populations of these tasa are subject
to an increased likelihood of extinction from stochastic events.

The ultimate objective of this plan is to provide a framework for the eventual recovery of these 31 taxa, preferably
so that their protection by the Endangered Species Act (ESA) is no longer necessary. Immediate actions necessary
for the prevention of extinction of these taxa include fencing for exclusion of ungulates, alien plant control, protection
from fire, population and plant community monitoring and management, 

ex situ

 propagation, and augmentation of populations, as appropriate. Long-term activities necessary for the perpetuation
of these taxa in their natural habitats additionally include baseline and long-term research regarding growth requirements,
public education, maintenance of fenced areas, long-term monitoring and management of populations and communities,
and re-establishment of populations within the historic ranges of some taxa. Further research regarding current
range, reproduction and reproductive status, pollinators, life history, limiting factors, habitat requirements,
and minimum viable population sizes is needed to facilitate appropriate management decisions regarding the long-term
perpetuation of each of these taxa.



Public Comments Solicited



The Service solicits written comments on the recovery plan described. All comments received by the date specified
above will be considered prior to approval of these plans.



Authority



The authority for this action is section 4(f) of the Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C. 1533(f).




Dated: September 26, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Michael J. Spear,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Regional Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 1.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9424196 Filed 92994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055M
</BILLING>



