 

Over the years, the poultry and meat food industries have also referred to poultry products produced by mechanical
means as ``comminuted (i.e., ground) poultry.'' Terminology such as ``finely comminuted,'' ``finely ground,''
and ``mechanically deboned'' have been used on poultry product labels to describe the form (i.e., physical appearance)
and composition of the product according to 9 CFR 381.117(d). 

Poultry products produced by mechanical means are currently subject to 9 CFR 381.117(d) relating to boneless poultry
products. This regulation requires boneless poultry products to be labeled in a manner that accurately describes
their actual form and composition. The product name must indicate the form of the product, e.g., emulsified or finely
chopped, and the kind name of the poultry from which it is derived. If the product does not consist of natural proportions
of skin and fat, as they occur in the whole carcass, the product name must also include terminology that describes the
actual composition. If the product is cooked, it must be so labeled. Section 381.117(d) also limits the bone solids
content of boneless poultry products to 1 percent. 


Existing regulations do not distinguish between boneless poultry products produced by mechanical separation and
poultry products produced by traditional methods, e.g., hand-deboning. Poultry product produced by mechanical
separation is declared in the ingredients statement of a product in which it is used, along with any other boneless
poultry product used, as ``chicken'' or ``turkey'' where skin and fat are included but not in excess of their natural
proportions, or as ``chicken meat'' or ``turkey meat'' when skin with attached fat is not included. 




II. Report on Health and Safety of Mechanically Deboned Poultry 



In 1976, the Department initiated an analytical program to obtain data on a number of nutrients and substances of potential
health concern in poultry products produced by mechanical separation. Data were also gathered from scientific literature,
industry, other government agencies, and university scientists. Details of the analytical program and a resulting
evaluation were published in a June 1979 report entitled ``Health and Safety Aspects of the Use of Mechanically Deboned
Poultry'' (hereafter referred to as the 1979 Report). An errata supplement correcting certain items in the report
was prepared and published on August 14, 1979 (44 FR 47576). (The 1979 Report and the errata supplement are available
for public inspection in the FSIS Docket Clerk's office.) On June 29, 1979, the Agency announced the availability
of this report and encouraged interested members of the public to comment on its content. The Department also notified
the public that it was particularly interested in receiving comments regarding the proper labeling of products containing
poultry product produced by mechanical separation and what means, if any, should be taken to implement the labeling
recommendations in the report (44 FR 37965). 


The Department received 221 comments, most of which were general reactions to the labeling issues raised in the notice,
and health, safety, or economic concerns. Of the 187 commenters that expressed a general opinion on the adequacy of
the regulations concerning mechanically deboned poultry products, 175 were supportive. Some commenters stated
that the regulations have effectively controlled the use of product produced by mechanical separation over many
years with a wide base of consumer acceptance, that such product is not significantly different from product produced
by hand-deboning, that these regulations provide truthful labeling, and/or that the report and scientific literature
support the adequacy of current regulations. Other commenters indicated that mechanically deboned poultry should
be regulated the same as mechanically separated (species) (MS(S)) (then named mechanically processed (species)
product). 


