 

NHTSA is aware of the concerns of final stage and intermediate stage manufacturers about crash testing their vehicles.
The agency notes that its regulations already provide that certification of an incomplete vehicle can pass through
to the final stage manufacturer, provided that the final stage manufacturers take the necessary precautions to ensure
they do not invalidate the certification. More specifically, the final stage manufacturers must ensure that they
complete the vehicle without exceeding the GAWRs, altering any fuel system component, moving the center of gravity
of the completed vehicle with the body installed outside the envelope of specifications provided by the chassis manufacturer,
or otherwise violating that envelope. If the final stage manufacturer takes care to comply with all of the chassis
manufacturer's specifications, the final stage manufacturer will not have to recertify the vehicle. 

If the final stage manufacturer decides not to comply with the specifications to the extent that the vehicle, in its
final form, differed significantly from what was anticipated by the chassis manufacturer in specifying the envelope,
and the basis for the incomplete vehicle manufacturer's certification was thus no longer valid, then the final stage
manufacturer will have to accept the responsibility for certification. 

Pass-through certification is also not available for vehicles built on chassis lacking sufficient components to
be certified as an incomplete vehicle. Some of the manufacturers that build these vehicles may be small businesses
that may be unable to conduct their own crash tests. 

NHTSA notes that while manufacturers must certify that their vehicles meet all applicable safety standards, this
does not necessarily mean that a manufacturer must conduct the specific tests set forth in an applicable standard.
Certifications may be based on, among other things, engineering analyses, actual testing, and computer simulations.


Moreover, a manufacturer need not conduct these operations itself. Manufacturers can utilize the services of independent
engineers and testing laboratories. They can also join together through trade associations to sponsor testing or
analysis. Finally, they can rely on testing and analysis performed by other parties, including the CNG container
manufacturers. The container manufacturers typically perform extensive analyses and tests of their products and,
in order to sell those products, will have a strong incentive to provide their customers, the vehicle manufacturers,
with information that can be used to certify the vehicle to the applicable standard. Based on the above discussion,
NHTSA does not believe that the requirements pose any significant certification burdens for the final stage manufacturers
or other small manufacturers. 



2. Benefits 



In the NPRM, NHTSA estimated the benefits from a CNG vehicle standard by comparing them to the benefits from Standard
No. 301. The proposal referred to a NHTSA technical report on Standard No. 301's effect on motor vehicle fires in traffic
crashes. That report estimated that Standard No. 301 has reduced fires in all passenger car crashes by 14 percent.
(``Motor Vehicle Fires in Traffic Crashes and the Effects of Fuel System Integrity Standard,'' DOT HS 807 675, November
1990.) The NPRM also discussed information submitted by NFPA about 19841988 annual average automobile fire
rates to the docket (Docket No. 7320N15027). These data contain information on the number of
fires in passenger cars by type of material first ignited (gasoline, LP-gas, or natural gas). However, the agency
stated that there were limitations with using these data, and thus they could not be used to enable the agency to determine
the fire rate of CNG and LPG vehicles in comparison to gasoline fueled vehicles. 

Notwithstanding these limitations, NHTSA estimated in the NPRM the number of fires in CNG vehicles, assuming they
have the same fire rate as gasoline powered vehicles. Based on Standard No. 301 fire rates and on one Department of Energy
scenario of projected on-road alternative fuel vehicles, by fuel type, the agency estimated that there could be 1,690
fires in CNG vehicles in the year 2010. 




