 

10. For purposes of further forbearance, the Commission asks whether there are any CMRS providers whose market is
so specialized, or their customer base or size of operation so small that applying TRS obligations to them would not
appreciably advance the universal service objectives of Section 225. Would forbearance in such cases meet the test
in section 332? Parties are also asked to address whether the need for forbearance is reduced by providers' ability
to designate a third party to provide TRS. The Commission also seeks comment on whether there are technical or operational
limitations that would make compliance with our TRS technical standards difficult for a particular type of CMRS provider.
The Commission asks whether interfacing with a third-party TRS provider would also pose technical difficulties,
particularly for those private providers who will be reclassified as CMRS after new technical/operational rules
become effective.

11. The Commission has adopted a shared-funding mechanism for interstate TRS cost recovery. Under the Commission's
shared-funding plan, providers of interstate telecommunications services are required to contribute to a TRS fund
and comply with reporting and filing obligations, including conforming their accounts to a specified format. The
amount of the yearly contribution is a percentage (.00030) of the carrier's gross interstate revenues. Each carrier
must contribute at least $100, even if its share under the actual computation would be less.

12. In light of the small percentage used to calculate the contribution and the low minimum required, the Commission
asks whether the burden from the funding and concomitant filing obligations are likely to be significant for any type
of CMRS. The Commission also reiterates that providers that do not themselves use TRS facilities are nevertheless
required to contribute to the Fund. The Commission seeks comment on its tentative view that the public interest would
not be furthered by exempting CMRS entirely because they do not use TRS facilities.

13. The Telephone Operator Consumer Services Improvement Act (TOCSIA), codified at 47 U.S.C. 226, protects consumers
making interstate operator service calls from phones available to the public or to transient users against unreasonably
high rates and anti-competitive practices. It regulates two groups. The first consists of operator service providers
(OSPs). These are providers of interstate telecommunications service from phones available to the public or to transient
users that give automatic or live assistance for billing or completion to a caller. The second group are aggregators,
generally persons that, in the ordinary course of their operations, make telephones available to the public or to
transient users of the premises and who use a provider of operator services. Pursuant to TOCSIA and Commission rules,
OSPs are subject to various identification, disclosure and billing requirements, including the requirement that
they ``brand'' calls, 

i.e., 

audibly identify themselves at the beginning of the call and before the consumer incurs any charges for the call. They
may not engage in ``call splashing'' (transfer of a call to another carrier at a location different from the originating
consumer where the second carrier cannot tell the originating location, with the result that the charge to the consumer
is incorrect and not based on originating location). OSPs must file informational tariffs. Aggregators are required
to identify and disclose certain information regarding the presubscribed OSP and to disclose that rate information
is available and that the consumer has the right to use an OSP of his or her choice. The aggregator must also ensure (1)
that its telephones presubscribed to an OSP allow consumers to use 800 or 900 numbers to obtain access to the OSP of choice,
and (2) according to an established implementation schedule, that any of its presubscribed equipment allows the
consumer to use equal access (10XXX) codes to access the customer's choice of OSP.

14. The Notice requests comment on whether forbearance from section 226 for particular classes of CMRS would be justified.
Parties advocating forbearance for specific types of providers from the aggregator or OSP rules should explain how
such action would meet the three-part test for forbearance under Section 332. In particular, parties should address
how the first and second prongs of the test, that rates be just and reasonable and that consumers be adequately protected,
would be met. In connection with the third prong, parties should address whether the statute imposes any costs that
would be exceptionally difficult for certain types of CMRS provider to bear, and whether forbearance in such case
would significantly diminish statutory protections for the public. In particular, the Commission seeks comment
on whether such costs are likely to prove unduly burdensome for specific types of small CMRS providers.

15. The telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (TCPA), 47 U.S.C. 227, restricts the use of automatic telephone
dialing systems, artificial or prerecorded voice messages, and telephone facsimile machines to send unsolicited
advertisements. TCPA prohibits autodialed and prerecorded voice message calls to emergency lines, health care
facilities or similar establishments, and with certain exceptions, number (such as cellular numbers) for which
the called party is charged for the call.

