 

3. Modeling and experimentation on two-phase flow, interfacial relations, and heat transfer in reactor coolant
systems. Experiments in modeling of passive heat transfer in natural circulation systems.
4. Development of condensation models for thermal-hydraulic systems codes with and without condensible gases.
5. Conduct experimentation and model development of the boron in reactor coolant systems under natural circulation
conditions.
6. Development and validation of a standard model of human performance in (a) nuclear power plant operations and maintenance,
(b) medical uses of by-product materials, and (c) industrial uses of by-product materials.
7. Develop and codify pragmatic, statistically valid methods for updating severe accident frequency and consequence
analysis to reflect results of new operational, experimental and calculation data.
8. Develop methods and comparison of probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) results with operational data and experience.
9. Studies of corrosion processes that lead to degradation of materials in light-water reactor components such as
piping, reactor internals, and steam generators.
10. Development of nondestructive testing methods for in-situ evaluation of material properties and property degradation
due to aging, such as fracture toughness, fatigue, residual life, and radiation effects.
11. Development of and/or validation of models to predict the propagation of seismic ground motion in Central and
Eastern United States including the effects of ground motions on the response of NPPs and their site characteristics.
12. Development and/or validation of models to explain the quaternary tectonics and seismicity of the Central and
Eastern United States (East of 105 degrees W).
13. Development of techniques and QA and QC procedures necessary for rapid bioassay analysis in the event of accidental
internal exposure.
14. Studies of volcanism or other disruptive processes or events in the Basin and Range.
15. Development of improved instrumentation or techniques for measuring activity, radiation dose, and dose rates,
especially from small radioactive particles.
16. Research on the metabolism of radionuclides and their compounds relative to the calculation of internal dose.
17. Investigation of radiation induced effects at the cellular/molecular levels and repairs thereof emphasizing
the reduction of uncertainties in risk of deleterious health effects from low-level radiation.
18. Validation of approaches to quantitatively assess human health effects of radiation, including new approaches
to analyses of human epidemiological studies and experimental animal studies.
19. Analysis of the effectiveness of decontamination technologies for land, structures, recycled materials and
equipment and estimation of individual comparative costs.
20. Investigations, including natural analogue studies for long-term analyses, of coupling between hydrologic,
thermal, chemical, and/or mechanical processes as they affect the simulation of high-level waste repository performance.
21. Development of methods to apply safety goal philosophy, including risk-based regulation.


