 

c. Adding a new paragraph (g), to read as follows: 



208.9 

Interview and procedure. 



(a) For each application for asylum or withholding of deportation that is complete within the meaning of 208.3(c)(5)
and that is within the jurisdiction of the Office of Refugees, Asylum, and Parole, an interview shall be conducted
by an asylum officer, either at the time of the application or at a later date to be determined by the Asylum Office. Applications
within the jurisdiction of an immigration judge are to be adjudicated under the rules of procedure established by
the Executive Office for Immigration Review in parts 3, 236, and 242 of this chapter. 

(b) The asylum officer shall conduct the interview in a nonadversarial manner and, at the request of the applicant,
separate and apart from the general public. The purpose of the interview shall be to elicit all relevant and useful
information bearing on the applicant's eligibility for the form of relief sought. At the time of the interview, the
applicant must provide complete information regarding his or her identity, including name, date and place of birth,
and nationality, and may be required to register this identity electronically or through any other means designated
by the Attorney General. The applicant may have counsel or a representative present, may present witnesses, and may
submit affidavits of witnesses and other evidence. 

(c) The asylum officer shall have authority to administer oaths, verify the identity of the applicant (including
through the use of electronic means), verify the identity of any interpreter, present and receive evidence, and question
the applicant and any witnesses. 

(d) Upon completion of the interview, the applicant or his representative shall have an opportunity to make a statement
or comment on the evidence presented. The asylum officer, in his or her discretion, may limit the length of such statement
or comment and may require their submission in writing. Upon completion of the interview, the applicant shall be informed
that he or she must appear in person to receive and to acknowledge receipt of the decision of the asylum officer and any
other accompanying material at a time and place designated by the asylum officer. An applicant's failure to appear
to receive and acknowledge receipt of the decision shall be treated as delay caused by the applicant for purposes of
208.7(a)(3) and shall extend the period within which the applicant may not apply for employment authorization
by the number of days until the applicant does appear to receive and acknowledge receipt of the decision or until the
applicant appears before an immigration judge in response to the issuance of a charging document under 208.14(b).


(e) The asylum officer shall consider evidence submitted by the applicant together with his or her asylum application,
as well as any evidence submitted by the applicant before or at the interview. As a matter of discretion, the asylum
officer may grant the applicant a brief extension of time following an interview during which the applicant may submit
additional evidence. Any such extension shall extend by equivalent time the periods specified by 208.7 for
the filing and adjudication of employment authorization applications. 



* * * * * 



(g) An applicant unable to proceed with the interview in English must provide, at no expense to the INS, a competent
interpreter fluent in both English and the applicant's native language. The interpreter must be at least 18 years
of age. Neither the applicant's attorney or representative of record nor a witness testifying on the applicant's
behalf may serve as the applicant's interpreter. Failure without good cause to comply with this paragraph may be considered
a failure without good cause to appear for the interview for purposes of 208.10. 

9. Section 208.10 is amended by: 

a. Revising the first sentence; and 

b. Removing, wherever it appears in the second and third sentences, the phrase ``Asylum Officer'' and adding in its
place the phrase ``asylum officer'', to read as follows: 




