 

A commenter representing one of the State regulatory authorities criticized the provisions of the proposed rule
which would have required that the regulatory authority provide thirty days' written notice to the permittee, if
the regulatory authority decides to suspend the permit. This commenter asserted that there may be circumstances
which require the immediate suspension and, possibly, outright rescission of a permit. This commenter asserted
that delay, in the interests of due process rights, may not serve the public interest.

OSM appreciates the commenter's concerns. It is entirely conceivable that a permittee could have been issued a permit
even though the permittee was linked, through ownership or control, to a string of unabated violations at the time
of permit issuance. The permittee could have willfully and fraudulently concealed such links through some clever
scheme or artifice at the time of permit application. While AVS has reduced the potential for such a scenario to occur,
it remains possible. Such a permit ought to be subject to immediate suspension.

Nevertheless, OSM must weigh the public interest in preventing violators from keeping permits against the public
interest in assuring that permittees' due process rights are protected. The remedies of permit suspension and rescission
are serious. Unlike an applicant who merely has an expectancy in his application to receive a permit to mine, a permittee
has, in fact and as a matter of law, assumed the rights and responsibilities incident to the permit to engage in surface
coal mining operations. Indeed, OSM's regulations provide that a valid permit carries with it the right of successive
renewal. See 30 CFR 774.15(a). Thus, a permittee has an interest which is deserving of a higher level of protection
than the interest of an applicant.

Further, the provisions of 30 CFR 773.21 previously provided for notice to the permittee only prior to a proposed permit
suspension and rescission. Thus, a permittee got prior notice of a suspension only if the suspension was the precursor
to a subsequent rescission. If the regulatory authority did not intend the suspension of a permit to be followed by
the permit's rescission, there was no requirement for prior notice. Also, the provisions of 30 CFR 773.21 provided
appeal rights for a notice of suspension and rescission. There were no similar appeal rights in 30 CFR 773.20 with respect
to suspension. In substance, permit suspension had the potential of being a harsher punishment than permit rescission
by reason of these procedural differences. These were anomalies that OSM wanted to correct.

Accordingly, the final version of 30 CFR 773.20(c)(2) provides for notice prior to permit suspension; for administrative
review of the notice of suspension under 43 CFR 4.1370 et seq. or under the State program equivalent; for a common appeal
procedure for both permit suspensions and permit rescissions with respect to improvidently issued permits and for
the regulatory authority's decision to remain in effect during the pendency of an appeal, unless temporary relief
has been granted in accordance with 43 CFR 4.1376 or the State program equivalent. States can be more stringent with
respect to providing less prior notice, but they are responsible for the legal consequences of such actions.

Industry commenters objected to OSM's assertion of any role in revoking or setting aside improvidently issued permits
based upon the totality of their objections to the AVS, the ownership and control rules, and the proposed rules. These
reasons included the proposed rules' alleged deficiencies with respect to due process, State primacy, dispersion
of authority for permit decisionmaking, and all other objections asserted by industry commenters.

OSM disagrees with the commenters' views, including their view that OSM has no legitimate role in the improvidently
issued permit process. OSM has an essential role to play, both as a regulatory authority and as an agency of the Federal
government overseeing the States' programs. OSM incorporates by reference its previous responses to industry commenters
in this preamble which address the commenters' concerns. Further, in the preamble to the rules governing improvidently
issued permits, OSM has explained the legal basis for the improvidently issued permit rules and the rationale for
OSM's role with respect to the implementation of such rules in relation to the States. See Preamble to 30 CFR 773.20,
773.21, and 843.21; Final Rule, 54 FR 18438 

et seq., 

especially see pages 1845818461 (April 28, 1989). OSM also incorporates these explanations by reference.

