 

(ii) The provision of services as an integral part of the institution's educational program and as part of the institution's
educational philosophy; and 

(4) Provides students participating in the comprehensive work-learning program with the opportunity to contribute
to their education and to the welfare of the community as a whole. 

(b) 

Comprehensive student work-learning program: 

A student work/service program that_

(1) Is an integral and stated part of the institution's educational philosophy and program; 

(2) Requires participation of all resident students for enrollment, participation, and graduation; 

(3) Includes learning objectives, evaluation, and a record of work performance as part of the student's college record;


(4) Provides programmatic leadership by college personnel at levels comparable to traditional academic programs;


(5) Recognizes the educational role of work-learning supervisors; and 

(6) Includes consequences for nonperformance or failure in the work-learning program similar to the consequences
for failure in the regular academic program. 





(Authority: 42 U.S.C. 2756b) 



675.42

Purpose. 



The purpose of the Work-Colleges program is to recognize, encourage, and promote the use of comprehensive work-learning
programs as a valuable educational approach when it is an integral part of the institution's educational program
and a part of a financial plan that decreases reliance on grants and loans and to encourage students to participate
in community service activities. 





(Authority: 42 U.S.C. 2756b) 



675.43

Program description. 



(a) An institution that satisfies the definition of ``work-college'' in 675.41(a) and wishes to participate
in the Work-Colleges program must apply to the Secretary at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Secretary.


(b) An institution may expend funds separately, or in combination with other eligible institutions, to provide work-learning
opportunities for currently enrolled students. 

(c) For any given award year, Federal funds allocated for that award year under sections 442 and 462 of the HEA may be
transferred for the purpose of carrying out the Work-Colleges program to provide flexibility in strengthening the
self-help-through-work element in financial aid packaging. 





(Authority: 42 U.S.C. 2756b) 



675.44

Allowable costs, Federal share, and institutional share. 



(a) 

Allowable costs.

 An institution participating in the Work-Colleges program may use appropriated funds to carry out the following
activities: 

(1) Support the educational costs of qualified students through self-help payments or credits provided under the
work learning program within the limits of part F of title IV of the HEA. 

(2) Promote the work-learning-service experience as a tool of postsecondary education, financial self-help, and
community service-learning opportunities. 

(3) Carry out activities in sections 443 or 446 of the HEA. 

(4) Administer, develop, and assess comprehensive work-learning programs including_

(i) Community-based work-learning alternatives that expand opportunities for community service and career-related
work; and 

(ii) Alternatives that develop sound citizenship, encourage student persistence, and make optimum use of assistance
under the Work-Colleges program in education and student development. 

(b) 

Federal share of allowable costs. 

An institution, in 
addition to the funds allocated for this program, may transfer allocations provided under its Federal Perkins Loan
or its Federal Work-Study program to pay allowable costs. 

(c) 

Institutional share of allowable costs. 

An institution must match Federal funds made available for this program on a dollar-for-dollar basis from non-Federal
sources. The institution shall keep records documenting the amount and source of its share. 




(Authority: 42 U.S.C. 2756b) 



675.45

Unallowable costs. 



An institution may not use funds appropriated to carry out the Work-Colleges program to pay costs related to the purchase,
construction, or alteration of physical facilities or indirect administrative costs. 




(Authority: 42 U.S.C. 2756b) 



675.46

Multiinstitutional work-colleges arrangements. 



(a) An institution participating in the Work-Colleges program may enter into a written agreement with another participating
institution to promote the work-learning-service experience. 

(b) The agreement described in paragraph (a) of this section must_

(1) Designate the administrator of the program; and 

(2) Specify the terms, conditions, and performance standards of the program. 

(c) Each institution shall retain responsibility for the proper disbursement of the Federal funds it contributes
under an agreement with other eligible institutions. 




(Authority: 42 U.S.C. 2756b) 



675.47

Agreement. 



To participate in the Work-Colleges program, an institution shall enter into an agreement with the Secretary. The
agreement provides that, among other things, the institution shall_

(a) Assure that it will comply with all the appropriate provisions of the HEA and the appropriate provisions of the
regulations; 

(b) Assure that it satisfies the definition of ``work-college'' in 675.41(a); 




