 

V. Health/Medical Program 



Each State should integrate occupant protection into health programs. The failure of drivers and passengers to use
occupant protection systems is a major health problem that must be recognized by the health care community. The SHSA
and the State Health Department should collaborate in developing programs that: 


 


Integrate occupant protection into professional health training curricula and comprehensive public health planning;


Promote occupant protection systems as a health promotion/disease prevention measure; 

Require public health and medical personnel to use available motor vehicle occupant protection systems when on the
job; 

Provide technical assistance and education about the importance of motor vehicle occupant protection to primary
caregivers, (e.g., doctors, nurses, clinic staff); 

Include questions about safety belt use in health risk appraisals; 

Utilize health care providers as visible public spokespersons for belt use and child safety seat use; 

Provide information about availability of child safety seats through maternity hospitals and other pre-natal and
natal care centers (see Program Component VI: Child Passenger Safety Program); and 

Collect, analyze, and publicize data on additional injuries and medical expenses resulting from non-use of occupant
protection devices. 



VI. Child Passenger Safety Program 



Each State should vigorously promote the use of child safety seats. States should require every child up to 40 pounds
to ride correctly secured in a child safety seat that meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (see Program Component
II: Legislation, Regulation, and Policy). State and community child passenger safety programs that will help to
achieve that objective should be established to: 



Educate parents, pediatricians, hospitals, law enforcement, EMS and the general public about the safety risks to
small children, the benefits of child safety seats, and their responsibilities for compliance with child passenger
safety laws; 

Encourage child safety seat retailers and auto dealers to provide information about child seat and vehicle compatibility,
as well as correct use; 

Require safe child transportation policies for certification of pre-school and day care providers; 

Require hospitals to ensure that newborn and other small children are correctly secured in an approved child safety
seat or safety belt upon discharge; 

Make child safety seats available at affordable cost to low-income families; and 

Encourage local law enforcement to vigorously enforce child passenger safety laws, including safety belt use laws
as they apply to children. 



VII. School-Based Program 



Each State should incorporate occupant protection education in school curricula. Buckling up is a good health habit
and, like other health habits, must be taught at an early age and reinforced until the habit is well established. The
State Department of Education and the State Highway Safety Agency should: 


 


Ensure that highway safety in general, and occupant protection in particular, are included in the State-approved
K12 health and safety education curricula and textbooks; 

Establish and enforce written policies requiring that school employees operating a motor vehicle on the job use safety
belts; and 

Encourage active promotion of regular safety belt use through classroom and extra-curricular activities as well
as in the school-based health clinics. 



VIII. Worksite Program 



Each State should encourage all employers to require safety belt use on the job as a condition of employment. The Federal
government has already taken that step for its employees. Private sector employers should follow the lead of Federal
and State government employers and comply with all applicable FHWA Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations or Occupational
Health and Safety (OSHA) regulations requiring private business employees to use safety belts on the job. All employers
should: 


 


Establish and enforce a safety belt use policy with sanctions; and 

Conduct occupant protection education programs for employees on their belt use policies and the safety benefits
of motor vehicle occupant protection. 



IX. Outreach Program 



Each State should encourage extensive community involvement in occupant protection education by involving individuals
and organizations outside the traditional highway safety community. Community involvement broadens public support
for the State's programs and can increase a State's ability to deliver highway safety education programs. To encourage
community involvement, States should: 


 



