 

(e) The Committee may delete an item from the Procurement List without a request from a central nonprofit agency if
the Committee determines that none of the nonprofit agencies participating in the JWOD Program are capable and desirous
of furnishing the commodity or service to the Government, or if the Committee decides that the commodity or service
is no longer suitable for procurement from nonprofit agencies employing people who are blind or have other severe
disabilities. In considering such an action, the Committee will consult with the appropriate central nonprofit
agency, the nonprofit agency or agencies involved, and the contracting activity.




22. Section 516.12 is amended by revising paragraphs (a), (c), and (d) and adding paragraph (e) to read as follows:



516.12

 Specification changes and similar actions.



(a) Contracting activities shall notify the nonprofit agency or agencies authorized to furnish a commodity on the
Procurement List and the central nonprofit agency concerned of any changes to the specification or other description
of the commodity.



* * * * *



(c) For services on the Procurement List, the contracting activity shall notify the nonprofit agency furnishing
the service and the central nonprofit agency concerned at least 90 days prior to the date that any changes in the statement
of work or other conditions of performance will be required.

(d) If an emergency makes it impossible for a contracting activity to give the 90-day notice required by paragraphs
(b) and (c) of this section, the contracting activity shall inform the nonprofit agency and the central nonprofit
agency concerned of the reasons it cannot meet the 90-day notice requirement when it places the order or change notice.

(e) Nonprofit agencies shall recommend changes in specifications, item descriptions, and statements of work that
will improve the commodity or service being provided, reduce costs, or improve overall value to the Government. Contracting
activities shall respond promptly to these recommendations and work with the nonprofit agencies to implement them
when appropriate.




23. Section 516.13 is revised to read as follows:



516.13

 Replacement and similar commodities.



(a) When a commodity on the Procurement List is replaced by another commodity which has not been recently procured,
and a nonprofit agency can furnish the replacement commodity in accordance with the Government's quality standards
and delivery schedules, the replacement commodity is automatically considered to be on the Procurement List and
shall be procured from the nonprofit agency designated by the Committee at the fair market price the Committee has
set. The commodity being replaced shall continue to be included on the Procurement List until there is no longer a Government
requirement for that commodity.

(b) If contracting activities desire to procure additional sizes, colors, or other variations of a commodity after
the commodity is added to the Procurement List, and these similar commodities have not recently been procured, these
commodities are also automatically considered to be on the Procurement List.

(c) In accordance with 515.3 of this chapter, contracting activities are not permitted to purchase
commercial items that are essentially the same as commodities on the Procurement List.



PART 518_PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF AGENCY MATERIALS



24. The authority citation for part 518 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 5 U.S.C. 552.






