 

United States Delegation to the United Nations Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for a Framework Convention
on Climate Change, Eighth Session, Geneva, August 1627, 1993



Representative



Rafe Pomerance, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs,
Department of State



Alternate Representative



Daniel A. Reifsnyder, Director, Office of Global Change, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs, Department of State



Congressional Staff Advisers



Philip Barnett, Committee on Energy and Commerce, United States House of Representatives

Nancy M. Carmen, Committee on Foreign Affairs, United States House of Representatives

Leslie Black Cordes, Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, United States Senate

David B. Finnegan, Committee on Energy and Commerce, United States House of Representatives

Richard Grundy, Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, United States Senate

Catherine Van Way, Committee on Energy and Commerce, United States House of Representatives

Gregory S. Whetstone, Committee on Energy and Commerce, United States House of Representatives



Advisers



Daniel L. Albritton, Director, Aeronomy Laboratory, National Atmospheric and Oceanic Administration, Department
of Commerce

Susan Biniaz, Assistant Legal Adviser for Oceans, Environment and Science, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department
of State

Gary R. Evans, Special Assistant for Global Change, Science and Education, Office of the Secretary, Department of
Agriculture

Dirk Forrister, Special Assistant for Environment, Office of the Secretary, Department of Energy

Abraham Haspell, Associate Deputy Under Secretary for Planning and Program Analysis, Office of Policy, Planning
and Analysis, Department of Energy

Thomas F. Hourigan, International Environmental Policy Analyst, Office of International Donor Programs, Agency
for International Development 

Michael Kaplan, Office of Multilateral Development Banks, Department of the Treasury

Thomas L. Laughlin III, Chief, International Liaison Staff, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
Department of Commerce

Jonathan C. Pershing, Science Officer, Office of Global Change, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental
and Scientific Affairs, Department of State

Jefferson B. Seabright, Special Assistant to the Director of Policy, Office of International Donor Programs, Agency
for International Development

John Schick, Policy Analyst, Office of the Geographer, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Paul Stolpman, Director, Office of Atmospheric Programs, Office of Air and Radiation, Environmental Protection
Agency

Dennis Tirpak, Director, Global Climate Change Division, Policy, Planning and Evaluation, Environmental Protection
Agency

Jonathan Wiener, Council of Economic Advisers, Executive Office of the President

Edward R. Williams, Director, Office of Environmental Analysis, Policy, Planning and Analysis, Department of Energy



Private Sector Advisers



Carol Werner, Attorney, Environmental and Energy Study Institute, Representative, Climate Action Network, Washington,
DC

Connie Holmes, Senior Vice President, Policy Analysis, National Coal Association, Chair, International Committee,
Global Climate Coalition, Washington, DC



United States Delegation to the Extraordinary Meeting of the Executive Committee (COM/CITEL), Inter-American
Telecommunications Commission (OAS/CITEL), Organization of American States (OAS), Washington, DC, August 1718,
1993 



Chairman Ex Officio



Richard C. Beaird, Acting Coordinator and Director, Bureau of International Communications and Information Policy,
Department of State



Representative



Gary M. Fereno, Director for CITEL and ITUTS Standard Policy, Bureau of International Communications and
Information Policy, Department of State



Advisers



Rudolfo M. Bacca, Attorney Adviser, Office of the Chairman, Federal Communications Commission

Barbara Bowie-Whitman, Economic Counselor, United States Mission to the Organization of American States, Department
of State

William F. Moran, Policy Specialist, National Telecommunication and Information Administration, Department
of Commerce

Pamela Spratlen, Economic Adviser, United States Mission to the Organization of American States, Department of
State

Robert Stephans, Policy Analyst, Common Carrier Bureau, Federal Communications Commission



Private Sector Advisers



William M. Borman, Vice President and Director, Motorola, Inc., Washington, DC

David Fine, Assistant Vice President, Southwestern Bell, Washington, DC

Steven Ganote, Communications Satellite Corporation, Bethesda, Maryland

Thomas Plevyak, Manager, International Standards, Bell Atlantic, Arlington, Virginian 

