 







<USDEPT>FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>Banque Nationale de Paris, Paris, France; Application to Engage in Nonbanking Activities</DOCTITLE>




Banque Nationale de Paris

, Paris, France (BNP), has applied pursuant to section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8))
(BHC Act) and  225.23(a)(3) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.23(a)(3)), through a newly-formed wholly-owned
subsidiary, BNP/Cooper Neff, Inc., Radnor, Pennsylvania (Company), to acquire certain assets and liabilities
of Mitsui TB Options, Inc., New York, New York, Cooper Neff  Associates, L.P., Radnor, Pennsylvania, and
Cooper Neff Technologies, L.P., Radnor, Pennsylvania, and to engage in the following activities: 1) providing full-service
securities brokerage services; 2) providing investment advisory services; 3) proprietary trading in futures and
exchange-traded and over-the-counter options on foreign exchange for hedging and nonhedging purposes; 4) acting
as a registered options trader on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange with respect to options on the Australian dollar,
British pound, Canadian dollar, Deutsche mark, European Currency Unit, French franc, Japanese yen, and Swiss franc;
5) acting as a specialist on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange with respect to the Australian dollar, European Currency
Unit, and French franc; 6) selling computer software consisting of pricing and risk management models, and providing
related support services; and 7) providing futures commission merchant (FCM) and commodity trading advisor services,
including executing, buying and selling through omnibus accounts, and offering investment advisory services (including
discretionary portfolio management), with respect to futures and options on futures on bullion, government securities,
certificates of deposit, other money market instruments that a bank may buy and sell for its own account, bonds, interest
rates, and financial indexes on exchanges previously approved by the Board. Company would not provide FCM services
with respect to foreign currency contracts. BNP also has applied pursuant to section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, to acquire
Mitsui TB Futures, Inc., Chicago, Illinois (to be renamed BNP Futures, Inc.), and to provide FCM clearing-only
services with respect to those contracts for which Company would provide execution and advisory services. BNP would
engage in these activities on a worldwide basis.
Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with Board approval, engage in any activity
which the Board, after due notice and opportunity for hearing, has determined (by order or regulation) to be so closely
related to banking or managing or controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto. This statutory test requires
that two separate tests be met for an activity to be permissible for a bank holding company. First, the Board must determine
that the activity is, as a general matter, closely related to banking. Second, the Board must find in a particular case
that the performance of the activity by the applicant bank holding company may reasonably be expected to produce public
benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects.
A particular activity may be found to meet the ``closely related to banking'' test if it is demonstrated that banks
generally have provided the proposed activity, that banks generally provide services that are operationally or
functionally similar to the proposed activity so as to equip them particularly well to provide the proposed activity,
or that banks generally provide services that are so integrally related to the proposed activity as to require their
provision in a specialized form. 

National Courier Ass'n v. Board of Governors

, 516 F.2d 1229, 1237 (D.C. Cir. 1975). In addition, the Board may consider any other basis that may demonstrate that
the activity has a reasonable or close relationship to banking or managing or controlling banks. Board Statement
Regarding Regulation Y, 49 FR 806 (1984).
BNP states that the Board previously has determined by Regulation that certain of the proposed activities, when conducted
within limitations established by the Board in its regulations and in related interpretations and orders, are closely
related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. 

See

 12 CFR 225.25(b)(15) (full-service securities brokerage); 12 CFR (b)(4) (investment advisory services); 12 CFR
225.25(b)(7), 

Citicorp

, 72 Federal Reserve Bulletin 497 (1986), and 

Citicorp

, 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 505 (1982) (data processing services).
BNP also maintains that the Board has determined by order that several of the other proposed activities, when conducted
within the limitations established by the Board in previous orders, are closely related to banking. 

See Sakura Bank, Limited

, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 723 (1993) (providing execution-only, clearing-only, and investment advisory services,
and buying and selling contracts through omnibus accounts, with respect to financial futures and options on futures);


Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation

, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 217 (1989), and 

Nippon Credit Bank, Ltd.

, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 308 (1989) (proprietary trading of futures and options on foreign exchange for nonhedging
and hedging purposes); 

Swiss Bank

, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 126 (1991), and 

Societe Generale

, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 776 (1990) (acting as a specialist and registered options trader on the Philadelphia
Stock Exchange). BNP maintains that Company and BNP Futures, Inc. would conduct these previously approved activities
in conformance with the conditions and limitations established by the Board in prior cases.
In order to approve the proposal, the Board must determine that the proposed activities to be conducted by Company
and BNP Futures, Inc. ``can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience,
increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration
of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices.'' 12 U.S.C.
 1843(c)(8). BNP believes that the proposal will produce public benefits that outweigh any potential adverse effects.
In particular, BNP maintains that the proposal will enhance competition and enable BNP to offer its customers a broader
range of products. In addition, BNP states that the proposed activities will not result in adverse effects such as
an undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking
practices.
In publishing the proposal for comment, the Board does not take a position on issues raised by the proposal. Notice
of the proposal is published solely to seek the views of interested persons on the issues presented by the application
and does not represent a determination by the Board that the proposal meets, or is likely to meet, the standards of the
BHC Act.
Any comments or requests for hearing should be submitted in writing and received by William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551, not later than November 7, 1994. Any request for
a hearing on this application must, as required by  262.3(e) of the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 CFR 262.3(e)), be
accompanied by a statement of the reasons why a written presentation would not suffice in lieu of a hearing, identifying
specifically any questions of fact that are in dispute, summarizing the evidence that would be presented at a hearing,
and indicating how the party commenting would be aggrieved by approval of the proposal. 
This application may be inspected at the offices of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.


Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 5, 1994.




<SIGNER>
Jennifer J. Johnson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary of the Board.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9425273 Filed 101294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 621001F
</BILLING>



