 

At paragraph (f)(3)(i) of the final rule, OSHA is requiring that the specified logging machines that are placed into
initial service after the effective date of the final standard be equipped with falling object protective structures
(FOPS) and/or rollover protective structures (ROPS). This provision applies to each tractor, skidder, swing yarder,
log stacker, and mechanical felling device, such as a tree shear or feller-buncher. This provision combines the FOPS
and ROPS requirements contained in the proposed standard. ROPS requirements are also contained in several State
logging standards (Ex. 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 38J, 38K). In addition,
FOPS and ROPS requirements are contained in OSHA Construction Safety Standards, 29 CFR Part 1926, and Agriculture
Safety Standards, 29 CFR Part 1928. 
OSHA received many comments supporting the FOPS and ROPS requirement (Ex. 56, 57, 510, 519,
521, 522, 535, 536, 554, 574 through 592) and did not receive any comments
opposing this provision in general. Many of the commenters addressed the issues of retrofitting machines with ROPS
and FOPS and incorporation by reference of SAE standards have been discussed above in the Major Issues section. 
One commenter said that the ROPS requirement should also apply to loaders on self-loading logging trucks (Ex. 57).
However, three other commenters said this machine should be excluded from the requirement because the machine would
not meet most state highway height restrictions if FOPS and/or ROPS were added to the operator station (Ex. 521,
536, 549). OSHA agrees with these three commenters and has not expanded the FOPS and ROPS requirements
to cover loaders on self-loading logging trucks. 
The necessity of ROPS and FOPS on logging machines is not disputed. Steep terrain, slippery or uneven ground, large
loads, top-heavy equipment with loads, and other environmental conditions and unsafe work practices increase the
potential for logging machine rollover. ROPS reduce the likelihood that operators will be crushed in the event their
machine rolls over. FOPS prevent falling objects such as trees, limbs and winch lines from penetrating the cab and
injuring the operator. As OSHA noted in the preamble to the proposed rule, ROPS and FOPS are standard features on all
currently manufactured logging machines. 
Based on other comments in the record, OSHA has made the following changes to the ROPS and FOPS provision in the final
rule: 
1. The ROPS and FOPS requirements have been incorporated in one provision because the SAE FOPS standard (J231, January
1981) specifies that only machines equipped with ROPS can also be equipped with FOPS. The ROPS-FOPS requirement of
the SAE standard was pointed out by three commenters (Ex. 516, 522, 557). 
2. Machines only used in construction activities, such as road building, rather than logging operations have been
deleted from this provision (e.g., graders, scrapers, bulldozers, front-end loaders). Construction machines
and activities continue to be covered under 29 CFR Part 1926. 
3. Forklift trucks have been deleted from this provision and included in a separate provision in the final standard
(see paragraph (f)(4)). One commenter pointed out that forklift trucks were manufactured with overhead guards rather
than ROPS and FOPS and, therefore, were not included in the SAE standards (Ex. 516, 547; Tr. W1 224)).






