 

This system of records is currently exempt from certain provisions of the Privacy Act. No amendment to the rule exempting
this system from certain provisions of the Privacy Act is being made to the system. The system notice, as revised, is
published in its entirety below.



<SIGNER>
Alex Rodriguez,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Assistant Secretary (Administration).



Treasury/IRS 42.021



System name:



Compliance Programs and Project Files.



System location:



National Office, Districts, Service Centers, and Austin Compliance Center. (See IRS Appendix A for addresses.)



Categories of individuals covered by the system:



Any individual who has business and/or financial activities. These may be grouped by industry, occupation, or financial
transactions, included in commercial databases, or in information provided by state and local licensing agencies.
Taxpayers who may be involved in any area of noncompliance: Such as self-employed persons who don't file income tax
returns, businesses who don't file employment tax returns, taxpayers with income reported on information returns
who don't file tax returns, withholding noncompliance, migrant workers, and any individuals who may be involved
in tax evasion schemes.



Categories of records in the system:



From the Audit Information Management System (AIMS)_Treasury/IRS 42.008: Tax return status and location, closing
information as well as other internal management information (i.e., type of return, adjustment, penalty, occupation
code, issue code, etc.). From the Individual Master File (IMF)_Treasury/IRS 24.030 and the Business Master File
(BMF)_Treasury/IRS 24.046: Taxpayer entity records (name, address, identification number (TIN), tax modular
records which contain all records relative to specific tax returns for each applicable tax period or year. Tax transactions
such as tax amount, statements and/or additions, etc. From the Wage and Information Returns Processing (IRP) File_Treasury/IRS
22.061; Records representing certain wages and information returns: For example, Forms W2, W2P, and
1087 and 1099 series, currency transaction reports, state tax refunds, statements of sales and equity obligations,
and records of agricultural subsidy payments, etc. Information from the Returns Compliance Programs System_Treasury/IRS
26.016. Information from the Taxpayer Delinquent Accounts Files (TDA)_Treasury/IRS 26.019: For example, taxpayers
who have outstanding assessments and persons owing child support obligations. From the Taxpayer Delinquency Investigation
(TDI) Files_Treasury/IRS 26.020; Taxpayers who may be delinquent in filing Federal tax returns. Information on
foreign corporations from International Enforcement Program Files, Treasury/IRS 42.017. From the Centralized
Evaluation and Processing of Information Items (CEPII), Treasury/IRS 46.009, and from the Case Management and Time
Reporting System, Treasury/IRS 46.002: Information items received by Internal Revenue Service about taxpayers
alleging violation of laws. Other information would relate to unreported income and asset situations involving
significant financial transactions within the U.S. as well as foreign transactions. Examples of other information
would include data from commercial databases, any state's Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV), credit bureaus, state
and local real estate records, commercial publications, newspapers, airplane and pilot information, US Coast Guard
vessel registration information, any state's Department of Natural Resources information, as well as other state
and local records. In addition, Federal government databases may also be accessed, such as, federal employment files,
federal licensing data, etc.



Authority for maintenance of the system:



5 U.S.C. 301, 26 U.S.C. 7602, 7801, and 7802.



Purpose(s):



The Internal Revenue Service has adopted a mission-based philosophy to increase voluntary compliance with the tax
laws of the Internal Revenue Code. In order to accomplish this, we will be focusing more on research and analysis techniques
as opposed to case-by-case enforcement in order to determine key areas of non-compliance. The IRS will approach these
areas with a more unified perspective instead of addressing isolated or systemic compliance of business issues on
national, regional or local levels. The IRS will also address major broad-based issues that affect compliance and
will lead to better tax administration.



Routine uses of records maintained in the system including category of users and the purposes of such uses:



Disclosure of returns and return information may be made only as provided by 26 U.S.C. 6103.

</SIGNJOB>
