 


Wednesday


February 23, 1994





Part IX


Department of Education





Star Schools Program; Notice Inviting Application for New Awards for Fiscal Year 1994









Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 36/Wednesday, February 23, 1994/Notices 









<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION </USDEPT>




<RINDOCK>[CFDA Nos.: 84.203 A, B and C] </RINDOCK>


Star Schools Program; Notice Inviting Applications for New Awards for Fiscal Year 1994





Note to applicants:

 This notice is a complete application package. Together with the Education Department General Administrative Regulations
(EDGAR), the notice contains all of the information, application forms, and instructions needed to apply for a grant
under the Star Schools Program competitions. 



Organization of notice:

 This notice applies to three separate grant competitions under the Star Schools Program. The notice is organized
in four parts plus an appendix. Part I contains certain information that is pertinent to all competitions. Part II
consists of fiscal information for each competition announced in this notice. Part III consists of programmatic
information for each competition. Part IV consists of the selection criteria that applies to all competitions. The
appendix contains all forms necessary for applying for grant awards under each of the individual competitions. 


Part I:

 The following information applies to all three competitions in this notice: 



Deadline for transmittal of applications:

 April 18, 1994. 



Deadline for intergovernmental review:

 June 17, 1994. 



Project period:

 Up to 24 months.



Budget period:

 12 months. 



Applicable regulations:

 The Education Department General Administrative Regulations (EDGAR) as follows: 

(a) 34 CFR Part 74 (Administration of Grants to Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Nonprofit Organizations).


(b) 34 CFR Part 75 (Direct Grant Programs). 

(c) 34 CFR Part 77 (Definitions that Apply to Department Regulations). 

(d) 34 CFR Part 79 (Intergovernmental Review of Department of Education Programs and Activities). 

(e) 34 CFR Part 80 (Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative Agreements to State and Local
Governments). 

(f) 34 CFR Part 81 (General Education Provisions Act_Enforcement). 

(g) 34 CFR Part 82 (New Restrictions on Lobbying). 

(h) 34 CFR Part 85 (Governmentwide Debarment and Suspension (Nonprocurement) and Governmentwide Requirements
for Drug-Free Workplace (Grants)). 

(i) 34 CFR Part 86 (Drug-Free Schools and Campuses). 




Description of program:

 The Star Schools Program is authorized by Title IX of the Education for Economic Security Act (the ``Act''), Public
Law 100297, as amended by Public Law 102103. The purpose of the program is to encourage improved instruction
in mathematics, science, foreign languages, and other subjects, such as literacy skills and vocational education,
and to serve underserved populations, including disadvantaged, illiterate, limited-English proficient, and
disabled students through distance learning technologies. The Star Schools Program, as well as the absolute priorities
for this year, supports Goals 2000, the President's strategy for moving the Nation toward the National Education
Goals. Specifically, in the Goals 2000 legislation pending before Congress, National Education Goal 3 calls for
students' mastery of challenging subject matter in the following subjects: English, mathematics, science, foreign
languages, the arts, history, civics, and geography. Goal 4 calls for U. S. students to be first in the world in mathematics
and science. Goal 5 calls for all Americans to be literate and to possess the knowledge and skills necessary to compete
in a global economy and exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship. 




Geographic distribution:

 In determining which applications shall be funded, the Secretary shall assure an equitable geographic distribution
of funds and services. 



Special requirement:

 The Federal Government maintains an interest in all equipment purchased through projects funded under this program
for the useful life of the equipment. Therefore, grantees are required to maintain an annual inventory of equipment
and the use of such equipment for ten years after purchase. 




Definitions:

 The following definitions apply to the terms used in this notice: 


``Educational institution'' means an institution of higher education, a local educational agency, and a State educational
agency. 


``Institution of higher education'' has the same meaning given that term under section 1201(a) of the Higher Education
Act of 1965, as amended (20 U.S.C. 1141(2)). 

``Instructional programming'' means courses of instruction, training courses, and materials used in such instruction
and training which have been prepared in audio and visual form on tape, disc, film, or live interactive presentations,
and presented by means of telecommunications devices. 

``Local educational agency'' has the same meaning given the term under section 1471(12) of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 2891(12)). 


``Public broadcasting entity'' has the same meaning as that given that term in section 397 of the Communications Act
of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 397). 

``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American
Samoa, the Virgin Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Palau, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 


``State educational agency'' has the same meaning given that term under section 1471(23) of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 2891(23)). 

``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education. 







