 

13. The mortality risk arises, in large part, from ITT Hartford's obligation:

(i) To make monthly annuity payments, regardless of how long an annuitant may live, and regardless of how long annuitants
as a group may live; and

(ii) To pay the minimum death benefit under a Contract.

14. The expense risk is that administrative fees assessed by ITT Hartford will fail to meet the actual expenses incurred.

15. The Applicants represent that the mortality and expense risk charge will not increase. If the charge is insufficient
to cover actual costs, the loss will fall on ITT Hartford. Conversely, if the charge proves more than sufficient to
meet actual experience, the excess will be a profit to ITT Hartford and will become part of its general account surplus.
ITT Hartford expects to realize a profit from the mortality and expense risk charge.



Applicants' Legal Analysis and Conclusions



1. The Applicants request an exemption from sections 26(a)(2)(C) and 27(c)(2) of the 1940 Act to the extent relief
is necessary to permit the deduction of a mortality and expense risk charge from the assets of the Separate Account
which serves as a funding medium for the Contracts.

2. Sections 26(a)(2)(C) and 27(c)(2), as herein pertinent, prohibit a registered unit investment trust and any depositor
thereof or underwriter therefor from selling periodic payment certificates unless the proceeds of all payments
(other than sales load) are deposited with a qualified bank as trustee or custodian and held under arrangements which
prohibit any payment to the depositor or principal underwriter except a fee, not exceeding such reasonable amounts
as the Commission may prescribe, for performing bookkeeping and other administrative services.

3. The Applicants represent that the mortality and expense risk charge is reasonable in relation to the risks assumed
by ITT Hartford under the Contracts.

4. The Applicants represent that the mortality and expense risk charge is within the range of industry practice for
comparable variable annuity contracts. This representation is based upon Hartford Life's survey of comparable
contracts issued by a large number of other insurance companies. Hartford Life will undertake to maintain and make
available to the Commission upon request a memorandum outlining the methodology underlying this representation.

5. The Applicants represent that it is likely that the proceeds from sales loads will be insufficient to cover the expected
costs of distributing the contracts. Any shortfall will be covered from the assets of the general account, which may
include profit from the mortality and expense risk charge. Therefore, ITT Hartford has concluded that there is a reasonable
likelihood that the Separate Account's distribution financing arrangement will benefit the Separate Account and
Contract owners, and that it will maintain and make available to the Commission, upon request, a memorandum setting
forth the basis for this representation.

6. The Applicants represent that the Separate Account will invest only in open-end management companies which, if
they should adopt any distribution financing plan under Rule 12b1 under the 1940 Act, will have a board of directors,
a majority of whom are not interested persons of the open-end management company. Such board of directors must formulate
and approve any such distribution plan.



Applicants' Conclusion



The Applicants assert that for the reasons set forth above, the requested exemptions from sections 26(a)(2)(C) and
27(c)(2) of the 1940 Act to deduct a mortality and expense risk charge under the Contracts meet the standards in section
6(c) of the 1940 Act. The Applicants assert that the requested exemptions are necessary or appropriate in the public
interest and consistent with the protection of investors and the purposes fairly intended by the policies and provisions
of the 1940 Act.




For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, pursuant to delegated authority.



<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 949012 Filed 41394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>



