 

One specific issue that the FDIC received comments on is whether the appraiser employed to value a State Savings Bank
also should be permitted to serve as underwriter or selling agent in the bank's mutual-to-stock conversion. The main
concern is the possibility of a conflict of interest if the appraiser, or its affiliate, also is involved in the sale
of conversion stock. In reviewing the comments the Board has determined that the appraisal process and the independence
of the appraiser should not be tainted by an actual or even an appearance of a conflict of interest. Thus, under its appraisal
review the FDIC will object to appraisals prepared by an appraiser, or its affiliate, who also will serve as an underwriter
or selling agent in the same mutual-to-stock conversion. The FDIC will not raise this objection, however, where procedures
have been implemented and representations are made to ensure that an appraisal subsidiary is truly separate from
the selling agent subsidiary and the selling agent does not make recommendations on, or in any other way have an impact
upon, the appraisal. 


3. Voting Requirement/Prohibition Against Running Proxies 


The Proposed Rule included a requirement that depositors and other stakeholders of a State Savings Bank vote in favor
of a mutual-to-stock conversion in order for the FDIC not to object to the proposed conversion. It also proposed a prohibition
on the use of running proxies in mutual-to-stock conversions of State Savings banks. 
As discussed in detail in the Proposed Rule, the Board believes that, in order for a board of directors or trustees of
a mutual savings bank to properly exercise its fiduciary responsibilities to the bank and its depositors, the board
should obtain a vote of depositors in favor of the proposed conversion before the proposed conversion is completed.
Most states, but not all, require a depositor vote for mutual-to-stock conversions. The OTS also requires both federal
and state savings associations to obtain a majority vote of association members as one of the pre-conditions to converting.
Some states, however, require only that the board of directors or trustees (or similar group) approve the plan of conversion
and do not require a vote of members. 
As also discussed in the Proposed Rule, in the same vein, the Board also believes that a proxy specifically designed
for the proposed conversion should be used to obtain a depositor vote on the conversion. In some states the management
of converting banks and savings associations, subject to certain conditions, may use so-called ``running proxies''
(proxies obtained when a depositor opened his or her account with the institution) to vote in favor of the proposed
conversion. The former OTS mutual-to-stock conversion regulations also permitted the use of running proxies, under
certain circumstances. Running proxies are prohibited by the OTS Revisions. 
The FDIC received numerous comments on these related issues. Several of the comments voiced opposition to ``voting
rights'' for depositors in states that do not provide such rights. One state bank asserted that ``voting rights should
be left to state law. To impose some sort of depositor approval requirement in a state that does not have depositor voting
could lead to expanded ownership claims by depositors that could operate to the detriment of mutuals''. One state
regulator asserted that ``any FDIC requirement of a depositor vote in a mutual-to-stock conversion ***
[would be] wholly unsupported by any expressly preemptive federal statute''. Many banks in Massachusetts commented
that any depositor voting right requirements imposed by the FDIC would put undue pressure on mutuals in that state
to convert to stock ownership. 
An individual noted that general proxies should be prohibited and that all conversions should be subject to a special
proxy, or proxies should be entirely eliminated in favor of a majority-rules scheme. Others commented that the proposed
voting requirement and prohibition against running proxies would increase the cost of mutual-to-stock conversions.

In response to these comments, the Board continues to believe that it is necessary and appropriate for the FDIC to require
a depositor vote on proposed conversions. Such a requirement will not necessarily contradict state laws (that do
not require a depositor vote), but will supplement the state law by requiring the member vote. The FDIC's concern is
with the board of directors'/trustees' proper exercise of its fiduciary duties of loyalty and care to the bank and
its depositors. The Board believes that the proper exercise of such duties requires that depositors, as stakeholders
of the bank, have the opportunity to approve or disapprove the proposed conversion. This requirement is, in part,
rooted in the concern that bank insiders often benefit personally from bank conversions. This almost inherent conflict
of interest (between self interest and the interests of the bank) may be mitigated by the existence of a depositor vote
on the proposed conversion. The Board also believes that any additional expense caused by the voting requirement
and prohibition against running proxies is outweighed by the need to ensure the proper participation of depositors
and other stakeholders in the proposed conversion. The final rule, therefore, adopts the requirement in the Proposed
Rule for a depositor vote in favor of the proposed conversion of a State Savings Bank to stock form. 




