 




<DOCTITLE>Management of English Teaching Fellow Program</DOCTITLE>



<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice_Request for proposals.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Office of Academic Programs, English Language Programs Division, Programs Branch of the United States Information
Agency's Bureau of Education and Cultural Affairs announces an open competition for an assistance award. Public
or private non-profit organizations meeting the provisions described in IRS regulation 501(c)(3) may apply to conduct
the recruitment, placement and management of 3040 English teaching Fellows (ETFs). The exact number of ETFs
will be contingent upon the amount of cost sharing by overseas posts who wish to host a fellow and by the availability
of funds. The fellows will serve as full-time teachers of English as a Foreign Language, as materials or test developers
or as teacher trainers in countries around the world.



Overall grant making authority for this program is contained in the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act
of 1961, Public Law 87256, as amended, also known as the Fulbright-Hayes Act. The purpose of the Act is ``to enable
the Government of the United States to increase mutual understanding between the people of the United States and the
people of other countries ...; to strengthen the ties which unite us with other nations by demonstrating
the educational and cultural interests, developments, and achievements of the people of the United States and other
nations ... and thus to assist in the development of friendly, sympathetic and peaceful relations
between the United States and the other countries of the world.'' The funding authority for the program cited above
is provided through the Fulbright-Hayes Act.

Programs and projects must conform with Agency requirements and guidelines outlined in the Application Package.
USIA projects and programs are subject to the availability of funds.




ANNOUNCEMENT NAME AND NUMBER: 

All communications with USIA concerning this announcement should refer to the above title and reference number E/ALP9501.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Deadline for proposals: All copies must be received at the U.S. Information Agency by 5 p.m. Washington, D.C. time
on Monday, November 21, 1994. Faxed documents will not be accepted, nor will documents postmarked on November 21,
but received at a later date. It is the responsibility of each applicant to ensure that proposals are received by the
above deadline.



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

The Office of Academic Programs, English Language Programs Division, E/ALP-Room 304, U.S. Information Agency,
301 4th Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20547, telephone number 2026195869, fax number 2024011250,
to request an Application Package, which includes more detailed award criteria; all application forms; and guidelines
for preparing proposals, including specific criteria for preparation of the proposal budget. Please specify the
USIA Program Specialist Cathy Siemonh on all inquiries and correspondences. Interested applicants should read
the complete 

Federal Register

 announcement before addressing inquiries to the Office of Academic Programs, English Language Programs Division,
Programs Branch or submitting their proposals. Once the RFP deadline has passed, the Office of Academic Programs,
English Language Programs Division, Programs Branch may not discuss this competition in any way with applicants
until after the Bureau proposal review process has been completed.



</FURTHER>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Applicants must follow all instructions given in the Application Package and send only complete applications to:
U.S. Information Agency, Ref.: E/ALP9501, Office of Grants Management, E/XE, Room 336, 301 4th Street,
S.W., Washington, D.C. 20547.


</ADDRESS>
