 

Other populations throughout the species' range are still in danger of extinction, to varying degrees, by taking.
Penalties for illegal exports and enforcement activities will help ensure that illegal skins or products do not enter
into commercial trade. Because crocodiles of the Australian population cannot be distinguished from saltwater
crocodiles of other populations and from other endangered crocodilians once made into manufactured products, the
Service is proposing a special rule to strengthen the implementation of the CITES skin-tagging program (see description
presented later in this notice). 

The proposed reclassification to a threatened status and adoption of a special rule allowing commercial trade under
certain conditions would not end trade controls for the species. The species remains on Appendix II of CITES with export
permits required, and the special rule would require adherence to the CITES marking scheme for crocodilian skins,
among other things discussed later in this document when provisions of the special rule are described. Trade in legally
harvested saltwater crocodile skins, meat, and products, when controlled as specified in the special rule, will
provide an incentive for conserving the species without posing significant risks to wild populations. 



E. Summary of Criteria To List the Papua New Guinea Populations as Threatened by Similarity of Appearance 



The Papua New Guinea population of the saltwater crocodile is not listed at present under the ESA. In determining whether
to treat a species as endangered or threatened due to similarity of appearance, the Director must consider the criteria
in section 4(e) of the ESA. Section 4(e) of the ESA (16 U.S.C. 1534(e)) and 50 CFR 17.50(b) set forth three criteria in
determining whether to list a species for reasons of similarity of appearance. These factors and their applicability
to populations of the saltwater crocodile in Papua New Guinea are as follows: 

1. 

The degree of difficulty enforcement personnel would have in distinguishing the species, at the point in question,
from an endangered or threatened species (including those cases where the criteria for recognition of a species are
based on geographical boundaries). 

The different populations of saltwater crocodile are morphologically indistinguishable. It is impossible to distinguish
the different geographical populations as live animals, skins or finished products. Thus, Papua New Guinea saltwater
crocodiles, their parts and products cannot be distinguished as to origin by law enforcement personnel. 

2. 

The additional threat posed to the endangered or threatened species by loss of control occasioned by similarity of
appearance. 

The primary threat to other saltwater crocodile populations is the difficulty of identifying skins and products
by geographic region as discussed above. 

3. 

The probability that so designating a similar species will substantially facilitate enforcement and further the
purposes and policy of the ESA. 

The populations of saltwater crocodiles in Australia, Indonesia, and Papua New Guinea are listed on CITES Appendix
II and are traded in international commerce. The Indonesian population, although listed as endangered by the United
States, is traded among other CITES parties subject to a CITES export quota. International protection has not resulted
in complete cessation of illegal trade in other populations. Only specimens and parts and products from Papua New
Guinea (and under this proposal, from Australia) may be imported into the United States. Designation of the Papua
New Guinea population as threatened by similarity of appearance will help the United States to control illegal trade
of other protected saltwater crocodile populations. Due to the difficulty in distinguishing crocodiles from the
Papua New Guinea population from other populations of saltwater crocodiles and from other endangered crocodilians
once made into manufactured products, the Service is proposing rules to strengthen the implementation of the new
CITES skin tagging program (see description presented later in this notice). 



Special Rule for Nile and Saltwater Crocodiles 



A. Nile Crocodile Listing History 





