 

Attached hereto, and constituting a part of this labeling application, are the following: 
A. Preliminary requirements. A complete explanation of how the substance conforms to the requirements of 381.414(b).
For labeling applications where the subject substance is a food ingredient or a component of a food ingredient, the
applicant should compile a comprehensive list of the specific ingredients that will be added to the poultry product
to supply the substance in the poultry product bearing the health claim. For each such ingredient listed, the applicant
should state how the ingredient complies with the requirements of 381.414(b)(3)(ii), e.g., that its use is
generally recognized as safe (GRAS), listed as a food additive, or authorized by a prior sanction issued by FSIS, and
what the basis is for the GRAS claim, the food additive status, or prior sanctioned status. 
B. Summary of scientific data. The summary of scientific data provides the basis upon which authorizing a health claim
can be justified as providing the health benefit. The summary must establish that, based on the totality of publicly
available scientific evidence (including evidence from well-designed studies conducted in a manner which is consistent
with generally recognized scientific procedures and principles), there is significant scientific agreement among
experts qualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate such claims, that the claim is supported by such
evidence. 
The summary shall state what public health benefit will derive from use of the claim as proposed. If the claim is intended
for a specific group within the population, the summary shall specifically address nutritional needs of such group
and shall include scientific data showing how the claim is likely to assist in meeting such needs. 
The summary shall concentrate on the findings of appropriate review articles, National Institutes of Health consensus
development conferences, and other appropriate resource materials. Issues addressed in the summary shall include
answers to such questions as: 
1. Is there an optimum level of the particular substance 
to be consumed beyond which no benefit would be expected? 
2. Is there any level at which an adverse effect from the substance or from poultry products containing the substance
occurs for any segment of the population? 
3. Are there certain populations that must receive special consideration? 
4. What other nutritional or health factors (both positive and negative) are important to consider when consuming
the substance? 
In addition, the summary of scientific data shall include a detailed analysis of the potential effect of the use of
the proposed claim on food consumption, specifically any change due to significant alterations in eating habits
and corresponding changes in nutrient intake resulting from such changes in food consumption. The latter item shall
specifically address the effect on the intake of nutrients that have beneficial and negative consequences in the
total diet. 
If the claim is intended for a significant subpopulation within the general U.S. population, the analysis shall specifically
address the dietary practices of such group, and shall include data sufficient to demonstrate that the dietary analysis
is representative of such group (e.g., adolescents or the elderly). 
If appropriate, the labeling application shall explain the prevalence of the disease or health-related condition
in the U.S. population or subpopulation and the relevance of the claim in the context of the total daily diet. 
Also, the summary shall demonstrate that the substance that is the subject of the proposed claim conforms to the definition
of the term ``substance'' in 381.414(a)(2). 
C. Analytical data. Analytical data that show the amount of the substance that is present in representative poultry
products that would be candidates to bear the claim should be obtained from representative samples using methods
in accordance with 381.409(h). If no USDA or AOAC methods are available, the applicant shall submit the assay
method used, and data establishing the validity of the method for assaying the substance in the poultry product. The
validation data shall include a statistical analysis of the analytical and product variability. 







