 

Section 283.17: Post-Hearing Procedures



This section of the NPRM contains the procedures which will be followed at the completion of the hearing before the
ALJ. This section includes the requirements for post-hearing submissions by the parties to the appeal as well as the
issuance of the ALJ decision.

ALJ's initial decision: In 283.17(c)(1) of the NPRM, the Department proposed that the ALJ would issue a decision
on the appeal within a reasonable period of time after the termination of the time allowed for filing of proposed findings
of fact, conclusions of law, orders, and any briefs in support thereof.

Section 13951(c)(4) of the Leland Act requires that the ALJ decide the appeal within 60 days after receipt of rebuttal
evidence by the State agency, or, if no rebuttal evidence is submitted, within 90 days after the State submits the notice
of appeal and evidence in support of the appeal. The Department has revised 283.17(c)(1) and 283.32(a)
to incorporate this legislative provision. As previously discussed, 283.22(f) of the final rule requires
the State agency to file a written request for the extension prior to the due date for the submission with a showing of
cause for the extension.



ALJ's Initial decision.

 In 283.17(c)(3) of the NPRM, the Department proposed that no decision would be final for purposes of judicial
review except a final decision of the Judicial Officer upon appeal.



Comment:

 The Department received one comment on this provision. The commenter noted that if the decision of the ALJ is adverse
to the State agency, judicial review by the Federal court should not be precluded because the State agency did not seek
review by the Judicial Officer.



Response:

 The Department has considered this comment and has revised the final rule to provide that the initial decision of the
ALJ is considered final for purposes of judicial review. However, this would not preclude FNS, or any other party to
the appeal, from seeking either reconsideration by the ALJ or review by the Judicial Officer.

Motion for Reconsideration: In 283.17(d)(3) of the NPRM, the Department proposed that a response to the motion
for reconsideration would be allowed only upon the request of the ALJ.



Comment:

 The Department received two comments on this provision. The commenters argued that a response to a motion for reconsideration
should be the standard procedure rather than at the discretion of the ALJ.



Response:

 The Department has considered this comment and has revised 283.17(d)(3) to provide that the other parties
to the appeal shall respond within 10 days of receipt of the brief or written materials filed by the party requesting
reconsideration unless an extension has been requested and granted by the ALJ or the ALJ has extended the time frame


sua sponte.



Motion for Reconsideration: In 283.17(d)(4) of the NPRM, the Department proposed that the parties to the appeal
could not pursue a motion for reconsideration if the initial ALJ decision had been revised based upon a previous motion
for reconsideration.



Comment:

 The Department received one comment on this provision. The commenter noted that other agencies permit a party to file
a motion for reconsideration at any time, as of right, on the basis of material error, new evidence, or substantially
changed circumstances.



Response:

 The Department has considered this comment but has decided not to adopt it. The Department believes that with the modification
to 283.17(d)(3) allowing all parties to the appeal to respond to the initial motion for reconsideration, any
further requests for review of the ALJ's decision should be made to the Judicial Officer.



Section 283.18: Motions and Requests



This section of the NPRM contains the procedures related to the filing of motions and requests with the ALJ or the Judicial
Officer.

Response to motions and requests: In 283.18(d) of the NPRM, the Department proposed that a party have 20 days
to respond to a motion or request and that the party initiating the motion or request not be permitted to reply to the
response of the other party unless ordered to do so by the ALJ.



Comment:

 The Department received one comment on this provision. The commenter argued that by not being permitted to file a reply
brief, the party initiating the motion or request is disadvantaged since the initiating party would not have access
to arguments raised in response to the motion or request. The commenter recommended that one response be allowed each
party after the initial motion and response.



Response:

 The Department has considered this comment but has decided not to adopt it. This provision is in keeping with the congressional
intent that the appeal process be streamlined and that the appeal procedures be as expeditious as possible. Since
the ALJ can direct 

sua sponte

 that a reply be filed either to clarify issues or upon motion in those instances where a party believes that a reply is
necessary, the Department believes that restricting the number of responses to a motion or request which may be filed
would not be disadvantage to the party initiating the motion or request.

The Department has also revised the 20-day time frame to respond to a motion or request in order to address the statutory
deadlines established by section 13951(c)(4) of the Leland Act for the completion of the appeals process. Given these
deadlines, the Department has shortened the 20-day time frame to 10 days unless an extension has been requested and
granted by the ALJ or the ALJ has extended such time frame 

sua sponte.





Section 283.20: Review by the Judicial Officer



This section of the NPRM contains the procedures for appealing the initial ALJ decision to the Department's Judicial
Officer.

Filing of review petition: In 283.20(a) of the NPRM, the Department proposed that within 30 days of receipt
of the initial ALJ decision, any party to the appeal may seek Judicial Officer review.






