 

(c) Transmission will be computer-to-computer EDI, whenever possible. If computer-to-computer EDI is not possible,
an alternative method allowing the Contractor to receive orders by facsimile transmission will be used.

(d) When computer-to-computer EDI procedures will be used to place orders, the Contractor shall enter into a Trading
Partner Agreement (TPA) with FSS in order to ensure mutual understanding by the parties of certain electronic transaction
conventions and to recognize the rights and responsibilities of the parties as they apply to this method of placing
orders. The TPA must identify, among other things, the third party provider(s) through which electronic orders are
placed, the transaction sets used, security procedures, and guidelines for implementation.



Alternate II (XXX 1993)

. As prescribed in 516.505(a), substitute the following paragraph (a) for paragraph (a) of the basic clause:

(a) Delivery orders under this contract may be placed by either the using Federal agencies or the General Services
Administration's Federal Supply Service (FSS).





4. Section 552.21674 is added to read as follows:



552.21674

Ordering Information.



As prescribed in 516.505(b), insert the following provision:



Ordering Information (XXX 1993)



(a) In accordance with the Placement of Orders clause of this solicitation, the offeror elects to receive orders placed
by GSA's Federal Supply Service (FSS) by either () facsimile transmission or () computer-to-computer Electronic
Data Interchange (EDI).

(b) An offeror electing to receive computer-to-computer EDI is requested to indicate below the name, address, and
telephone number of the representative to be contacted regarding establishment of an EDI interface.




















(c) An offeror electing to receive orders by facsimile transmission is requested to indicate below the telephone
number(s) for facsimile transmission equipment where orders should be forwarded.
















(End of Provision)





Alternate I (XXX 1993).

 As prescribed in 516.505(b), add the following paragraph (d) to the basic provision:

(d) If the Placement of Orders clause provides for the mailing of orders, the offeror is requested to include the postal
mailing address.


















Alternate II (XXX 1993).

 As prescribed in 516.505(b), add the following paragraphs (d) and (e) to the basic provision:


(d) For mailed orders, the offeror is requested to include the postal mailing address(es) where paper form orders
should be mailed.


















(e) Offerors marketing through dealers are requested to indicate below whether those dealers will be participating
in the proposed contract.




Yes ()No ()




If ``yes'' is checked, ordering information to be inserted above shall reflect that in addition to offeror's name,
address, and facsimile transmission telephone number, orders can be addressed to the offeror's name, c/o nearest
local dealer. In this event, two copies of a list of participating dealers shall accompany this offer, and shall also
be included in Contractor's Federal Supply Schedule pricelist.




Dated: November 29, 1993.



<SIGNER>
Richard H. Hopf, III,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Administrator for Acquisition Policy.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 942678 Filed 2494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 682061M
</BILLING>



