 




<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Cooperative Agreement to Support a National Center for Food Safety and Technology; Notice of Intent to Renew a Cooperative
Agreement</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing its intention to accept and consider a single source application
for the award of a cooperative agreement to the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) to support the National Center
for Food Safety and Technology (NCFST), which is located on IIT's Moffett Campus in Summit-Argo, IL 60501. Competition
is limited to IIT because IIT has: the unique capability of bringing together diverse perspectives on food safety;
access to the exceptional combination of scientific expertise, pilot plants, and research facilities necessary
to focus those perspectives on cooperative food safety programs; and a cooperative food safety research program
and an academic degree program in food safety underway.

 
</SUMMARY>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 


 An application is available from and should be submitted to: Maura Stephanos, State Contracts and Assistance Agreements
Branch (HFA520), Food and Drug Administration, Park Bldg., rm. 340, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville,
MD 20857, 3014436170. 
 Applications hand-carried or commercially delivered should be addressed to the Park Bldg., rm. 340, 12420
Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 


 Regarding the administrative and financial management aspects of this notice: Maura Stephanos (address above).

 Regarding the programmatic aspects: Karen Carson, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS22),
Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 
2022055140.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 FDA is announcing its intention to accept and consider a single source application from IIT for a cooperative agreement
to support NCFST. FDA's authority to enter into grants and cooperative agreements is set out in section 301 of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241). FDA's research program is described in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance
No. 93.103. Before entering into cooperative agreements, FDA carefully considers the benefits that such agreements
will provide to the public. 



IIT's application will undergo dual peer review. An external review committee of experts in food science research
will review and evaluate the application based on its scientific merit. A second level review will be conducted by
the National Advisory Environmental Health Science Council.



I. Background


In the 

Federal Register

 of May 3, 1988 (53 FR 15736), FDA published a request for applications for a cooperative agreement to establish a National
Center for Food Safety which joins the resources of government, academia, and industry in a consortium to study questions
of food safety. FDA awarded the cooperative agreement to IIT in September, 1988. Applications received were competitively
reviewed by a panel of non-FDA food scientists, and the award was approved by the National Advisory Environmental
Health Science Council in September, 1988.

 In the 

Federal Register

 of September 10, 1991 (56 FR 46189), FDA published a notice of its intention to limit consideration for the award of
a cooperative agreement to IIT to support NCFST. FDA awarded the cooperative agreement to IIT on September 30, 1991,
following competitive review of the application by a panel of non-FDA food scientists. The award was approved by the
National Advisory Environmental Health Science Council in September, 1991.

 Under the cooperative agreement, IIT has established and staffed the NCFST at IIT's Moffett Campus in Summit-Argo,
IL. Other participants in this effort are the IIT Research Institute, the Food Science Department of the University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, FDA, and industry. NCFST is structured so that representatives of participating
organizations play a role in establishing policy and administrative procedures, as well as identifying long- and
short-term research needs. With this organizational structure, NCFST is able to build cooperative programs focused
on food safety on a foundation of knowledge about current industrial trends in food processing and packaging technologies,
regulatory perspectives from public health organizations, and fundamental scientific expertise from academia.



II. Mechanism of Support 


A. Award Instrument 


 Support for this program, if granted, will be in the form of a cooperative agreement. In 1994, FDA is providing $2,000,000
for this award. The award will be subject to all policies and requirements that govern the research grant programs
of the Public Health Service (PHS), including the provisions of 42 CFR part 52, 45 CFR part 74, and PHS grants policy
statement. 



B. Length of Support


 The length of support will be 1 year with the possibility of an additional 4 years of noncompetitive support. Continuation,
beyond the first year, will be based upon performance during the preceding year and the availability of Federal fiscal
year appropriations.



 III. Reasons for Single Source Selection


 FDA believes that there is compelling evidence that IIT is uniquely qualified to fulfill the objectives of the proposed
cooperative agreement. IIT's Moffett Campus, where NCFST is located, is a unique research facility which includes
an industrial-size pilot plant and smaller pilot plants for food processing and packaging equipment, a biotechnology
laboratory, a packaging laboratory, analytical laboratories, offices, containment facilities, classrooms,
and support facilities which permit research from benchtop to industrial-scale. The industrial-size pilot plant
is built to accommodate routine food processing and packaging research in a commercial atmosphere. The physical
layout of the plant provides maximum versatility in the use and arrangement of equipment of both commercial and pilot
size, and in the capability to simultaneously operate several different pieces of equipment without interference
with each other. In addition to facilities to conduct routine processing research, there are facilities suitable
for more complex research, notably a biotechnology research facility, funded by the State of Illinois, for scale-up
and downstream processing and purification research. Other facilities include containment facilities in which
research involving use of components that may be potentially hazardous, such as pathogens in pasteurization or modified
atmosphere packaging research, may be conducted.

 Since 1988, IIT has provided an environment in which scientists from diverse backgrounds, such as academia, government,
and industry, have brought their unique perspectives to focus on contemporary issues of food safety. NCFST functions
as a neutral ground where scientific exchange about generic food safety issues occurs freely and is channeled into
the design of cooperative food safety programs. NCFST recently convened a meeting of its members to identify and discuss
the mechanisms and safety aspects of new food processing and packaging technologies that are either now moving into
the food manufacturing industry or are expected to be introduced soon, including laser heating, high voltage pulse
processing and high pressure processing, and cold sterilization techniques. Ongoing research on recycling plastics
for food contact use was initiated from a planning meeting that brought together NCFST participants with expertise
and knowledge about plastics recycling, including representatives of government, academia, and industry, to discuss
the status of recycling research in the U.S. industry and regulatory perspectives. The cooperative research that
was generated by this meeting has recently been expanded to include recycling of paperboard for fatty and aqueous
foods, which is a use that is not currently provided for by Federal regulations. This type of research fills existing
gaps in knowledge and expertise associated with recycled packaging materials in a time when many States are mandating
the recycling of packaging materials, and answers questions about safety and use of these materials. 

In addition to research on recycled materials for food container use, the cooperative research program in progress
investigates safety aspects of biotechnological and fermentation techniques, validation of critical controls
in computerized and automated processing lines, and formation of potentially detrimental compounds during high-temperature
processing. This cooperative research will provide fundamental food safety information in the public domain for
use by all segments of the food science community in product and process development, regulatory activities, academic
programs, and consumer programs. A particular use of this type of data by both industry and public health agencies
is in Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) programs. Food manufacturers can use the information in the
design of HACCP programs, which prevent food safety hazards before they occur and enhance the safety of the final product,
for use in their plants.

 An academic degree program in food safety science, which is not part of the cooperative agreement, has been underway
for 3 years at IIT. The program will produce graduates with a foundation in food science and technology with specialization
in food safety. Graduates from this program will manage quality control, safety assurance, and HACCP programs in
industry. They will design equipment and processes for use in the production and packaging of safe food products.
In the public sector, these graduates will evaluate the adequacy of processing and packaging parameters to produce
safe endproducts, as well as manage regulatory and information programs designed to enhance the safety of the food
supply and consumer knowledge about the food supply. Graduate students from IIT and the University of Illinois can
gain hands-on experience in food safety by participating in the cooperative food safety research program. Several
masters of science degrees, which included research conducted on cooperative projects, have been granted in disciplines
such as engineering by IIT since the inception of NCFST. 

 Collaboration between the public and the private sector is an efficient means for both to remain current with scientific
and technical accomplishments from a food safety perspective. These collaborative programs will produce generic
knowledge and expertise that can be used by all segments of the food processing and packaging industry, as well as by
public health organizations, regulatory agencies, and academic institutions in the performance of their roles
in the food science community. The trend toward use of HACCP in both the domestic and international food industry,
as a means of assuring safety of products and as a basis for harmonizing regulatory activities, is but one example of
the effects that food safety knowledge and expertise are having. Technology transfer mechanisms, which are developing
out of the cooperative food safety programs, will facilitate the movement of advanced food processing and packaging
technologies into the marketplace, while ensuring the safety of those products.



 IV. Reporting Requirements


 Program progress reports and financial status reports will be required annually, based on date of award. These reports
will be due within 30 days after the end of the budget period. A final program progress report and financial status report
will be due 90 days after expiration of the project period of the cooperative agreement.



 V. Delineation of Substantive Involvement 


 Substantive involvement by the awarding agency is inherent in the cooperative agreement award. Accordingly, FDA
will have substantial involvement in the program activities of the project funded by the cooperative agreement.
Substantive involvement includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
 1. FDA will appoint a project officer or coproject officers who will actively monitor the FDA-supported program under
this award. 
 2. FDA will have prior approval on the appointment of all key administrative and scientific personnel proposed by
the grantee. 
 3. FDA will be directly involved in the guidance and development of the program and of the personnel management structure
for the program. 
  4. FDA scientists will participate, with the grantee, in determining and carrying out the methodological approaches
to be used. Collaboration will also include data analysis, interpretation of findings, and where appropriate, coauthorship
of publications. 



 VI. Use of the Metric System



 In order to be eligible for this FDA grant program, applications must be in compliance with the Metric Conversion Act
of 1975 (as amended by the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988) which requires that the metric system be used
in all Federal procurements, grants, and business-related activities. Therefore, all applications submitted
under this notice which contain measurement-sensitive information and/or data, must reflect such data using the
metric system. During this period of transition, both metric and inch-pound units will be used simultaneously to
express measurements. Examples of measurements that should now be reflected in metrics include: (1) Travel (if applicable)
in kilometers (km); (2) office or laboratory space (if applicable) in square meters (m

2

); (3) audio/visual (film) (if applicable) in millimeters (mm); and (4) publications (if applicable) in centimeters
(cm). Applications found not to be in compliance will be returned to the applicant without consideration. Written
requests for exemption from the requirement will be considered on a case-by-case basis. If additional costs are incurred
due to implementation of this requirement, such costs may be considered as allowable if bonafide supporting justification
is presented. The grants management officer will determine the allowability of such costs.


 VII. Smoke-Free Workplace


 PHS strongly encourages all grant recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace and promote the non-use of all tobacco
products. This is consistent with the PHS mission to protect and advance the physical and mental health of the American
people.




Dated: May 4, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9411595 Filed 51194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

