 

(1) Compliance with the one required is economically or physically impracticable;

(2) The alternative provides an equivalent level of security; and

(3) The operator submits a written request for the alternative, which contains sufficient information to establish,
to the satisfaction of the COTP, that the alternative provides an equivalent level of security.

(b) The COTP will approve or disapprove the request, in writing, within 30 days of receipt of the written request.



Subpart B_Security Program



128.200 

General.



(a) Each operator of a passenger terminal shall implement for the terminal a security program that_

(1) Provides for the safety of persons and property in the terminal and aboard each passenger vessel subject to Part
120 of this chapter moored at the terminal, against acts of criminal violence and piracy;

(2) Prevents or deters the carriage aboard any such vessel moored at the terminal of any prohibited weapon, incendiary,
or explosive on or about any person or within his or her personal articles or baggage, or the carriage of any prohibited
weapon, incendiary, or explosive in stowed baggage, cargo, or stores;

(3) Prevents or deters unauthorized access to any such vessel and to restricted areas in the terminal;

(4) Takes into account both the current assessment of the likely threat of an unlawful act against the terminal, the
vessel, or persons on the terminal or vessel, and the existing local circumstances;

(5) Designates, by name, a terminal security officer for the terminal;

(6) Provides for the evaluation of all security personnel of the terminal, before hiring, to determine suitability
for employment;

(7) Provides for coordination with vessel security while any passenger vessel subject to Part 120 of this chapter
is moored at the terminal; and

(8) Includes the plans, procedures, and equipment required by Subparts B and C of this part.

(b) Each operator of a passenger terminal shall, where practicable, work with the operator of each passenger vessel
subject to Part 120 of this chapter to provide for the security of passengers, the terminal, and the vessel. The terminal,
however, need not duplicate any provisions of this part fulfilled by the vessel.



128.210 

Restricted areas.



(a) Each operator of a passenger terminal shall designate all points of access to the boarding area for passenger vessels
subject to Part 120 of this chapter and the following areas of the terminal ``restricted areas'':

(1) The boarding area for passengers adjacent to where such vessels moor, inside the security barriers and screening
points.

(2) Areas for the handling and storage of baggage and cargo.

(3) Areas used to store weapons.

(4) Control rooms for security alarms and monitoring devices.

(5) Other areas, determined by the operator, to which access must be restricted to maintain the security of the terminal
and passenger vessels moored at the terminal.

(b) Each restricted area must be appropriately secured, with access limited to authorized personnel.

(c) Each restricted area must be distinctly marked with a placard, mounted at eye level, that is at least 20 centimeters
(8 in) high by 30 centimeters (12 in) wide with the words ``RESTRICTED AREA_AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY'' in red letters,
at least 5 centimeters (2 in) high, on a white background.

(d) Each restricted area, other than the boarding area for passengers, must be equipped with an intrusion detection
system that activates an audible alarm in accordance with 128.420(a).

(e) Each restricted area and its intrusion detection system must be designated in the plan required by 128.300.



128.20 

Terminal security officer.



(a) Each operator of a passenger terminal shall designate a terminal security officer for the terminal.

(b) This officer shall be responsible for_

(1) Conducting, amending, and updating the survey required by 128.310;

(2) Evaluating security personnel of the terminal for suitability before employment;

(3) Instituting, monitoring, and recording training for employees of the terminal relative to security;

(4) Conducting regular inspections of the terminal;


