 

The proposed revisions to the regulations also change the period of limitations for collection of the withholding
taxes and interest from six years to ten years. This revision will conform the period of limitations for the purposes
of section 3505 with the general rule on limitations on collection. See Internal Revenue Code section 6502, amended
by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, Pub. L. 101508, 11317(a)(1) (1990).

Finally, 31.35051(d)(3) has been added to the regulations to provide for extensions of the period of
limitation for collection because, on occasion, the IRS or the lender requires additional time for compliance with
the regulation.



Special Analyses



It has been determined that this notice of proposed rulemaking is not a significant regulatory action as defined in
EO 12866. Therefore, a regulatory assessment is not required. It has also been determined that section 553(b) of the
Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 5) and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 6) do not apply
to these regulations, and, therefore, a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis is not required. Pursuant to section 7805(f)
of the Internal Revenue Code, this notice of proposed rulemaking will be submitted to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy
of the Small Business Administration for comment on its impact on small business.



Comments and Requests for a Public Hearing



Before these proposed regulations are adopted as final regulations, consideration will be given to any written comments
(preferably a signed original and eight (8) copies) that are submitted timely to the IRS. All comments will be available
for public inspection and copying. A public hearing may be scheduled if requested in writing by a person that timely
submits written comments. If a public hearing is scheduled, notice of the date, time, and place for the hearing will
be published in the 

Federal Register

.



Drafting Information



The principal author of these regulations is Robert Walker, Office of Assistant Chief Counsel (General Litigation).
However, other personnel from the IRS and Treasury Department participated in their development.



List of Subjects in 26 CFR Part 31



Employment taxes, Income taxes, Penalties, Pensions, Railroad retirement, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,
Social Security, Unemployment compensation.



Proposed Amendments to the Regulations



Accordingly, 26 CFR part 31 is proposed to be amended as follows: 




