 

Executive Order 12372 


This final rule is excluded from the scope of Executive Order 
12372, Intergovernmental Consultation that requires 
intergovernmental consultation with state and local officials. A 
Notice of Final rule titled Department Programs and Activities 
Excluded From Executive Order 12372 (50 FR 47034) exempts REA and 
RTB loans and loan guarantees, and RTB bank loans, to 
governmental and nongovernmental entities from coverage under 
this Order. 


Executive Order 12778 


This final rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, 
Civil Justice Reform. If adopted, this final rule will not: (1) 
Preempt any State or local laws, regulations, or policies; (2) 
Have any retroactive effect; and (3) Require administrative 
proceedings before parties may file suit challenging the 
provisions of this rule. 


Background 


REA issues publications titled ``Bulletin'' which serve to guide 
borrowers regarding already codified policy, procedures, and 
requirements needed to manage loans, loan guarantee programs, and 
the security instruments which provide for and secure REA 
financing. REA issues standards and specifications for the 
construction of telephone facilities financed with REA loan 
funds. 
REA has rescinded REA Bulletin 34526, REA Specification for 
Buried Plant Housings, PE35, dated July 23, 1976, and REA 
Bulletin 34577, REA Specification for Serving Area Interface 
Housings, PE79, dated January 24, 1978. REA is incorporating and updating the information previously contained
in 
those bulletins in 7 CFR 1755.910, REA Specification for Outside 
Plant Housings and Serving Area Interface Systems. 
The specification contains mechanical, electrical, and 
environmental requirements, desired design features, and test 
methods for evaluation of outside plant housings and serving area 
interface systems. 
The test procedures described in the specification are 
required to demonstrate the functional reliability of outside 
plant housings and serving area interface systems. The test 
procedures satisfy the requirements of housings as well as the 
requirements of terminals that may be installed within housings. 
Outside plant housings are fabricated of either metallic or 
nonmetallic materials in different sizes and configurations to 
suit a variety of applications. The purpose of a housing is to 
protect its contents from environmental elements, rodents, 
insects, or vandalism and unauthorized access. Outside plant 
housings accommodate cable splices, bonding and grounding 
connections, cable terminals, cross-connect facilities, load 
coils, and optical and electronic equipment. 
Serving area interface systems serve as the connecting 
terminal between feeder cable and distribution cables. 


