 

Time: beginning at 9:00 a.m. each day.
Persons desiring to attend the conference should notify the Docket Clerk in writing at the above address or by telephone
at (202) 3662257 by close of business January 27, 1995.



<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Marina C. Appleton, Trial Attorney, Office of Chief Counsel, FRA, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20590
(telephone 2023660628); or Robert Finkelstein, Chief, Systems Support Division, Office of Safety
Analysis, Office of Safety, FRA, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20590 (telephone 2023662760).

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
(I) History and Purpose


Following publication of the NPRM on accident reporting in the 

Federal Register

 (59 FR 42880), FRA conducted a series of public hearings to obtain the industry's views and comments on specific issues
addressed in the NPRM. Public hearings were held in Washington, D.C. on October 56; in Kansas City, Missouri
on October 19; and in Portland, Oregon on November 3. FRA examined the issues and interests involved and made a preliminary
inquiry among the hearing participants to determine whether additional hearings or regulatory meetings could be
successful in narrowing areas of disagreement and exploring possible accommodations. Most participants expressed
interest in continuing the rulemaking process by holding additional or supplementary regulatory meetings, roundtables
or workshops. After further deliberation, FRA decided that an informal public regulatory conference would prove
advantageous in the development of the accident reporting regulations. FRA also believes that the quality of the
agency's final rule will be improved by facilitating an exchange of ideas that may lead to solutions acceptable to
all interested groups.


(II) Methodology


In accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 551 

et seq.

), the public regulatory conference is a continuation of the accident reporting rulemaking proceeding. A court reporter
will take a verbatim transcript of the conference which will be placed in the public docket for this rulemaking. The
format of the discussions will be informal and will employ a topical, interactive approach. The public regulatory
conference is currently scheduled for one week. FRA believes the time allotted for this conference will prove more
than adequate. Of course, the conference will conclude earlier than initially planned if a majority of participants
in attendance agree that the key issues have been adequately addressed.


(III) Participants


FRA invites all affected parties, including small entities, to participate in the public regulatory conference.
FRA believes that extensive comment from all interested parties is necessary to develop the most effective and reasonable
final regulation. For this conference to be successful, participants should come prepared to discuss, at a minimum,
the key issues identified below and to suggest reasonable alternatives to the various proposals in the NPRM. FRA also
encourages participants to bring supporting documentation where appropriate.


(IV) Key Issues


A number of issues were raised in the written comments received to date and at the public hearings. We encourage interested
parties to come prepared to respond to the following questions and to make any other comments or suggestions regarding
the issues presented. Please note that the conference is not limited to these issues. FRA does retain the authority,
however, to limit the issues discussed at the regulatory conference.


A. Internal Control Plans (Proposed Section 225.33)


The regulation proposed by FRA would require railroads to maintain written internal control plans for the preparation
of reports required under part 225. Most railroad commenters believe the internal control plan in proposed 225.33
is burdensome and recommend that a performance standard of 99-percent be established to replace the internal control
plan. Dividing the number of reported accidents or incidents by the number of actual reportable accidents or incidents
would yield a number (percentage) that would then be compared against the 99-percent performance level to determine
actual performance by the railroad.
(1) Would a performance standard system, in lieu of the proposed internal control plan, ensure FRA receives reliable
and consistent reporting data?



</SUPPLEM>
