 

An environmental assessment (EA) of this proposed action has been completed 
(enclosed). Based on the EA, and in accordance with the guidelines for determining 
the significance of proposed federal actions (40 CFR 1508.27) and EPA criteria for 
initiating an environmental impact statement (EIS) (40 CFR 6.605), EPA has concluded 
that the proposed General NPDES permit will not result in a significant effect on the 
human environment. The proposed permit will not significantly affect land use patterns 
or population, wetlands or floodplains, threatened or endangered species, farmlands, 
ecologically critical areas, historic resources, air quality, water quality, noise levels, fish 
and wildlife resources, nor will it conflict with local, regional, or state land use plans or 
policies. The proposed permit conforms with all applicable federal statutes and 
executive orders. 

The proposed General Permit includes the same technology-based permit limits, 
established by regulation (40 CFR part 440, subpart M), as the individual permits 
currently do. The recirculation of process wastewater is required and the settleable 
solids concentration of the allowable discharge (i.e. excess water) is limited to 0.2 
milliliters per liter. Water quality-based limits are also included in the proposed permit. 

The proposed permit covers, in addition to conventional open-cut placer mining 
operations, placer mining operations utilizing hydraulic methods to remove 
overburden, and suction dredges. The proposed permit limits for the hydraulic 
overburden removal operations are based on the state sediment standard and best 
professional judgment and are the same as the limits for the conventional operations. The limits for the suction dredge
operations would be based on best professional 
judgment. 

The proposed General Permit would reduce the yearly administrative burden of 
EPA associated with the processing of numerous individual permits. Because the 
proposed General Permit and individual permits include essentially the same 
requirements, the primary impact related to permit type is expected to be 
administrative. No negative impacts to EPA, other agencies or operators are 
expected. 

The proposed General NPDES Permit may contribute to an improvement in 
environmental conditions because it would reduce the permitting administrative 
workload thus making available limited time that could be used for higher priority 
activities, such as permit compliance and inspections. The inclusion of suction dredge 
operations in the General Permit will improve the monitoring and compliance of these 
operations. 

Under the proposed action, the new source placer mining proposals requesting 
coverage under the General Permit would continue to be subject to individual NEPA 
reviews. This will enable EPA to evaluate the site-specific and cumulative impacts 
associated with the individual projects. Where an EA concludes that significant 
impacts are not anticipated, a Finding of No Significant Impact would be issued and 
the new source project would be granted coverage under the General Permit. If EPA 
determines that significant impacts from a proposed new source project may occur, an 
EIS would be prepared prior to EPA's final permit decision. Therefore the site-specific 
impacts of those projects would continue to be evaluated and considered prior to the 
permit actions. An individual permit may also be required by EPA in lieu of coverage 
under the General Permit. 

For the above reasons EPA has determined that an EIS will not be prepared for 
the proposed action. 

Comments pertaining to this Finding of No Significant Impact may be submitted to: Rick Seaborne, Environmental Protection
Agency, Environmental Review Section, 1200 Sixth Avenue, WD126, Seattle, WA 98101. 

No administrative action will be taken for at least 30 days after the release of this 
Finding of No Significant Impact. EPA will fully consider all comments before taking 
final action.




Sincerely, 



<SIGNER>
Charles E. Findley, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Water Division. 

</SIGNJOB>
