 

List of Subjects in 25 CFR Part 46 


Indian adults, Adult Education, Record keeping requirements. 
For the reasons set out in the preamble, a new Part 46 of Subchapter E of Chapter I, Title 25 of the Code of Federal Regulations
is proposed to be added as set forth below. 


PART 46_ADULT EDUCATION PROGRAM 


Sec. 
46.1Purpose and scope. 
46.2Definitions. 
46.3Information collection.
46.10Eligible activities.
46.20Program requirements. 
46.30Records and reporting requirements. 
46.40Appeals.





Authority:

 43 U.S.C. 1457; 25 U.S.C. 2, 9, and 13. 


46.1 


Purpose and scope. 


The Adult Education Program, administered under the authority of the Snyder Act of November 2, 1921 (25 U.S.C. 13),
provides assistance to eligible Indian adults. The purpose of the program is to: 
(a) improve educational opportunities for Indian adults who lack the level of literacy skills necessary for effective
citizenship and productive employment; 
(b) expand and improve existing programs for delivering adult education services, including delivery of these services
to educationally disadvantaged Indian adults; and 
(c) encourage the establishment of adult education programs that will: 
(1) enable Indian adults to acquire the basic educational skills necessary for literate functioning; 
(2) provide Indian adults with sufficient basic education to enable them to benefit from job training and retraining
programs and to obtain and retain productive employment so that they might more fully enjoy the benefits and responsibilities
of citizenship; and 
(3) enable Indian adults, who so desire, to continue their education to at least the level of completion of secondary
school. 


46.2 


Definitions. 


As used in this Part: 


Adult 

means an individual who has attained the age of sixteen. 


Adult Education 

means services or instruction below the college level for adults who: 
(1) Lack sufficient mastery of basic educational skills to enable them to function effectively in society; or 
(2) Do not have a certificate of graduation from a school providing secondary education and have not achieved an equivalent
level of education. 


Adult Basic Education 

(ABE) means instruction designed for an adult who: 
(1) Has minimal competence in reading, writing, and computation; 
(2) Is not sufficiently competent to speak, read, or write the English language to allow employment commensurate
with the adult's real ability; or 
(3) Is not sufficiently competent to meet the educational requirements of adult life. 
(4) Is included in grades 0 through 8. 


Adult Secondary Education 

means instruction designed for an adult who: 
(1) Is literate and can function in everyday life, but is not proficient; or 
(2) Does not have a certificate of graduation (or its equivalent) from a school providing secondary education. 
(3) Is included in grades 9 through 12. 


Adult Education Office 

means the Area Office administering funds appropriated to the Bureau for Adult Education programs. 


Assistant Secretary 

means the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, or his/her designee. 


Bureau 

means the Bureau of Indian Affairs. 


Department of Education 

(ED) means the U.S. Department of Education. 


Director 

means the Director, Office of Indian Education Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs. 


Indian 

means a person who is a member, or is at least a one-fourth degree Indian blood descendent of a member, of a federally
recognized Indian tribe, eligible to receive services from the Department of the Interior. 


Indian Priority System 

(IPS) means the Bureau's budget formulation process that allows direct tribal government involvement in the setting
of relative priorities for local operating programs. 



Indian tribe 

means any Indian tribe, band, nation, rancheria, pueblo, colony or community, including any Alaska native village
or regional or village corporation as defined in, or established pursuant to, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement
Act (85 Stat. 668) that is Federally recognized by the United States Government through the Secretary for the special
programs and services by the Secretary to Indians because of their status as Indians. 



Secretary 

means the Secretary of the Department of the Interior. 


Service area 

means the geographic area served by the local Adult Education Program. 


46.3 


Information collection. 


(a) The information and record keeping requirements contained in this rule will be submitted to the Office of Management
and Budget for approval as required by 44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

 The collection of information will not be required until it has been approved by the Office of Management and Budget.







