 

Employers, who are not owners, planning any such covered activity must notify the owner of the location and quantity
of ACM and PACM known or later discovered. The building owner must keep records of all information received through
this notification scheme, or through other means, which relates to the presence, location and quantity of ACM and
PACM in the owner's building/project or vessel and transfer all such information to successive owners. OSHA reaffirms
its finding of the 1986 standard that an employee's presence in the workplace places him at increased risk from asbestos
exposure regardless of whether he/she is actually working with asbestos or is just in the vicinity of such material.


OSHA has defined ``building owner'' to include these lessees who control the management and recordkeeping functions
of a building /facility/vessel. It is not OSHA's intention to exempt the owner from notification requirements by
allowing a lessee to comply. Rather when the owner has transferred the management of the building to a long-term lessee,
that lessee is the more appropriate party to receive, transmit, and retain information about in-place asbestos.
When a lease has expired, any records in the lessee's possession must be transferred to the owner or the subsequent
lessee exercising similar managerial authority. The expanded notification provisions also require that on multi-employer
worksites, any employer planning to perform work which will be in a regulated area, before starting, must notify the
building owner of the location of the ACM and the protective measures taken; upon discovering unexpected ACM, they
must provide similar notification; and, upon work completion they must provide to the owner a written record of the
remaining ACM at the site. 

OSHA has included a provision that within 10 days of the completion of Class I or II asbestos work, the employer of the
employees who performed the work shall inform the owner and employers of employees who will be working in the area of
the current location and quantity of PACM and/or ACM remaining in the former regulated area and shall also inform him/her
of the final monitoring results taken in that operation. OSHA has determined that the employer of employees reoccupying
the area must have this information in order to provide the appropriate protection to his/her workers. 

To provide effective notification in Class III asbestos operations, OSHA is building upon its earlier requirement
to 

post

 warning signs in regulated areas. Now since all Class III work must be conducted in a regulated area all maintenance-type
operations will be posted with signs, which state the fact that asbestos exposing activities are present. OSHA considers
site posting to be a particularly effective means to alert employees of hazardous areas where relatively short-term
repair and maintenance activities are taking place. OSHA believes that site posting will adequately notify potentially
affected employees who are not working on the operation, but are working within the area or adjacent to it. 



Identification of Asbestos-containing Materials in Buildings and Facilities



In addition to the ``notification'' issues just discussed, OSHA addresses a related widespread concern expressed
by participants in this rulemaking: how to ensure that workers in buildings and facilities with previously installed
asbestos containing products, are not exposed to asbestos fibers merely because they have no knowledge of where such
products were installed. OSHA has found that such workers, primarily maintenance workers and custodians, but also
contract workers such as plumbers, carpenters and sheet metal workers and workers in industrial facilities have
shown historic disease patterns which in large part resulted from exposure to previously installed asbestos. (see
discussions elsewhere in this preamble of data submitted by BCTD, AFSCME, SEIU and others). In its 1990 proposal OSHA
raised the issue of how to identify previously installed asbestos and asked for comments and recommendations (55
FR 29730). OSHA opened the record for supplemental comments in November 1992, in a notice which also set out OSHA's
preliminary views on how to effectively protect workers from unknowing exposure to previously installed ACM (57
FR 49657). There, OSHA proposed to require employers to presumptively identify certain widely prevalent and more
risky materials. These are thermal system insulation, and sprayed-on and troweled-on surfacing materials, in buildings
built between 1920 and 1980. These materials were to be termed ``presumed asbestos containing materials'' (PACM)
and were to be treated as asbestos containing for all purposes of the standard. OSHA would have allowed building owners
and employers to rebut these presumptions using building records and/or bulk sampling. 

The final provisions which are included in all three standards, like OSHA's 1992 approach, require building owners
and employers to presume that thermal system insulation (TSI) and sprayed-on and troweled-on surfacing materials
contain asbestos, unless rebutted pursuant to the criteria in the standard. Additionally, OSHA is requiring in its
mandatory work practices for flooring material containing asbestos, that employers assume that resilient flooring
material consisting of vinyl sheeting, and vinyl and asphalt containing tile installed before 1980 also be presumed
to contain asbestos (see discussion in the ``Methods of Compliance'' section). Unlike the proposal, buildings constructed
before 1920 are not excluded from these requirements. Also rebuttal criteria have been changed. Unlike the approach
OSHA suggested in the November, 1992 notice, building records may 

not

 be relied upon to rebut the presumption of asbestos containing material and more detailed instructions are supplied
for the inspection process. 

OSHA believes that these provisions will protect employees in buildings and facilities from the consequences of
unknowing significant exposure to asbestos in the most cost-effective manner. 



