 

(2) The other person, or an affiliate thereof, is not a fiduciary who has investment management authority or renders

investment advice with respect to any assets of such person. 
P. ``Sale'' includes the entrance into a forward delivery 
commitment (as defined in section Q below), provided: 
(1) The terms of the forward delivery commitment 
(including any fee paid to the investing plan) are no less favorable to the plan than they would be in an arm's length
transaction with an unrelated party; 
(2) The prospectus or private placement memorandum is provided to an investing plan prior to the time the plan enters

into the forward delivery commitment; and 
(3) At the time of the delivery, all conditions of 
this exemption applicable to sales are met. 
Q. ``Forward delivery commitment'' means a contract for the 
purchase or sale of one or more certificates to be delivered at an agreed future settlement date. The term includes
both mandatory contracts (which contemplate obligatory delivery and acceptance of the certificates) and optional
contracts (which give one party the right but not the obligation to deliver certificates to, or demand delivery of
certificates from, the other party). 
R. ``Reasonable compensation'' has the same meaning as that 
term is defined in 29 CFR 2550.408c2. 
S. ``Qualified Administrative Fee'' means a fee which meets 
the following criteria: 
(1) The fee is triggered by an act or failure to act 
by the obligor other than the normal timely payment of amounts 
owing in respect of the obligations; 
(2) The servicer may not charge the fee absent the act 
or failure to act referred to in (1); 
(3) The ability to charge the fee, the circumstances 
in which the fee may be charged, and an explanation of how the fee is calculated are set forth in the pooling and servicing
agreement; and 
(4) The amount paid to investors in the trust will 
not be reduced by the amount of any such fee waived by the servicer. 
T. ``Qualified Equipment Note Secured By A Lease'' means an 
equipment note: 
(1) Which is secured by equipment which is leased; 
(2) Which is secured by the obligation of the lessee 
to pay rent under the equipment lease; and 
 (3) With respect to which the trust's security 
interest in the equipment is at least as protective of the rights of the trust as the trust would be have if the equipment
note were secured only by the equipment and not the lease. 
U. ``Qualified Motor Vehicle Lease'' means a lease of a motor vehicle where: 
(1) The trust holds a security interest in the lease; 
(2) The trust holds a security interest in the leased 
motor vehicle; and 
(3) The trust's security interest in the leased motor 
vehicle is at least as protective of the trust's rights as the trust would receive under a motor vehicle installment
loan contract. 
V. ``Pooling and Servicing Agreement'' means the agreement or agreements among a sponsor, a servicer and the trustee
establishing a trust. In the case of certificates which are denominated as debt instruments, ``Pooling and Servicing
Agreement'' also includes the indenture entered into by the trustee of the trust issuing such certificates and the
indenture trustee. 


Effective Date: 

This exemption, if granted, will be effective for transactions occurring on or after August 12, 1994. 







