 

As another way of harmonizing the CARB LEV program and the CFF program 
to ensure a sufficient number of HDDEs will be available by 1998 for the fleet 
program, EPA will only test engine families which were certified to CFV standards on 
California diesel fuel on diesel fuel meeting California specifications during any 
Selective Enforcement Audit (SEA) testing or in-use recall enforcement testing. The 
Agency believes that if manufacturers of HD CFVs certified on California fuel perceive 
that their engines may be subject to later EPA testing on federal diesel fuel, then they 
may desire to perform additional testing of these engines on federal certification diesel 
fuel for the purpose of assuring themselves of in-use compliance on federal diesel 
fuel. This approach to SEA and in-use recall testing should assure manufacturers that 
they will not need to perform any additional testing at certification beyond that required 
for California certification. Fuel meeting California diesel test fuel specifications is an 
acceptable test fuel under the FTP because it meets the federal fuel specifications. 
This policy of the Agency using fuel meeting California diesel test fuel specifications 
for SEA and recall testing applies only to CFVs. If the Agency becomes aware of 
changed circumstances which indicate that this policy is inappropriate, the Agency 
reserves the right to discontinue this policy. 
For gasoline-fueled HD CFVs, EPA is aware of no evidence to suggest any 
significant difference in emissions between such vehicles operating on federal and 
California certification gasolines; thus the technical basis for separate standards which 
exists for diesels does not apply for gasoline engines. Commenters did not respond 
to the issue of the appropriateness of a single standard for all HDEs. However, EPA 
believes that in general, a single standard for all fuels provides equity among 
manufacturers of different types of engines for this program. Also, section 245 of the 
Act seems to indicate that Congress intended for there to be a single heavy-duty CFV 
standard. Therefore, as for diesel engines, EPA today also promulgates a standard of 
3.8 g/Bhp-hr for gasoline clean-fuel vehicle engines certified on federal gasoline test 
fuel. As with diesel engines, gasoline engines demonstrating compliance with the 
California 3.5 g/Bhp-hr standard on California gasoline certification fuel will be eligible 
for a federal certificate. 
Given the arguments above, as well as the fact that manufacturers have more 
than three years before the purchase requirements for clean-fuel fleet vehicles begin, 
EPA believes that several heavy-duty diesel engine families will achieve a standard of 
3.8 g/Bhp-hr NMHC + NO

X

 on federal certification fuel or 3.5 g/Bhp-hr NMHC + NO

X

 
on California certification fuel by the 1998 model year. Also, EPA believes that most 
gasoline-fueled HDE families can meet a standard of either 3.8 g/Bhp-hr on federal 
certification fuel or 3.5 g/Bhp-hr on California fuel by the 1998 model year. These 
clean fuel vehicle standards will apply to HDEs used in clean-fuel fleet vehicles of 
8,501 to 26,000 lbs. GVWR to meet the purchase requirements of the fleet program. 


b. Heavy-Duty ULEV and ZEV Standards. 


As previously discussed, section 246(f)(4) of the CAA requires EPA to 
promulgate emission standards for ULEVs and ZEVs, for the purpose of determining 
fleet program credits. The provision states that the standards: 



***shall be more stringent than those otherwise applicable to clean-fuel 
vehicles under this part***. The standards***for [light-duty] vehicles***shall

conform as closely as possible to standards which are established by the 
State of California for ULEV and ZEV vehicles in the same class. For 
vehicles of 8,500 lbs. GVWR or more, the Administrator shall promulgate 
comparable standards for purposes of this subsection. 




EPA interprets this comparability criteria to mean that ULEV and ZEV standards 
for heavy-duty engines should require approximately the same percentage of emission 
reduction compared to heavy-duty CFV LEV standards as light-duty CFV ULEV and 
ZEV standards require compared to light-duty CFV LEV standards. Under this 
provision, EPA must determine the appropriate level for the heavy-duty ULEV and 
ZEV standards. EPA proposed this interpretation and did not receive any comments 
objecting to it. 
EPA also believes it is appropriate to take California's ULEV and ZEV 
standards into consideration and attempt to harmonize the federal and California 
standards where possible. As mentioned above in the section pertaining to the 
feasibility of the HD CFV LEV standard, EPA believes such harmonization is valuable 
because it helps create a single larger market for heavy-duty ULEVs and ZEVs rather 
than two smaller markets. A single larger market makes it more economical for 
manufacturers to produce heavy-duty ULEVS and ZEVs, which makes it more likely 
that manufacturers will choose to produce vehicles that can participate in the federal 
program. (The federal program does not have a sales mandate for manufacturers, so 
their participation is voluntary and controlled, in part, by market demand for their 
products.) 




