 

Overview


This document contains proposed amendments to the Income Tax Regulations (26 CFR Part 1) under section 83(h) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (Code). The proposed regulations eliminate the requirement to deduct and withhold
income tax as a prerequisite for claiming a deduction.
Under section 83(h) of the Code, in the case of a transfer of property to which section 83(a) applies, the person for
whom services were provided may deduct an amount equal to the amount included in the service provider's gross income.
In light of the difficulty that a service recipient may have in demonstrating that an amount has actually been included
in the service provider's gross income, the general rule in existing 1.836(a)(1) permits the deduction
for the amount ``includible'' in the service provider's gross income. Thus, the deduction may be allowed to the service
recipient even if the service provider does not properly report the includible amount. Where the service provider
is an employee of the service recipient, however, the special rule in 1.836(a)(2) provides that a deduction
may be claimed only if the service recipient (employer) deducts and withholds income tax in accordance with section
3402. The special rule was designed to ensure that the service recipient's deduction is in fact offset by a corresponding
inclusion in the service provider's gross income. The special rule is limited to employer-employee situations because
in other situations there is no underlying withholding requirement upon which the deduction could be conditioned.
Taxpayers have expressed concern that it is often difficult to satisfy the prerequisite that employers must deduct
and withhold income tax from payments in kind as a condition for claiming a deduction. The proposed amendments to the
section 83 regulations would address this concern by eliminating this prerequisite, while still ensuring consistent
treatment between service recipients and service providers as required by the statute. In addition, because the
deduction no longer would be conditioned on withholding, there no longer would be a need to have different rules for
those who receive services from employees and those who receive services from others.
Under the proposed amendments, the existing general rule and special rule would be replaced by a revised general rule
that more closely follows the statutory language of section 83(h). The service recipient would be allowed a deduction
for the amount ``included'' in the service provider's gross income. For this purpose, the amount included means the
amount reported on an original or amended return or included in gross income as a result of an IRS audit of the service
provider.
Because of the potential difficulty of demonstrating actual inclusion by the service provider, a special rule would
provide that, if the service recipient timely complies with applicable Form W2 or 1099 reporting requirements
under section 6041 (or 6041A), as appropriate, with respect to the amount includible in income by the service provider,
the service provider will be deemed to have included the amount in gross income for this purpose. Thus, the proposed
amendments would allow the deduction without requiring the service recipient to demonstrate actual inclusion by
the service provider. If a transfer met the requirements for exemption from reporting for payments aggregating less
than $600 in any taxable year, or was eligible for any other reporting exemption, no reporting would be required in
order for the service recipient to rely on the deemed inclusion rule.
In order to allow service recipients to take advantage of the deemed inclusion rule with respect to property transfers
to all service providers, the proposed amendments would permit service recipients to use the special rule also in
the case of transfers to corporate service providers. To that end, service recipients would be permitted, solely
for purposes of this rule, to treat the Form 1099 reporting requirements as applicable to transfers to corporate service
providers in the same manner as those requirements would apply to transfers to noncorporate service providers. Thus,
if a service recipient who transferred property to a corporate service provider timely reported that income on Form
1099 (to both the service provider and the federal government), the service recipient would be entitled to rely on
the deemed inclusion rule in claiming a deduction for the amount of that income. If the transfer met the requirements
for exemption from reporting for payments aggregating less than $600 in any taxable year, or was eligible for any other
reporting exemption applicable to a service provider that is not a corporation, no reporting would be required in
order for the service recipient to rely on the deemed inclusion rule.





