 

It should be emphasized that the application of the ``substantially related'' test to third-party paid advertising
in publications does not preclude all paid advertising in publications mailed at the special bulk third-class rates.
If the product or service advertised is substantially related to one or more of the nonprofit's qualifying purposes,
the publication may still be mailed at the special rates. Each situation must be considered on a case-by-case basis,
including consideration of the product or service advertised and the nature of the nonprofit organization. Examples
of acceptable types of advertisements include an advertisement for a blood glucose tester in a nonprofit diabetes
association's publication and an advertisement for courses at one college in another college's publication. 

It should also be noted that the ``substantially related'' test and other advertising restrictions do not apply if
the material in question is not considered an advertisement under postal rules. The Postal Service received numerous
comments concerning the listing of contributors in publications, such as the lists of individuals and firms that
appear on the back page of many church bulletins. For purposes of these rules, acknowledgments of organizations or
individuals who have contributed to the nonprofit mailer are not generally treated as advertising. 39 U.S.C. 3626(j)(2)(A).
To prevent technical disputes in individual cases concerning the distinction between an advertisement and an acknowledgment,
the rule will consider material to be acknowledgments, rather than advertising, if they appear on a page headed ``Sponsors,''
``Contributors,'' ``Donors'' or a similar term, and each acknowledgment does not exceed the size of a business card
(approximately 7 square inches). The listings should not be labeled as advertising in other portions of the publication
or elsewhere (such as rate cards). 

Similarly, organizations may still include information and response cards concerning membership benefits in publications
sent at the special third-class rates. Such matter will still be required to comply with the restrictions in 39 U.S.C.
3626(j)(2)(B). 

Consistent with Postal Service practice and policy, public service announcements for which no consideration has
been paid will not be considered advertising, and may be included in publications sent at the special bulk third-class
rates. 

Finally, announcements of activities substantially all the work of which is contributed by the members or supporters
of a qualified organization without compensation and advertisements for products and services, including products
and services offered as prizes or premiums, substantially all of which have been received by a qualified organization
as gifts or contributions, are considered to be ``substantially related'' to the organization's purposes. 

One hundred twenty-seven comments asserted that the Postal Service's proposed rule did not follow the intent of Congress
to base mailing restrictions on whether the qualified organization pays unrelated business income tax on the particular
activity advertised. The law, however, does not adopt the test urged by the comments. Instead it clearly states that
the products or services advertised must be ``substantially related'' to the purpose(s) on which the qualified organization's
authorization to mail at special bulk third-class rates is based. This ``relatedness'' test is only one of the factors
considered by the IRS in determining whether unrelated business income tax must be paid, but this part of the test is
singled out by the statute as the standard that the Postal Service must follow. Accordingly, the Postal Service is
directed to rely on the ``substantially related'' portion of the unrelated business income tax analysis but not the
other parts. 

Twenty-five comments oppose or protest increases in rates for nonprofit mailers over the next 6 years, the end of subsidized
funding for nonprofit postage rates, and other aspects of the Revenue Forgone Reform Act that will have an adverse
effect on the mailing activities of churches and church organizations. In general, these types of comments are beyond
the scope of this rulemaking. These comments also questioned whether including new member information, financial
information, attendance information, and announcements of upcoming church events would disqualify church bulletins
from being sent at the special bulk third-class rates. This kind of information concerning the qualified organization's
activities would generally be considered to be substantially related to the nonprofit religious purposes of a church.


Three comments requested that scholarly journals be allowed to continue to accept exchange advertisements and paid
advertisements to attract new subscriptions and promote books and journals. The final rule allows paid advertisements
to be in materials that are mailed at the special bulk third-class rates as long as the advertisements are for products
or services related to the purposes on which the qualified organization's authorization to mail at special bulk third-class
rates is based. Although each advertisement must be considered on a case-by-case basis, the inclusion of exchange
advertisements and third-party paid advertisements under the circumstances described would not appear to violate
the ``substantially related'' test. 

Ten comments stated that the proposed definition of ``low-cost items'' was inconsistent with the Internal Revenue
Service definition. These comments are correct. 





