 

Applications: The SHA1 may be used with the DSA in electronic mail, electronic funds transfer, software distribution,
data storage, and other applications which require data integrity assurance and data origin authentication. The
SHA1 may also be used whenever it is necessary to generate a condensed version of a message. 

Implementations: The SHA1 may be implemented in software, firmware, hardware, or any combination thereof.
Only implementations of the SHA1 that are validated by NIST will be considered as complying with this standard.
Information about the requirements for validating implementations of this standard can be obtained from the National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Systems Laboratory, Attn: SHS Validation, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.


Export Control: Implementations of this standard are subject to Federal Government export controls as specified
in Title 15, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 768 through 799. Exporters are advised to contact the Department of
Commerce, Bureau of Export Administration for more information. 

Patents: Implementations of the SHA1 in this standard may be covered by U.S. and foreign patents. 

Implementation Schedule: This standard becomes effective (insert 90 days after approval by the Secretary of Commerce).


Specifications: Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS 1801) Secure Hash Standard (affixed).


Cross Index: 

a. FIPS PUB 461, Data Encryption Standard. 
b. FIPS PUB 73, Guidelines for Security of Computer Applications. 
c. FIPS PUB 1401, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules. 
d. FIPS PUB 186, Digital Signature Standard. 
e. Federal Information Resources Management Regulations (FIRMR) subpart 201.20.303, Standards, and subpart 201.39.1002,
Federal Standards. 

Objectives: The objectives of this standard are to: 
a. Specify the secure hash algorithm required for use with the Digital Signature Standard (FIPS 186) in the generation
and verification of digital signatures; 

b. Specify the secure hash algorithm to be used whenever a secure hash algorithm is required for Federal applications;
and 

c. Encourage the adoption and use of the specified secure hash algorithm by private and commercial organizations.


Qualifications: While it is the intent of this standard to specify a secure hash algorithm, conformance to this standard
does not assure that a particular implementation is secure. The responsible authority in each agency or department
shall assure that an overall implementation provides an acceptable level of security. This standard will be reviewed
every five years in order to assess its adequacy. 

Waiver Procedure: Under certain exceptional circumstances, the heads of Federal departments and agencies may approve
waivers to Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS). The head of such agency may redelegate such authority
only to a senior official designated pursuant to section 3506(b) of Title 44, United States Code. Waiver shall be granted
only when: 

a. Compliance with a standard would adversely affect the accomplishment of the mission of an operator of a Federal
computer system; or 

b. Compliance with a standard would cause a major adverse financial impact on the operator which is not offset by Government-wide
savings. 

Agency heads may act upon a written waiver request containing the information detailed above. Agency heads may also
act without a written waiver request when they determine that conditions for meeting the standing cannot be met. Agency
heads may approve waivers only by a written decision which explains the basis on which the agency head made the required
finding(s). A copy of each decision, with procurement sensitive or classified portions clearly identified, shall
be sent to: National Institute of Standards and Technology; ATTN: FIPS Waiver Decisions, Technology Building, Room
B154, Gaithersburg, MD 20899. 

In addition, notice of each waiver granted and each delegation of authority to approve waivers shall be sent promptly
to the Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Government Affairs
of the Senate and shall be published promptly in the 

Federal Register

.

When the determination on a waiver applies to the procurement of equipment and/or services, a notice of the waiver
determination must be published in the Commerce Business Daily as part of the notice of solicitation for offers of
an acquisition or, if the waiver determination is made after that notice is published, by amendment to such notice.


A copy of the waiver, any supporting documents, the document approving the waiver and any accompanying documents,
with such deletions as the agency is authorized and decides to make under 5 United States Code Section 552(b), shall
be part of the procurement documentation and retained by the agency. 

Where to Obtain Copies of the Standard: Copies of this publication are for sale by the National Technical Information
Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA 22161. When ordering, refer to Federal Information Processing
Standards Publication 1801 (FIPS PUB 1801), and identify the title. When microfiche is desired, this
should be specified. Prices are published by NTIS in current catalogs and other issuances. Payment may be made by check,
money order, deposit account or charged to a credit card accepted by NTIS.

 


<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9416666 Filed 7894; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3510CNM 
</BILLING>



