 

Several first-tier testing procedures have been devised to screen for overt sensory 
deficits. Many rely on orientation or the response of an animal to a stimulus. Such tests are 
usually included in the FOB used in screening (e.g., tail-pinch or click responses). 
Responses are usually recorded as being either present, absent, or changed in magnitude 
(Moser, 1989; O'Donoghue, 1989). Screening tests for sensory deficits are typically not 
suitable to characterize chemical-induced changes in acuity or fields of perception. The 
characterization of sensory deficits usually necessitates psychophysical methods that study the 
relationship between the physical dimensions of a stimulus and the behavioral response it 
generates (Maurissen, 1988). 
One second-tier approach to the characterization of sensory function involves the use 
of reflex-modification techniques (Crofton, 1990). Chemical-induced changes in the stimulus 
frequency or threshold required to inhibit a reflex are taken as possible changes in sensory 
function. Prepulse inhibition has been used only recently in neurotoxicology (Fechter and 
Young, 1983) and can be used to assess sensory function in humans as well as in 
experimental animals. 
Various behavioral procedures require that a learned response occur only in the 
presence of a specific stimulus (i.e., discriminated or conditioned responding). Chemical-induced changes in
sensory function are determined by altering the physical characteristics of 
the stimulus (e.g., magnitude or frequency) and measuring the alteration in response rate or 
accuracy. In an example of the use of a discriminated conditional response to assess 
chemical-induced sensory dysfunction, Maurissen et al. (1983) trained monkeys to respond to 
the presence of a vibratory or electric stimulus applied to the fingertip. Repeated dosing 
with acrylamide produced a persistent decrease in vibration sensitivity; sensitivity to electric 
stimulation was unimpaired. That pattern of sensory dysfunction corresponded well to 
known sensory deficits in humans. Discriminated conditional response procedures have been 
used to assess the ototoxicity produced by toluene (Pryor et al., 1983) and the visual toxicity 
produced by methylmercury (Merigan, 1979). 
Procedures to characterize chemical-induced sensory dysfunction have been used often 
in neurotoxicology. As in the case of most procedures designed to characterize nervous 
system dysfunction, training and motivational factors can be confounding factors. Many tests 
designed to assess sensory function for laboratory animals can also be applied with some 
adaptation to humans. 


4.3.2.5. Learning and memory.



Learning and memory disorders are neurotoxic effects of 
particular importance. Impairment of memory is reported fairly often by adult humans as a 
consequence of toxic exposure. Behavioral deficits in children have been caused by lead 
exposure (Smith et al., 1989), and it is hypothesized (Calne et al., 1986) that chronic low-level exposure to toxic
agents may have a role in the pathogenesis of senile dementia. 
Learning can be defined as an enduring change in the mechanisms of behavior that 
results from experience with environmental events (Domjan and Burkhard, 1986). Memory 
is a change that can be either short-lasting or long-lasting (Eckerman and Bushnell, 1992). 
Alterations in learning and memory must be inferred from changes in behavior. However, 
changes in learning and memory must be separated from other changes in behavior that do 
not involve cognitive or associative processes (e.g., motor function, sensory capabilities, and 
motivational factors), and an apparent toxicant-induced change in learning or memory should 
be demonstrated over a range of stimuli and conditions. Before it is concluded that a 
toxicant alters learning and memory, effects should be confirmed in a second learning 
procedure. It is well known that lesions in the brain can inhibit learning. It is also known 
that some brain lesions can facilitate some types of learning by removing behavioral 
tendencies (e.g., inhibitory responses due to stress) that moderate the rate of learning under 
normal circumstances. A discussion of learning procedures and examples of chemicals that 
can affect learning and memory have appeared in recent reviews (Heise, 1984; WHO, 1986; 
Peele and Vincent, 1989). 
One simple index of learning and memory, which can be measured as a first-tier 
endpoint, is habituation. Habituation is defined as a gradual decrease in the magnitude or 
frequency of a response after repeated presentations of a stimulus. A toxicant can affect 
habituation by increasing or decreasing the number of stimulus presentations needed to 
produce response decrements (Overstreet, 1977). Although habituation is a very simple form 
of learning, it can also be perturbed by a number of chemical effects not related to learning. 
A more complicated approach to studying the effects of a chemical on learning and 
memory involves the pairing of a novel stimulus with a second stimulus that produces a 
known, observable, and quantifiable response (i.e., classical ``Pavlovian'' conditioning). The 
novel stimulus is known as the conditioned stimulus, and the second, eliciting stimulus is the 
unconditioned stimulus. With repeated pairings of the two stimuli, the conditioned stimulus 
comes to elicit a response similar to the response elicited by the unconditioned stimulus. The 
procedure has been used in behavioral pharmacology and, to a lesser extent, in 
neurotoxicology. Neurotoxicants that interfere with learning and memory would alter the 
number of presentations of the pair of stimuli required to produce conditioning or learning. 
Memory would be tested by determining how long after the last presentation of the two 
stimuli the conditioned stimulus would still elicit a response (Yokel, 1983). Other classically 
conditioned responses known to be affected by psychoactive or neurotoxic agents are 
conditioned taste aversion (Riley and Tuck, 1985) and conditioned suppression (Chiba and 
Ando, 1976). 
Second-tier procedures to assess learning or memory typically involve the pairing of a 
response with a stimulus that increases the probability of future response through 
reinforcement. Response rate can be increased by using positive reinforcement or removing 
negative reinforcement. Learning is usually assessed by determining the number of 
presentations or trials needed to produce a defined frequency of response. Memory can be 
defined specifically as the maintenance of a stated frequency of response after initial training. 
Neurotoxicants may adversely affect learning by increasing or decreasing the number of 
presentations required to achieve the designated criterion. Decrements in memory may be 
indicated by a decrease in the probability or frequency of a response at some time after initial 
training. Toxicant-induced changes in learning and memory should be interpreted within the 
context of possible toxicant-induced changes in sensory, motor, and motivational factors. 
Examples of instrumental learning procedures used in neurotoxicology are repeated 
acquisition (Schrot et al., 1984), passive and active avoidance, Y-maze avoidance, spatial 
mazes (radial-arm maze), and delayed matching to sample (Heise, 1984; WHO, 1986; Tilson 
and Mitchell, 1984). 





