 

(v) Under no circumstances will loan funds be used to pay the owner/builder or its stockholders, members, directors
or officers, directly or indirectly, any profits from the construction of the project except a typical builder's
fee for performing the services that would normally be performed by a general contractor under the contract method
of construction. Discounts and rebates given the owner-builder in advance must be deducted before the invoices are
paid. If discounts or rebates are given after the invoices are paid, the funds must be returned to the supervised bank
account or applied on the interim construction loan, as appropriate. Under no circumstances will the dollar amount
be placed in the reserve account. 



* * * * * 



(viii) The applicant/owner-builder and any subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor sharing an identity
of interest as defined in 1924.4(i) of this subpart must each provide certification as to the actual cost of
the work performed in connection with the construction of the project on Form FmHA 192413 prior to final payment.
The construction costs, as reported on Form FmHA 192413, must be audited by a CPA, or LPA licensed on or before
December 31, 1970, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, and certain agreed upon procedures (available
in any FmHA office) performed in accordance with Attestation Standards. In some cases, FmHA will contract directly
with a CPA or LPA for the cost certification. In that event, documentation necessary to have the costs of construction
certified by an FmHA contractor that they were the actual costs of the work performed, as reported on Form FmHA 192413,
will be provided. Funds which were included in the loan for cost certification and which are ultimately not needed
because FmHA contracts for the cost certification will be returned on the loan. 
 
(A) The CPA or LPA's audit, performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, will include such tests of
the accounting records and such other auditing procedures of the applicant/owner-builder (and any subcontractor,
material supplier, or equipment lessor sharing an identity of interest) concerning the work performed, services
rendered, and materials supplied in connection with the construction of the project he/she considers necessary
to express an opinion on the construction costs as reported on Form FmHA 192413. Upon completion of construction
and prior to final payment, the CPA or LPA will provide an opinion as to whether the construction costs as reported on
Form FmHA 192413 present fairly the costs of construction in conformity with eligible construction costs
as prescribed in FmHA regulations. FmHA reserves the right to determine, upon receipt of the certified Form FmHA 192413
and the auditor's report, whether they are satisfactory to FmHA. At a minimum, the CPA or LPA shall also perform any
additional agreed upon procedures (available in any FmHA office) specified by FmHA, performed in accordance with
Attestation Standards, of the owner-builder (and any subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor sharing
an identity of interest) concerning the work performed, services rendered, and materials supplied in connection
with the construction. There will exist no business relationship between the CPA or LPA and the borrower except for
the performance of the examination of the cost certification, accounting systems work, and tax preparation. Any
CPA or LPA who acts as the borrower's accountant (performing manual or automated bookkeeping services or maintains
the official accounting records) will not be the same CPA or LPA who cost certifies the project. 

(B) Prior to final payment to anyone required to cost certify, FmHA must be provided with a certification and a trade-item
breakdown showing the actual cost compared to the estimated cost furnished in accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(i)(G)
of this section. Form FmHA 192413 is the form of comparative breakdown that must be used, and contains the certification
required of the applicant/owner-builder prior to final payment. The amounts for builder's general overhead, general
requirements, and builder's profit shall not exceed the amounts represented on the estimate of cost breakdown provided
in accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(i)(G) of this section for the owner-builder or any subcontractor, material
supplier, or equipment lessor having or sharing an identity of interest with the applicant/owner-builder. Final
payment to the owner-builder will be adjusted, if necessary, to assure that the amounts shown on the certificate of
actual cost do not exceed the amounts represented on the cost breakdown. Any funds remaining as a result of hard cost
savings will be applied to the account as an extra payment or used for eligible loan purposes approved by FmHA as long
as the improvements are genuinely needed and will enhance marketability of the project. All increases or decreases
of 15 percent or more in line item costs will require documentation as to the reason for the increases or decreases.
The State Director may require documentation for increases or decreases of less than 15 percent, if he/she determines
it necessary. This information will be required with the cost certification. 

(C) Subcontracting development work. 

(

1

) Owner-builders will not be allowed to obtain a profit and overhead unless they are performing actual construction.
``Actual construction'' means ``work'' as defined in AIA documents: ``*** labor, materials, equipment,
and services provided by the contractor to fulfill the contractor's obligations.'' Under this definition, owner-builders
who choose to subcontract out construction of the project to another contractor will not obtain a builder's fee (general
overhead and profit) when: 

(

i

) More than 50 percent of the total cost of the building construction is subcontracted to one subcontractor, material
supplier, or equipment lessor, and/or 

(

ii

) Seventy-five percent or more with three or fewer subcontractors, material suppliers, and/or equipment lessors.


(

2

) 

Note: 

If two or more subcontractors have common ownership, they are considered as one subcontractor. 


