 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

NASA has reviewed the EA prepared for the proposed LITE and has determined that it represents an accurate and adequate
analysis of the scope and level of associated environmental impacts. The EA is incorporated by reference in this FONSI.


NASA is proposing to test a lidar system in space for use in a global atmospheric monitoring program. The principal
components of a lidar system are the laser transmitter module (LTM) and the telescope-receiver. The LTM shoots a pulsed
laser beam into the atmosphere where much of the laser energy is absorbed by the atmosphere. Some of the energy is reflected
back toward the telescope-receiver, while a small fraction passes through the atmosphere and reaches the Earth's
surface. The energy reflected toward the telescope-receiver is used to assess meteorological conditions (e.g.,
cloud conditions) and atmospheric aerosols (e.g., atmospheric contaminants), and to monitor the ozone layer. NASA
proposes to fly a lidar system as an attached payload on the Space Shuttle. The first flight is scheduled for the fall
of 1994 as a 9-day mission to gain experience in operating a lidar system in a space environment and to evaluate the sensitivity
of the lidar instrument for monitoring atmospheric conditions.
The proposed action and the No-Action Alternative (i.e., no space-based testing of a lidar system) were considered
in the EA. The No-Action Alternative will not fulfill NASA's objective to advance atmospheric monitoring capabilities.
Under the No-Action Alternative, it will not be possible to develop the technology for a space-based lidar atmospheric
monitoring system, and it will be necessary to continue to rely on existing passive monitoring instruments which
have limitations in assessing the vertical distribution of atmospheric constituents.
The proposed action is the normal operation of the LITE payload from within the Space Shuttle cargo bay. The LITE payload
will remain in the Shuttle cargo bay and will not produce any effluent which could escape the cargo bay during mission
operations. The only feature of the LITE payload which will emerge from the cargo bay will be the laser beam.
The LITE LTM will produce laser energy in three wavelengths, one of which will be visible (pale green). The portion
of the laser energy which will pass through the atmosphere will reach the Earth's surface in a series of circular ``laser
spots'' as the Shuttle moves across the Earth's surface. The diameter of the spots will vary from 265 meters (870 feet)
to 483 meters (1,585 feet). Exposure will occur only to persons who are within a laser spot. Each laser pulse will last
for 20 nanoseconds. The planned mission orbits will be between 57 degrees north latitude and 57 degrees south latitude.
Given the laser pulse rate and the Shuttle's orbiting velocity, a person cannot be within two consecutive laser spots.
A comprehensive safety analysis performed for the proposed LITE found minimal risk of skin or eye injury from operation
of the LITE LTM. The maximum Radiant Exposure (RE) to a person within a laser spot was calculated to be more than a million
times lower than the Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE) for skin exposure and at least two orders of magnitude lower
than the MPE for eye exposure for each of the three laser energy wavelengths. The cumulative effect or simultaneous
exposure to multiple wavelengths was calculated to be at least two orders of magnitude lower than the MPE. RE to persons
using binoculars to view the Shuttle from within a laser spot was calculated to be lower than the MPE. While RE to persons
using a 165-mm (6.5-inch) telescope to view the Shuttle from within a laser spot was calculated to be equal to the MPE,
there is still considerable safety factor in the MPE, since MPE's are established at exposures which are one to two
orders of magnitude lower than the level of any known hazard.
A Phase I Flight Safety Review found that the LITE LTM lasers will not be hazardous to persons in aircraft and will not
interfere with microwave, very-high-frequency, or ultra-high-frequency communications. A review by the U.S.
Space Command Laser Clearinghouse found that the LITE lasers will not exceed the damage threshold to space systems.
No other potential environmental impacts were identified as a result of the environmental assessment. On the basis
of the LITE EA and underlying reference documents, NASA has determined that the environmental impacts associated
with this project will not individually or cumulatively have a significant effect on the quality of the environment.
NASA will take no final action prior to the expiration of the 30-day comment period.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Gregory M. Reck,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Associate Administrator, for Advanced Concepts and Technology.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 945025 Filed 3394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 751001M
</BILLING>


