 

One commenter requested that OPM provide guidance to help them develop procedures and allow sufficient lead time
for them to do this. OPM will provide guidance to help agencies set up procedures; however, agencies will find that
the reconsideration function is not difficult. They have been making the initial decisions on prospective corrections
for many years, and reconsideration decisions are similar. We do not believe that a lengthy delay is necessary with
regard to prospective corrections. The modification we are making in the regulation to limit retroactive corrections
of administrative errors occurring after December 31, 1994, will have a delaying effect on decisions regarding retroactive
corrections.

One commenter suggested that we change the proposed regulations at 5 CFR 870.102 to read ``The employing office may
make 

prospective and retroactive

 corrections ***'' to conform to the language in 5 CFR 890.103. The difference in language is intentional.
Under current regulations, an agency's failure to withhold Basic Life insurance premiums is always corrected retroactively
because coverage is automatic unless the employee submits a waiver. Similarly, an agency's failure to process a waiver
on a timely basis is retroactive to the effective date of the waiver. Since agencies are not free to make a judgment as
to whether the change should be retroactive in these cases, it is not appropriate for the regulations to imply that
they do. However, the language of the FEGLI regulations does not preclude either prospective or retroactive changes
that do not conflict with the law or regulations. In the case of FEHB enrollments, the agency is generally free to make
a judgment as to whether a prospective or retroactive change is appropriate.

One commenter suggested that we clarify whether OPM's decision to order a retroactive correction is subject to retroactive
payment of premiums under 870.102 and 890.103. Since retroactive payment of premiums is required under
the law, it has been OPM's practice to include the requirement for payment of retroactive premiums in its letters to
the agencies ordering the retroactive correction. However, we are modifying the regulations to make it clear that
the requirement for payment of retroactive premiums applies regardless of who authorizes the retroactive correction.

One commenter suggested that we change the requirements for the information that must be included in an employee's
request for reconsideration to include a copy of the initial decision. We have intentionally not included a copy of
the initial decision as a regulatory requirement. This information should be given in the initial decision itself;
however, we do not agree that the copy of the initial decision need be included for the request to be considered timely
under the regulations. If the request includes sufficient information to identify the individual, it can be accepted
as a timely request and the initial decision can be requested if it is not included.

