 

(b) 

Infrastructure rating component.

 (1) The following criteria will be used to rate applications for infrastructure construction.

(i) Project need and design.

(ii) Planning and implementation.

(iii) Leveraging.

(2) The NOFA will contain the specific community facilities-infrastructure rating criteria which are designed
to measure need, benefit to low and moderate income persons, cost and other factors.

(c) 

Buildings rating component.

 (1) The following criteria will be used to rate applications for buildings.

(i) Project need and design.

(ii) Planning and implementation.

(iii) Leveraging.

(2) The NOFA will contain the specific community facilities-buildings rating criteria which are designed to measure
need, benefit to low and moderate income persons, cost and other factors.



953.305

 Economic development rating category.



(a)(1) Economic development assistance may be provided only when an analysis is done which shows public benefit commensurate
with the assistance to the business can reasonably be expected to result from the assisted project, and the project
has a reasonable chance of success. The applicant shall demonstrate the need for grant assistance by providing documentation
to support a determination that the assistance is appropriate to implement an economic development project. Economic
development projects may receive a maximum of 100 points.

(2) The economic development rating category has one component consisting of four parts.

(i) Project success.

(ii) Organization.

(iii) Leveraging.

(iv) Permanent full time job creation.

(b) The NOFA will contain the specific economic development rating criteria which are designed to measure need, benefit
to low and moderate income persons, cost and other factors.



953.306

 Public services.



Public services activities may comprise no more than 15 percent of the total grant award. Such projects must therefore
be submitted with one or more other projects, which must comprise at least 85 percent of the total grant award. A public
service project will be funded only if the project(s) with which it is submitted rank high enough to be funded.



953.307

 Funding process.



(a) 

Notification.

 Field offices will notify applicants of the actions taken regarding their applications. Grant amounts offered may
reflect adjustments made by the field offices in accordance with 953.100(b).

(b) 

Grant award.

 (1) As soon as HUD determines that the applicant has complied with any pre-award requirements and absent information
which would alter the threshold determinations under 953.302, the grant will be awarded. These regulations
(

i.e.,

 24 CFR Part 953) become part of the grant agreement.

(2) All grants shall be conditioned upon the completion of all environmental obligations and approval of release
of funds by HUD in accordance with the requirements of part 58 of this title and, in particular, subpart J of Part 58 of
this title, except as otherwise provided in:

(i) Section 58.33 of this title, ``Emergencies'';

(ii) Section 58.34 of this title, ``Exempt activities''; or

(iii) Section 58.22 of this title, ``Limitations on activities pending clearance'' on the commitment of funds and
which are reimbursable under subpart C of part 570 of this title.

(3) HUD may impose other grant conditions where additional actions or approvals are required prior to the use of funds.





(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB Control No. 25060043.)



953.308

 Program amendments.



(a) Grantees shall request prior HUD approval for all program amendments involving the alteration of existing activities
that will significantly change the scope, location, objective, or class of beneficiaries of the approved activities,
as originally described in the application.

(b) Amendment requests shall include the information required under 953.300(a).

(1) Amendments of $25,000 or more shall address all the rating parts and subparts of the last rating cycle. Approval
is subject to the following:

(i) A rating equal to or greater than the lowest rating received by a funded project during the last rating cycle;

(ii) Capability to complete promptly the modified or new activities;

(iii) Compliance with the requirements of 953.604 for citizen participation; and

(iv) The preparation of an amended or new environmental review in accordance with Part 58 of this title, if there is
a significant change in the scope or location of approved activities.

(2) Amendments of less than $25,000 shall be approved subject to meeting the requirements of paragraphs (b)(1) (ii),(iii),
and (iv) of this section.

(3) Amendments which address imminent threats to health and safety shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with
the requirements of Subpart E of this part.






