 

Section 953.602 describes applicable relocation and real property acquisition policies, including those implementing
the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (URA). Under the government-wide
URA rule at 49 CFR Part 24, any person (family, individual, business, nonprofit organizations, or farm) displaced
on or after April 2, 1989 as a direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation or demolition for a project assisted under
this part is entitled to URA relocation assistance. The acquisition of real property for a project assisted under
this part is also subject to the URA. The URA policies are described in HUD Handbook 1378, Tenant Assistance, Relocation
and Real Property Acquisition. 


Public Comments 




The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) received 18 individual comments from 9 sources on the interim
rule published on April 7, 1992. HUD received 6 letters from tribes, and 3 from regional and private organizations.
General comments are discussed below and are followed by specific comments. The specific comments and the Department's
responses are discussed under ``Specific Comments,'' according to the section where they appear in the interim regulation.





General Comments 



Numerous comments were received requesting more tribal involvement in the development of the final rule and NOFA.
Also questioned was the need for a national NOFA since the program had operated with a regional competition in the past.



The passage of two statutes, NAHA and the Reform Act, created the need for a national NOFA and revised rule. These statutes
changed the Indian Community Development Block (ICDBG) program selection process. The NAHA required the Secretary
of HUD to promulgate a regulation containing selection criteria used to award funds in competitive programs. The
Reform Act restricts the disclosure of information about HUD programs and discretionary funds. The current interim
ICDBG rule contained changes reflecting the NAHA and Reform Act requirements. As a result of the written comments
received and the consultation sessions held relative to this interim rule, a second interim rule is being published
to continue the process of refining and developing a final rule. HUD is committed to involving the public in this process
to the extent practicable. In order to publish a fair and coherent NOFA, HUD Headquarters consulted extensively with
HUD ONAP field offices throughout the NOFA's development. Since the ONAP field offices are in frequent contact with
the tribes/villages within their jurisdiction, they were able to provide Headquarters with information on how various
NOFA provisions would be received by ICDBG applicants. Following the publication of the NOFA and regulation and after
the selection process has been completed, HUD field staff will hold public meetings to get suggestions on how to improve
the NOFA. 



To facilitate the Department's ability to more readily respond to the consultation process, changes to the rating
criteria have been made in this Interim Rule. Sections 953.303, 953.304, and 953.305 have been modified to permit
a wider range of changes to the rating criteria in the NOFA without changing the regulation. The separate rating criteria
has been eliminated for Public Services activities at 953.306. Eligible Public Service activities must still
meet the submission criteria set out in this part. 



Specific Comments 




Section 953.4Definitions 






Comment: 

One comment was received concerning the requirement that the applicant must, when reporting income levels to HUD,
include and identify the distribution of tribal or village income to families, households or individuals in the definition
of low and moderate income beneficiary. The commenter pointed out the existence of a Federal statute that might preclude
the use of portions of such payments from being considered income when determining eligibility for federal or federally
assisted programs. 




Response: 

It is recognized that such exclusions may exist and the statutory mandates will be followed where appropriate. Their
existence would not necessarily indicate the need for additional language identifying the exclusions. These claimed
exclusions would be identified by the applicant when reporting income to HUD when complying with this section of the
interim rule. 




Section 953.5Eligible Applicants 





Comment: 

One comment was received noting that Indians residing in urban areas and metropolitan cities and not on reservations
do not receive adequate service or funding from IHS and no service from BIA. The commenter suggested that if HUD recognized
these groups it would be beneficial in gaining acceptance with other agencies such as IHS and BIA. 




Response: 

The Department does not have legislative authority to provide Federal recognition to Indian Tribes or Alaskan Native
Villages, but deals with those tribes and villages recognized by the Treasury Department and the Bureau of Indian
Affairs as stipulated in this section. The Indian groups residing in urban areas and metropolitan cities and not on
reservations can receive, to the extent such persons are otherwise eligible as low income persons, benefits under
the regular CDBG programs serving the area where they reside. 




