 

III. Public Comment Procedures


In accordance with the provisions of 30 CFR 884.14 and 884.15(a), OSM is seeking comment on whether the proposed amendment
satisfies the applicable plan approval criteria of 30 CFR 884.14. If the amendment is deemed adequate, it will become
part of the Kentucky plan.


Written Comments


Written comments should be specific, pertain only to the issues proposed in this rulemaking, and include explanations
in support of the commentor's recommendations. Comments received after the time indicated under 

DATES 

or at locations other than the Lexington Field Office will not necessarily be considered in the final rulemaking or
included in the Administrative Record.


Public Hearing


Persons wishing to speak at the public hearing should contact the person listed under 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT 

by 4:00 p.m., E.D.T., on June 20, 1994. The location and time of the hearing will be arranged with those persons requesting
the hearing. If no one requests an opportunity to speak at the public hearing, the hearing will not be held.
Filing of a written statement at the time of the hearing is requested as it will greatly assist the transcriber. Submission
of written statements in advance of the hearing will allow OSM officials to prepare adequate responses and appropriate
questions.
The public hearing will continue on the specified date until all persons scheduled to speak have been heard. Persons
in the audience who have not been scheduled to speak, and who wish to do so, will be heard following those scheduled.
The hearing will end after all persons scheduled to speak and persons present in the audience who wish to speak have
been heard.


Public Meeting


If only one person requests an opportunity to speak at a hearing, a public meeting, rather than a public hearing, may
be held. Persons wishing to meet with OSM representatives to discuss the proposed amendments may request a meeting
by contacting the person listed under 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT

. All such meetings will be open to the public and, if possible, notices of meetings will be posted at the locations listed
under 

ADDRESSES

. A written summary of each meeting will be made a part of the Administrative Record.


IV. Procedural Determinations


Executive Order 12866


This rule is exempted from review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under Executive Order 12866 (Regulatory
Planning and Review).


Executive Order 12778


The Department of the Interior has conducted the reviews required by section 2 of Executive Order 12778 (Civil Justice
Reform) and has determined that, to the extent allowed by law, this rule meets the applicable standards of subsections
(a) and (b) of that section. However, these standards are not applicable to the actual language of State and Tribal
abandoned mine land reclamation plans and revisions thereof since each such plan is drafted and adopted by a specific
State or Tribe, not by OSM. Decisions on proposed State AMLR plans and revisions thereof submitted by a State are based
on a determination of whether the submittal meets the requirements of Title IV of SMCRA (30 U.S.C. 12311243)
and the Federal regulations at 30 CFR Parts 884 and 888.


National Environmental Policy Act


No environmental impact statement is required for this rule since agency decisions on proposed State AMLR plans and
revisions thereof are categorically excluded from compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C.
4332) by the Manual of the Department of the Interior (516 DM 6, appendix 8, paragraph 8.4B(29)).


Paperwork Reduction Act


This rule does not contain information collection requirements that require approval by the OMB under the Paperwork
Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3507 

et seq

).


Regulatory Flexibility Act


The Department of the Interior has determined that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

). The State submittal which is the subject of this rule is based upon Federal regulations for which an economic analysis
was prepared and certification made that such regulations would not have a significant economic effect upon a substantial
number of small entities. Accordingly, this rule will ensure that existing requirements established by SMCRA or
previously promulgated by OSM will be implemented by the State. In making the determination as to whether this rule
would have a significant economic impact, the Department relied upon the data and assumptions in the analyses for
the corresponding Federal regulations.


List of Subjects in 30 CFR Part 917


Intergovernmental relations, Surface mining, Underground mining.



Dated: May 27, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Robert J. Biggi,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Assistant Director, Eastern Support Center.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413504 Filed 6294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431005M
</BILLING>


