 

11. Tarantulas (Brachypelma spp.)


The Service has been considering listing additional 

Brachypelma 

species to address look-alike concerns. As a result of the Service's discussions, a proposal was received from Dr.
Robert Wolff of Trinity Christian College, Palos Heights, Illinois, to list all members of the tarantula genus 

Brachypelma 

(also known as 

Euathlus 

and 

Brachypelmides

) in Appendix II of CITES. Most species of this genus have very limited distributions within the general area of Central
America from northern Mexico south into Colombia, and are known only from a very limited geographic region within
a single country. The very limited distributions of these species places each in greater danger of possible extinction.


Brachypelma 

tarantulas are ground-dwelling, burrowing spiders occurring from semi-desert regions, through tropical dry deciduous
forests, to tropical moist forests. The red-haired 

Brachypelma 

tarantulas are very popular as pets. They are long-lived spiders; the females frequently live up to 20 years, with
as many as 12 possible years for breeding. The males are only mature for a single breeding season and are heavily preyed
upon during their wanderings. Whereas up to 400 individual eggs may be produced in each egg sac, the number of hatchlings
surviving to adulthood is extremely small (about 1 percent). Therefore, the loss of mature individuals from a population
is a major threat to the species; larger individuals are preferred by the pet trade. Several species in the genus are
poorly described or virtually unknown, and no thorough population studies have been conducted on any of the species.
Very little is known about the trade in 

Brachypelma 

tarantulas and most specimens are probably coming out of Mexico without proper documentation. Mexico prevents the
hunting and export of tarantulas without a permit. At the Fifth Meeting of the Conference of the Parties (Buenos Aires,
1985), the United States proposed the inclusion of 

Brachypelma smithi 

(the red-kneed tarantula) in Appendix II because of widespread documented trade. The listing of all 

Brachypelma 

tarantulas would eliminate the present confusion over identification of which species are entering trade. Most
species within the genus are easily recognized by the red or reddish hairs on the legs or abdomen. The Service is, therefore,
considering the listing of all members of the genus 

Brachypelma 

in Appendix II and seeks information on the effects of trade on these tarantulas, especially any data on the volume
of specimens entering trade.


12. Port-Orford-Cedar (Chamaecyparis lawsoniana)


In response to the July 15, 1993, notice (58 FR 38112) which initiated listing preparation for COP9, the Oregon Natural
Resources Council provided a thorough draft proposal to include the Lawson-cypress or Port-Orford-cedar (

Chamaecyparis lawsoniana

) in Appendix II. This species is native to southwestern Oregon and northwestern California within a general coastal
area of less than 200 by 100 miles, mostly from about Coos Bay, Oregon south to Arcata, California. It is also in cultivation
(and has a number of horticultural varieties). The species has been reduced both in range and by over 85 percent in natural
standing volume, and is now logged almost entirely for export (primarily to Japan). An introduced pathogen (

Phytophthora lateralis

) has been spreading particularly along waterways and as a side effect of soil transport by vehicles and logging equipment.
The main stimulus for the logging of Port-Orford cedar is high export prices, and one important stimulus for the construction
of many logging roads is the export of raw logs. This fungus has spread through the northern and western portions of
the tree species' range, and it has infected perhaps 20 percent of the remaining coastal stands. The root disease is
virulent, and the infected trees cannot be cured. By the mid-1980s, an estimated 60 percent of the trees of this species
in southwestern Oregon's young-growth forests had been killed by this introduced disease.
The Service is considering submission of a proposal to list the U.S. population of this species and its logs, sawn wood,
and veneer in Appendix II. Information is desired particularly on populations that are functioning naturally and
are effectively safe from habitat loss, exploitation, and infection; and in addition, information is requested
on the location of U.S. non-natural silvicultural plantations and the extent of such exports from them.


