 

An inspection program tied to mandatory industry adoption of the HACCP system would not be industry self-certification,
nor would it be deregulatory. An investigator under such a program would perform HACCP reviews but not to the exclusion
of other inspection activities. Thus, it is highly doubtful whether any falsification of records would go undetected.
Investigators are taught to recognize falsification of records, and the inspection techniques they use would likely
reveal any instances in which the records do not reflect actual conditions and practices. Falsification of records
carries strict penalties under Federal law. 
Unlike the other inspection options discussed previously that would involve continuous or high-frequency inspection
and commensurate costs, an inspection system tied to HACCP would not necessarily require an increase over current
inspection frequencies. Recordkeeping and record inspection will provide the inspector, however, with a broader
view. Moreover, to the extent that States adopt equivalent inspection programs in response to these proposed regulations,
the resultant network of consistent inspections would, in effect, increase the frequency of inspections at no additional
cost. The value to the nation of such a network would be substantial. 
FDA recognizes that many States are under considerable pressure to cut back funding in areas where a Federal presence
also exists. For seafood, however, FDA urges that the States maintain their programs, strengthen them to the extent
possible, and work with the agency to integrate them into a HACCP-based, Federal/State network. Such an approach
would be consistent with recommendations relating to the role of States made by NAS in its 1991 report on seafood safety
(Ref. 7, p. 16). FDA especially invites comment on how the proposed FDA program should mesh with an existing State HACCP
program for seafood, such as the program that exists in Alaska, so that inconsistent Federal and State HACCP requirements
are not imposed. 


V. The Proposal 


A. Decision To Propose To Make Use of HACCP Mandatory 


For the foregoing reasons, FDA has tentatively concluded that a new system of regulatory controls for seafood is necessary,
and that HACCP is the appropriate system. Therefore, FDA is proposing to add part 123 to establish procedures for the
safe processing and importing of fish and fishery products. FDA is proposing these procedures under sections 402(a)(1),
402(a)(4), and 701(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(1), 342(a)(4), and 371(a)),
in conjunction with section 361 of the Public Health Service Act (the PHS Act) (42 U.S.C. 264). Section 402(a)(1) of
the act states that food is adulterated if it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance that may render
it injurious to health. Section 402(a)(4) of the act was included in the act to provide additional control over insanitary
and contaminated foods. (H.R. Rept. No. 2139, 75th Cong., 3d sess. 6 (1938).) Section 701(a) of the act authorizes
the agency to adopt regulations for the efficient enforcement of the act. Section 361 of the PHS Act authorizes the
agency to adopt regulations to prevent the spread of communicable diseases. 
The proposed regulations set out those requirements that the agency tentatively has concluded are the minimum necessary
to ensure that, to the extent possible, the processing and importation of fish and fishery products will not result
in a product that is injurious to health. These requirements include the establishment of HACCP preventive controls
that take into account the unique characteristics of seafood products. If a processor or an importer fails to adopt
and implement an HACCP plan that complies with the requirements that FDA is proposing, or otherwise fails to operate
in accordance with these proposed provisions, it will be preparing, packing, or holding the food under insanitary
conditions under which the food may be rendered injurious to health. Thus the food will be adulterated under section
402(a)(4) of the act and subject to regulatory action by FDA. The agency has reflected this fact in proposed 123.6(d).

FDA's tentative decision to adopt regulations that require the implementation of HACCP principles by the seafood
industry is grounded in the statutory objective of preventing food safety and sanitation problems. Section 402(a)(4)
of the act does not require that FDA demonstrate that food is actually hazardous or contaminated in order to deem the
food adulterated and to exclude it from commerce. Instead, under section 402(a)(4) of the act, food producers must
assure that the food is not ``prepared, packed, or held under insanitary conditions whereby it 

may have been

 contaminated with filth, or whereby it 

may have been

 rendered injurious to health.'' [emphasis added.] 
In enforcing section 402(a)(4) of the act, FDA has considered, among other things, prevailing industry standards
and the technical state-of-the-art in determining on a case-by-case basis whether the conditions under which a company
is processing or handling food satisfy section 402(a)(4) of the act. This proposed regulation would codify an appropriate
state-of-the-art means of assuring seafood safety and of preventing sanitation problems under FDA's authority
to promulgate regulations for the ``efficient enforcement'' of the act (section 701(a) of the act (21 U.S.C. 371(a))).

The factual record that FDA has developed concerning the safety and sanitation issues posed by seafood illustrates
the need for codifying appropriate preventive methods consistent with the emerging technical state-of-the-art
and explains why FDA's initial focus in implementing HACCP is on seafood. Proof that any particular process or set
of manufacturing conditions in the production of seafood has in fact caused injuries or sanitation problems is not,
however, a legal prerequisite to this rule. 




