 

(6) 

Sale of townsites_

The Townsites and Power Development Act of April 16, 1906 (43 U.S.C. 561) authorized the withdrawal of lands from public
entry to be used for the purpose of townsite lots in conjunction with irrigation projects (up to 160 acres). The lands
were then surveyed, subdivided and sold by Reclamation for townsite lots (43 U.S.C. 562). 
(7) 

Sale of land_

The Bureau of Reclamation has authority to sell land that is under its jurisdiction in several different statutes:

(a) The Sale of Surplus Acquired Lands Act of February 2, 1911 (43 U.S.C. 374) authorizes the sale of lands acquired
under the provisions of the Reclamation Act that are no longer needed for the purpose for which the lands were acquired.

(b) The Sale of Surplus Improved Public Lands Act of May 20, 1920 (43 U.S.C. 375) authorizes the sale of withdrawn public
domain lands that were improved at the expense of the project for which the lands were withdrawn. 
(c) The Disposal of Small Tracts Act of March 31, 1950 (43 U.S.C. 375b) authorizes the sale of public domain lands withdrawn
for the construction of a Reclamation project that are in tracts too small to qualify as farm units. 


B. Methods of Disbursement 


Revenues disposition statutes governing Reclamation projects generally cover four primary methods of crediting.
These methods are: (1) Front-end or direct credit; (2) credit to the project or tail-end credit; (3) general credit
to the Reclamation fund; and (4) general credit to revolving funds or special accounts authorized by Congress. 
(1) Revenues that are to be credited as a direct or front-end credit are credited to the reimbursable construction
costs of the project by satisfying all or part of the annual payment currently due from the water users. All revenues
in excess of the annual construction payment are to be applied against the annual operation and maintenance expenses
of the district. This relieves the water users of their current repayment obligation, in part or in its entirety, without
accelerating the repayment of the total construction debt. Section 4, Subsection I of the Fact Finders Act is the only
general statute with applicability at more than one Reclamation project in which front-end crediting provisions
are found. These provisions were conditioned on whether the district had assumed the operation and maintenance of
the project, or the Secretary of the Interior had granted this relief under the authority of the Omnibus Adjustment
Act of May 25, 1926. Subsection I allowed the revenues derived from the sale of project power, the sale or use of townsite
lots, and the leasing of Federal lands for the purposes of grazing and agriculture to be credited as a direct or front-end
credit. 
(2) Credits to the project or tail-end credits involve funds being directed to the Reclamation fund and applied to
the construction obligation of the project associated with the revenues. This method of repayment accelerates the
return of the construction cost of the project to the Reclamation fund. 
(3) General credit to the Reclamation fund does not provide a benefit to either the project construction costs or to
the districts' annual obligations. When revenues are a credit to the Reclamation fund, the funds are not targeted
to be spent on a specific function or project, but are only available to be spent as directed by the laws that control
the fund. 
(4) General credit to special accounts or revolving funds are created by Congressional authorization and relate
to specific projects or specialized activities. These accounts/revolving funds are maintained separate and apart
from the Reclamation fund and are managed in accordance with the legislation that authorized their creation. Project-specific
special accounts or revolving funds are: (a) The Recreation Account within the general fund of the Treasury was created
by the Omnibus Adjustment Act of 1987. This account is a depository for recreation user fees or concession fees; (b)
The Lower Colorado River Basin Development Fund is specific to the Central Arizona Project and was established under
the authority of Section 403 of the Colorado River Basin Project Act of September 10, 1968; (c) The Columbia Basin Land
Development Account was authorized under Section 6 of the Columbia Basin Project Act of March 10, 1943, and is specific
to the Columbia Basin Project; (d) The Colorado River Dam Fund was authorized under the authority of Section 2 of the
Boulder Canyon Project Act of December 21, 1928, and is specific to the Boulder Canyon Project; and (e) The Upper Colorado
River Basin Fund was established under the authority of Section 5 of the Colorado River Storage Project Act of April
11, 1956, and is specific to the divisions of the Colorado River Storage Project.

