 

(4) 

Criminal record check.

 The administrator or designee shall conduct a criminal record 
check of all new employees, in accordance with the Indian Child Protection and Family Violence Prevention Act of 1990
(25 U.S.C. 3201), prior to employment to determine if there are 
criminal convictions that have a specific relationship to job performance. 

(5) 

Physical examination.

 All employees who have direct contact with juveniles shall 
have a pre-employment physical examination. There shall be provisions for re-examination. 

(6) 

Physical fitness.

 Juvenile detention workers shall meet BIA or comparable tribal 
standards for physical fitness. 

(7) 

Code of ethics.

 The facility shall have a written Code of Ethics that outlines the 
professional standards expected of all employees and recognizes that detention personnel may be held to a 
higher behavioral standard because of the nature of their duties. 

(8) 

Confidentiality.

 Consultants, contract personnel, employees of other public and 
private agencies and volunteers who work with juveniles shall agree to comply with the facility's policies on 
confidentiality of information. 

(d) 

Training and staff development

_(1) 

Management of training programs.

 A qualified employee, who has received training 
in training delivery methods, shall plan, coordinate and supervise employee and volunteer training programs. 
The administrator shall identify, evaluate and update job-related training needs annually. 

(2) 

Training curriculum approval.

 The Chief, Division of Law Enforcement, in 
conjunction with the Indian Police Academy, shall approve training programs and curriculum required by these 
standards. 

(3) 

Outside resources.

 The facility shall support the integration of IHS-approved and 
other training with the approval of the administrator. 

(4) 

Education and training.

 The administrator shall encourage employees to continue 
their education and training. 

(5) 

Cultural awareness.

 Orientation training shall include a component on cultural issues 
relative to the local tribe(s). 

(6) 

Juvenile detention worker orientation training.

 All new full or part-time juvenile 
detention workers shall receive the number of hours of orientation training recommended by the Chief, Division 
of Law Enforcement, during their first year of employment. Employees shall complete forty of these hours prior 
to being independently assigned to work in the facility. 

(7) 

Juvenile detention worker in-service training.

 All full or part-time juvenile detention 
workers shall receive an additional forty hours of job-relevant training each subsequent year of employment. 

(8) 

Clerical and support staff orientation training.

 All new clerical and support staff who 
have minimal juvenile contact shall receive the number of hours of orientation and training recommended by the 
Chief, Division of Law Enforcement, within their first year of employment. 

(9) 

Clerical and support staff in-service training.

 All clerical and support staff shall 
receive an additional sixteen hours of job-relevant training each subsequent year of employment. 

(10) 

Administrative and managerial staff orientation training.

 New administrative and 
managerial staff shall receive at least the number of hours of training recommended by the Chief, Division of 
Law Enforcement, within their first year of employment in this position. 

(11) 

Administrative and managerial staff in-service training.

 Administrative and 
managerial staff shall receive at least twenty-four hours of job-relevant training each subsequent year of 
employment. 

(12) 

Specialized training.

 At least one juvenile detention worker per shift shall receive 
specialized training in the management of juveniles with health and behavioral problems, including substance 
abuse and suicide. At least one juvenile detention worker per shift shall be certified as an emergency medical 
technician. All detention staff who have contact with juveniles shall receive training in advanced first aid and

CPR. The health authority shall identify health-related training needs. 

(e) 

Facility records

_(1) 

Compliance.

 The facility shall comply with 5 U.S.C. 552 (the Freedom of 
Information Act), 5 U.S.C. 552(a) (the Privacy Act of 1974), as amended, 43 CFR 2.79(a), or comparable 
tribal regulations. 

(2) 

Records management.

 The facility shall have a system for the management, dis 
semination, retrieval, storage, archiving and (when appropriate) destruction of information and detention 
records. 

(3) 

Law enforcement sensitive information.

 Law enforcement sensitive records and 
information shall be marked privileged. The administrator or designee shall keep these records in a locked cabi 
net or file room. 

(4) 

Release of information and consent.

 Juveniles shall sign a Release of Information 
Consent Form in compliance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) (the Privacy Act of 1974) as amended prior to the release of 
privileged information. The administrator or designee shall keep a copy of the signed release in the juvenile's 
record. 

(5) 

Separation of record contents.

 The administrator or designee shall identify and 
separate contents of juvenile records according to an established format which, at a minimum, shall separate 
privileged from public information and juvenile records from those of adult offenders. 

(6) 

Access to information.

 The administrator shall define clearly personnel who have 
access to juvenile records. 

(7) 

Daily report.

 The administrator or designee shall maintain a daily report and provide 
a copy of it to the appropriate court(s). The daily report shall identify: 

(i) the names of juveniles in custody, including juveniles on temporary release or 
in other locations; 

(ii) names of juveniles admitted and released; 

(iii) the legal status of each juvenile; and 

(iv) the number of days each juvenile has been in custody. 

(8) 

Identification and location record.

 The facility shall maintain a system that identifies 
all juveniles in custody and their actual physical location. 

(9) 

Custody record.

 The facility shall maintain custody records of all juveniles held at the 
facility. The record shall include only relevant and necessary information and shall be limited to: 

(i) initial admission form; 



