 


Wednesday


February 2, 1994





Part VI


Department of Health and Human Services





Food and Drug Administration





21 CFR Part 331
Antacid Drug Products for Over-the-
Counter Human Use; Amendment to Antacid Final Monograph; Proposed Rule










Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 22/Wednesday, February 2, 1994/Proposed Rules









<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>


21 CFR Part 331



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93N-0164]</RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN 0905-AA06</RINDOCK>


Antacid Drug Products for Over-the-Counter Human Use; Proposed Amendment of Antacid Final Monograph


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of proposed rulemaking.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing to amend the final monograph for over-the-counter (OTC) antacid
drug products to require specific indication, warning, and direction statements in the labeling of products containing
sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient. The new labeling would be required only for oral dosage forms intended
to be dissolved in liquid prior to administration, such as powders and effervescent granules or tablets. As proposed,
no such oral dosage forms containing sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient would be allowed to make a claim for
``relief of overindulgence in food and drink.'' The proposed warnings would alert consumers to avoid antacid drug
products containing sodium bicarbonate when the stomach is overly full from eating or drinking. The proposed directions
would inform consumers that sodium bicarbonate should be completely dissolved before drinking and that the recommended
dose should not be exceeded. FDA is issuing this notice of proposed rulemaking after receiving reports of gastric
(stomach) rupture following ingestion of sodium bicarbonate to relieve gastrointestinal distress. This proposal
is part of the ongoing review of OTC drug products conducted by FDA.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Written comments by April 4, 1994; written comments on the agency's economic impact determination by April 4, 1994.
The agency is proposing that any final rule that may issue based on this proposal become effective 6 months after the
date of publication in the 

Federal Register

.

 
</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 William E. Gilbertson, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (HFD810), Food and Drug Administration, 5600
Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, 3015945000.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 




I. Background


In the 

Federal Register

 of June 4, 1974 (39 FR 19862), FDA issued a final monograph for OTC antacid drug products that established conditions
in part 331 (21 CFR part 331) under which these drug products are generally recognized as safe and effective and not
misbranded. Sodium bicarbonate is listed as a permitted active ingredient in 331.11. Permitted indications
for products containing sodium bicarbonate are in 331.30 and include relief of the symptoms of ``heartburn,''
``sour stomach,'' and/or ``acid indigestion.'' In the 

Federal Register

 of August 31, 1982 (47 FR 38481), permitted indications for OTC antacid drug products were changed to the following:
``For the relief of'' (optional, any or all of the following:) ``heartburn,'' ``sour stomach,'' and/or ``acid indigestion''
(which may be followed by the optional statement:) ``and upset stomach associated with'' (optional, as appropriate)
``this symptom'' or ``these symptoms.'' The agency recognized that ``upset stomach'' is a general term used by consumers
to describe symptoms associated with gastric hyperacidity such as acid indigestion, heartburn, or sour stomach
(47 FR 38481 at 38482). 
In the 

Federal Register

 of November 16, 1988 (53 FR 46204), the agency published the tentative final monograph for OTC internal analgesic,
antipyretic, and antirheumatic drug products (internal analgesic tentative final monograph). This proposal permitted
combinations of acetaminophen and any monograph antacid ingredient and combinations of aspirin and any monograph
antacid ingredient (see proposed 343.20(b)(1) and (b)(3) (53 FR 46204 at 46255)). As proposed in 343.60(b)(2)
and (b)(4), indications for these combination products included concurrent antacid and internal analgesic symptoms
(53 FR 46204 at 46258). In the same issue of the 

Federal Register

 (53 FR 46190), the agency proposed amendments to the final monograph for OTC antacid drug products so that the antacid
and internal analgesic final monographs would be consistent. The agency proposed to revise 331.15(b) to include
antacid/acetaminophen and antacid/aspirin combinations as generally recognized as safe and effective. The agency
also proposed to add a new 331.60 (entitled ``

Labeling of permitted combinations of active ingredients

'') to reflect that the new combinations included in 331.15(b) should use the indications that were proposed
in 343.60(b)(2) and (b)(4) of the internal analgesic tentative final monograph. 
In the 

Federal Register

 of October 1, 1982 (47 FR 43540), FDA published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking for OTC orally administered
drug products for relief of symptoms associated with overindulgence in alcohol and food. The notice included a report
prepared by the Advisory Review Panel on OTC Miscellaneous Internal Drug Products (the Panel). The Panel had reviewed
data on drug products containing antacid, analgesic, and stimulant ingredients in various combinations and recommended
conditions for their safe and effective use. The Panel concluded that the following combinations of Category I ingredients
were safe and effective for use in relief of the symptoms of hangover: (1) Antacids and analgesics, (2) antacids and
stimulants, (3) analgesics and stimulants, and (4) antacids, analgesics, and stimulants. The Panel also classified
two ingredients, bismuth subsalicylate and sodium citrate in solution, in Category I (generally recognized as safe
and effective) for relief of symptoms of upset stomach due to overindulgence in food and drink. 
In the tentative final monograph for OTC orally administered drug products for relief of symptoms associated with
overindulgence in food and drink, published in the 

Federal Register

 of December 24, 1991 (56 FR 66742), the agency recognized that the overindulgence rulemaking significantly overlaps
other OTC drug monographs, including antacid (21 CFR part 331), stimulant (21 CFR part 340), and internal analgesic
(proposed 21 CFR part 343). To avoid unnecessary monograph duplication, the agency proposed to amend the final monographs
for OTC antacid and stimulant drug products and to amend the tentative final monograph for OTC internal analgesic
drug products to include conditions for relief of hangover symptoms. Similarly, the agency found that the Panel's
recommended claim for relief of symptoms of upset stomach due to overindulgence in food and drink overlaps claims
in the antacid monograph. Therefore, the agency proposed to amend the final monograph for OTC antacid drug products
to include appropriate conditions for relief of the symptoms of upset stomach due to overindulgence in food and drink.
In a proposed amendment of 331.30 of the antacid final monograph (56 FR 66754 at 66756, December 24, 1991), the
agency proposed to add a claim for the relief of upset stomach due to overindulgence in food and drink for all antacid
ingredients, including sodium bicarbonate. 
Likewise, in a proposed amendment to the internal analgesic tentative final monograph (56 FR 66762 at 66764, December
24, 1991), the agency proposed to include a claim for relief of symptoms of hangover and a claim for relief of symptoms
of overindulgence in food and drink for internal analgesic/antacid combinations proposed in 343.60(b)(2)
and (b)(4). At that time, the agency was not aware of the number of reports of adverse effects associated with the ingestion
of sodium bicarbonate for the relief of gastrointestinal distress. These adverse effects include the possibility
of stomach rupture and, in rare cases, death. (See discussion in section II of this document.) Based on a review of these
reports of adverse effects, the agency is proposing labeling changes for OTC antacid drug products containing sodium
bicarbonate as an active ingredient in dosage forms that are intended to be dissolved in liquid before administration.
The agency considers these labeling changes necessary for the safe use of these products. 
Elsewhere in this issue of the 

Federal Register

, the agency is also proposing to amend 343.60(b)(2) and (b)(4) of the internal analgesic tentative final monograph
to include labeling indications, warnings, and directions specifically for internal analgesic/antacid combination
products containing sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient in a dosage form intended to be dissolved in liquid
before administration. 


II. Stomach Rupture Associated With Sodium Bicarbonate 


After reviewing the literature and the case reports, the agency concludes that the ingestion of sodium bicarbonate
may, under certain circumstances, induce acute gastric dilatation (stretching of the stomach beyond normal dimensions)
and rupture.Sodium bicarbonate reacts with gastric acid to form sodium chloride, water, and carbon dioxide. A rapid
accumulation of carbon dioxide in the stomach may occur if sodium bicarbonate is ingested before it is fully dissolved
(i.e., before all the gas has evolved) (Refs. 1 through 4). In this case, an individual may not have ingested a solution
of sodium bicarbonate, but rather a suspension of sodium bicarbonate, that is, partially dissolved material with
the complete dissolution likely to occur inside the stomach. As long as the effervescent reaction of sodium bicarbonate
continues in the stomach, carbon dioxide is produced. The increased amount of carbon dioxide may induce gastric dilatation.
If the stomach is overly full, such as after ingestion of a large meal, especially with large amounts of liquids, there
is limited space for expansion and a rupture can occur (Refs. 1 through 4).


A. Summary of Literature Case Reports


In 1986, Lazebnik, Iellin, and Michowitz (Ref. 5) reviewed eight cases of rupture of the normal stomach following
ingestion of sodium bicarbonate. The cases had been reported from 1926 to 1986. Seven of these cases had previously
been reported individually in the literature (Refs. 6 through 12). Six cases involved overindulgence in food and/or
alcoholic beverages, while in two cases, no meal was ingested. However, in one case where no meal was ingested, the
subject drank an entire bottle of citrate of magnesia prior to ingestion of sodium bicarbonate. Although in most cases
the person took higher than recommended doses of the antacid, in some cases the person took smaller amounts. In some
cases, it is not clear whether the sodium bicarbonate was taken directly without mixing with liquid or was taken as
a solution or suspension. All of the people who experienced gastric rupture in 1963 or earlier died. In the more recent
cases, the people underwent repair of the ruptured stomach. Although serious complications, such as formation of
abscesses, atelectasis, and gastric fistula occurred, in all of the cases occurring after 1963, the people survived.
Brismar, Strandberg, and Wiklund (Ref. 13) reported a case of spontaneous stomach rupture after ingestion of sodium
bicarbonate that took place in Sweden in 1986. A 43-year-old male consumed a large meal consisting of new potatoes,
herring pickled in vinegar, and aerated water. At the end of this meal, the man ingested approximately 30 grams (g)
of sodium bicarbonate. (The report does not describe the method of administration.) Immediately afterwards he experienced
a rapidly increasing sensation of filling, with abdominal distention, very severe abdominal pain, and a sensation
that something had ``burst'' in his abdomen. He was transported to the hospital and was found to have a 5-centimeter
(cm)-long rupture on the posterior aspect of his stomach close to the lesser curvature. The authors state that at the
recommended dose of sodium bicarbonate, corresponding to approximately 1.8 g, only 20 milliliters (mL) of gas is
released within 3 minutes. However, if 8.4 g of sodium bicarbonate is added to the same volume of gastric juice (1,000
mL with a concentration of 100 milliequivalents (meq) per liter (L)), 470 mL of gas will be produced. The ingestion
of 30 g of sodium bicarbonate resulted in enormous gas development with resultant stomach rupture.
In 1989, Downs and Stonebridge (Ref. 14) reported a case of stomach rupture in Scotland in which a 70-year-old man took
2 teaspoons (12 g) of sodium bicarbonate in water following a large meal. His abdomen rapidly distended, becoming
tense and uncomfortable. He experienced increasing difficulty in breathing and could neither vomit nor belch. This
was followed by a severe, sudden epigastric pain, as though ``something had burst.'' A 6-cm tear on the anterior surface
of the lesser curvature of the stomach had occurred. The authors estimated that the approximate volume of gas produced
from the chemical reaction of 12 g of sodium bicarbonate is 3.4 L, approaching the 4 L estimate necessary to cause stomach
rupture. 


B. Summary of Case Reports


The agency has identified a total of 29 cases of adverse effects associated with the ingestion of sodium bicarbonate
for the relief of gastrointestinal distress. These cases were obtained from a search of the FDA Spontaneous Reporting
System (SRS), a literature review, and voluntary submissions from a manufacturer covering the period from 1926 to
May 1993. Included in this total are 21 cases of stomach rupture. Death occurred in five of these cases. All of these
case reports are on file in the Dockets Management Branch (Refs. 15 and 16). The agency's summary of these case reports
follows.
In August 1979 a 52-year-old male ate a large meal and consumed several alcoholic beverages. Shortly after going to
bed, he awakened with indigestion. He then mixed a teaspoon of baking soda with a small amount of water, drank the mixture,
and less than a minute later collapsed in agony because of sudden onset of severe abdominal pain. An exploratory laparotomy
revealed a 6-cm tear in the stomach extending from the gastroesophageal junction down the lesser curvature of the
stomach. 
In the second case report (June 1981), a 31-year-old male ingested a large Mexican meal, felt uncomfortable, put one
dosage (amount unknown) of baking soda in a glass with water, and quickly drank the mixture. He immediately experienced
severe, intense abdominal pain, could neither vomit nor belch, and his abdomen became markedly distended. Exploratory
surgery revealed a 5-cm linear tear along the lesser curvature of the stomach. 
The third case report (April 1982) involved a 56-year-old female who had been on a liquid protein diet for 1 month prior
to her hospitalization. She ate a large dinner accompanied by champagne and bicarbonate of soda. No information was
provided on the amount of the dose or how it was taken. She was admitted to the hospital with acute abdominal pain, and
exploratory laparotomy revealed a 12-cm tear extending from the distal esophagus onto the posterior aspect of the
lesser curvature of the stomach. The size of the gastric tear was so big that it allowed the extrusion of gastric contents
into the peritoneal cavity. It is conceivable that in this case the patient's stomach had been modified and even became
atrophic because of the liquid diet and, thereby, sustained more damage as a consequence of the sodium bicarbonate-induced
distention. 
The fourth case report (December 1983) involved a 37-year-old male who developed progressive abdominal pain after
dinner. He drank soda with some sodium bicarbonate and then experienced severe chest and back pain, and shock. At laparotomy,
a tear of the stomach just below the gastroesophageal juncture was found. In this case, the ingestion of soda and sodium
bicarbonate may have aggravated the situation because soda is very acidic and produces carbon dioxide in addition
to that produced by the sodium bicarbonate. 
The fifth case report (October 1984) involved a 42-year-old male with a history of slight burning epigastric pain
an hour following heavy meals and exacerbated by strong foods such as onions, cabbages, and spicy foods. On the night
of his admission to the hospital, he had eaten a large meal of hot, spiced chili and then promptly ingested two beers.
He then ingested bicarbonate of soda and experienced a spontaneous onset of abdominal pain. An exploratory laparotomy
revealed a perforation along the lesser curvature of the stomach. Initially, this case appeared to be one of a perforated
gastric or duodenal ulcer, but during the ensuing operation and under subsequent microscopic examination, no ulcer
was found. 
The sixth case report (December 1988) describes a 23-year-old male who had increasingly severe abdominal pain with
subsequent vomiting after eating a spaghetti dinner. At some time the subject took sodium bicarbonate, but there
was no information on how much was ingested, whether it was completely dissolved, how much water was taken with it,
or exactly when it was taken. However, on exploratory laparotomy, a 6- to 7-cm linear tear in the lesser curvature of
the stomach was found. 
The seventh report (June 1989) involved a 37-year-old male who experienced heartburn, for which he took a bismuth
subsalicylate-containing product. He then developed severe diffuse abdominal pain. On the trip to the emergency
room, he stated that he had eaten a lot of food and had taken some baking soda when the pain became very severe. However,
that statement is the only indication in the medical records that the subject ingested sodium bicarbonate prior to
his injury. Thus, there is some question whether sodium bicarbonate ingestion actually occurred in this case.
The eighth case report (July 1991) involved a 39-year-old male with no previous history of gastrointestinal disease.
He had a large Mexican meal and developed epigastric distress for which he took some sodium bicarbonate. When his sleep
was interrupted by continuing epigastric distress, he arose and took at least 2 tablespoons of sodium bicarbonate.
(This amount is higher than the recommended dose.) Within 2 minutes, he experienced an acute onset of severe epigastric
pain. An exploratory laparotomy revealed a 4-cm perforation on the lesser curvature of the stomach. Neither the surgeon
nor the pathologist could definitely document the presence of an ulcer. However, the patient did have a moderate narrowing
of the pylorus due to mucosal scarring. Because this condition interfered with gastric emptying, it may have contributed
to the reported problem.


C. Additional Data 


In December 1990, a probability sample survey was conducted to determine the number of doses of sodium bicarbonate
taken by American adults annually to settle an upset stomach (Ref. 17). In this survey, 20 percent of the U.S. adult
population 18 years of age and older answered affirmatively when asked if they ever use baking soda or bicarbonate
of soda to help settle an upset stomach. Based on an estimated adult population of 186.4 million, the survey indicated
that 37.3 

#

 6.5 million adults used sodium bicarbonate for an upset stomach. The average (mean) frequency with which these people
use bicarbonate is 19.7 times during a 1-year period, which indicates that 734.8 million doses of sodium bicarbonate
are taken by American adults annually (S.D. 235.8 million). Further statistical analysis revealed that the median
dose frequency was five times per year per user. 
An independent estimate of doses of sodium bicarbonate ingested per year calculated from the weight of consumer baking
soda sold each year and the amount used by consumers for indigestion, as gauged by consumer surveys, was also provided
to the agency (Ref. 18). Although not identical, the number of doses estimated, based on this information, is within
the range of the survey discussed above. Regardless of the method of calculation used, the agency concludes that the
number of doses-per-year of sodium bicarbonate is very large. 
The agency also considers the 21 identified cases of gastric rupture that have occurred in association with sodium
bicarbonate to be a very serious but uncommon event. The agency is proposing changes in the labeling of OTC drug products
containing sodium bicarbonate so that such products can be used safely and the incidence of untoward effects reduced
to the lowest possible levels.


III. Additional Agency Concerns


In addition to the serious adverse reactions described above, the agency has identified several other problems that
could occur when sodium bicarbonate is used as an OTC antacid. These include systemic metabolic alkalosis, occurrence
of milk-alkali syndrome, increased sodium load for certain susceptible individuals, and the overall risk-to-benefit
ratio of sodium bicarbonate as an OTC antacid drug product. 
Sodium bicarbonate is readily absorbed and may produce systemic metabolic alkalosis and/or sodium overload, particularly
if taken in large doses or for a prolonged period of time. Rapid alkalization may precipitate tetany in people having
hypocalcemia and cause cardiotoxicity and paralysis in people having hypokalemia (Refs. 1, 2, 3, and 19 through 24).
These occurrences can be life-threatening medical emergencies. The agency is aware of one death attributed to complications
resulting from severe metabolic alkalosis caused by ingestion of sodium bicarbonate (Ref. 19). In this case, a 45-year-old
man was admitted to an emergency room in alert and stable condition but complaining of burning pain in his arms and legs.
He admitted taking baking soda for epigastric pain over the past several days. Although the total amount consumed
was not ascertained, the man had a half empty 8-ounce box of baking soda in his pocket. Shortly after admission, the
man had a sudden, unexpected cardiopulmonary arrest. During this period, no medications were given (including sodium
bicarbonate). A diagnosis of severe metabolic alkalosis was made after laboratory results revealed a primary elevation
in serum bicarbonate concentration. The man remained comatose and died (due to infectious complications) 14 days
after admission. 
Large doses or chronic administration of sodium bicarbonate with milk or calcium may lead to an increase in calcium
absorption and may precipitate the milk-alkali syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by hypercalcemia, reduced
secretion of parathyroid hormone, retention of phosphate, precipitation of calcium salts in the kidney, alkalosis,
and renal insufficiency or failure. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, headache, mental confusion, and anorexia.
This may be particularly important in pregnancy where milk or calcium intake is emphasized (Refs. 1, 2, 3, and 25).

Each g of sodium bicarbonate contains 12 meq of sodium. This large quantity may cause problems for people who are pregnant,
on low-salt diets, receiving diuretics, or have a tendency toward fluid overload (Ref. 2). Even moderate amounts
of sodium bicarbonate may expand plasma volume, increase blood pressure, and lead to edema (Ref. 1). The final monograph
for OTC antacid drug products limits the daily dosage for sodium to 200 meq for persons up to 60 years old and to 100 meq
for persons 60 years or older. Limitations for bicarbonate ion are also 200 meq for persons up to 60 years old and 100
meq for persons 60 years or older. (See 331.11(b) and (k)(1).) 
Because of the potential severity of the adverse effects of sodium bicarbonate, the agency is concerned that the risk
to consumers from ingestion of sodium bicarbonate in antacid doses may outweigh the benefit. There are many other
OTC antacid ingredients currently available that do not pose the possibility of such serious side effects. Based
on the concerns discussed above, the agency is considering the need for additional changes and/or additions to the
indications and/or warnings provided for sodium bicarbonate in the antacid monograph (21 CFR part 331). 
For example, the agency has concerns how the presently allowed portion of the indications in 331.30(b) that
mentions ``upset stomach'' may be confusing to consumers in light of the new warning being proposed in this document.
The agency questions whether consumers will be able to recognize that sodium bicarbonate should not be used to relieve
an ``upset stomach'' caused by excessive eating or drinking. The agency invites specific comment on how the indications
for sodium bicarbonate antacid products might be changed and on any of the other issues discussed above or any additional
issues that relate to the safe and effective use of sodium bicarbonate as an OTC antacid drug product. For example,
the agency notes that a major manufacturer of baking soda currently voluntarily labels its product with warnings
similar to those proposed in this document (Ref. 26).


References


(1) Gennaro, A., editor, ``Remington's 
Pharmaceutical Sciences,'' 18th ed., Mack 
Publishing Co., Easton, PA, pp. 777778 and 
819820, 1990.
(2) Garnett, W. R., ``Antacid Products''
in ``Handbook of Nonprescription Drugs,''
9th ed., American Pharmaceutical Association, Washington, p. 257, 1990. 
(3) Brunton, L. L., ``Agents for Control 
of Gastric Acidity and Treatment of Peptic 
Ulcers'' in ``The Pharmacological Basis of 
Therapeutics,'' 8th ed., edited by 
L. S. Goodman and A. G. Gilman, Pergamon
Press Co., Inc., New York, pp. 904909, 1990. 
 (4) Fordtran, J. S. et al., ``Gas 
Production After Reaction of Sodium 
Bicarbonate and Hydrochloric Acid,'' 


Gastroenterology

, 87:10141021, 1987. 
(5) Lazebnik, N., A. Iellin, and 
M. Michowitz, ``Spontaneous Rupture of the 
Normal Stomach After Sodium Bicarbonate 
Ingestion,'' 

Journal of Clinical 
Gastroenterology

, 8(4):454456, 1986. 
(6) Murdfield, P., ``Rupture of the 
Stomach from Sodium Bicarbonate,'' 

Journal of 
the American Medical Association

, 87:1692 
1693, 1926. 
(7) Lemmon, W. T., and G. W. Paschal, 
``Rupture of the Stomach Following Ingestion of 
Sodium Bicarbonate,'' 

Annals of Surgery

, 114: 
9971003, 1941. 
(8) Burket, D. G., ``Spontaneous Rupture 
of the Stomach. Report of a Case,'' 

Journal 
of the American Medical Association

, 139:27 
28, 1949. 
(9) Kregel, L. A., ``Spontaneous Rupture 
of the Stomach,'' 

American Journal of Surgery

, 
21:505507, 1955.
(10) Bruno, M. S., W. R. Grier, and 
W. B. Ober, ``Spontaneous Laceration and Rupture 
of the Stomach,'' 

Archives of Internal Medicine

, 
112:574583, 1963.
(11) Zer, M. et al., ``Spontaneous 
Rupture of the Stomach Following Ingestion 
of Sodium Bicarbonate,'' 

Archives of Surgery

,
101:532533, 1970.
(12) Mastrangelo, M. R., and E. W. Moore,
``Spontaneous Rupture of the Stomach in a 
Healthy Adult Man After Sodium Bicarbonate 
Ingestion,'' 

Annals of Internal Medicine

, 101:
649650, 1984.
(13) Brismar, B., A. Strandberg, and 
B. Wiklund, ``Stomach Rupture Following 
Ingestion of Sodium Bicarbonate,'' 

Acta 
Chirurgica Scandinavica

, 530:9799, 1986.
(14) Downs, N. M., and P. A. Stonebridge,
``Gastric Rupture Due to Excessive Sodium
Bicarbonate Ingestion,'' 

Scottish Medical 
Journal

, 34:534535, 1989.
(15) Medical records submitted by 
Church  Dwight Co., Inc., included in OTC 
Vol. 01AM2, Docket No. 93N0164, Dockets 
Management Branch.
(16) Memorandum from M. Chen, FDA, to 
W. Gilbertson, FDA, dated December 1, 1991, 
in OTC Vol. 01AM2, Docket No. 93N0164, 
Dockets Management Branch. 
(17) Survey Center, Inc., ``Use of Soda 
Bicarbonate to Settle an Upset Stomach,'' 
draft of unpublished consumer survey in OTC 
Vol. 01AM2, Docket No. 93N0164, Dockets 
Management Branch. 
(18) Letter from W. Sorenson, Church 
 Dwight Co., Inc., to H. Gallo-Torres, FDA, 
dated April 23, 1992, copy included in OTC 
Vol. 01AM2, Docket No. 93N0164, Dockets 
Management Branch. 
(19) Mennen, M., and C. Slovis, ``Severe 
Metabolic Alkalosis in the Emergency 
Department,'' 

Annals of Emergency Medicine

, 
17:4:354357, 1988.
(20) Brown, A. L., S. Whaley, and 
W. Arnold, ``Acute Bicarbonate Intoxication 
From a Folk Remedy,'' 

American Journal of 
Diseases of Children

, 135:965, 1981. 
 (21) Robertson, W. O., ``Baking Soda 
(NaHCO3) Poisoning,'' 

Veterinary and Human 
Toxicology

, 30(2):164165, 1988.
 (22) Wechsler, D., L. Ibsen, and 
P. Fosarelli, ``Apparent Proteinuria as a 
Consequence of Sodium Bicarbonate Ingestion,''


Pediatrics

, 86(2):318319, 1990.
(23) Linford, S. M., and H. D. James, 
``Sodium Bicarbonate Abuse: A Case Report,''


British Journal of Psychiatry

, 149:502503, 
1986. 
(24) ``Drug Evaluations,'' 6th ed., 
American Medical Association, Chicago, p. 
833, 1986.
(25) ``Drug Evaluations Subscription,''
Vol. 2, American Medical Association, Chicago, 
p.118, Spring 1990.
(26) Copy of labeling for Arm  Hammer 
Baking Soda in OTC Vol. 01AM2, Docket No. 
93N0164, Dockets Management Branch. 


IV. The Agency's Proposal for Revised Labeling for Sodium 
Bicarbonate in OTC Antacid Drug Products 


The case reports have shown that the ingestion of sodium bicarbonate may cause gastric dilatation and rupture of the
stomach, particularly if the stomach is overly full from food or drink. The reports indicate that this problem occurs
with dosage forms intended to be dissolved in liquid before administration, e.g., powders or effervescent granules
or tablets. In some cases, the person drank a solution or suspension of sodium bicarbonate, while in other cases the
person ingested the sodium bicarbonate in a dry form. The agency is aware of OTC antacid drug products in chewable tablet
dosage form, in which sodium bicarbonate is an inactive ingredient. However, the agency is not aware of any reports
of gastric dilatation and stomach rupture resulting from ingestion of these products. Accordingly, the agency is
proposing to amend 331.30 to include specific indication, warning, and direction statements for all OTC antacid
drug products containing sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient in dosage forms intended to be dissolved in liquid
before administration. Separate indications are proposed in 
331.30(b) for products that either do or do not contain sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient intended
to be dissolved in liquid before administration. Antacid products containing sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient
will not be allowed to include a claim for relief of overindulgence in food and drink. In addition, the agency is proposing
that these sodium bicarbonate products bear new warnings and directions. 
Because of the potential serious health risk involved, the agency is proposing that the new warnings appear after
the header ``STOMACH WARNING.'' Portions of the new warnings must appear in bold print and in capital letters. The
proposed warnings read as follows:


``To avoid serious injury, do not take until'' (insert product dosage form, e.g., ``tablet,'' ``powder'') ``is completely
dissolved. It is very important not to take this product when overly full from food or drink. [first two sentences in
boldface type and all capital letters] Consult a doctor if severe stomach pain occurs after taking this product.''


Additional directions, proposed to appear after the header ``DIRECTIONS,'' read as follows: 


``Dissolve completely in water'' [

For effervescent dosage forms add

: ``and be sure all bubbling has stopped''] ``before drinking. Do not exceed recommended dose. [second sentence in
boldface type and all capital letters] See Warnings.''


The agency has examined the economic consequences of this proposed rulemaking and has determined that it does not
require either a regulatory impact analysis, as specified in Executive Order 12866, or a regulatory flexibility
analysis, as defined in the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96-354). This rulemaking for OTC antacid drug products
containing sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient is not expected to have an impact on small businesses. The final
rule will impose direct one-time costs associated with changing product labels, but that cost is estimated to be less
than $1 million. Also, there appears to be a limited number of products involved. Further, a major manufacturer of
baking soda currently voluntarily labels its product with statements similar to those proposed in this amendment.
Manufacturers will have 6 months after the date of publication of the final rule in which to implement this relabeling.
However, manufacturers of OTC antacid drug products are encouraged to voluntarily implement this labeling as of
the date of publication of this proposal, subject to the possibility that FDA may change the wording as a result of comments
filed in response to this proposal. Because FDA is encouraging the proposed labeling changes to be used on a voluntary
basis at this time, the agency advises that manufacturers will be given ample time after publication of a final rule
to use up any labeling implemented in conformance with this proposal. The impact of the proposed rule, if implemented,
appears to be minimal. Therefore, the agency concludes that the proposed rule is not a major rule as defined in Executive
Order 12866. Further, the agency certifies that this proposed rule, if implemented, will not have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities as defined in the Regulatory Flexibility Act. 

The agency invites public comment regarding any substantial or significant economic impact that this rulemaking
would have on OTC antacid drug products. Types of impact may include, but are not limited to, costs associated with
relabeling or repackaging. 
Comments regarding the impact of this rulemaking on OTC antacid drug products should be accompanied by appropriate
documentation. The agency will evaluate any comments and supporting data that are received and will reassess the
economic impact of this rulemaking in the preamble to the final rule.
The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24(c)(6) that this action is of a type that does not individually or cumulatively
have a significant effect on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessment nor an environmental
impact statement is required.



Interested persons may, on or before April 4, 1994, submit written comments on the proposed regulation and the agency's
economic impact determination to the Dockets Management Branch (address above). Three copies of all comments are
to be submitted, except that individuals may submit one copy. Comments should be identified with the docket number
found in brackets in the heading of this document and may be accompanied by a supporting memorandum or brief. Received
comments may be seen in the office above between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 331


Labeling, Over-the-counter drugs.



Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, it is proposed that 21 CFR part 331 be amended as follows:


PART 331_ANTACID PRODUCTS FOR OVER-THE-COUNTER (OTC) HUMAN USE 



1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 331 continues to read as follows:





Authority:

 Secs. 201, 501, 502, 503, 505, 510, 701 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 351, 352, 353, 355,
360, 371).


2. Section 331.30 is amended by revising paragraph (b), and by adding new paragraphs (c)(8), (e)(1), and (e)(2) to
read as follows:



331.30 

 Labeling of antacid products.


* * * * *


(b) 

 Indications

. The labeling of the product states under the heading ``Indications,'' any of the phrases listed in this paragraph,
as appropriate. Other truthful and nonmisleading statements, describing only the indications for use that have
been established and listed in this paragraph, may also be used, as provided in 330.1(c)(2) of this chapter,
subject to the provisions of section 502 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) relating to misbranding
and the prohibition in section 301(d) of the act against the introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate
commerce of unapproved new drugs in violation of section 505(a) of the act. 
(1) 

For products containing active ingredients identified in 331.11(a)

 

through (j)

, 

(k)(2)

, 

(l)

, and 

(m)

. ``For the relief of'' (select any or all of the following: ``heartburn,'' ``sour stomach,'' and/or ``acid indigestion'')
which may be followed by the statement: ``and upset stomach associated with'' (select one or more of the following,
as appropriate: ``this symptom,'' ``these symptoms,'' or ``overindulgence in food and drink.'')) 
(2) 

For products containing sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient in a dosage form intended to be dissolved in liquid
before administration identified in 331.11(k)(1)

. ``For the relief of'' (select any or all of the following: ``heartburn,'' ``sour stomach,'' and/or ``acid indigestion'')
(which may be followed by the statement: ``and upset stomach associated with'' (select one of the following, as appropriate:
``this symptom'' or ``these symptoms''.)) These products may not bear any claims that relate to use for ``overindulgence
in food and drink.''
(c) * * *
(8) For products containing sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient in a dosage form intended to be dissolved in
liquid before administration identified in 331.11(k)(1), portions of the warning statements must appear
in bold print and in capital letters as follows: ``STOMACH WARNING: To avoid serious injury, do not take until'' (insert
product dosage form, e.g., ``tablet,'' ``powder'') ``is completely dissolved. It is very important not to take this
product when overly full from food or drink. [first two sentences in bold print and all capital letters] Consult a doctor
if severe stomach pain occurs after taking this product.''


* * * * *


(e) * * *
(1) The labeling for products containing sodium bicarbonate as an active ingredient in a dosage form intended to be
dissolved in liquid before administration identified in 331.11(k)(1) contains the following additional
directions: ``Dissolve completely in water'' [

For effervescent dosage forms add

: ``and be sure bubbling has stopped''] ``before drinking. Do not exceed recommended dose. [second sentence in bold
print and all capital letters] See Warnings.''
(2) [Reserved]


* * * * *




Dated: November 3, 1993.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 942264 Filed 2194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>



