 

Section 210.51 


Congress amended 19 U.S.C. 1337(b) to eliminate the time limit for completing an investigation, but directed that
the Commission complete an investigation and make its determination ``at the earliest practicable time.'' Section
210.51(a) is revised to reflect this change and to implement the requirement that the Commission, within 45 days after
an investigation is instituted, set a target date for completion of the investigation. The rule allows the administrative
law judge to set (and modify) the target date in a final order not subject to review as long as the target date does not
exceed 15 months from the date of institution. Target dates exceeding 15 months are set in initial determinations,
reviewable by the Commission. The Commission expects that most investigations will be concluded within the traditional
time frame of 12 months or less. Deadlines for various activities pertaining to section 337 investigations have been
retained in the rules unless specifically amended herein. 
Paragraph (c) is revised to reflect the elimination of the Commission's authority to suspend an investigation except
as set forth in 210.23. 


Subpart H_Temporary Relief 


Section 210.52 


Paragraph (c) is revised to indicate that the Commission will be guided by Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
in determining whether to require a bond as a prerequisite to the issuance of temporary relief, as mandated by the legislative
history of the statutory amendments. H.R. Rep. No. 103826, 103d Cong., 2d Sess. 142 (1994). The factors relied
upon by the Commission in its past practice are deleted from paragraphs (c) and (e), and paragraph (f) is redesignated
as (e). 


Section 210.70 


Paragraph (a) is revised to reflect the statutory change authorizing forfeiture of the complainant's temporary
relief bond to the respondent and to authorize the complainant to file a motion for the return of its bond when appropriate.

Paragraph (c) is revised to indicate that the Commission will be guided by practice under Rule 65 of the Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure in determining whether to require a bond as a prerequisite to the issuance of temporary relief,
as mandated by the legislative history of the statutory amendments. H.R. Rep. No. 103826, 103d Cong., 2d Sess.
142 (1994). ``Practice under Rule 65'' includes all sources of authority pertaining to Rule 65 that are generally
relied on in the practice of law, including (but not limited to) judicial decisions and notes of the advisory committee
on rules. Treatises and commentary also may be considered. 
Because forfeiture of a bond posted by a complainant now will be to the respondent rather than the government, the provision
in the prior rule allowing a motion for forfeiture to be made by the Commission investigative attorney or by the Commission
is deleted. Consistent with practice under Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, a respondent seeking forfeiture
would be required to show the costs and damages incurred as a result of the imposition of temporary relief. The respondent
itself is in the best position to make this showing and should bear the responsibility of filing a motion for forfeiture
of a bond when appropriate. 
The former provision precluding a stay of forfeiture proceedings pending appeal of the Commission's determination
on violation also is deleted in view of the statutory change. A stay may or may not be appropriate depending on the facts
of each case, including the ability of a respondent to repay an amount forfeited to it in the event of a reversal on appeal.



List of Subjects in 19 CFR Part 210 


Administrative practice and procedure, Business and industry, Customs duties and inspection, Imports, Investigations.




For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 19 CFR Part 210 is amended as set forth below. 




