 

The proposed rule changes are in conformity with the requirements of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 601
et seq., Executive Order 12612, and the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq. This proposed rule has
been determined to be not significant for the purposes of E.O. 12866.

The Assistant General Counsel for Legislation and Regulation of the Department of Commerce has certified to the Chief
Counsel for Advocacy, Small Business Administration, that the proposed rule changes will not have a significant
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities (Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 605(b)). The principal
impact of these changes is to provide a procedure for domestic applicants to quickly and inexpensively file a provisional
application. The filing date of the provisional application will not be used to measure the term of a patent granted
on an application which claims the earlier filing date of the provisional application.

The Patent and Trademark Office has also determined that this notice has no Federalism implications affecting the
relationship between the National Government and the States as outlined in E.O. 12612.

These proposed rules contain collections of information subject to the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction
Act (Act). The provisional application has been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control numbers
06510031 and 06510032. The cover sheet is necessary to expedite the processing of a provisional application
and improve quality. Public reporting burden for the collection of information on the cover sheet is estimated to
average 12 minutes per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments
regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for
reducing the burden to the Office of Assistance Quality and Enhancement Division, Patent and Trademark Office Washington,
DC 20231, and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC
20503.

Notice is hereby given that pursuant to the authority granted to the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks by 35 U.S.C.
6, the Patent and Trademark Office proposes to amend Title 37 of the Code of Federal Regulations as set forth below.



List of Subjects



37 CFR Part 1



Administrative practice and procedure, Courts, Freedom of Information, Inventions and patents, Reporting and
record keeping requirements, Small businesses.



37 CFR Part 3



Administrative practice and procedure, Inventions and patents, Reporting and record keeping requirements.

For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 37 CFR parts 1 and 3 are proposed to be amended as follows, with removals (other
than 1.60 which is proposed to be removed and reserved) indicated by brackets ([]) and additions by arrows (>&lt;):



PART 1_RULES OF PRACTICE IN PATENT CASES



1. The authority citation for 37 CFR part 1 would continue to read as follows:






Authority:

 35 U.S.C. 6 unless otherwise noted.




2. Section 1.1 is proposed to be amended by adding new paragraph (i) to read as follows:



1.1



All communications to be addressed to Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks.



* * * * *



>(i) The filing of all provisional applications and any communications relating thereto should be additionally marked
``Box Provisional Patent Application.''&lt;



* * * * *



3. Section 1.9 is proposed to be amended by revising paragraph (a) to read as follows:



1.9



Definitions



(a)>(1)&lt;A national application as used in this chapter means a U.S. national application for patent which was either
filed in the Office under 35 U.S.C. 111 or which resulted from an international application after compliance with
35 U.S.C. 371.

>(2) A provisional application as used in this chapter means a U.S. national application for patent filed in the Office
under 35 U.S.C. 111(b).&lt;



* * * * *

