 

4. 

Similar terms.

 An advertisement may not use a term such as ``fees waived'' if a maintenance or activity fee may be imposed because it
is similar to the terms ``free'' or ``no cost.'' 

5. 

Specific account services.

 Institutions may advertise a specific account service or feature as free as long as no fee is imposed for that service
or feature. For example, institutions that provide free access to their ATMs could advertise that fact. 

6. 

Free for limited time.

 If an account or a specific account service is free only for a limited period of time_for example, for one year following
the account opening_the account or service may be advertised as free as long as the time period is stated. 

7. 

Conditions not related to deposit accounts.

 Institutions may advertise accounts as ``free'' for consumers that meet conditions not related to deposit accounts
such as age. For example, institutions may advertise a NOW account as ``free for persons over 65 years old,'' even though
a maintenance or activity fee may be assessed on accounts held by consumers that are 65 or younger. 



(b) Permissible Rates 



1. 

Tiered-rate accounts.

 An advertisement for a tiered-rate account that states an annual percentage yield must also state the annual percentage
yield for each tier, along with corresponding minimum balance requirements. Any interest rates stated must appear
in conjunction with the annual percentage yields for the applicable tier. 

2. 

Stepped-rate accounts.

 An advertisement that states an interest rate for a stepped-rate account must state each interest rate and the time
period each rate is in effect. 

3. 

Representative examples.

 An advertisement that states an annual percentage yield for a type of account (such as a time account) need not state
the annual percentage yield applicable to every variation offered by the institution. For example, if rates vary
depending on the amount of the initial deposit and term of a time account, institutions need not list each balance level
and term offered. Instead, the advertisement may: 

&bull;Provide a representative example of the annual percentage yields offered, clearly described as such. For
example, if an institution offers a $25 bonus on all time accounts and the annual percentage yield will vary depending
on the term selected, the institution may provide a disclosure of the annual percentage yield as follows: ``For example,
our 6-month certificate of deposit currently pays a 3.15% annual percentage yield.'' 

&bull;Indicate that various rates are available, such as by stating short-term and longer-term maturities along
with the applicable annual percentage yields: ``We offer certificates of deposit with annual percentage yields
that depend on the maturity you choose. For example, our one-month CD earns a 2.75% APY. Or, earn a 5.25% APY for a three-year
CD.'' 



(c) When Additional Disclosures Are Required 



1. 

Trigger terms.

 Disclosures are triggered by statements such as ``We will pay a bonus of 1% over our current rate for one-year certificates
of deposit opened before April 15, 1995.'' The following are examples of information stated in advertisements that
are not ``trigger'' terms: 

&bull;``One, three, and five year CDs available'' 

&bull;``Bonus rates available'' 



(c)(2) Time Annual Percentage Yield Is Offered 



1. 

Specified recent date.

 If an advertisement discloses an annual percentage yield as of a specified date, that date must be recent in relation
to the publication or broadcast frequency of the media used. For example, the printing date of a brochure printed once
for a deposit account promotion that will be in effect for six months would be considered ``recent,'' even though rates
change during the six-month period. Rates published in a daily newspaper or on television must be a rate offered shortly
before (or on) the date the rates are published or broadcast. 



(c)(5) Effect of Fees 



1. 

Scope.

 This requirement applies only to maintenance or activity fees as described in paragraph 8(a). 



(c)(6) Features of Time Accounts 

(c)(6)(i) Time Requirements 



1. 

Club accounts.

 If the maturity date of a club account is set but the term may vary depending on when the account is opened, institutions
may use a phrase such as: ``The term of the account varies depending on when the account is opened. However, the maturity
date is November 15.'' 



(c)(6)(ii) Early Withdrawal Penalties 



1. 

Discretionary penalties.

 Institutions that impose early withdrawal penalties on a case-by-case basis may disclose that they ``may'' (rather
than ``will'') impose a penalty if that accurately describes the account terms. 



(d) Bonuses 



1. 

General reference to ``bonus.''

 General statements such as ``bonus checking'' or ``get a bonus when you open a checking account'' do not trigger the
bonus disclosures. 



(e) Exemption for Certain Advertisements 

(e)(1) Certain Media 

(e)(1)(iii) 



1. 

Tiered-rate accounts.

 Solicitations for tiered-rate accounts made through telephone response machines must provide all annual percentage
yields and the balance requirements applicable to each tier. 



(e)(2) Indoor Signs 

(e)(2)(i) 



1. 

General.

 Indoor signs include advertisements displayed on computer screens, banners, preprinted posters, and chalk or peg
boards. Any advertisement inside the premises that can be retained by a consumer (such as a brochure or a printout from
a computer) is not an indoor sign. 




