 

(ii) The amount and innovativeness, complexity, and responsiveness of 
the savings association's qualified investments, as defined in 563e.23 of this part; and 
(iii) The extent and availability of the savings association's services, 
including, as appropriate, the accessibility of retail delivery systems and the extent and innovativeness of community
development services, as defined in 
563e.24 of this part. 
(g) 

Plan amendment.

 During the term of a plan, the savings association may petition the OTS to approve an amendment to the plan on grounds
that a material change in circumstances has made the plan no longer appropriate. Any amendment proposed shall be developed
in accordance with the public participation requirements of paragraph (c) of this section. 
(h) 

Strategic plan assessment. 

The OTS shall approve the goals and 
assess performance under a strategic plan as provided for in Appendix A of this part. 


563e.28 

Assigned ratings. 



(a) 

Ratings in general.

 Subject to paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section, the OTS shall assign to a savings association a rating of ``outstanding,''
``satisfactory,'' ``needs to improve,'' or ``substantial noncompliance'' based on the savings association's
performance under the lending, investment and service tests, the community development test, the small savings
association assessment standards, or an approved strategic plan, as applicable. 
(b) 

Lending, investment, and service tests. 

The OTS shall assign a 
rating for a savings association assessed under the lending, investment, and 
service tests in accordance with the procedures provided in Appendix A of this 
part and the following principles: 
(1) A savings association's rating on the lending test shall be weighed so 
as to count for at least 50 percent of its assigned rating; 
(2) A savings association that receives an ``outstanding'' rating on the 
lending test shall receive an assigned rating of at least ``satisfactory''; 
(3) A savings association that receives an ``outstanding'' rating on the 
lending test and an ``outstanding'' rating on either the service test or the 
investment test shall receive an assigned rating of ``outstanding''; 
 





