 







<USDEPT>OFFICE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>National Bioethics Advisory Commission Proposed Charter</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP).



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Request for Comments.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This notice describes a proposal to establish a National Bioethics Advisory Commission within the Executive Branch.
The Commission would be charged to consider issues of bioethics arising from research on human biology and behavior,
and the applications of that research.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments must be received on or before October 11, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Submit written comments by mail to: Bioethics Docket, Office of Science and Technology Policy, Room 436, OEOB, Washington,
D.C. 20500, or by FAX to: 2024566027.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



By mail: Rachel E. Levinson, Assistant Director for Life Sciences, Office of Science and Technology Policy, Room
436, OEOB, Washington, D.C. 20500. Office telephone number: 2024566137.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

OSTP proposes that a standing advisory body be established within the Executive Branch to consider issues of bioethics
arising from research on human biology and behavior, and the applications of that research. This action would fulfill
a need recognized by all branches of the Federal government. For example, a report by the House of Representatives
Committee on Government Operations recommended establishment of an advisory committee to examine the ethical,
legal and social implications of the Human Genome Project. The proposed advisory body would expand the work of the
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research; the Department
of Health, Education and Welfare's Ethics Advisory Board; and the President's Commission for the Study of Ethics
Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research.







OSTP seeks comments on a draft charter for a proposed National Bioethics Advisory Commission (NBAC). The NBAC would
report to the President's National Science and Technology Council (NSTC). This arrangement will facilitate access
to the deliberations and recommendations of the NBAC for the Executive Branch agencies most heavily invested in biological
and behavioral research.





The Commission would be asked to identify and develop broad overarching principles to govern the ethical conduct
of biological and behavioral research, and the applications of that research. The proposed NBAC would not have responsibility
for the review and approval of individual projects.




The draft charter seeks to strike a balance between defining the NBAC's agenda so as to fulfill governmental needs,
and allowing the Commission sufficient flexibility to advise the government on issues this group of experts and stakeholders
believe should be addressed.

The charter specifies two prospective areas of inquiry, issues in the management and use of genetic information and
protection of the rights and welfare of research subjects. Discrete issues that full under these two broad topics
include: issues of genetic privacy, screening for genetic disorders, intellectual property rights, access to research
data or materials developed with public funding, current views on informed consent, adequacy and implementation
of Federal human subject research guidelines, and the concept of ``minimal risk.''




In addition, several other potential issues for consideration by the Commission have been raised in discussions
to date including: adequacy and implementation of Federal human subject research guidelines, recommendations
on requirements to maintain research data, and the ethical aspects of access to costly health care technology. The
question is, how best might the scope of the Commission's charge be defined so as to meet public needs for deliberation
of pressing issues in bioethics, without being so broad as to limit its effectiveness? An alternative option for addressing
the last issue, for example, might be referral to a body more directly involved with decisions related to the provisions
of health care and relevant cost/benefit analysis.



The Commission would be established in accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA). As such, its meetings
would be open tot he public and announced in advance to facilitate public participation. In addition, reports produced
by the NBAC would be made available to public either 

in toto, 

or in summary. The purpose of these efforts would be to involve the public in the deliberations of the NBAC to the greatest
extent possible.

As a FACA committee, the NBAC will be required to have a balanced membership. Naturally, selection of Commission members
is going to be a delicate process that should take into account the social and cultural mores of the times in order to
establish a body that is sensitive to the potential impacts of its deliberations and recommendations. The draft charter
proposes that members be appointed by the President. Suggestions for potential members or membership posts are sought
through this Notice.






Draft Charter






Proposed National Bioethics Advisory Commission





Purpose



The National Bioethics Advisory Commission will provide advice and make recommendations to the National Science
and Technology Council, other appropriate entities and the public, on bioethical issues arising from research on
human biology and behavior, and the applications of that research.




Authority





42 U.S.C. 6617(a)(2). This Commission is governed by the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA),
Public Law 92463, as amended (5 U.S.C. Appendix 2), which sets forth standards for the formation of advisory
committees, and implementing regulations (41 CFR 1016.10).





</SUPPLEM>
