 

Subpart F_ Conditions of Participation for Providers of Inpatient Psychiatric Services for Individuals Under Age
21 



483.200 

Basis and scope of subpart F. 



(a) 

Basis. 

Section 1905(h) of the Act provides that 
the inpatient psychiatric services benefit for individuals under age 21 includes inpatient services which are provided
in an institution (or distinct part thereof) which is a psychiatric hospital as defined in section 1861(f) or in another
inpatient setting that the Secretary has specified in regulations. Section 1905(h) also specifies that a team of
physicians and other personnel qualified to make determinations about mental health treatment must determine that
inpatient care is necessary for the individual; and that these services must_ 

(1) Involve active treatment that meets standards which may be specified in regulations; and 
(2) Reasonably be expected to improve the individual's condition to the extent that inpatient psychiatric services
will no longer be necessary. 
(b) 

Scope.

 This subpart contains the requirements that a facility must meet in order to qualify as a Medicaid provider of psychiatric
inpatient services for individuals under age 21. These requirements serve as the basis for survey activities for
the purpose of determining whether a facility meets the requirements for participation in Medicaid. All providers
of this benefit must also meet the requirements in subpart D of part 441 of this chapter. 



483.202 

Condition of participation: Active treatment program. 



(a) 

Standard: Active treatment requirement.

 The inpatient provider must ensure that each individual receives a continuous program of individualized psychiatric
treatment that is designed to enable the individual to achieve sufficient stability to progress to outpatient care,
and to attain the treatment objectives specified in the inpatient plan of treatment specified in paragraph (b) of
this section. These services must be consistent with implementation of the individual comprehensive services plan
required in 441.45(b) of this chapter. 

(b) 

Standard: Inpatient plan of treatment.

 The inpatient provider must_ 

(1) Ensure that an interdisciplinary team, including a facility staff physician and at least one other professional
staff person, reviews the assessment data collected as specified in 441.45(a) of this chapter, and updates
the data as necessary. The team then immediately initiates appropriate treatment. 




