 

III. Other Required Documentation 


Facilities should include in their proposal the information they deem necessary to address the criteria outlined
above,

 and

 the following required information: 
&bull;Contact person, mailing address, telephone number, and fax number. 
&bull;Company and/or facility environmental policy statement. 
&bull;State pollution prevention plan, if required under State law, in summary form. 
&bull;RCRA waste minimization certification, in summary form. 
&bull;Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) and Pollution Prevention Act (PPA) data, all available years, in summary form.

&bull;A brief summary of participation in other EPA or State voluntary programs. 
&bull;While not required to do so, facilities may attach additional 

summary

 information related to the criteria outlined above that may help EPA evaluate their proposal. 


IV. Suggested Proposal Format 


In order to expedite the proposal review and selection process, EPA suggests that facilities use the following format
to organize their proposals: 
Section 1_Table of Contents, 1 page. 
Section 2_Executive Summary, 12 pages. 
Section 3_Main Narrative, organized by the seven criteria and containing a clear statement of pilot project goals,
2530 pages maximum. 
Section 4_Exhibits and Attachments, 2530 pages. 
Section 5_Bibliography of Supporting Material, including a 

list

 of local, State, and Federal permits, and a 

list

 of applicable Federal technology-based standards, 35 pages.


V. Role of the States 


States have been invited to work in partnership with EPA in the pilot project phase; the pilots will be more likely to
succeed if EPA and States work in concert. EPA recognizes that States' level of involvement may vary according to available
resources. The Agency strongly encourages candidate facilities to contact their State environmental agency as
soon as possible to express their intention to prepare a pilot project proposal, and to begin discussions about the
State's role, including opportunities to build on existing partnerships and programs. Strong proposals will include
documentation showing that the proposal has been reviewed, sponsored, or endorsed by the appropriate State agency.


Recognizing the valuable role of States as laboratories for new approaches to environmental protection, EPA is eager
to have significant State participation in the pilot effort. A number of States have already expressed interest in
working with EPA to further develop the ELP concept. As of the date of this notice, the following States have approached
EPA and offered to work as partners in the pilot project effort: 



&bull;Alaska 
&bull;Arizona 
&bull;Massachusetts 
&bull;New York 
&bull;North Carolina 
&bull;Washington 



Contact people for these States are listed below. 
EPA has invited 

all

 States to participate in the ELP, and is actively working to build additional partnerships. Facilities in States
not listed here are encouraged to contact their State environmental agency as soon as possible to express their intention
to prepare a pilot project proposal, and to begin discussions about the State's role, including opportunities to
build on existing partnerships and programs. EPA recognizes that States may not be able to, or may choose not to, become
involved in the pilot project phase. The Agency will keep all States informed of the status of the pilot projects on
a regular basis, and, during the next phase of the projects, will convene a workshop to discuss the pilot experience,
ideas for launching a possible full-scale leadership program, and other ideas for further expanding the leadership/excellence
concept. 


VI. Role of EPA Regions 


EPA Regions have also been invited by the Office of Compliance to participate in the pilot project effort. In this phase
of the ELP, Regional involvement may vary according to available resources. At a minimum, Regions will play a role
in the screening and review of proposals. Through the pilot projects, EPA hopes to more accurately gauge the level
of resources necessary for Regional participation in any future full-scale program. 
Each Region's ELP contact is listed below. Interested facilities should contact their Region as soon as possible
to express their intention to prepare a pilot project proposal, and to begin discussions about the Region's role,
including opportunities to build on existing partnerships and programs. More general questions about the ELP pilot
project phase should be directed to the Headquarters contacts listed at the beginning of this notice.





