 

Calculation of Sick Leave


The proposed regulations would permit employees to use a total of up to 5 days of sick leave each year (or, in the case
of a part-time employee or an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, the average number of hours of work in the employee's
scheduled tour of duty each week) to provide care for a family member or for bereavement purposes. Several agencies
requested guidance on how to calculate the 5 days of sick leave for part-time employees or employees working compressed
work schedules. They asked what period of time an agency should use to determine the average number of hours of work
in an employee's tour of duty each week. One agency suggested that OPM use either days or hours, but not both. The agency
further recommended the use of hours to calculate the entitlement to sick leave to care for a family member because
granting 5 days of sick leave to a full-time employee on a compressed work schedule amounts to 50 hours for an employee
with a 10-hour daily tour of duty (and represents more that 1 week).
OPM agrees that it would be desirable to express these entitlements in terms of ``hours'' rather than ``days.'' As
a result, 5 CFR 630.401 has been revised accordingly. If the number of hours of work in an employee's tour of duty is changed
during the leave year, the employee's entitlement to use sick leave to care for a family member or for bereavement purposes
must be recalculated based on the new tour of duty. As provided in 5 CFR 630.206, employees may take sick leave to care
for a family member in increments of less than 1 hour if the agency's leave policies allow the granting of leave in increments
of less than 1 hour.


Recredit of Sick Leave


Nineteen commenters supported OPM's proposal to remove the 3-year break-in-service limitation on the recredit
of sick leave; one individual opposed the change, believing that there should be a penalty for voluntary separation.
Many agencies and individuals believe the elimination of the 3-year limitation on the recredit of sick leave would
be an incentive for employees under the Federal Employees Retirement system (FERS) to save their sick leave as insurance
for possible future use. However, several individual employees objected to OPM's intent to make this change prospective.
These individuals thought our proposal unfairly discriminated against employees who had forfeited sick leave as
a result of returning to Federal service prior to the effective date of the rule change.
OPM agrees that the proposed change in the rules on the recredit of sick leave fosters the conscientious use of sick
leave. Employees will no longer feel forced to use their sick leave prior to separating from the Federal Government
because there will no longer be a risk of forfeiting accrued sick leave when they return to Federal employment. However,
OPM does not believe it is feasible to give this change retroactive effect.
Under the Administrative Procedure Act, retroactivity is not favored where it could work an inequity. OPM believes
retroactivity could create as many inequities as it alleviates, since any effective date that OPM selects (except
an indefinite retroactive effective date) will be perceived as unfair 
by employees who do not benefit from the change. An indefinite retroactive effective date for the recredit of sick
leave would cause administrative problems for Federal agencies because it may be difficult to identify all employees
who were adversely affected. In addition, it may be difficult, if not impossible, to reconstruct affected employees'
sick leave records.
Based on the comments we received, there appears to be confusion as to whether the removal of the 3-year break-in-service
limitation on the recredit of sick leave applies to an employee who resigns before the effective date of the regulations
and returns after the effective date. (OPM also received numerous telephone inquiries on this matter.) Therefore,
we have revised 630.502(b) to state that a former employee is entitled to a recredit of sick leave (

without regard to the date of his or her separation

) if reemployed in the Federal Government on or after the effective date of these regulations, unless the sick leave
was forfeited upon reemployment in the Federal Government before the effective date of these regulations. Similar
revisions have also been made in 630.502(c), (e), and (f) and 630.504(b).
Reemployed annuitants also are entitled to a recredit of sick leave. However, the elimination of the 3-year restriction
on sick leave recredit does not affect the sick leave the reemployed annuitant had at the time of retirement if that
sick leave was creditable in the annuity computation. That sick leave balance became part of the annuity computation
and is no longer available for use as sick leave. Recredited sick leave will be added to the reemployed annuitant's
current sick leave account for use in his or her current employment. If the reemployed annuitant qualifies for a supplemental
or redetermined annuity under the Civil Service Retirement System, 5 U.S.C. 8344, any unused sick leave in his or her
sick leave account upon separation after reemployment may be included in the computation of the supplemental or redetermined
benefit.


Voluntary Leave Transfer and Leave Bank Programs


Three agencies noted that an employee who applies to become a leave recipient under the voluntary leave transfer or
leave bank programs to care for a family member with a medical emergency must exhaust all available leave (excluding
advanced leave) before he or she becomes eligible for any donated leave. Since an employee was previously not permitted
to use sick leave to care for a family member (except in cases of contagious disease), there was no requirement to exhaust
available sick leave before requesting donated leave in such cases. The agencies suggested that an employee be required
to use the sick leave provided under 630.401(b) to care for a family member before he or she can become eligible
for donated leave. OPM agrees that an employee is required to use the sick leave available under 630.401(b)
through (d) before becoming eligible for donated leave to care for a family member. The regulations have been revised
to clarify this matter in the case of applications to become a leave recipient that are approved on or after the effective
date of these regulations. (See 630.405(b).) In addition, the regulations have been revised to require an
employee who is in a shared leave status on the effective date of these regulations to use the sick leave available under
630.401(b) through (d) before he or she can continue using donated leave. (See 630.405(c).)


Sick Leave for Adoption


Five commenters noted that OPM's proposal to revise the sick leave regulations did not include any provisions authorizing
the use of sick leave for purposes related to adoption, as recommended by the Report of the National Performance Review.
Under previous law, OPM did not have authority to permit the use of sick leave for adoption. However, section 629(b)
of Public Law 103329, September 30, 1994, the Treasury, Postal Service, and General Government Appropriations
Act for fiscal year 1995, amends 5 U.S.C. 6307 to permit the use of sick leave for purposes relating to the adoption of
a child. In addition, the new law allows sick leave to be substituted retroactively for any annual leave used by an employee
for adoption-related purposes between September 30, 1991, and September 30, 1994. OPM is issuing interim regulations
permitting the use of sick leave for adoption-related purposes at the same time as the final sick leave regulations
are issued.




