 

(2) 

Emphasis on certain individuals. 

In selecting 
individuals to receive leadership training under this provision, 
the Corporation will make special efforts to select individuals 
who have served_
(i) In the Peace Corps; 
(ii) As VISTA volunteers; 
(iii) As participants in AmeriCorps programs receiving 
assistance under parts 2520 through 2524 of this chapter; 
(iv) As participants in National Service Demonstration 
programs that received assistance from the Commission on National 
and Community Service; or 
(v) As members of the Armed Forces of the United States and 
who were honorably discharged from such service. 
(3) 

Assignment. 

At the request of a program that receives 
assistance, the Corporation may assign an individual who receives 
leadership training under paragraph (c)(1) of this section to 
work with the program in a leadership position and carry out 
assignments not otherwise performed by regular participants. An 
individual assigned to a program will be considered to be a 
participant of the program. 


2522.220 

What are the required terms of service for AmeriCorps 
participants, and may they serve for more than one term? 


(a) 

Term of service. 

In order to be eligible for the 
educational award described in 2522.240(a), participants 
serving in approved AmeriCorps positions must complete a term of 
service as defined in this section: 
(1) 

Full-time service. 

1,700 hours of service during a 
period of not less than nine months and not more than one year. 
(2) 

Part-time service. 

900 hours of service during a period 
of not more than two years, or, if the individual is enrolled in 
an institution of higher education while performing all or a 
portion of the service, not more than three years. 
(3) 

Reduced part-time term of service. 

The Corporation may 
reduce the number of hours required to be served in order to 
receive an educational award for certain part-time participants 
serving in approved AmeriCorps positions. In such cases, the 
educational award will be reduced in direct proportion to the 
reduction in required hours of service. These reductions may be 
made for summer programs, for categories of participants in 
certain approved AmeriCorps programs and on a case-by-case, 
individual basis as determined by the Corporation. 
(4) 

Summer programs. 

A summer program, in which less than 
1700 hours of service are performed, are part-time programs. 
(b) 

Restriction on multiple terms. 

An AmeriCorps participant 
may only receive the benefits described in 2522.240 through 
2522.250 for the first two successfully-completed terms of 
service, regardless of whether those terms were served on a 
full-, part-, or reduced part-time basis. 
(c) 

Eligibility for second term. 

A participant will only be 
eligible to serve a second or additional term of service if that 
individual has received satisfactory performance review(s) for 
any previous term(s) of service in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (d) of this section. Mere eligibility 
for a second or further term of service in no way guarantees a 
participant selection or placement. 
(d) 

Participant performance review. 

For the purposes of 
determining a participant's eligibility for a second or additional term of service and/or 
for an AmeriCorps educational award, each AmeriCorps program will 
evaluate the performance of a participant mid-term and upon 
completion of a participant's term of service. The end-of-term 
performance evaluation will assess the following: 
(1) Whether the participant has completed the required 
number of hours described in paragraph (a) of this section; 
(2) Whether the participant has satisfactorily completed 
assignments, tasks or projects; and 

&rsquo;



