 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE



Forest Service

DASH Mining Project; Humboldt National Forest, Elko County, NV



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Forest Service.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of Intent to Prepare an Environmental Impact Statement.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Department of Agriculture, Forest Service will be directing the preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement
(EIS) for the proposed development of an open pit and underground gold mining project in Elko County, Nevada. This
EIS will be prepared by contract and funded by the proponent, Independence Mining Company Inc. (IMC).



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

A public scoping meeting will be held December 12, 1994 at the Red Lion Inn and Casino, 2065 E. Idaho St., Elko, Nevada
at 7:00 p.m. Two informal open houses will also be held. The first will be held at the Independence School, Tuscarora,
Nevada on December 13, 1994 between 4 and 7 p.m. The second open house will be held at the Holiday Inn, 1000 6th Street,
Reno, Nevada on December 14, 1994 between 3 and 7 p.m. Written comments concerning the scope of the analysis should
be received by December 19, 1994 to ensure timely consideration.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Send written comments to: R.M. ``Jim'' Nelson, Acting Forest Supervisor, Humboldt National Forest, 2035 Last Chance
Road, Elko, Nevada 89801.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Direct questions about the proposed project and preparation of the EIS to Mary Beth Marks, Project Team Leader, Humboldt
National Forest, 2035 Last Chance Road, Elko, Nevada 89801. Telephone: 7027385171.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

IMC has submitted to the Humboldt National Forest, a Proposed Plan of Operations (POO) for additional mining activities
at its Jerritt Canyon Mine in Elko County, Nevada. The POO describes the proposed mining development activities and
operational and reclamation procedures for the DASH Mining Project. The proposal includes developing two open pits
and mining of reserves by underground methods. Waste rock dumps, soil stockpiles, pit backfills, ore stockpiles,
haul roads and support facilities would also be developed. Ore would be processed at the existing Jerritt Canyon Millsite
located on BLM administered lands adjacent to the project site. The proposal would affect approximately 700 acres
of public and private lands. Preliminary internal scoping has identified several issues which would be addressed
in the analysis process. The following list of issues is not intended to be all inclusive. They are: impacts to ground
and surface water resources; impacts to grazing resources; impacts to Waters of the United States including wetlands;
mine economics; threatened, endangered, and sensitive plant and wildlife species; and visual resources. These
issues and any others identified during the scoping process may be used to develop alternatives to the proposed action.
In addition, the No Action alternative will be considered in the analysis.



Public participation is important during the EIS scoping process. As part of the scoping process, the Forest Service
will be seeking information and comments from Federal, State, County and local agencies and other individuals or
organizations who may be interested in or affected by the proposed actions. This input will be used in the preparation
of the draft EIS and final EIS.

Several government agencies will be invited to participate in this project as cooperating or participating agencies.
These agencies include, but are not limited to, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Nevada Division of Environmental Protection, Nevada Division of Wildlife, and
Elko County Board of Commissioners. In addition to the Plan of Operations, various Federal, State, and local permits
and licenses may be required to implement the proposed action. These may include, but are not limited to, a Section
404 permit, Water Pollution Control Permit, Reclamation Permit for Mining Operations, and a General Discharge Permit
for Stormwater.

The Forest Service is the lead agency for this project and R.M. ``Jim'' Nelson, Acting Forest Supervisor of the Humboldt
National Forest is the responsible official. He will make a decision to approve the proposed Plan of Operations or
one of the alternatives analyzed. IMC's rights under the 1872 Mining Law as amended, applicable Forest Service regulations
and the Humboldt National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (1986) will be taken into account throughout the
analysis.

The Draft EIS is expected to be filed with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and be available for review
in June of 1995. At that time, EPA will publish a Notice of Availability of the Draft EIS in the 

Federal Register

.

The comment period on the Draft EIS will be at least 45 days from the date the EPA's notice of availability appears in
the 

Federal Register

.

The Forest Service believes, at this early stage, it is important to give reviewers of several court rulings related
to public participation in the environmental review process. First, reviewers of draft environmental impact statements
must structure their participation in the environmental review of the proposal so that it is meaningful and alerts
an agency to the reviewer's position and contentions. 

Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. 

v. 

NRDC, 435 U.S. 519, 553 (1978). 

Also, environmental objections that could be raised at the draft environmental impact stage but that are not raised
until after completion of the final environmental impact statement may be waived or dismissed by the courts. 

City of Angoon 

v. 

Hodel, 

803 F.2d 1016, 1022 (9th Cir. 1986) and 

Wisconsin Heritages, Inc. 

v. 

Harris, 

490 F. Supp. 1334, 1338 (E.D. Wis. 1980). Because of these court rulings, it is very important that those interested
in this proposed action participate by the close of the 45 day comment period so that substantive comments and objections
are made available to the Forest Service at a time when it can meaningfully consider them and respond to them in the final
environmental impact statement. To assist the Forest Service in identifying and considering issues and concerns
on the proposed action, comments on the draft environmental impact statement should be as specific as possible. It
is also helpful if comments refer to specific pages or chapters of the draft statement. Comments may also address the
adequacy of the draft environmental impact statement or the merits of the alternatives formulated or discussed in
the statement. Reviewers may wish to refer to the Council on Environmental Quality Regulations for implementing
the procedural provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act at 40 CFR 1503.3 in addressing these points.




Dated: November 9, 1994.


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
R.M. ``Jim'' Nelson,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Forest Supervisor, Humboldt National Forest.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9428237 Filed 111594; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341011M
</BILLING>


