 

3. Forty-two percent of firms that pasteurized products did not perform can seam evaluations or performed them less
frequently than every 12 hours. Such evaluations are necessary to ensure that there will not be microbiological contamination
of the finished pasteurized product. FDA's regulations for the processing of low acid canned food (parts 108 and 113
(21 CFR parts 108 and 113)) require such evaluations every 4 hours as an HACCP-type control, but products that need
refrigeration (e.g., pasteurized products) are outside the scope of those regulations. Again, part 110 states only
that the pasteurization process should be adequate. FDA must conduct end-product sampling and analysis to determine,
or at least infer, whether a pasteurization process is adequate.

4. Forty-three percent of firms that pasteurized products did not perform cooling water sanitizer strength checks
to ensure that the pasteurized product would not be contaminated during this process. The presence of a sanitizer
in the cooling water is important to prevent contamination of the product after pasteurization because during cooling,
some water can be drawn into hot cans. Part 110 does not specifically mention a cooling water sanitizer. The ``adequate''
provision cited above is the closest relevant provision, and FDA must conduct end-product sampling and analysis
to determine, or at least infer, whether a pasteurization process is adequate.

5. Eighty-four percent of the firms did not monitor the internal temperature of products during the various stages
of processing. Such monitoring is important because time/temperature abuse can result in the growth of pathogenic
microorganisms, decomposition, and, in some cases, the formation of histamine. Part 110 states that all reasonable
precautions should be taken to prevent contamination and recommends temperature control as one type of precaution.
Again, end-product sampling is the only practical way for FDA to measure compliance.

6. Fourteen percent of the firms did not have temperature-indicating devices on their finished product coolers,
and 89 percent did not have temperature-recording devices. Part 110 states that processors should have one or the
other but does not specifically require that processors monitor either one. While 14 percent were out of compliance,
most who were in compliance opted for the control that did not provide a continuous record.

7. Thirty-one percent of the temperature-indicating devices on finished product coolers were more than 5 
&cir;F out of adjustment. Fifty-five percent of these were giving readings that were too low. For these, the deviation
would permit the growth of pathogenic microorganisms, decomposition, and histamine formation. Part 110 specifically
states that thermometers should be accurate. Five degree deviations are clearly out of compliance. A significant
percentage of firms surveyed were not paying attention to a significant preventive control.

8. Twenty-three percent of temperature-indicating devices on pasteurizers and 80 percent of such devices on finished
product coolers were never calibrated. Again, part 110 calls for accuracy. The failure to calibrate means that these
firms have no assurance that their devices are accurate. A preventive control is not being applied, and thus a significant
percentage of processors are apparently relying on Government investigators to determine accuracy during inspections.
Also, this deficiency may account in part for the deviations described in section III.A.7. of this document.

9. Twenty-nine percent of temperature-recording devices on finished product coolers were never checked for accuracy,
while 34 percent of such devices on pasteurizers and 74 percent on finished product coolers were checked less frequently
than once a month. Temperature-recording devices are easily jarred out of calibration and must be routinely adjusted
to agree with an accurate temperature-indicating device. Thus, they need to be checked for accuracy at least at the
start and the end of each processing day in order to determine whether they remained accurate throughout the day's
production.

10. Forty-eight percent of the firms cleaned and sanitized the processing equipment less frequently than every 4
hours, while 13 percent cleaned and sanitized less than every 12 hours. Part 110 states that sanitation practices
should occur as frequently as necessary. In order to control salmonella and other undesirable bacteria within a facility,
the frequency should be at least every 4 hours, and more frequently if feasible. This frequency helps reduce the likelihood
that these microorganisms will enter a rapid phase of growth during which their numbers increase logarithmically
(Ref. 22, p. 114; Ref. 23, p. 2).

11. Twenty-two percent of the firms did not perform plant or equipment sanitation audits (i.e., inspections), and
35 percent did not check the strength of hand or equipment sanitizing solutions. These results reveal that a significant
number of plants are not checking up on themselves to ensure that they were doing an adequate job of sanitation. In such
plants, the only check on sanitation is provided by the Government investigators who visit the plant.

Other survey and inspection findings by FDA and others strongly indicate that the seafood industry does not always
operate on the basis of preventive controls. For example, recent FDA and State surveys showed that many processors
of smoked and smoke-flavored fish are operating outside of the parameters that have been demonstrated through scientific
research to be necessary to ensure that the hazard from botulism is adequately controlled. These parameters are process
times and temperatures and salinity levels. A number of firms surveyed did not even know their own operating parameters,
let alone the scientifically established ones (Refs. 24, 25, and 26). For seafood products such as these that require
no cooking by the consumer, preventive measures by the processor to eliminate 

C. botulinum,

 type E to the maximum extent possible are critically important. 



