 

207.93 

Protection of proprietary information during panel and committee proceedings. 



(a) 

Requests for protective orders. 

A request for access to proprietary information pursuant to 19 U.S.C. 1677f(f)(1) shall be made to the Secretary of
the Commission.

(b) 

Persons authorized to receive proprietary information under protective order. 

The following persons may be authorized by the Commission to receive access to proprietary information if they comply
with these regulations and such other conditions imposed upon them by the Commission:

(1) The members of a binational panel or an extraordinary challenge committee, any assistant to a member, court reporters
and translators;

(2) Counsel and professionals, provided that the counsel or professional does not participate in competitive decision-making,
as defined in 

US Steel Corp. 

v. 

United States, 

730 F.2d 1465 (Fed. Cir. 1984), for the person represented or for any person that would gain a competitive advantage
through knowledge of the proprietary information sought;

(3) Clerical persons who are employed or retained by and under the direction and control of a person described in paragraph
(b) (1), (2), (5) or (6) of this section who has been issued a protective order, if such clerical persons: 

(i) Are not involved in the competitive decision-making, or the support functions for the competitive decision-making,
of a participant to the proceeding or of any person that would gain a competitive advantage through knowledge of the
proprietary information sought, and

(ii) Have agreed to be bound by the terms set forth in the application for protective order of the person who retains
or employs him or her;

(4) The Secretaries of the United States, Canadian and Mexican sections of the Secretariat and members of their staffs;

(5) Any officer or employee of the United States Government who the United States Trade Representative informs the
Commission Secretary needs access to proprietary information to make recommendations regarding the convening
of extraordinary challenge committees; and

(6) Any officer or employee of the Government of Canada or the Government of Mexico who the Canadian Minister of Trade
or the Mexican Secretary of Commerce and Industrial Development, as the case may be, informs the Commission Secretary
needs access to proprietary information to make recommendations regarding the convening of extraordinary challenge
committees. 
(c) 

Procedures for obtaining access to proprietary information under protective order._

(1) 

Persons who must file an application for release under protective order. 

To be permitted access to proprietary information in the administrative record of a determination under panel review,
all persons described in paragraphs (b) (1), (2), (4), (5) or (6) of this section, unless described in paragraph (c)(5)(i)
of this section, shall file an application for a protective order.


(2) 

Contents of applications for release under protective order. 

(i) The Commission Secretary shall adopt from time to time forms for submitting requests for release pursuant to protective
order that incorporate the terms of this rule. The Commission Secretary shall supply the United States Secretary
with copies of the forms for persons described in paragraphs (b) (1), (4), (5) and (6) of this section. Other applicants
may obtain the forms at the Commission Secretary's office at 500 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20436.

(ii) Such forms shall require the applicant to submit a personal sworn statement that, in addition to such other conditions
as the Commission Secretary may require, the applicant will:

(A) Not disclose any proprietary information obtained under protective order and not otherwise available to any
person other than:

(

1

) Personnel of the Commission involved in the particular panel review in which the proprietary information is part
of the administrative record,

(

2

) The person from whom the information was obtained,

(

3

) A person who is authorized to have access to the same proprietary information pursuant to a Commission protective
order, and


(

4

) A clerical person retained or employed by and under the direction and control of a person described in paragraph (b)
(1), (2), (5), or (6) of this section who has been issued a protective order, if such clerical person has signed and dated
an agreement to be bound by the terms set forth in the application for a protective order of the person who retains or
employs him or her;

(B) Not use any of the proprietary information released under protective order and not otherwise available for purposes
other than the particular proceedings under Article 1904 of the Agreement;

(C) Upon completion of panel review, or at such other date as may be determined by the Commission Secretary, return
to the Commission, or certify to the Commission Secretary the destruction of, all documents released under the protective
order and all other material (such as briefs, notes, or charts), containing the proprietary information released
under the protective order, except that those described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may return such documents
and other materials to the United States Secretary. The United States Secretary may retain a single file copy of each
document for the official file. 




