 

The regulations in 7 CFR 273.18 and 276.2 previously provided that FNS would collect amounts due FNS for recipient
claims collections and title IV reimbursements and pay State agencies by offsetting or amending the States' letter
of credit. However, in order to accommodate State and Federal financial management requirements, FNS has accepted
FNS209 payments by check from a number of State agencies and has sent checks to State agencies which were owed
money. The Department believes it is appropriate to change the current language to provide for checks when requested
by State agencies rather than require a number of State agencies to conform to the letter of credit procedure. In the
final rule the Department is allowing State agencies to request that FNS accept checks from the State for FNS209
amounts due FNS, or that FNS pay the State by check for FNS209 amounts due the State. If such a request has not been
or is not made, payment to the State agency and collection from the State agency will be made through the letter of credit.
The Department reserves the right to offset any amount due FNS by letter of credit offset if payment is not made. 
The final rule also amends similar provisions relating to title IV reimbursements in 7 CFR 276.2 and letter of credit
offsets in 7 CFR 277.16 to conform with this change. Title IV reimbursements are reported as a separate line item on
the FNS209 and are used along with claims collection data in the calculation of the total amount due FNS from
the FNS209. Thus, a change in the method of collection or payment of the total amount due from the FNS209
would also apply to the line items that make up the total figure. The change in the general authority for letter of credit
offset in 7 CFR 277.16 is a consolidation of the authority for organization purposes. As noted above, the regulations
in 7 CFR 273.18 and 276.2 previously allowed FNS to offset from the letter of credit for FNS209 payments due FNS.



Automated Data Processing (ADP) Enhanced Funding Rate Reduction to 63 Percent 


The proposed rule stated that section 1752(a) of Public Law 101624, enacted on November 28, 1990, changed the
enhanced funding rate for ADP and information retrieval system development from 75 percent to 63 percent effective
October 1, 1991. The proposed rule also stated that pursuant to section 1752(b) of Public Law 101624 this change
in the funding rate does not apply to proposals approved prior to the enactment date of November 28, 1990. 
Three comments were received which stated that this reduction is unreasonable at a time when automation efforts need
to be increased to keep pace with growing caseloads and decreasing resources. One other commenter stated that this
reduction was unfair to those States that had never requested enhanced funding because they had not previously had
the necessary resources available for development purposes and that were now in the process of pursuing such development.
The reduction in the enhanced funding rate was mandated by law and does not allow Departmental discretion. Since the
retention rate is mandated by law, the final regulation retains the 63 percent rate as specified in the proposed rule.

One commenter requested clarification of whether approval of the planning advance planning document (PAPD) prior
to November 28, 1990, constituted total project approval at the enhanced funding rate. The Department believes that
the purpose of the PAPD is to determine whether the developing system would be a viable one and whether continued system
development is appropriate. Therefore, approval for funding a PAPD is separate from later funding decisions. 
The Department was also made aware of concerns about the approval of funding proposals after November 28, 1990 that
were submitted prior to that date. Specifically, there was a concern that States which had submitted complete implementation
advance planning documents (IAPD) prior to November 28, 1990, but did not receive approval by FNS until after that
date were being unfairly penalized. The Department reviewed the legislation in light of this concern and has made
a change in 7 CFR 277.4(b)(12) of the final rule. This section now provides that a State will receive 75 percent enhanced
funding for automated system development, if prior to November 28, 1990, the State had both an approved (PAPD) and
had submitted an IAPD along with all the paperwork required for approval. However, modifications to approved IAPDs
and any increase in costs which occur after September 30, 1991 (during system development), will be funded at the 63
percent level. Other than this modification, 7 CFR 274.4(b)(12) is adopted as proposed. 


One-time Enhanced Funding 


Nine comments were received on the proposed one-time enhanced funding provision which provided that all requests
for more than one-time enhanced funding for automated system development in a particular State be denied. These comments
focused on the rapid pace of changes in technology and the need for federal enhanced funding to allow States to incorporate
these changes into a system once the initial system development has been completed. 
As noted in the proposed rule, a 1988 audit issued by the General Accounting Office (GAO) interpreted the original
legislation differently than the Department. According to GAO, the funding scheme was initially designed so that
enhanced funding for automation should only be available for a State's first attempt at automation development.

FNS recognizes the concern expressed by commenters to keep pace with the rapid change in computer technology. However,
the legislative history accompanying Public Law 96249, The Food Stamp Amendments of 1980, specifically addressed
the funding of upgrading or modification of a system originally funded at the enhanced level. In the House Report the
Committee stated that the 75 percent rate for cost sharing was intended to be one-time and funds were to be strictly
limited to initial development. H.R. Rep. No. 96788, 96th Cong., 2nd Sess. 112113 (1980). Ongoing system
utilization or upgrading expenses would be shared at the 50 percent level applicable to most other administrative
costs. 
Based on the House Report and the General Accounting Office (GAO) audit cited in the proposed rule, the Department
has decided that enhanced funding should not be available for system changes to an already existing system which was
initially developed with enhanced funding. Accordingly, with some technical corrections described later, the
proposed 277.18(g)(1) is adopted. 
The Department also wants to clarify that it will fund one ``complete'' system development effort at the enhanced
level one time, if the system meets all applicable standards. A ``complete'' system contains both certification
and issuance components that meet existing standards. For example, a State may receive enhanced funding for the development
of a certification component of a system which meets all of the applicable functional standards. The State may then
also receive enhanced funding for a subsequent project to ``upgrade'' the system by adding an issuance component
which also meets all of the applicable functional standards.


