 

4. Federated Securities Corporation (FSC) is the principal distributor for all shares of the Funds including Trust
Shares which are sold to the Client Plans.

16

 There are no fees for distribution expenses, pursuant to Rule 12b1 under the 1940 Act, paid to FSC with respect
to the Trust Shares. In addition, MI does not and will not receive fees payable pursuant to Rule 12b1 in
connection with transactions involving any shares of the Funds. The Trust Shares are charged for certain administrative
expenses of the Funds. FSC is a subsidiary of Federated Investors (Federated) which, through other subsidiaries,
acts as the transfer and dividend disbursing agent for the Funds and provides certain personnel and administrative
services for the Funds. Federated and its subsidiaries are unrelated to MI. However, MI Trust is the custodian
for the securities and cash of the Funds and Marshall Funds Investor Services (MFIS), another affiliate of MI
Corp., is the shareholder servicing agent for the Funds.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


16

</FOOTNAME>
According to the Fund prospectuses, investors may purchase shares of the Funds through MI Brokerage Services,
Inc. (MI Brokerage Services), an affiliate of MI Corp. However, the involvement of MI Brokerage
Services in selling Fund shares is limited to transactions through MI ``retail'' accounts_i.e., accounts
other than those accounts handled by MI Trust or other MI affiliated trust companies. MI represents
that purchases and sales of Fund shares for all MI trust accounts, including the Client Plans, are handled by
MI trust officers dealing directly with Federated, the Funds' distributor.
In addition, MI Brokerage Services does not provide portfolio execution services for the Funds. MI states
that securities transactions for a Fund's portfolio are executed by broker-dealers unrelated to MI and do not
generate commissions or other fees to MI Brokerage Services or any affiliate. The Department notes that for
purposes of this exemption the term ``secondary service'' does not include any brokerage services provided to the
Funds by MI for the execution of securities transactions engaged in by the Funds (see Section IV(h) above).

</FOOTNOTE>


5. MI Investment Management Corp. (MI Management), a wholly-owned subsidiary of MI Corp., serves
as the investment adviser for the Funds pursuant to investment advisory agreements with the Funds (the Agreements)
which allow MI Management to receive monthly investment advisory fees based on a percentage of the average daily
net assets of each of the Funds. The Agreements and the fees received by MI Management are approved by the Board
of Directors of the Funds (the Funds' Directors), in accordance with the applicable provisions of the 1940 Act. Any
changes in the fees are approved by the Funds' Directors. All of the Funds' Directors are independent of MI.
6. Prior to November 20, 1992, MI generally invested assets of Client Plans for which it acted as a trustee with
investment discretion in a series of CIFs. In addition, certain Client Plans where investment decisions are directed
by a Second Fiduciary generally used an MI CIF as an investment option for individual accounts in the Client Plans.
However, on Friday, November 20, 1992, MI terminated three of its CIFs_the MI Employee Benefit Money Market
Fund, the MI Employee Benefit Bond Fund, and the MI Employee Benefit Stock Fund. The assets in these CIFs
were transferred to the Marshall Money Market Fund, the Marshall Intermediate Bond Fund, and the Marshall Stock Fund,
respectively. Each CIF transferred its assets to the corresponding Fund in exchange for Trust Shares of that Fund
at the then current market value of the CIF assets, in accordance with Rule 17a7 under the 1940 Act (as discussed
below).

17

 The CIFs were liquidated and the Trust Shares were distributed to the Client Plans, subject to the prior written consent
of the Second Fiduciary for the Client Plan. Any Client Plan that had not provided prior written approval for the transfer
of its CIF assets to the Funds, by the deadline set for such approvals, received a cash distribution of its pro rata share
of the CIF assets no later than Friday, November 20, 1992, preceding the transfers.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


17

</FOOTNAME>
Rule 17a7 permits transactions between investment funds that use the same investment adviser, subject to
certain conditions. Rule 17a7 requires, among other things, that such transactions be effected at the ``independent
current market price'' for each security, involve only securities for which market quotations are readily available,
involve no brokerage commissions or other remuneration, and comply with valuation procedures adopted by the board
of directors of the investment company to ensure that all requirements of the Rule are satisfied.

</FOOTNOTE>


The assets of the CIFs were reviewed by MI Management as investment adviser to the Funds, in coordination with
Federated Administrative Services (FAS), the Funds' third party administrator, to determine that the assets were
appropriate investments for the corresponding Funds. FAS created a portfolio accounting system to track the securities
to be acquired by the Funds. Prior to the transfer of CIF assets to the Funds, the Funds did not hold any securities or
other assets except cash or, as in the case of the Marshall Money Market Fund, U.S. Treasury Bills.


