 

Proposals may also be reviewed by the Office of General Counsel or other Agency offices. Funding decisions are at the
discretion of the Associate Director for Educational and Cultural Affairs. Final technical authority for grant
awards resides with USIA's contracting officer. The award of any grant is subject to availability of funds. The U.S.
Government reserves the right to reject any or all applications received. USIA will not pay for design and development
costs associated with submitting a proposal. Applications are submitted at the risk of the applicant; should circumstances
prevent award of a grant all preparation and submission costs are at the applicant's expense.



USIA will not award funds for activities conducted prior to the actual grant award.



Review Criteria



USIA will consider proposals based on their conformance with the objectives and considerations already stated in
this RFP, as well as the following criteria:

1. Quality of program idea:

 Proposals should exhibit relevance, originality, rigor and substance to USIA's mission. They should demonstrate
the match of U.S. resources to a clearly defined need.

2. 

Institutional ability/capacity/record:

 Applicant institutions should demonstrate their potential for program excellence and/or provide documentation
of successful programs. If an organization is a previous USIA grant recipient, responsible fiscal management and
full compliance with all reporting requirements for past USIA grants as determined by the Office of Contracts (M/KG)
will be considered. Relevant program evaluation of previous projects may also be considered in this assessment.

3. 

Project personnel:

 Personnel's thematic and logistical expertise should be relevant to the proposed program. Resumes should be relevant
to the specific proposal.

4. 

Program planning:

 A detailed work plan should provide milestones for the accomplishment of each phase of the project and clearly demonstrate
how the grantee institution will meet milestones. In addition, the work plan should indicate how the work plan will
accomplish the overall project goals.

5. 

Thematic expertise:

 Proposals should demonstrate the organization's expertise in the subject area.

6. 

Cross-cultural expertise and Area Expertise:

 Proposals should show evidence of sensitivity to historical, linguistic, and other cross-cultural factors, as
well as relevant knowledge of target area/country.

7. 

Multiplier effect/follow-on activities:

 Proposed programs should strengthen long-term mutual understanding, to include maximum sharing of information
and establishment of long-term institutional and individual ties. Proposals should also reflect an institutional
commitment for continued exchange activity beyond the term of the USIA grant.

8. 

Cost-effectiveness:

 Overhead and administrative costs should be kept as low as possible. All other items proposed for USIA funding should
be necessary and appropriate to achieve the program's objectives.

9. 

Cost-sharing:

 Proposals should maximize cost-sharing through other private sector support as well as direct funding contributions
and/or in-kind support from the prospective grantee institution.

10. 

Project evaluation:

 Proposals should include a plan to evaluate the activity's success. In this respect the applicant should include
a draft survey questionnaire or other technique and a methodology that will be used to link outcomes to original project
objectives. Applicants will be expected to submit intermediate reports after each project component is concluded
or quarterly, whichever is less frequent.



Notice:

 The terms and conditions published in this RFP are binding and may not be modified by any USIA representative. Explanatory
information provided by USIA that contradicts published language will not be binding. Issuance of the RFP does not
constitute an award commitment on the part of the U.S. Government. Awards cannot be made until funds have been fully
appropriated by the U.S. Congress and allocated and committed through internal USIA procedures.



Notification:

 All applicants will be notified of the results of the review process on or about June 1, 1994. Awarded grants will be
subject to periodic reporting and evaluation requirements.




Dated: January 14, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Barry Fulton,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Associate Director, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 941681 Filed 12694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 823001M
</BILLING>


