 

Discussion





The FAA may issue and amend special conditions, as necessary, as part of the type certification basis if the Administrator
finds that the airworthiness standards, designated according to 21.101(b), do not contain adequate or appropriate
safety standards because of novel or unusual design features of an airplane. Special conditions are prescribed under
the provisions of 21.16 to establish a level of safety equivalent to that established in the regulations. Special
conditions are normally issued according to 11.49, after public notice, as required by 11.28
and 11.29(b), effective October 14, 1980, and become a part of the type certification basis in accordance with 21.101(b)(2).



Yingling Aircraft, Inc., plans to incorporate certain novel and unusual design features into an airplane for which
the airworthiness standards do not contain adequate or appropriate safety standards for protection from the effects
of HIRF. These features include electronic systems, which are susceptible to the HIRF environment, that were not
envisaged by the existing regulations for this type of airplane.








Protection of Systems From High Intensity Radiated Fields (HIRF)





Recent advances in technology have given rise to the application in aircraft designs of advanced electrical and electronic
systems that perform functions required for continued safe flight and landing. Due to the use of sensitive solid state
advanced components in analog and digital electronics circuits, these advanced systems are readily responsive
to the transient effects of induced electrical current and voltage caused by the HIRF. The HIRF can degrade electronic
systems performance by damaging components or upsetting system functions.






Futhermore, the HIRF environment has undergone a transformation that was not foreseen when the current requirements
were developed. Higher energy levels are radiated from transmitters that are used for radar, radio, and television.
Also, the number of transmitters has increased significantly. There is also uncertainty concerning the effectiveness
of airframe shielding for HIRF. Furthermore, coupling to cockpit-installed equipment through cockpit window apertures
is undefined.





The combined effect of the technological advances in airplane design and the changing environment has resulted in
an increased level of vulnerability of electrical and electronic systems required for the continued safe flight
and landing of the airplane. Effective measures against the effects of exposure to HIRF must be provided by the design
and installation of these systems. The accepted maximum energy levels in which civilian airplane system installations
must be capable of operating safely are based on surveys and analysis of existing radio frequency emitters. These
special conditions require that the airplane be evaluated under these energy levels for the protection of the electronic
system and its associated wiring harness. These external threat levels, which are lower than previous required values,
are believed to represent the worst case to which an airplane would be exposed in the operating environment.




These special conditions require qualification of systems that perform critical functions, as installed in aircraft,
to the defined HIRF environment in paragraph 1 or, as an option to a fixed value using laboratory tests, in paragraph
2, as follows:




(1) The applicant may demonstrate that the operation and operational capability of the installed electrical and
electronic systems that perform critical functions are not adversely affected when the aircraft is exposed to the
HIRF environment defined below:











