 

(H) For the purpose of this regulation, each 100 grams of the product 
(on a 13 percent moisture basis) must contain protein in amounts which 
is equivalent to that provided by 20 grams of protein with a quality of 
not less than 95 percent casein. The equivalent grams of protein 
required per 100 grams of product (on a 13 percent moisture basis) would 
be determined by the following equation: 





<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSER07OC94.022



</IMPORT>




X=grams of protein required per 100 grams of 
product 
a=20 grams (amount of protein if casein) 
b=.95 [95% &times; 1 (PDCAAS of casein)] 
c=PDCAAS for protein used in formulation 
(ii) The total solids content is not less than 87 percent by weight as 
determined by the methods described in the ``Official Methods of Analysis 
of the AOAC International'' cited in paragraph (a)(2) under Enriched 
Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in this Appendix. 
(b)(1) Each pound of food covered by this section shall contain 5 
milligrams of thiamine, 2.2 milligrams of riboflavin, 34 milligrams of 
niacin or niacinamide, and 16.5 milligrams of iron. 
(2) Each pound of such food may also contain 625 milligrams of calcium. 
(3) Only harmless and assimilable forms of iron and calcium may be 
added. The enrichment nutrients may be added in a harmless carrier used 
only in a quantity necessary to effect a uniform distribution of the 
nutrients in the finished food. Reasonable overages, within the limits 
of good manufacturing practice, may be used to assure that the 
prescribed levels of the vitamins and mineral(s) in paragraphs (b)(1) 
and (2) under Enriched Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in this 
Appendix are maintained throughout the expected shelf life of the food 
under customary conditions of distribution. 
(c) Ingredients that serve a useful purpose such as to fortify the 
protein or facilitate production of the food are the safe and suitable 
ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) under Enriched Macaroni 
Products with Fortified Protein in this Appendix. This does not include 
color additives, artificial flavorings, artificial sweeteners, chemical 
preservatives, or starches. Ingredients deemed suitable for use by this 
paragraph are added in amounts that are not in excess of those 
reasonably required to achieve their intended purposes. Ingredients are 
deemed to be safe if they are not food additives within the meaning of 
section 201(s) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, or in case 
they are food additives if they are used in conformity with regulations 
established pursuant to section 409 of the act. 
(d)(1) The name of any food covered by this section is ``Enriched Wheat 


XXXXXXXX

 Macaroni Product with Fortified Protein'', the blank being filled 
in with appropriate word(s) such as ``Soy'' to show the source of any 
flours or meals used that were made from non-wheat cereals or from 
oilseeds. In lieu of the words ``Macaroni Product'' the words ``Macaroni'', 
``Spaghetti'', or ``Vermicelli'' as appropriate, may be used if the units 
conform in shape and size to the requirements of 21 CFR 139.110 (b), (c), 
or (d). 


