 

45 CFR SUBTITLE A



2. A new Part 94 is added to 45 CFR subtitle A to read as follows:



45 CFR Part 94_Responsible Prospective Contractors



94.1Purpose.

94.2Applicability.

94.3Definitions.

94.4Institutional Assurance and Responsibility regarding Significant Financial Interests of Investigators.

94.5Management of Significant Financial Interests.

94.6Remedies.







Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 216, 289b1, 299c3.



94.1


Purpose.



This part promotes objectivity in research by establishing special standards for each Institution to ensure that
the design, conduct, and reporting of research to be performed are not compromised by any Significant Financial Interest
of an Investigator responsible for the design, conduct, or reporting of the research.



94.2 


Applicability.



This section is applicable to each Institution that seeks PHS funding for research and, through the implementation
of this section, to each Investigator who participates in such research; provided that this section does not apply
to SBIR Program Phase I applications.



94.3 


Definitions.



As used in this part:



Contractor

 means an entity that provides property or services for the direct benefit or use of the Federal Government.



HHS

 means the United States Department of Health and Human Services, and any components of the Department to which the
authority involved may be delegated.



Institution

 means any public or private entity or organization (excluding a Federal agency) that:
(1) Submits a proposal for a research contract whether in response to a solicitation from the PHS or otherwise, or 
(2) Assumes the legal obligation to carry out the research required under the contract.



Investigator

 means the principal investigator and any other person at the Institution who is responsible for the design, conduct,
or reporting of a research project funded by PHS, or proposed for such funding. For the purposes of the requirements
of this section relating to financial interests, ``Investigator'' includes the Investigator's spouse and dependent
children.



PHS

 means the Public Health Service, an operating division of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and any
components of the PHS to which the authority involved may be delegated.



PHS Awarding Component

 means an organizational unit of the PHS that funds research that is subject to this part.



Public Health Service Act

 or PHS Act mean the statute codified at 42 U.S.C. 201 

et seq.

Research

 means a systematic investigation designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge relating broadly
to public health, including behavioral and social-sciences research. The term encompasses basic and applied research
and product development. As used in this part, the term includes any such activity for which funding is available from
a PHS Awarding Component, whether authorized under the PHS Act or other statutory authority.



Significant Financial Interest

 means anything of monetary value, including but not limited to, salary or other payments for services (e.g., consulting
fees or honoraria); equity interests (e.g., stocks, stock options or other ownership interests); and intellectual
property rights (e.g., patents, copyrights and royalties from such rights). The term does not include:

(1) Salary, royalties, or other remuneration from the institution; or any ownership interests in the institution,
if the institution is an applicant under the SBIR program;

(2) Income from seminars, lectures, or teaching engagements sponsored by pubic or nonprofit entities;

(3) Income from service on advisory committees or review panels for public or nonprofit entities; or

(4) Financial interests in business enterprises or entities if the value of such interests do not exceed $5,000 or
represent more than a 5% ownership interest for any one enterprise or entity when aggregated for the investigator
and the investigator's spouse and dependent children.



Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program

 means the extramural research program for small business that is established by the awarding components of the Public
Health Service and certain other Federal agencies under Public Law 97219, the Small Business Innovation Development
Act, as amended. For purposes of this part, the term SBIR Program includes the Small Business Technology Transfer
(SBTT) Program, which was established by Public Law 102564.



