 

(c) 

Code Enforcement

. Section 807(e) of the 1992 Act adds ``private improvements or services'' undertaken in an area to the list of activities
that may be considered, together with code enforcement, in determining whether CDBG funds may be used to pay for the
code enforcement in an area. 
(d) 

Loans to Subrecipients. 

Section 807(d) of the 1992 Act amends section 105(a)(14) of the HCD Act to authorize the use of CDBG assistance for activities
in the form of loans_both interim and long-term_as well as grants. 
(e) 

Public Service Cap. 

NAHA amended section 105(a)(8) of the HCD Act by placing the 15 percent cap for public services on each State's total
nonentitlement CDBG allocation, plus 15 percent of program income anticipated to be received in the fiscal year.
(Previously, the 15 percent cap for public services was applied to each recipient's grant.) As a result of this provision,
HUD may award a grant to a recipient for public service activities with 100 percent of the funds spent for public service
activities. However, any application requesting funds for public service activities must be ratable under one of
the existing Single Purpose or the Comprehensive grant categories. HUD will apply the 15 percent statewide cap to
public service activities by funding public service activities in the highest-rated applications until the cap
is reached. 

(f) 

Neighborhood-Based Nonprofit Organizations. 

Section 807(f) of the 1992 Act amends section 105(a)(15) of the HCD Act to add nonprofit organizations serving the
development needs of communities in nonentitlement areas as entities eligible to carry out CDBG activities. 
(2) New Categories of Eligible Activities. (a) Nonprofit Capacity Building. Section 807(a)(4) makes eligible the
provision of technical assistance to public or nonprofit entities to increase the capacity of these entities to carry
out eligible neighborhood revitalization or economic development activities. Section 807(a)(4) makes clear,
however, that the use of funds for technical assistance is not to be considered as a planning or administrative cost
of the program. Before the amendment, the use of CDBG funds for nonprofit capacity building was an eligible activity
only under 570.205, and therefore was subject to the cap on planning and administration set out at 570.200(g).
While nonprofit capacity building is now eligible under the new provision and is not subject to a percentage limitation,
it should be noted that any such use of funds under the new authority must be shown to meet one of the national objectives.
(This may be difficult in some cases, since all activities carried out by the nonprofit using the added capacity will
need to be considered for that purpose.) 

(b) 

Institutions of Higher Education. 

Section 807(a)(4) of the 1992 Act makes it possible for a grantee to provide CDBG funds to institutions of higher education
to carry out activities otherwise eligible for CDBG assistance, provided that it can be determined that the institution
has demonstrated a capability to carry out such activities. 
(c) 

Acquisition by Tax Foreclosure. 

Section 807(a)(4) of the 1992 Act makes eligible the use of CDBG funds to make essential repairs and to pay operating
expenses necessary to maintain the habitability of housing units acquired through tax foreclosure proceedings
in order to prevent abandonment and deterioration of housing in primarily low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.

(d) 

Microenterprises. 

Section 807(a)(4) of the 1992 Act establishes a new category of eligibility under which CDBG funds may be used to provide
assistance to public and private organizations, agencies, and other entities (including nonprofit and for-profit
entities) to enable these entities to facilitate economic development by: 
&bull;Providing credit (including providing direct loans and loan guarantees, establishing revolving loan funds,
and facilitating peer lending programs) for the establishment, stabilization, and expansion of microenterprises;

&bull;Providing technical assistance, advice, and business support services (including assistance, advice,
and support relating to developing business plans, securing funding, conducting marketing, and otherwise engaging
in microenterprise activities) to owners of microenterprises and persons developing microenterprises; and 
&bull;Providing general support (such as peer support programs and counseling) to the owners of microenterprises
and to persons developing microenterprises. 
(e) 

Housing Services. 

Section 807(a)(4) of the 1992 Act, as amended by section 207 of the Multifamily Housing Property Disposition Reform
Act of 1994, establishes a new category of eligibility for ``housing services''. Housing services include housing
counseling, energy auditing, preparation of work specifications, loan processing, inspections, tenant selection,
management of tenant-based rental assistance, and other services related to assisting owners, tenants, contractors,
and other entities, participating or seeking to participate in housing activities authorized under the HOME program.


(f) 

Lead-Based Paint Hazards. 

Section 1012 of the 1992 Act amends section 105(a) by stating that CDBG funds may be used for lead-based paint hazard
evaluation and reduction, as defined in section 1004 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of
1992 (42 U.S.C. 4851). It should be noted that 570.202(a)(iv) currently authorizes inspection and abatement
of lead-based paint in conjunction with CDBG-assisted rehabilitation. Additionally, 570.205 authorizes
evaluation of lead-based paint hazards within the jurisdiction generally. Until the regulations are modified to
incorporate this new provision, grantees may use the new authority to fund lead-based paint inspection of houses
whether or not rehabilitation of the houses will be CDBG-funded. The new authority may also be used to fund large scale
evaluation of lead based-paint hazards in the community (assuming that it is an approved activity in the Small Cities
application), outside of the 20 percent limitation on planning and administration cost, if the grantee can demonstrate
that the evaluation addresses a CDBG national objective. 

(3) Changes Concerning National Objectives. (a) Low/Mod Jobs Presumption. Section 806(e) of the 1992 Act amends
section 105(c) of the HCD Act by adding a new paragraph (4) which states that, for purposes of determining whether an
activity involves the employment of persons the majority of whom are low- and moderate-income persons, a person may
be presumed to be a low- and moderate-income person in either of the following circumstances: 
&bull;if the employee resides in, or the assisted activity through which he or she is employed, is located in a census
tract that meets the Federal enterprise zone eligibility criteria; or 
&bull;the employee resides in a census tract where not less than 70 percent of the residents are low- and moderate-income
persons. 

The provision of new paragraph (4) concerning the percentage of low- and moderate-income persons residing in a census
tract was effective upon enactment. However, because existing HUD regulations do not clearly apply enterprise zone
criteria to census tracts, the portion of new paragraph (4) concerning census tracts that meet the Federal enterprise
zone eligibility criteria will not become effective until regulations are established identifying the specific
criteria that must be met. 
f. 

Housing Strategies. 

Any applicant which plans to undertake a housing activity with Fiscal Year 1995 funds under the HUD-administered
Small Cities Program must prepare and submit a comprehensive housing affordability strategy (CHAS) to be eligible
to apply for such assistance. In order to receive funding if the Small Cities application is approved, the housing
strategy must be approved by HUD. Further, any Small Cities application for which a housing strategy is required must
include a certification that the application is consistent with the housing strategy. 




