 

The Agency's basis for proposing to restrict use of HCFC141b is that this compound has a comparatively high
ODP_0.11. This is the highest ODP of all the HCFCs; in fact, the ODP for HCFC141b is nearly equal to the ODP for
MCF (0.12). For this reason, the Agency concludes that replacing MCF with HCFC141b is unacceptable, since
using HCFC141b in place of MCF would not provide the environmental benefits that the phase-out was designed
to achieve. 

To analyze the impacts from use of HCFC141b as a CFC113 replacement, the Agency estimated HCFC141b
use over time in each of the cleaning end uses, and projected health effects due to ozone depletion with the help of the
Atmospheric Stabilization Framework model. The modeling period starts in 1990 and measures health effects expected
for people born before 2030. 

The findings of this modeling show adverse health effects of the magnitude commonly associated with the use of ozone-depleting
compounds. For example, in the case of metals cleaning, the Agency projected that use of HCFC141b to replace
MCF where technically feasible could yield approximately 40,000 additional skin cancer cases and approximately
1,000 additional skin cancer fatalities compared to use of non-ozone-depleting substitutes. 

The Agency believes that these figures and the availability of superior substitutes as described in the section on
acceptable substitutes justify the proposal to list HCFC141b as an unacceptable substitute. The Agency believes
that, in almost all applications, other solvent cleaning substitutes are available that meet industry performance
and safety criteria. To reach its decision on HCFC141b use, the Agency also took into account the cost of other
alternatives. The analysis suggested that, although HCFC141b can be used with modification to existing equipment,
the capital costs for the retrofit and the materials costs in combination would be so high as to render other alternatives
comparatively affordable, even though they require new equipment. 

HCFC141b will be restricted as a substitute only where other alternatives exist to CFC113 for the application
in question. Several companies have already contacted the Agency, indicating that they have tested available alternatives
to CFC113, and that in some cases only HCFC141b meets performance or safety criteria. The most commonly
cited reasons for needing to use HCFC141b are either applications where a non-flammable solvent is required
or where sensitive parts could be destroyed by use of other cleaning systems. 

For these applications of HCFC141b, the Agency may find that the uses are acceptable subject to limitations
if it determines that these critical uses persist beyond the grandfathering period provided in the listing. For EPA
to issue a narrowed use acceptability listing, companies who believe they may need to use HCFC141b past the
effective date must first contact EPA, since the Agency has not yet received any indication from users of a technical
need to use HCFC141b past the grandfathering period granted under the unacceptability listing. Narrowed
use acceptability listings are described in more detail in section VII. of the Preamble. Companies interested in
submitting a SNAP application for a narrowed use are encouraged to contact the Agency at least 90 days in advance of
the expiration of the grandfathering period. Companies that intend to use HCFC141b within the parameters
of the final unacceptability listing and who will cease using HCFC141b after the expiration of the grandfathering
period need not contact the Agency. 

The Agency believes that the decision to restrict HCFC141b use as a CFC113/MCF substitute for metals
cleaning will have little effect on industry since few vendors of HCFC141b have been selling HCFC141b
as a metals cleaning substitute. Companies in this end use sector that want to replace CFC113 with HCFC141b
and use it beyond the date described in this SNAP determination should review the section referenced above. The Agency
expects to receive few such requests, however, since most metals cleaning is currently performed with MCF. 

(2) Electronics cleaning. (a) HCFC141b and its blends. HCFC141b and its blends are unacceptable as
substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in electronics cleaning, with acceptability subject to narrowed use limitations
to be granted by EPA, if necessary, as CFC113 replacements after the effective date of this listing. The effective
date for this prohibition is 30 days after the date of the final rule for new equipment (including retrofits made after
the effective date) and January 1, 1996 for existing equipment. The structure and reasons for this unacceptability
listing are the same as those for the decision on HCFC141b as a metals cleaning substitute. As in the metals cleaning
sector, the Agency will grant narrowed use acceptability listings in limited cases for use beyond the grandfathering
period of the listing, as necessary. As discussed earlier in this action in section VI.B., the Agency is authorized
to grandfather existing uses from a prohibition where appropriate under the four-part test established in 

Sierra Club 

v. 

EPA,

 supra. 

The Agency has conducted the four analyses required under this test, and it has concluded that the balance of equities
favors a grandfathering period of two years for existing equipment in this application. The prohibition set forth
in this action clearly represents a departure from previously established practice, as use of the substitute was
allowed previously. Existing users of HCFC141b who switched from class I substances into this solvent invested
in this substitute on the assumption that it would be considered an acceptable substitute. It would impose a severe
economic burden on these users to prohibit their use of the substitute immediately, with no provision of time to allow
them to recover their investment in existing equipment or acquire new equipment in a timely fashion. These factors
taken together appear to outweigh any statutory interest in applying the new rule immediately to existing users,
especially since the restriction would apply immediately to new equipment using HCFC141b, which would serve
to prevent further ozone depletion from use of HCFC141b in this application. 

As with metals cleaning applications for HCFC141b, the Agency modeled potential HCFC141b use in electronics
cleaning applications over time, and projected health effects due to ozone depletion with the help of the Atmospheric
Stabilization Framework model. For electronics cleaning, the maximum market penetration for HCFC141b as
a replacement for CFC113 is 90 percent. With this penetration, the model predicted approximately 400 additional
skin cancer fatalities and 30,000 additional skin cancer cases compared to uses of non-ozone-depleting substitutes.


(3) Precision cleaning. (a) HCFC141b. HCFC141b and its blends are unacceptable as substitutes for
CFC113 and MCF in precision cleaning, with acceptability subject to narrowed use limitations to be granted
by EPA, if necessary, as CFC113 replacements after the effective date of this listing. The effective date for
this listing is 30 days after the date of the final rule for new equipment and as of January 1, 1996, for existing equipment.
The structure and reasons for this decision are described in the section on metals cleaning. As discussed earlier
in this action in section VI.B., the Agency is authorized to grandfather existing uses from a prohibition where appropriate
under the four-part test established in 

Sierra Club 

v. 

EPA,

 supra. 

The Agency has conducted the four analyses required under this test, and it has concluded that the balance of equities
favors a grandfathering period of two years for existing equipment in this application. The prohibition set forth
in this action clearly represents a departure from previously established practice, as use of the substitute was
allowed previously. Existing users of HCFC141b who switched from class I substances into this solvent invested
in this substitute on the assumption that it would be considered an acceptable substitute. It would impose a severe
economic burden on these users to prohibit their use of the substitute immediately, with no provision of time to allow
them to recover their investment in existing equipment or acquire new equipment in a timely fashion. These factors
taken together outweigh any statutory interest in applying the new rule immediately to existing users, especially
since the restriction would apply immediately to new equipment using HCFC141b, which would serve to prevent
further ozone depletion from use of HCFC141b in this application. 

In the case of precision cleaning uses of HCFC141b, the Agency's modeling of HCFC141b use as a CFC113
replacement projected approximately 5,000 additional skin cancer cases when compared to use of non-ozone-depleting
substitutes. 



