 

(b) Non-captive-bred species. The list in this paragraph includes species of non-captive-bred exotic birds and
countries for which importation into the United States is not prohibited by 15.11. The species are grouped
taxonomically by order, and may only be imported from the approved country, except as provided under a permit issued
pursuant to subpart C of this part. 



<TABLE>







1Species 
1Common name 
1Country 
1Date approved 
 





</TABLE>
 


(To be determined at a later date) 




4. Subpart E is revised to read as follows: 




15.41General application procedures. 
15.42Approval criteria and conditions. 



Subpart E_Qualifying facilities breeding exotic birds in captivity 



15.41 

General application procedures. 



(a) Any person may petition the Director to determine whether a foreign exotic bird breeding facility may be designated
as a qualifying facility. The Director may approve foreign breeding facilities to import exotic birds otherwise
prohibited by 15.11, in accordance with the approval criteria of this subpart. Approved species from qualifying
facilities do not require permits issued under this part 15 and are not limited as to the number of birds that can be imported,
for purposes of the WBCA. 

(b) Applications for approval of foreign breeding facilities under this subpart shall be submitted to the Director,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of Management Authority, 4401 N. Fairfax Drive, Arlington, Virginia 22203.
Each application must be submitted on an official application (Form 3200) provided by the Service and must
contain all of the information specified in this section. The sufficiency of the application shall be determined
by the Director in accordance with the requirements of this part. A separate petition must be submitted for each species
for which the approval is requested. 

(c) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Director may approve foreign breeding facilities, which will allow
individuals to import exotic bird species otherwise prohibited by section 15.11, if they are captive-bred in the
facility. Each application shall provide the following information and any such other information that the Director
may require: 

(1) A description of the exotic bird species to be imported, including the common and scientific name of the species;


(2) The name and address of the foreign breeding facility, and a statement of the reasons supporting approval; 

(3) Certification in writing from the Management Authority of the country in which the facility is located that the
facility has the capability of breeding the species in captivity in the numbers to be traded without detriment to the
wild population, and that the operator of the facility has not been convicted of any violations of the country's laws
governing trade and export of avian species; 

(4) A summary of the legislation implementing the Convention in the country in which the facility is located; 


