 



Earlier date

 is the earlier of the special access zone date and the transport zone date.


Earlier service

 is special access if the special access zone date precedes the transport zone date, and is transport if the transport
zone date precedes the special access zone date.


Later date

 is the later of the special access zone date and the transport zone date.


Later service

 is transport if the special access zone date precedes the transport zone date, and is special access if the transport
zone date precedes the special access zone date.


Revenue weight

 of a given group of services included in a zone category is the ratio of base period demand for the given service rate
elements included in the category priced at existing rates, to the base period demand for the entire group of rate elements
comprising the category priced at existing rates.


Special access zone date

 is the date on which a local exchange carrier tariff establishing divergent special access rates in different zones,
as described in 69.123(c) of this chapter, becomes effective.



Transport zone date

 is the date on which a local exchange carrier tariff establishing divergent switched transport rates in different
zones, as described in 69.123(d) of this chapter, becomes effective.
(2) 

Simultaneous Introduction of Special Access and Transport Zones.

 Local exchange carriers subject to price cap regulation that have established density pricing zones pursuant to
69.123 of this chapter, and whose special access zone date and transport zone date occur on the same date, shall
initially establish density pricing zone SBIs and bands pursuant to the methodology in 61.47(h).
(3) 

Sequential Introduction of Zones in the Same Tariff Year.

 Notwithstanding 61.47(h), local exchange carriers subject to price cap regulation that have established
density pricing zones pursuant to 69.123 of this chapter, and whose special access zone date and transport
zone date occur on different dates during the same tariff year, shall, on the earlier date, establish density pricing
zone SBIs and pricing bands using the methodology described in 61.47(h), but applicable to the earlier service
only. On the later date, such carriers shall recalculate the SBIs and pricing bands to limit the pricing flexibility
of the services included in each density pricing zone category, as reflected in its SBI, as follows:
(i) The upper pricing band shall be a weighted average of the following:
(A) The upper pricing band that applied to the earlier services included in the zone category on the day preceding the
later date, weighted by the revenue weight of the earlier services included in the zone category; and
(B) 1.05 times the SBI value for the services included in the zone category on the day preceding the later date, weighted
by the revenue weight of the later services included in the zone category.

(ii) The lower pricing band shall be a weighted average of the following:
(A) The lower pricing band that applied to the earlier services included in the zone category on the day preceding the
later date, weighted by the revenue weight of the earlier services included in the zone category; and
(B) 0.90 times the SBI value for the services included in the zone category on the day preceding the later date, weighted
by the revenue weight of the later services included in the zone category.

(iii) On the later date, the SBI value for the zone category shall be equal to the SBI value for the category on the day
preceding the later date.
(4) 

Introduction of Zones in Different Tariff Years.

 Notwithstanding 61.47(h), those local exchange carriers subject to price cap regulation that have established
density pricing zones pursuant to 69.123 of this chapter, and whose special access zone date and transport
zone date do not occur within the same tariff year, shall, on the earlier date, establish density pricing zone SBIs
and pricing bands using the methodology described in 61.47(h), but applicable to the earlier service only.

