 

(2) 

Single occupancy space requirements. 

All single rooms or cells shall have at least 
sixty square feet of floor space, provided inmates spend no more than ten hours per day locked in. When 
confinement exceeds ten hours per day, there shall be at least seventy square feet of floor space. 
(3) 

Multiple occupancy space requirements. 

Where used, multiple occupancy rooms or 
cells shall house inmates, who have been screened for suitability to and classified for group living. The rooms 
shall provide: 
(i) continuous observation by staff; 
(ii) a minimum of fifty square feet of floor space per occupant in the sleeping 
area and a clear floor-to-ceiling height of not less than eight feet; 
(iii) natural light; 
(iv) a toilet(s) with some degree of privacy; 
(v) an operable wash basin(s) with hot and cold running water; 
(vi) access to showers; and 
(vii) beds above floor level and a locker or container for each occupant's belongings. 
(4) 

Single occupancy furnishings and conditions (general population). 

Each room or cell 
shall have, at a minimum: 
(i) natural light; 
(ii) toilet facilities with some degree of privacy that are located above floor level 
and that are available for use without staff assistance twenty-four hours a day; 
(iii) a wash basin with hot and cold running water; 
(iv) access to showers; and 
(v) a bed above floor level, a desk or writing surface, safety-type hooks or closet 
space, and a chair or stool. 
(5) 

Single occupancy furnishings and conditions (special management). 

Segregation rooms shall provide living conditions that approximate those of the general inmate population; all
exceptions shall be clearly documented. Each room or cell shall have, at a minimum: 
(i) natural light; 
(ii) a minimum of seventy square feet of floor space; 
(iii) toilet facilities with some degree of privacy that are located above floor level 
and are available for use without staff assistance twenty-four hours a day; 
(iv) access to showers; 
(v) hot and cold running water; and 
(vi) a bed at or above floor level, a desk or writing surface, and a stool. 
(6) 

Space, furnishings and conditions for dayrooms. 

The facility shall provide separate 
dayroom space. The dayroom shall provide: 
(i) a minimum of thirty-five square feet of space per inmate exclusive of 
lavatories; 
(ii) showers and toilets with some degree of privacy; and 
(iii) seating and writing surfaces, appropriate to the classification which uses this 
space, sufficient for the number of inmates who use the dayroom at one time. 
(7) 

Toilets. 

The facility shall provide operable toilets at a minimum ratio of one for 
every twelve inmates in male facilities and one for every eight inmates in female facilities. Urinals may be 
substituted for up to one-half of the toilets in male facilities. All housing units with three or more inmates shall

have two toilets. 
(8) 

Wash basins. 

Inmates shall have access to operable wash basins with hot and cold 
running water in the housing units at a minimum ratio of one basin for every twelve occupants. 
(9) 

Showers. 

Inmates shall have access to operable showers with temperature-controlled 
hot and cold running water at a minimum of one shower for every eight inmates. Water for showers shall be 
controlled thermostatically to temperatures ranging from one hundred degrees to one hundred-twenty degrees 
Fahrenheit. 
(10) 

Housing for the disabled. 

Disabled inmates shall be housed in a manner that provides 
for their safety in compliance with 25 U.S.C. 794 (the Rehabilitation Act of 1973) as amended, 41 CFR 10119.6
(Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards), and 43 CFR Part 17, yet prevents their being discriminated 
against in their use of the facility. 
(11) 

Work or education release housing. 

Inmates who participate in work or education release programs shall be housed separately from inmates in the general
population. 
(12) 

Exercise and recreation. 

The facility shall provide secure outdoor, covered or enclosed exercise areas. Exercise areas shall be adequate
in size and type to ensure that each inmate shall be 
offered at least one hour of access daily regardless of climatic conditions. 
(13) 

Program Spaces. 

The facility shall provide a minimum of one accessible multi-purpose room. 
(14) 

Visiting Spaces. 

The facility shall provide a visiting room, which allows staff to 
observe visiting. 
(15) 

Dining. 

If dining occurs outside the dayroom, the facility shall provide a minimum of 
fifteen square feet per occupant. 
(16) 

Food Service Spaces. 

When the facility provides for food preparation, it shall have 
adequate space for food processing, storage, refrigeration and sanitation. Toilet and wash basin facilities shall
be 
available to food service personnel and inmates in the vicinity of the food preparation area. The square footage 
of the kitchen shall be appropriate to the needs of the facility. 
(17) 

Janitor closet. 

The facility shall provide a secure, well-ventilated janitor closet, which 
includes sink and adequate space for the storage of cleaning implements and supplies. 
(18) 

Storage of toxic, flammable and caustic items. 

The facility shall provide secure 
storage, outside the secure area, for flammable, toxic and caustic items. 
(19) 

Clothing and supply storage. 

The facility shall provide storage space for inmate clothing, bedding, mattresses, personal hygiene items and facility
supplies. 
(20) 

Laundry. 

The facility shall provide access to laundry services or laundry space and 
equipment. 
(21) 

Booking. 

The facility shall provide an intake/booking and release area which shall be 
located inside the security perimeter, but outside inmate living quarters. The booking area shall include: 



