 

6. Matching Criteria 
The mechanism for matching youth with mentors should be described. Where possible, there should be a match of similar
ethnic and gender characteristics. 
7. Mentor Support and Training Activities 
Mentor support is essential to ensure program success. Each program must employ a program coordinator for mentors
to contact for feedback and advice. Periodic feedback from mentors and mentees should be obtained, especially during
the first two months of the relationship. 
8. Mentor/Mentee Activities 
Applicants must assure that projects operated in secondary schools will provide mentees with a variety of activities,
including an opportunity to spend time or participate in the work environment, witness job skills useful for obtaining
employment, obtain assistance with homework, and be exposed to positive new experiences. Projects involving elementary
school age children should include such activities as academic assistance, exposure to positive new activities,
and emotional support. 
9. Evaluation Methods and Processes 
Evaluation is critical to assuring that the mentoring program is operating as designed and that it is meeting its goals
both in terms of the process and the impact on the mentee. Data on the program operations must be collected as well as
data on whether mentoring is having an impact on academic performance and behavior. OJJDP is required by the Congress
to submit a report regarding the success and effectiveness of these programs 120 days after the programs' termination;
consequently, programs funded under JUMP must be capable of providing this information and must provide written
assurance that they will participate in a national program evaluation. 
Applicants should address how their programs either currently comply with these guidelines or describe the steps
they will take to assure compliance. Applicants must demonstrate that they have or will create an infrastructure
capable of fully supporting their program. 
Applicants should provide a specific timetable for all program activities indicating what will be accomplished
the first year, the second year, and the third year, if they are requesting funding for multiple years. 
Applicants must demonstrate that they have the support of schools and, where appropriate, public agencies and other
community groups that might be directly involved. 
Applications should not exceed 25 double-spaced pages. 
10. Staffing/Budget 
Whether the school or an eligible public/private non-profit group is the primary applicant, it is suggested that
one full-time staff coordinator oversee up to 6070 matches. In addition, a second individual, either a volunteer,
paid, or assigned employee, should generally be expected to devote at least 67 hours a week to this project.
A cost of $75 per mentoring-match per year is also recommended. Program funds cannot be used directly to compensate
mentors except for reimbursement for reasonable incidental expenses, such as transportation, that are directly
associated with the mentoring program. 
Products: If appropriate, applicants should describe what written materials they will produce and how materials
may be useful to their own program participants and others hoping to replicate their efforts. 


References 


Freedman, Marc, The Kindness of Strangers: Reflections on the Mentoring Movement, Public/Private Ventures, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, Winter 1992. 
Hamilton, Stephen F., Apprenticeship for Adulthood, Free Press, New York 1990, p. 156. 



Eligibility Requirements: Applications are invited from local education agencies and public/private non-profit
organizations that can demonstrate knowledge of and/or experience with mentoring programs, as well as working with
volunteers and youth. When a local education agency is the primary applicant, it must partner with a public or private
agency or a public/private non-profit agency. Likewise, a public/private non-profit agency which applies as a primary
applicant must partner with the local education agency. National organizations are not eligible for these funds.
Consideration will be given to the geographic distribution (urban and rural) of applications and a variety of program
designs. 





