 

&bull;increase public understanding of jury decisions and the juror selection and service process; foster positive
attitudes toward jury service; and enhance the attractiveness of juror service through, e.g., incentives to participate,
modifications of terms of service, and/or juror orientation and education programs. 

Institute funds may not be used to directly or indirectly support legal representation of individuals in specific
cases. In addition, it is unlikely that the Institute will support development or testing of additional automated
kiosks such as those being used by the courts in Arizona, California, and Florida. 

Previous SJI-supported projects that address these issues include: evaluation of an experimental community court
in New York City; development of a manual for management of court interpretation services and materials for training
and assisting court interpreters; development of touchscreen computer systems, videotapes and written materials
to assist pro se litigants; a demonstration of the use of volunteers to monitor guardianships; studies of effective
and efficient methods of providing legal representation to indigent parties in criminal and family cases and the
applicability of various dispute resolution procedures to different cultural groups; guidelines for court-annexed
day care systems; and development of a manual for implementing innovations in jury selection, use, and management;
technical assistance and training to facilitate implementation of the Standards on Jury Management; development
of a guide for making juries accessible to persons with disabilities. 

b. 

Education and Training for Judges and Other Key Court Personnel. 

The Institute continues to be interested in supporting an array of projects to strengthen and broaden the availability
of court education programs at the State, regional, and national levels. Accordingly, this category is divided into
five subsections: (i) State Initiatives; (ii) National and Regional Education Programs; (iii) Judicial Education
Technical Assistance; (iv) Conferences; and (v) Scholarships. All Institute-supported conferences and education
and training seminars should be accessible to persons with disabilities in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities
Act. 

i. 

State Initiatives. 

This category includes support for training projects developed or endorsed by a State's courts for the benefit of
judges and other court personnel in that State. Funding of these initiatives does not include support for training
programs conducted by national providers of judicial education unless such a program is designed specifically for
a particular State and has the express support of the State Chief Justice, State Court Administrator, or State Judicial
Educator. The types of programs to be supported within this category should be defined by individual State need but
may include: 

(a) 

Development of State Court Education Programs. 

Projects to assist development of State court education programs include, but are not limited to: 

&bull;Seed money for the creation of an ongoing State-based entity for planning, developing, and administering
judicial education programs; 

&bull;Seed money for innovative interdisciplinary and, as appropriate, interbranch educational programs, such
as those addressing: (1) The development of better working relationships across court divisions and between courts
and criminal justice, social service, and treatment agencies; (2) organizational and leadership development,
including team-building; and (3) the specific educational needs of nonsupervisory staff as well as those filling
more direct managerial roles; and (4) the development and implementation of strategies for coping with the gap between
resources and the demand for services; and 

&bull;The development of the expertise, information, and commitment required for the preparation and implementation
of State court education plans, including model plans for career-long education of the judiciary (e.g., new judge
training and orientation followed by continuing education and career development) and for the career-long education
of court managers, clerks, and other court personnel. 





