 




<USBUREAU>Centers for Disease Control and Prevention</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[CDC305A] </RINDOCK>


Fiscal Year 1994 Preventive Health Services; Addendum to Program Announcement 305; Cooperative Agreements for
National/Regional Minority Organization HIV/STD Prevention, Immunization, and TB Projects 



Summary 


The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announces the availability of fiscal year (FY) 1994 supplemental
funds for current awardees of the National/Regional Minority Organizations (NRMO) program to provide technical
assistance and training to community planning groups and the State and local health departments working with them
to facilitate representation, inclusiveness, and parity in the implementation of HIV-prevention community planning.
This competitive announcement is an addendum to 

Federal Register

 (FR) Notice 305, published in the 

Federal Register

 on June 4, 1993 [58 FR 31721], in which current recipients are collaborating with community organizations and health
agencies to coordinate technical assistance and training programs that serve racial and ethnic minority populations.
Approximately $750,000 is expected to be available for a one-time award in FY 1994 to supplement up to 5 cooperative
agreements. The awards are not expected to exceed $150,000 each and will not be funded beyond the current budget period.
It is expected that these supplemental awards will be made on or about February 28, 1994. 
The purpose of this addendum to Program Announcement 305 is to provide State and local health departments and other
community organizations with the necessary technical assistance and training to: (1) Assure that inclusion, representation,
and parity occur in the community planning process; and (2) Enhance selection processes for equitable representation
in HIV prevention planning activities, thereby enhancing the capacity of affected communities and non-governmental
organizations to participate effectively and equally in the planning process. 
The CDC shall be responsible for coordinating all requests for technical assistance and training between the NRMO
and the community organizations (via State and local health departments) that are requiring the technical assistance;
providing consultation and technical assistance in planning, operating, and evaluating program activities under
this announcement; assisting in developing plans for evaluation of all program activities and services and interpreting
evaluation findings; assisting successful applicants in collaborating with State and local health departments
and other PHS grantees; facilitating the transfer of successful prevention interventions and program models to
other areas; monitoring the successful applicant's program activities, protection of client confidentiality,
and compliance with other requirements; and facilitating the exchange of program information and technical assistance
among community organizations, health departments, and NRMOs. 
The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention objectives
of ``Healthy People 2000,'' a PHS-led national activity to reduce morbidity and mortality and improve the quality
of life. This announcement is related to the priority areas of Educational and Community-Based Programs, HIV Infection,
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs), and Immunization and Infectious Diseases. (To order a copy of ``Healthy People
2000,'' see the section entitled ``Where to Obtain Additional Information.'') 


Authority 


This program is authorized under sections 301(a) and 317 of the Public Health Service Act, [42 U.S.C. 241(a) and 247b],
as amended. 


Eligibility 


Eligible applicants for this competitive supplement are the current cooperative agreement recipients under announcement
305, ``National/Regional Minority Organizations HIV/STD Prevention, Immunization, and TB Projects.'' Eligibility
is limited to these organizations since this is a competitive supplement to a pre-existing program announcement.
The program announcement and application kit have been sent to all eligible applicants. 


Other Requirements 


OMB Clearance 


Projects that involve the collection of information from 10 or more individuals and funded by cooperative agreement
will be subject to review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction Act. 


HIV Program Review Panel Requirements 


Recipients must comply with the terms and conditions included in the document titled, ``Content of HIV/AIDS-Related
Written Materials, Pictorials, Audiovisuals, Questionnaires, Survey Instruments, and Educational Sessions
in Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Assistance Programs (June 1992),'' a copy of which is included
in the application kit. In complying with the program review panel requirements contained in this document, recipients
are encouraged to use a current program review panel such as the one created by the State health department's HIV/AIDS
Prevention Program. If the recipient forms its own program review panel, at least one member must also be a designated
representative of a State or local health department. 





