 

i. 

Volatile methyl siloxanes.

 Cyclic and linear volatile methyl siloxanes (VMSs) are currently undergoing investigation for use as substitutes
for class I compounds in metals, electronics and precision cleaning. Because of their chemical properties, these
compounds show promise as substitutes for cleaning precision guidance equipment in the defense and aerospace industries.
In addition, the volatile methyl siloxanes have high purity and are therefore relatively easy to recover and recycle.
In the cleaning system using VMSs, the fluids are used to clean parts in a closed header system using a totally enclosed
process. The parts are drained and then dried using vacuum baking.

j. 

Supercritical fluid cleaning, plasma cleaning, UV-ozone cleaning.

 Supercritical fluid cleaning, plasma cleaning and UV-ozone cleaning are all three high-technology methods of cleaning
parts. These substitutes are mostly of interest for cleaning electronic parts or for precision cleaning, although
supercritical carbon dioxide is being investigated for metal cleaning applications as well.

k. 

Dibromomethane.

 The Agency has received notification that dibromomethane (also referred to as methylene bromide) can be used as a
substitute cleaning agent. This chemical has an ozone depletion potential of .17, although it is not yet listed under
the Clean Air Act. In addition, dibromomethane is believed to be more toxic than methylene chloride, although toxicity
studies are scarce since industrial applications in the past have been limited. As a result, the Agency intends to
propose this substitute as unacceptable in a separate rule-making.

l. 

HFC4310mee.

 HFC4310mee will soon be commercially available as a solvent cleaning agent. The Agency has received preliminary
data on this chemical, and anticipates that its use will be limited due to global warming concerns to applications
where it can replace longer-lived PFCs or where its special chemical properties make it the only viable substitute
for a class I or II compound. This chemical will be undergoing review under the Premanufacture Notice program of the
Toxic Substances Control Act.

Other HFCs are also being developed for solvent usage, although their composition is still proprietary.



3. Comment Response



The majority of public comments received on the proposed solvents cleaning SNAP decisions focused on the determinations
for perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and for chlorinated solvents. Most commenters on PFCs requested that the Agency expand
the acceptability determination for PFCs to parts other than computer components, as stated in the SNAP Notice of
Proposed Rule-Making (NPRM). Although many commenters agreed that a measure of control due to global warming effects
was necessary, several companies described in detail situations where PFCs are believed to be the only viable alternative
to CFC113 and methyl chloroform. The Agency agrees with these commenters, and the final SNAP determination
lists the PFCs as acceptable in all cases where no other alternative meets performance or safety standards. This approach
does not diverge significantly from that described in the NPRM, in which EPA noted its intention to examine the possibility
that PFCs may be necessary for cleaning other parts in addition to computer components.

Opinions on the chlorinated solvents diverged widely. A number of commenters disagreed with the Agency's decision
to list these chemicals as acceptable substitutes for solvents cleaning. This viewpoint was countered by other commenters
who strongly agreed with the continuing need to use chlorinated solvents. The Agency has not altered its decision
on these chemicals, and remains convinced that with responsible control measures and housekeeping practices, potential
risks from these solvents can be significantly reduced and that overall risks to human health and the environment
will not increase significantly as a result of substitution.



4. Listing Decisions



a. 

Acceptable substitutes. 

(1) Metals cleaning. (a) Semi-aqueous/aqueous cleaners. Semi-aqueous and aqueous cleaners are acceptable substitutes
for CFC113 and MCF in metals cleaning. The determinations in this action cover semi-aqueous cleaners using
terpenes, petroleum hydrocarbons, and alcohols. To complete its modeling of the ability of aqueous and semi-aqueous
substitutes to replace CFC113 and MCF in existing applications, the Agency examined their ability to meet
cleaning requirements in the metals cleaning sector. Each of these alternatives has the potential to service as much
as 70 percent of the metals cleaning market. To date, companies have shown the greatest interest in aqueous formulations
for metals cleaning, which is why the Agency has reviewed this option in its first round of SNAP determinations.

Concern over the water-based cleaners has historically focussed on the potential for adverse effects on aquatic
life following discharge of wastewaters to surface water bodies. Examples of these effects include death to aquatic
microorganisms, fish teratogenicity, or ecosystem effects such as inhibition of algal growth or bioconcentration.
In this case, the Agency wanted to ensure that, in restricting the use of CFC113 and methyl chloroform, it would
not simply be replacing risks from air emissions with equal risks from contaminated water effluent.






