 

The process defined in Order 5100.38A has been used successfully to evaluate several thousand AIP grant requests
each year and annually award as many as 1,500 grants-in-aid. Most of these grants-in-aid are for amounts of less than
one million dollars. However, recent developments have led the FAA to revise the existing award process. These developments
include: the need to improve the effectiveness of Federal airport infrastructure investments in light of an expected
lack of growth in Federal AIP budgets; issuance of Executive Order 12893, ``Principles for Federal Infrastructure
Investments'' (January 26, 1994); and guidance from Congress citing the need for economic airport investment criteria.

After steady growth in the late 1980's and early 1990's, Federal AIP budgets are projected to remain at or near current
levels for the next several years. At the same time, the cost and number of major airport capacity projects is expected
to increase significantly to accommodate forecast growth in the volume of aircraft operations. Effective Federal
investment of discretionary AIP funds will become increasingly important.

Executive Order 12893 is intended to promote more effective infrastructure investments. The Order instructs agencies
to conduct systematic economic analysis of these investments. The Order permits consideration of market and non-market
benefits and costs in the economic analysis. In addition, it directs that benefits and costs be quantified and monetized
to the maximum extent practicable and appropriately discounted over the full life-cycle of each project.

In May 1993, the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Transportation released a report identifying investment
criteria that the subcommittee believes should be established for evaluating the merits of infrastructure investments
in transportation. The report recommended analysis of project life-cycle costs and benefits. One set of criteria
was formulated for each transportation mode, including air transportation. Similarly, the General Accounting
Office (GAO) has testified to Congress that the FAA needs to better target AIP funds to the needs of the system.

To improve the effectiveness of AIP investment decisions, the FAA will immediately implement a number of revisions
to the project selection criteria identified in Order 5100.38A. These changes are limited to the evaluation of applications
for discretionary AIP grants. They are designed to strengthen those features of the current award process that enable
the prompt and fair evaluation of large numbers of grant applications, but at the same time permit the FAA to establish
investment priorities and conduct economic evaluations of projects that require disproportionately large amounts
of discretionary capacity funds. The new criteria described in this policy apply to all new projects to be considered
for AIP grant awards in FY 1995 and subsequent years. On a case-by-case basis, the FAA may apply the new criteria to ongoing
projects approved for AIP grant awards in prior years.

Several of the changes that the FAA is implementing are administrative, designed to ensure accountable and consistent
applications of the Priority System to all competing airport project proposals. The FAA will establish specific
national performance goals at the beginning of each fiscal year. In FY 1995, the goals relate to five factors of the
airport system: safety; security; infrastructure preservation; capacity; and environmental compatibility.
Performance targets with regard to capacity-enhancing development at congested airports, good pavement conditions
at airports, and relocation or insulation of homes and public buildings currently located in 75 DNL noise zones are
now under development. Specific time frames for accomplishing these and other goals will be established in conjunction
with an evaluation of the current airport system now being conducted. Establishment of specific numerical goals
ensures that essential improvements are being implemented in a systematic and measurable manner.

Under new guidance, AIP-eligible projects in all FAA regions must be consistently ranked according to the Priority
System and must meet national threshold scores to be considered for AIP discretionary funding. These threshold scores
will be determined by comparing the value of total grant applications to the amount of money available for discretionary
grants at the national level (based on annual obligation limitations and program authorization requirements).
These reforms will assure uniform levels of airport system safety, quality, and performance for passengers, shippers,
and aircraft operators throughout the Nation.

The FAA will strengthen its selection criteria by the application of benefit-cost analysis (BCA) to projects intended
to preserve or enhance capacity for which sponsors are seeking large amounts of AIP discretionary funds. Included
would be projects to add new capacity or reconstruct existing capacity. Grant award will be contingent on demonstrating
that a project's benefits will exceed its costs. Initially, FAA staff will conduct the BCA to ensure the consistent
application of BCA methodologies among different projects. Until further notice, application of BCA will be limited
to those capacity projects for which the total value of requested discretionary capacity grants is expected to equal
or exceed $10 million over the life of the project. This limit assures that costs likely to be incurred in preparing
a BCA are reasonable with respect to the value of the application(s) being evaluated. The $10 million threshold is
also the same value at which the FAA must notify Congress prior to the issuance of LOI awards.

The FAA will amend Order 5100.38A to incorporate the criteria described in this notice of policy. The FAA will also
publish summary information about the application of the grant selection process in its ``Annual Report of Accomplishments
Under the Airport Improvement Program.'' This report will help to keep interested parties informed of the FAA's progress
in implementing the reforms described in this policy statement.



