 

This section has been revised to clarify how an owner shall make vacant 
units in an elderly project if the owner has adopted the secondary preferences 
and there are an insufficient number of preferences, or if the owner has not 
adopted the secondary preferences and there are an insufficient number of 
preferences. 


Comment. 

One commenter requested that the rule provide not only for 
HUD's right to review at any time the accuracy of the owner's identification 
of a project as an elderly project, but an owner's implementation of the 
system of preferences authorized by subtitle D. 


Response. 

There is no need for the rule to include a provision 
addressing HUD's right to review an owner's implementation of the system of 
preferences authorized by subtitle D. An owner' implementation of the system 
of occupancy preferences is subject to HUD's ongoing monitoring activities of 
covered projects, as well as civil rights complaint investigations and 
compliance reviews. 


Comment. 

One commenter stated that the final rule must address the 
issue of whether a tenant who was a non-elderly disabled person upon admission 
to a covered section 8 project may still be counted as non-elderly disabled 
when that person reaches the age of 50. The commenter stated that any tenant 
who is counted for the purpose of determining whether a project is meeting its 
required set-aside of units for non-elderly tenants who are disabled should 
continue to be counted for such purpose as long as the tenant continues to 
reside in the project notwithstanding the fact that the tenant reaches the age 
of 50. 


Response. 

HUD disagrees with the commenter. As discussed in an earlier 
response, the statute allows for the possibility of zero reservation of units. 
However, where there is a required reservation of units (which HUD anticipates 
will be the case in the majority of covered section 8 projects), HUD believes 
that the Congress intended for project owners to maintain the required 
percentage of units for non-elderly disabled persons. When a non-elderly 
disabled person reaches the age of 50, this person's unit can no longer be 
counted as part of the required percentage of units reserved for non-elderly 
disabled families. The preamble to the May 3, 1994 interim rule addressed 
this issue in part when it stated: ``In calculating actual utilization of units 
reserved for disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly, units 
occupied by elderly families where a member of the family is disabled do not 
count as part of the required percentage'' (59 FR 22920). 


Comment. 

One commenter stated that the preamble to the May 3, 1994 
interim rule imposes an important responsibility on owners, that did not 
appear in the text of the regulation. That responsibility is to give notice 
to families on the waiting list adversely affected by the elderly preference. 
(See 59 FR 22921.) The commenter urged that this preamble language be 
included in the text of the regulation. 


Response. 

The commenter is correct. In the preamble to the May 3, 1994 
interim rule, HUD stated as follows:

 

[W]hen an owner's decision to provide preferences to elderly 
families under subtitle D would have an adverse effect on non-elderly families on the waiting list, the owner would
be required 
to notify those families of the new policy and how this policy may 
affect them. The notification requirement would be triggered if 
the current percentage of disabled families who are neither 
elderly nor near-elderly exceeds the minimum required percentage, 
and non-elderly families on the waiting list (including those with 
disabilities) may be passed over for covered section 8 units for 
the elderly, or if the project is one of the few which will have 
no units set aside for such disabled families under subtitle D.

 

HUD had intended to include this notification requirement in the May 3, 1994 
interim rule, and its omission was inadvertent. This requirement appears in 
this final rule with one change. (See new 880.612a(a)(1)(iii) and comparable 
sections in other parts covered by this rule.) The final rule provides that 
notification is triggered if the percentage of disabled families who are 
neither elderly nor near-elderly ``equals or exceeds'' the minimum required 
percentage. 


The purpose of requiring this notice is to alert non-elderly families on 
the waiting list where the owner's election of the preference scheme would 
possibly have an ``adverse effect'' on them. Once the percentage of non-elderly 
disabled families in occupancy ``is equal to'' the required percentage 
determined under subtitle D, non-elderly families may be passed over for 
covered section 8 units, unless, of course, the next unit to become vacant is 
a unit occupied by a non-elderly family. 


Comment. 

One commenter stated that the preamble to the May 3, 1994 
interim rule makes the point that owners are not allowed to use the interim 
rule to remove applicants from the waiting list, and that this point should be 
included in the text of the regulations. 


Response. 

HUD agrees with the commenter, and as noted earlier in this 
preamble has added a new paragraph (a)(1)(iii) to the rule which makes this 
point. (See new 880.612a(a)(1)(iv) and comparable sections in other parts 
covered by this rule.) 
Other Comments for Clarifying Changes or Editorial Corrections. Several 
other comments requested adoption of preamble language in the rule for clarity 
purposes or recommended editorial changes to certain of the regulatory 
provisions. 


Response. 

The significant clarifying changes have been individually 
addressed in this section of the preamble. With respect to other comments 
requesting clarifying changes, HUD determined that these requests for changes 
did not address significant issues that needed to be addressed individually in 
this preamble. In many cases, HUD determined that the clarification was not 
needed because the May 3, 1994 interim rule clearly and adequately addressed 
the issue or other HUD regulations addressed the issue of concern expressed by 
the commenter. An example of the former situation is one commenter's request 
that the subtitle D rule state that the subtitle D preferences do not apply to 
unassisted units. Since the rule clearly states that the subtitle D 
preference system applies to assisted, vacant units, HUD determined that there 
was no need to adopt the language suggested by the commenter. A few comments 
concerning clarification involved commenters requests to provide examples of 
application of subtitle D to certain circumstances. This, however, is the 
type of guidance best addressed by a handbook or other technical assistance 
materials, which HUD is now preparing. 



