 

Onsite personnel would not be exposed to unique hazards and would be adequately protected from potential exposure
to radionuclides or other hazards by the existing health and safety programs. Existing facility design features
would reduce direct worker contact with radioactive materials. 

The formation of dioxins from Glass Melter operation would be virtually precluded due to specific technological
design features of the equipment. For instance, the elevated operating temperatures of the Glass Melter would result
in a high destruction and removal efficiency (99.9999% in test burns). In addition, the rapid cooling of the offgases
below dioxin-forming temperatures, as recommended by the Environmental Protection Agency for municipal waste
incinerators, would also be used to preclude dioxin formation. 

The worst reasonably foreseeable accident involving the Glass Melter would be a fire on the loading dock that would
result in the complete vaporization of the contents of ten mixed waste storage drums. The estimated frequency of such
an accident is once every 100,000 years. The effective dose equivalent to the maximally exposed individual [approximately
200 m (220 yd) downwind] would be 0.2 mrem, well below Environmental Protection Agency standards. The environmental
assessment shows that the health risk from such exposures would be very small. Predicted concentrations of nonradiological
pollutants would meet the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency's maximum acceptable ground-level concentrations.
Taking account of the low probability of such an event and the small magnitude of the consequences, the health risk
posed by the accident is insignificant. 

No endangered species, critical habitats, floodplains, wetlands, or historical or archaeological resources would
be affected by the proposed action. 



Alternatives Considered:

 In the environmental assessment, DOE considered two onsite alternatives to the proposed action and seven offsite
alternatives in the context of the original proposed action (i.e., assuming the continuing operation of the Mound
Plant). The discussion below, however, while being based on the environmental assessment, reflects the current
proposed use of the Glass Melter following DOE's decision to close the Plant, which is to treat only mixed waste backlog.


&bull;

No Action.

 The present practices of waste storage and disposal would continue and the Glass Melter would not be used. Most of the
mixed waste backlog is liquid, and much of it is combustible. Storage of the untreated waste, therefore, could adversely
impact human health and the environment, especially in the case of a fire in the storage facility. 

&bull;

Administrative Action.

 Another alternative would be to rely upon the established Mound Waste Minimization and Pollution Prevention program
to identify, screen, and analyze options to reduce the generation of waste. Waste that is in storage would not be affected
by this program. The need for treatment options would persist. 

&bull;

Offsite Treatment and Disposal.

 These alternatives would involve the transportation of mixed wastes to designated sites. DOE considered seven options
for offsite treatment. All of the offsite treatment alternatives (i.e., all offsite alternatives except the Nevada
Test Site) would involve thermal treatment.

 


_

Quadrex HPS, Inc. (Gainesville, FL)

. This commercial facility cannot accept certain of the Mound mixed wastes, so this alternative would not, by itself,
address the need to treat such wastes. 









