 

(3) Subtract from the total obtained under paragraph (f)(2) 
of this section the number of students who were enrolled in the 
program at the end of that award year. 

(4) Determine the number of regular students who, during 
that award year, received the degree, certificate, or other 
recognized educational credential awarded for successfully 
completing the program. 

(5) Divide the number determined under paragraph (f)(4) of 
this section by the total obtained under paragraph (f)(3) of this 
section. 

(g) 

Calculation of placement rate. 

(1) An institution 
shall calculate its placement rate for an educational program for 
any award year as follows: 

(i) Determine the number of students who, during the award 
year, received the degree, certificate, or other recognized 
educational credential awarded for successfully completing the 
program. 

(ii) Subtract from the number determined under 
paragraph (g)(1)(i) of this section the number of students 
described in paragraph (g)(1)(i) of this section who were 
employed by the institution either before or after their receipt 
of the degree, certificate, or other recognized educational 
credential. 

(iii) Of the total obtained under paragraph (g)(1)(ii) of 
this section, determine the number of students who, within 180 
days of the day they received their degree, certificate, or other 
recognized educational credential, obtained gainful employment in 
the recognized occupation for which they were trained or in a 
related comparable recognized occupation and, on the date of this 
calculation, are employed or have been employed for at least 13 
weeks following receipt of the credential from the institution. 

(iv) Divide the number of students determined under 
paragraph (g)(1)(iii) of this section by the total obtained under 
paragraph (g)(1)(ii) of this section. 

(2) An institution shall document that each student 
described in paragraph (g)(1)(iii) of this section obtained 
gainful employment in the recognized occupation for which he or 
she was trained or in a related comparable recognized occupation. 
Examples of satisfactory documentation of a student's gainful 
employment include, but are not limited to_

(i) A written statement from the student's employer; 

(ii) Signed copies of State or Federal income tax forms; 
and 

(iii) Written evidence of payments of Social Security 
taxes. 

(h) 

Eligibility for Federal Pell Grant and FSEOG programs. 


In addition to satisfying other relevant provisions of this 
section, an educational program qualifies as an eligible program 
for purposes of the Federal Pell Grant or FSEOG Program only if 
the educational program is an undergraduate program. 

(i) 

Flight training. 

In addition to satisfying other 
relevant provisions of this section, for a program of flight 
training to be an eligible program, it must have a current valid 
certification from the Federal Aviation Administration. 

(j) 

English as a second language (ESL). 

(1) In addition 
to satisfying the relevant provisions of this section, an 
educational program that consists solely of instruction in ESL 
qualifies as an eligible program if_

(i) The institution admits to the program only students who 
the institution determines need the ESL instruction to use 
already existing knowledge, training, or skills; and 

(ii) The program leads to a degree, certificate, or other 
recognized educational credential. 

(2) An institution shall test each student at the end of 
the educational program to substantiate that the student has 
attained adequate proficiency in written and spoken English to 
use already existing knowledge, training, or skills. The 
institution shall identify the test or tests given to the 
students and the basis for the judgment that the student has 
attained the adequate proficiency. 

(3) An institution shall document its determination that 
ESL instruction is necessary to enable each student enrolled in 
its ESL program to use already existing knowledge, training, or 
skills with regard to the students that it admits to its ESL 
program under paragraph (j)(1)(i) of this section. 

(4) An ESL program that qualifies as an eligible program 
under this paragraph is eligible for purposes of the Federal Pell 
Grant Program only. 



