 

(i) an intake/booking work area;

(ii) sallyport;

(iii) access to operable toilets, wash basins, drinking water and showers;

(iv) space for alcohol and drug testing equipment;

(v) space for inmate identification equipment;

(vi) a secure, well-ventilated storage room for inmates' personal property;

(vii) telephone(s), which can be used by inmates;

(viii) private interview spaces;

(ix) temporary holding rooms or waiting spaces with sufficient fixed seating for all inmates at their rated capacities;
and

(x) access to continuously observable protective holding cells for the safe holding of intoxicated individuals.

(22) 

Medical examination room.

 The facility shall provide a space in which private medical examinations of inmates can occur. The space shall provide
for private examination of patients, hand washing, storage of equipment used in the examination room and a work surface
for health care personnel.

(23) 

Staff toilets.

 The facility shall provide staff toilets inside the secure area of the facility that inmates shall not use.

(24) 

Public spaces.

 The facility shall provide public restroom(s) and a public lobby with an adequate number of seats to accommodate anticipated
visitors outside the secure perimeter.

(25) 

Administration.

 The facility shall provide adequate space for its administrative functions.

(26) 

Staff.

 The facility shall provide adequate space for staff assigned to work in the facility.

(27) 

Mechanical.

 The facility shall provide separate and adequate space for mechanical systems and equipment.



10.13

 Institutional operations.



(a) 

Security and control.

_(1) 

Perimeter access.

 All security perimeter entrances and control center doors shall be kept locked, except when used for supervised entry
or exit of employees, inmates, or visitors and in emergencies.

(2) 

Location of detention officer posts.

 Detention officer posts shall be located in or immediately adjacent to inmate living areas to permit officers to hear
and respond promptly to emergency situations.

(3) 

Full coverage of detention officer posts.

 Staff shall be provided for full, around-the clock coverage of designated security posts, full surveillance of inmates
and performance of other detention functions.

(4) 

Supervision of high security areas.

 A staff member shall enter a high security area only when another staff member is immediately available to provide
assistance.

(5) 

Supervision of coed activities.

 Facility staff shall supervise male and female inmates in coed activities and spaces continuously and directly.

(6) 

Male and female staff requirement.

 When both males and females are housed in the facility, at least one male and female staff member shall be on duty at all
times.

(7) 

Prohibited supervision.

 No inmate or group of inmates shall be given control or authority over other inmates.

(8) 

Cell checks.

 A detention officer personally shall observe high and medium security inmates at least every thirty minutes, but
on an irregular schedule. The administrator shall require observation every fifteen minutes for inmates who are
mentally disordered or who demonstrate unusual or bizarre behavior and continuous observation of suicidal inmates.

(9) 

Counts.

 The facility shall have a system to physically count inmates that includes strict accountability for inmates assigned
to work and education release and other approved temporary releases.

(10) 

Movement.

 Detention staff shall regulate inmate movement.

(11) 

Transportation of inmates.

 The administrator shall govern the safe and secure transportation of inmates outside the facility.

(12) 

Use of vehicles.

 The administrator shall govern the use of departmental and personal vehicles for official purposes and shall prohibit
the use of personal vehicles for transportation of inmates.

(13) 

Shift activity log.

 The facility shall maintain a written record of the following:

(i) personnel on duty;

(ii) inmate population at the beginning and end of each shift;

(iii) record of counts taken;

(iv) shift activities;

(v) entry and exit of professional and other visitors;

(vi) unusual occurrences or incidents;

(vii) hours of programs provided; and

(viii) clothing and linen exchange.

(14) 

Weekly inspection.

 The administrator or designee shall inspect all facility spaces and devices at least weekly to determine the status
of all security items and the sanitary condition of the facility. The administrator or designee shall document the
inspection and shall initiate corrective action if needed.

(15) 

Monthly inspection.

 The administrator shall inspect all areas of the facility at least monthly to inventory security equipment to determine
numbers, usefulness and expiration dates, to determine the status of all security and safety items, and to determine
the sanitary condition of the facility. The administrator shall document the inspection and shall initiate corrective
action if needed.

(16) 

Fire safety inspection.

 A qualified fire protection specialist shall inspect the facility to test the fire suppression and detection system,
equipment and facility training in compliance with 29 CFR 1910.36(d), 1910.37(m), 1910.37(n), 1910.38, and 29 CFR
1960, Subpart D.

(17) 

Use of restraints.

 Staff shall use instruments of restraint only as a precaution against escape during transfer, for medical reasons
at the direction of the health authority, and as a prevention against inmate self-injury, injury to others or property
damage. Staff shall apply restraints only with the approval of the administrator or designee and only for the amount
of time that is absolutely necessary.




