 

(iv) The Certificate holder, master and crew must cooperate with the observer in the performance of the observer's
duties including: 
(A) Providing adequate accommodations; 
(B) Allowing for the embarking and debarking of the observer as specified by the National Marine Fisheries Service.
The operator of a vessel must ensure that transfers of observers at sea are accomplished in a safe manner, via small
boat or raft, during daylight hours as weather and sea conditions allow, and with the agreement of the observer involved;

(C) Allowing the observer access to all areas of the vessel necessary to conduct observer duties; 
(D) Allowing the observer access to communications equipment and navigation equipment as necessary to perform observer
duties; 
(E) Providing true vessel locations by latitude and longitude or loran coordinates, upon request by the observer;

(F) Providing marine mammal specimens, as requested; 
(G) Notifying the observer in a timely fashion of when commercial fishing operations are to begin and end; and 
(H) Complying with other guidelines, regulations or conditions in Certificates that the National Marine Fisheries
Service may develop to ensure the effective deployment and use of observers. 
(v) Marine mammals killed during fishing operations which are readily accessible to crew members must be brought
aboard the vessel for biological processing, if feasible and if requested by the observer. Marine mammals designated
as biological specimens by the observer must be retained in cold storage aboard the vessel, if feasible, until retrieved
by authorized personnel of the National Marine Fisheries Service. 
(vi) Observers may not bring a civil action against the vessel or vessel owner under any law of the United States for
any illness, disability, injury or death from service as an observer, except in cases of the vessel owner's willful
misconduct or if the observer is engaged by the owner, master or individual in charge of a vessel to perform any duties
in service to the vessel. 
(vii) The National Marine Fisheries Service will provide for the payment of all reasonable costs directly related
to housing and maintaining observers on board vessels and related to maintaining biological specimens as requested
by the observer or required in Exemption Certificates. 
(4) Any marine mammal incidentally taken must be immediately returned to the sea with a minimum of further injury and
may be retained only if authorized by an observer, by a condition of the Exemption Certificate, or by a scientific research
permit that is in the possession of the operator. 
(5) A Certificate holder or a crew member may intentionally take marine mammals to protect catch, gear or person during
the course of the commercial fishing operation by a means and in a manner not expected to cause death or injury to a marine
mammal. 
(6) If the infliction of the damage to catch, gear or person is substantial and immediate and only after all non-injurious
means authorized by paragraph (c)(5) of this section have been taken, a Certificate holder or crew member may intentionally
injure or kill a marine mammal to protect gear, catch or person; except that it is prohibited for a Certificate holder
or crew member to intentionally lethally take any Steller sea lion, any Alaskan sea otter, any cetacean, any depleted
species (including the Pribilof Island population of North Pacific fur seal), or any endangered or threatened marine
mammal. 
(7) No fishing gear, in whole or in part, may be willfully discarded. 
(8) A Certificate holder must notify the Assistant Administrator in writing: 
(i) If the vessel will engage in any Category I or II fishery not listed on the registration at least 30 days prior to engaging
in that fishery; and 
(ii) Of any changes in mailing address or vessel ownership within 30 days of such change. 
(9) Certificates and decals are not transferable. In the event of the sale or change in ownership of the vessel, the
Certificate is void and the new owner must register for an Exemption Certificate and decal. 
(10) The Assistant Administrator may establish other terms and conditions on Exemption Certificates, including
terms and conditions for specific fisheries necessary to minimize adverse impacts to a marine mammal population
in accordance with the procedures in 229.8(b) of this chapter or to comply with the Endangered Species Act of
1973. 
(d) 

Suspension, revocation or denial of Certificates.

 (1)(i) The Assistant Administrator may suspend or revoke an Exemption Certificate or deny a Certificate renewal
in accordance with the provisions in 15 CFR part 904 if the Certificate holder: 
(A) Fails to submit reports as required; 
(B) Fails to take on board an observer in a Category I fishery, if requested by the National Marine Fisheries Service;
or 
(C) Fails to comply with other terms and conditions, including special conditions, of the Exemption Certificate
or with these regulations. 
(ii) Except that the suspension, revocation or denial specified in paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section may be without
prior notice or opportunity for hearing. 
(2) A suspended Certificate may be reinstated at any time at the discretion of the Assistant Administrator. 


229.7 

Requirements for Category III fisheries. 


(a) Vessel owners engaged only in Category III fisheries are not required to register for or receive an Exemption Certificate.
Vessel owners and crew members of such vessels may incidentally take marine mammals subject to these provisions.





