 

Some commenters state that the smaller cargo compartments of the airplanes affected by this proposed AD are different
from the larger compartments on the airplanes that are affected by AD 930715, amendment 398547
(58 FR 21243, April 20, 1993), since those compartments contain pallets and/or containers. One commenter states
that the smaller cargo compartments used in commuter service have not been established to be similar, from the standpoint
of safety, to main deck Class B compartments of larger transports; therefore, any action to address fire safety should
concentrate on large ``Combi'' cargo compartments, as in AD 930715. Another commenter considers that
the fire detection problems that may exist on jumbo-jet airplanes do not have any relevance for smaller airplanes.
Another commenter states that the hazard of carrying large pallets/containers in increasingly large ``Combi''
compartments is the issue to be addressed, not the size of the compartment itself. 


The FAA disagrees that the smaller cargo compartments are not similar, with regard to fire safety, to the larger compartments
containing pallets or containers. On the smaller transport airplanes, cargo and luggage are loaded in a manner such
that smoke detection and access may be inhibited if the fire is deep-seated (buried in the cargo), much the same as in
a container or pallet on a larger transport airplane. Further, the FAA has observed, and one commenter to the notice
admitted, that in many instances, some operators of the smaller transport airplanes load the airplane's cargo compartments
in such a manner that there is no place to displace the cargo within the compartment in order to get at a fire. This presents
a two-fold hazard: 


1. The fire cannot be accessed and continues to burn; and 


2. If cargo is removed from the cargo compartment, passengers could be exposed to fire, toxic smoke, and fumes; this
situation is unsafe and contrary to the concept and rule requirements of the Class B cargo compartment. 


Four commenters provide information concerning the economic effects of the proposed AD. One of these commenters,
an operator, states that it has had a long-term investment in its combi operations; however, if the rule is issued,
any further ``Combi'' operations would be cost-prohibitive for this operator. This would force the operator to raise
passenger ticket prices, and resort to less frequent all-passenger or all-cargo flights. Another commenter states
that the proposed requirements of the rule would have a devastating effect on service to remote communities that have
no alternative means of transport available. Another commenter states that it would cost up to $200,000 per airplane
to accomplish the requirement to convert the cargo compartment to a Class C configuration; this would be a great economic
burden for small operators. Another commenter estimated that the requirements of the proposed rule would cost 10%
of its annual gross revenues. 

In light of these comments and other information provided, the FAA must continue to consider the following aspects
relevant to this rulemaking action: 


1. A service history indicating that there has not been a fire in the Class B cargo compartments of the size of aircraft
addressed by the proposed rule; and 


2. Cargo loading practices on the smaller transport category airplanes that may inhibit smoke detection and negate
access requirements of the Class B cargo compartment. 

Because of the potentially catastrophic consequences of fire in Class B cargo compartments and the impossibility
of eliminating the potential for such fires, the FAA cannot conclude that the existing Class B compartments do not
present an unsafe condition. However, this condition is a result of flaws in the underlying design standards for these
compartments, and correcting those flaws may have significant economic and operational consequences. For these
reasons, the FAA has concluded that issuance of an AD to address this condition is not warranted at this time. 

The FAA now considers that a change to part 25 (``Airworthiness Standards: Transport Category Airplanes'') of the
FAR (14 CFR part 25) and to the relevant operating regulations of the FAR to address these issues is more appropriate
and will allow further public participation in the rulemaking process. 


In 1989, just prior to the time that the notice was published, a subgroup of the Department of Transportation Task Force
on FAA Reform recommended that a Standing Advisory Committee for Rulemaking be established. The Secretary of Transportation
approved this recommendation, and the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) was chartered in 1991. The
purpose of the committee is to provide advice and recommendations to the FAA concerning the full range of the FAA's
rulemaking activity with respect to safety-related issues. The expected benefits of ARAC are to take advantage of
the industry technical expertise and experience, to resolve controversies in an open forum, to resolve issues before
formal rulemaking, and to broaden public participation in the process. 


The FAA has asked ARAC to consider 70 rulemaking issues, one of which is rulemaking relative to the Class B cargo compartment.
A ``Class B Cargo Compartment Harmonization Working Group'' was established recently to formulate and harmonize
an international position on amended requirements for the Class B cargo compartment as installed on transport category
airplanes. In its deliberations, ARAC currently is considering the safety issues related to the Class B cargo compartment,
appropriate rule requirements, necessary rule changes, estimated costs, and comments and advice from the aviation
industry. 


In light of this other on-going rulemaking activity, the FAA hereby withdraws the proposed AD. 


Withdrawal of this notice of proposed rulemaking constitutes only such action, and does not preclude the agency from
issuing another notice in the future, nor does it commit the agency to any course of action in the future. 


Since this action only withdraws a notice of proposed rulemaking, it is neither a proposed nor a final rule and therefore,
is not covered under Executive Order 12866, the Regulatory Flexibility Act, or DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures
(44 FR 11034, February 26, 1979). 


List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39 


Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Safety. 


The Withdrawal 



Accordingly, the notice of proposed rulemaking, Docket 89NM205AD, published in the 

Federal Register

 on September 5, 1990 (55 FR 36284), is withdrawn.

 

Issued in Renton, Washington, on May 31, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
Darrell M. Pederson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Manager, Transport Airplane Directorate, 
Aircraft Certification Service. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413629 Filed 6394; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491013U
</BILLING>


