 




<USBUREAU>National Institutes of Health (NIH)</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Meeting of Panel/Request for Public Comment</DOCTITLE>




The third meeting of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Human Embryo Research Panel will be held April 1112
at the Holiday Inn Bethesda, 8120 Wisconsin Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland. The meeting will begin each day at 8:30 a.m.
and end at 7 p.m. on April 11 and at 12:30 p.m. on April 12. The Panel is a group of special consultants to the Advisory Committee
to the Director (ACD), NIH, established to recommend guidelines for Federal funding of research involving the 

ex utero

 human embryo resulting from 

in vitro 

fertilization or other sources.

The NIH received a number of applications for support in this area and in the related field of parthenogenesis. However,
before proceeding with the consideration of specific human embryo research proposals for funding the NIH must address
the profound moral and ethical issues raised by the use of human embryo in research and develop guidelines to govern
the review and conduct of Federally-funded research. The Panel's charge is to consider various areas of research
involving the 

ex utero 

human embryo and provide advice as to those areas it views to be acceptable for Federal funding, areas that warrant
additional review, and areas that are unacceptable for Federal support. For those areas of research considered acceptable
for Federal funding, the Panel will recommend specific guidelines for the review and conduct of this research. Issues
related to human germ-line gene modification are not within the Panel's purview. The Panel's final report will be
presented to the ACD for review.


During part of its first and second meeting, the Panel reviewed the wide range of scientific and human health benefits
that could result from governmental support of research involving the human embryo. At the third meeting, Panel deliberations
will focus on the following issues:


The competing ethical frameworks with respect to the moral status of the human embryo. The acceptability of human
embryo research from the point of gastrulation (the beginning of the process that culminates in the formation of the
primitive streak). Issues raised by research on human embryo that will not be transferred. 


Ethically acceptable sources of human embryo or eggs, informed consent requirements, issues raised by compensation
of sperm/egg providers, and concerns regarding commercialization.


The need for additional mechanisms for the review, evaluation, and monitoring of human embryo research at local and/or
national levels.


The NIH continues to seek public comment on these and other issues raised by Federal funding of human embryo research
and encourages interested individuals and organizations to share with the Panel their views and perspectives on
these important matters. Those who wish to submit written comments of any length should forward these to Steven Muller,
Ph.D., Chair, NIH Human Embryo Research Panel, 


c/o National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Building 

#

1, room 218, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. To ensure that public input is available to the Panel during its deliberations,
written comments should be received in advance of the Panel's fourth scheduled meeting, May 4, 1994.



As with previous meetings of the Panel, an opportunity is also being provided at the April meeting for interested individuals
and organizations to make brief oral presentations to the Panel. To register to make an oral statement before the Panel,
individuals and organizations should contact Ms. Peggy Schnoor at the NIH by telephoning 3014961454
or by sending a facsimile message to 3014020280 or 3014021759. Oral statements must not
exceed five minutes in length, and a copy of the remarks should be forwarded to the above address one week in advance
of the scheduled presentation date. Opportunities to present statements will be determined by the order in which
requests are received.

The NIH will endeavor to provide seating for all members of the public who wish to attend the meetings. Individuals
are, however, asked to notify the NIH of their interest in attending by using the telephone or facsimile numbers listed
above. Individuals who require special accommodations are also asked to contact Ms. Schnoor at the above number.
General questions about the Panel or future meetings should also be directed to Ms. Schnoor.





Dated: March 18, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Ruth L. Kirschstein,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Director, NIH.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 947032 Filed 32494; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 414001M
</BILLING>




