 

In general, the Department relies on monthly weighted-average prices in the calculation of FMV in administrative
reviews. Because of the significant volume of home market sales involved in these reviews, we examined whether it
was appropriate to average, in accordance with section 777A of the Tariff Act, all of each respondent's home market
sales on an annual basis. In this case, the use of POR weighted-average prices results in significant time and resource
savings for the Department. To determine whether a POR weighted-average price was representative of the transactions
under consideration, we performed a three-step test. 

We first compared each monthly weighted-average home market price for each model with the weighted-average POR price
of that model. We calculated the proportion of each model's sales whose POR weighted-average price did not vary meaningfully
(

i.e.,

 was within plus or minus 10 percent) from the monthly weighted-average prices. We did this for each model within each
class or kind of merchandise. We then compared the volume of sales of all models within each class or kind of merchandise
whose POR weighted-average price did not vary meaningfully from the monthly weighted-average price with the total
volume of sales of that class or kind of merchandise. If the POR weighted-average price of at least 90 percent of sales
in each class or kind of merchandise did not vary meaningfully from the monthly weighted-average price, we considered
the POR weighted-average prices to be representative of the transactions under consideration. Finally, we tested
whether there was any correlation between fluctuations in price and time for the home market sales. Where the correlation
coefficient was less than 0.05 (where a coefficient approaching 1.0 means a direct relation between price and time,


i.e.,

 that prices consistently rise from month to month, and a coefficient approaching zero means no relation between prices
and time), we concluded that there was no significant relation between price and time. We calculated a weighted-average
POR FMV only for those classes or kinds that satisfied our three-step test for the factors of price, volume, and time.


We compared U.S. sales with sales of such or similar merchandise in the home market. We considered all non-identical
products within a bearing family to be equally similar. As defined in the questionnaire, a bearing family consists
of all bearings within a class or kind of merchandise that are the same in the following physical characteristics:
load direction, bearing design, number of rows of rolling elements, precision rating, dynamic load rating, and outer
diameter, inner diameter, and width. 

Home market prices were based on the packed, ex-factory or delivered prices to related or unrelated purchasers in
the home market. Where applicable, we made adjustments for movement expenses, differences in cost attributable
to differences in physical characteristics of the merchandise, and differences in packing. We also made adjustments
for differences in circumstances of sale in accordance with 19 CFR 353.56. For comparisons to PP sales, we deducted
home market direct selling expenses and added U.S. direct selling expenses. For comparisons to ESP sales, we deducted
home market direct selling expenses. We also made adjustments, where applicable, for home market indirect selling
expenses to offset U.S. commissions in PP and ESP calculations and to offset U.S. indirect selling expenses deducted
in ESP calculations, but not exceeding the amount of the indirect U.S. expenses. For comparisons to both ESP and PP
sales, we adjusted for VAT using the methodology detailed in the ``United States Price'' section of this notice. 

We used sales to related customers only where we determined such sales were made at arm's length, 

i.e.,

 at prices comparable to prices at which the firm sold identical merchandise to unrelated customers. 

Where we found home market sales below the cost of production in the previous administrative review period, we concluded
that reasonable grounds exist to believe or suspect that home market sales during the POR were made at prices below
the cost of production, and we therefore initiated cost investigations. 

In accordance with section 773(b) of the Tariff Act, in determining whether to disregard home market sales made at
prices below the cost of production, we examined whether such sales were made in substantial quantities over an extended
period of time. When less than 10 percent of the home market sales of a particular model were at prices below the cost
of production, we found that substantial quantities of such sales were not made and did not disregard any sales of that
model. When 10 percent or more, but not more than 90 percent, of the home market sales of a particular model were determined
to be below cost, we determined that substantial quantities of such sales were made and excluded the below-cost home
market sales from our calculation of FMV provided that these below-cost sales were made over an extended period of
time. When more than 90 percent of the home market sales of a particular model were made below cost over an extended period
of time, we disregarded all home market sales of that model from our calculation of FMV and went to CV. 

To determine if sales below cost had been made over an extended period of time, we compared the number of months in which
sales below cost had occurred for a particular model to the number of months in which the model was sold. If the model
was sold in three or fewer months, we did not find that below-cost sales were made over an extended period of time unless
there were sales below cost of that model in each month. If a model was sold in more than three months, we did not find that
below-cost sales were made over an extended period of time unless there were sales below cost in at least three of the
months in which the model was sold. 

Since none of the respondents has submitted information indicating that any of its sales below cost were at prices
which would have permitted ``recovery of all costs within a reasonable period of time in the normal course of trade,''
within the meaning of section 773(b)(2) of the Tariff Act, we were unable to conclude that the costs of production of
such sales were recovered within a reasonable period. As a result, we disregarded below-cost sales when the conditions
described above were met. 




