 




<DOCTITLE>Prospective Grant of Exclusive License: Method for Evaluating Chemotherapeutic Agents in Hollow Fibers In Vivo
</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 National Institutes of Health, Public Health Service, DHHS


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This is notice in accordance with 15 U.S.C. 209(c)(1) and 37 CFR 404.7(a)(1)(i) that the National Institutes of Health
(NIH), Department of Health and Human Services, is contemplating the grant of an exclusive license in the United States
to practice the invention embodied in U.S. Patent Application Serial Number 08/058,154, entitled ``Method for Evaluating
Chemotherapeutic Agents in Hollow Fibers 

In Vivo,

'' to Spectrum Medical Industries, Inc., having a place of business in San Diego, California. The patent rights in
this application have been assigned to the United States of America. 


The prospective exclusive license will be royalty-bearing and will comply with the terms and conditions of 35 U.S.C.
209 and 37 CFR 404.7. The prospective exclusive license may be granted unless, within 60 days from the date of this published
Notice, NIH receives written evidence and argument that establishes that the grant of the license would not be consistent
with the requirements of 35 U.S.C. 209 and 37 CFR 404.7. 
The present invention relates to a method of screening the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents 

in vivo

 using target cells grown in biocompatible, selectively permeable macrocapsules. Most conventional methods (i.e.,
subcutaneous tumor model, sub-renal tumor model, peritoneal model and the metastasis model) permit only one type
of tumor cell or cell line to be screened per experiment per animal, with the animal subsequently sacrificed for analysis.
The present method allows for placing samples of syngeneic or xenogeneic cells into laboratory animals using cells
or cell lines grown in selectively permeable hollow fibers or dialysis tubing. The invention provides a rapid and
reliable method to screen potential chemotherapeutic agents for therapeutic uses in cancer or other human diseases.
Additionally, the method allows a single experimental animal to carry implants in multiple sites allowing simultaneous
evaluation of a chemotherapeutic agent capacity to reach various physiologic compartments such as subcutaneous,
intraperitoneal or intra-organ regions. The advantages of this system over the classical antitumor animal models
include: 1) the requirement for a smaller amount of test agent to assess preliminary 

in vivo

 efficacy; 2) rapid turn-around time, 3) the ability to test potential activity against multiple tumor types simultaneously
in the same experimental animal; 4) a reduction in the number of experimental animals required for assessing efficacy,
5) the possibility of assessing multiple treatment schedules in a short time frame, 6) the ability to recover the entire
implant, 7) the lack of contamination of the implanted cells by host cell, and 8) the ability to screen a test agent against
target cells cultivated in various physiologic compartments in the same laboratory animal. 
The present invention can be used in transgenic animals to determine the effect of a transgenic or protein product
thereof on a target cell line. Further, re-cultivating and re-screening the cells after analysis makes its possible
to assess the regrowth potential of cells surviving treatment and then determine their susceptibility to a second
treatment with the same or alternate chemotherapeutic agent(s). 
The contemplated fields of use for licensing would be for 1) preclinical testing in animals of products for toxicity
and efficacy, and 2) diagnostic testing in animals of human tissue specimens for resistance and sensitivity to alternative
therapeutic regimes. Spectrum Medical Industries intends to make, use and sell products, falling within the scope
of the patent application for the research and clinical diagnostic markets.


</SUMMARY>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Requests for a copy of this patent application, inquiries, comments and other materials relating to the contemplated
license should be directed to: John Fahner-Vihtelic, Office of Technology Transfer, National Institutes of Health,
Suite 325, 6011 Executive Blvd., Rockville, Maryland 20852. Telephone: (301) 4967735, extension 285, or
fax (301) 4020220. A signed Confidentiality Agreement will be required to receive copies of the patent application.
Properly filed competing applications for a license filed in response to this notice will be treated as objections
to the contemplated license. Only written comments and/or application for a license which are received by the NIH
Office of Technology Transfer within sixty (60) days of this notice will be considered.




Dated: December 12, 1994.


</ADDRESS>
<SIGNER>
Barbara M. McGarey,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Director, Office of Technology Transfer.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9431393 Filed 122194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 414001P
</BILLING>


