 

The only known extant populations of 

Chorizanthe robusta 

var. 


hartwegii 

occur in Scotts Valley in the Santa Cruz Mountains north of 
the city of Santa Cruz. The plant occurs primarily on pockets of Santa 
Cruz mudstones and Purisima sandstones and is associated with annual 
grasslands and wildflower fields (Reveal and Morgan 1989). These 
islands of unique substrates are host to a number of rare plants. Three 
populations of the plant, each consisting of numerous small colonies, 
are scattered over an area 1 mile in diameter on three parcels in 
private ownership. In 1989, shortly after the taxon was rediscovered, 
the total number of individuals was estimated to be approximately 6,000 
(California Natural Diversity Data Base (CNDDB) 1990). As a result of 
two proposals for development that were pending at the time, additional 
surveys were conducted during the next few years. Results of 1992 
surveys were that the two populations on land proposed for a development 
named Glenwood Estates totalled between 30,000 and 100,000 individuals 
(Habitat Restoration Group 1992). The numbers of this annual plant are 
expected to fluctuate from year to year, depending on climatic 
conditions. 


Chorizanthe pungens 

var. 

hartwegiana 

(Ben Lomond spineflower) has 
dark pinkish to purple scarious margins on the involucral lobes and a 
slightly ascending to erect habit. The heads are medium in size (1 to 
1.5 cm (0.4 to 0.6 in) in diameter) and distinctly aggregate. The plant 
is found on sandy soils that are the basis for the Ben Lomond sandhills 
communities in the Santa Cruz Mountains, mostly on privately owned land. 


C. pungens 

var. 

hartwegiana 

is confined to outcrops of sandstone soils 
in the Santa Cruz Mountains from Big Basin State Park to the Felton area 
in the Santa Cruz Mountains. These sandstone soils support several 
unique plant communities, including the ponderosa pine-dominated Ben 
Lomond sandhills. The majority of occurrences of 

C. pungens 

var. 


hartwegiana 

are found on privately owned lands within the area generally 
bounded by the communities of Ben Lomond, Glenwood, Scotts Valley, and 
Felton. 


Erysimum teretifolium 

(Ben Lomond wallflower) was first collected 
at Glenwood, Santa Cruz County, by Horace Davis in 1914. This plant was 
described by Alice Eastwood in 1938 as 

E. filifolium, 

not realizing that 
this combination was already applied to another plant (Eastwood 1938). 
It was therefore renamed 

E. teretifolium 

in the following year (Eastwood 
1939). 

E. teretifolium 

is a biennial, or occasionally an annual, plant 
of the mustard family (Brassicaceae). Seedlings form a basal rosette of 
leaves, which then wither as the main stem develops flowers clustered in 
a terminal raceme. The flowers are a deep yellow with petals 1.3 to 2.5 
cm (0.5 to 1.0 in) long; the slender capsule reaches 10 cm (4.0 in) in 
length and is covered with three-parted hairs. The leaves are simple 
and narrowly linear, a characteristic that separates this plant from 
other wallflowers. 


Erysimum teretifolium 

is endemic to pockets of sandstone deposits 
in the Santa Cruz Mountains and is presently known from only a dozen 
scattered occurrences. These sandstone deposits support the unique 
ponderosa pine sandhill community, and 

E. teretifolium 

seems to prefer 
sites with loose, uncompacted sand in openings between scattered 
chaparral shrubs. 

Chorizanthe robusta 

var. 

robusta 

is found in close 
proximity with 

E. teretifolium 

at some locations. A dozen populations 
of 

E. teretifolium 

occur within the area generally bounded by the 
communities of Ben Lomond, Glenwood, Scotts Valley, and Felton, with one 
outlying population occurring in the Bonny Doon area, 5 miles west of 
Felton. One population occurs at Quail Hollow Ranch, which is jointly 
owned by Santa Cruz County, The Nature Conservancy, and the California 
Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). All other populations are on 
privately owned lands. 




