 

(ix) If you do not believe the proposals will provide adequate protection from steering, what alternatives would
provide such protection? 
(x) To what extent do you believe the proposal will lead to cost savings through increased efficiencies in the settlement
services industry? 
(xi) If you disagree that the proposal will lead to cost savings, what alternatives would you suggest to facilitate
efficiencies? 
In promulgating a final rule, the Secretary invites, and will consider, economic and other data submitted on the effect
on the settlement services industry and consumers of the Secretary's and other proposals. 


(2) Issue 2: Computer Loan Origination Services (``CLOs'') 


(a) 

Comments Critical of the CLO Provision.

 The final rule's revision of the RESPA regulations indicated that payment by a borrower for computer loan origination
services was 

not 


&rsquo;prohibited by RESPA or Regulation X. This provision also drew hundreds of adverse comments, as well as support
from several commenters responding to the Department's July 6, 1993, notice. 
Many commenters treated the CLO issue and the issue of referral payments as closely related concerns. Computer loan
origination services, these commenters claimed, often are nothing more than thinly disguised arrangements for
the referral of settlement services. The commenters argued that both referral payments and superficial or nominal
CLO services involve the ``steering'' of homebuyers to a limited choice of service providers. A number of these commenters
indicated their belief that simple disclosure of the fact that a fee is being charged affords inadequate protection
against these dangers. 
The Consumer Federation of America (CFA) entered vigorous objections to the borrower fee authorized by the final
rule. ``If there is economic value to the adoption of electronic loan origination technology, CFA believes that the
marketplace will, on its own, adopt it. There is no reason why the consumer should foot the bill for the industry's capital
investment.'' The CFA asserted that the RESPA statute was ``suspicious'' of fees for services of unknown or questionable
value, and it objected to any ``sanctioned levy against consumers for CLO services.'' 
Several commenters expressed their confusion concerning a CLO-related question posed to the public in the July 6,
1993, notice. The question presented was whether further clarifications or additional conditions regarding CLOs
are needed or would be desirable to protect consumers, 

particularly if any payment for the CLO service comes directly or indirectly from a lender.

 (Emphasis supplied.) 
Some commenters addressing this issue said they had assumed that the final rule only permitted ``customer-pay''
systems. If lender-pay systems are permissible, these commenters claimed, a major new problem is presented. Lender-pay
systems are especially dangerous, the commenters declared, because the broker's financial gain and incentive to
steer may be totally hidden. 
A significant minority of the commenters (including many who otherwise opposed features of the final rule) believe
that CLO services are the wave of the future and that computer-based systems promise real benefit to prospective homebuyers.
These commenters, however, joined with other critics of the CLO provision in questioning the legitimacy of linking
CLO systems to referral fee arrangements. Others commenters objected to the final rule's failure to assure universal
access to CLOs by lenders doing business in a particular location. Hundreds of comments_predominantly from lenders
and related settlement service providers_urged that a comprehensive, limiting definition of CLO services be added
to the rule. 
A commenter representing an automated service provider expressed his fear that CLOs operated by real estate brokers
and agents could be used to ``display financial information [about other lenders] inferior to what [the broker's
affiliate] is offering, and charge the borrower for doing it; then use the CLO fee collected for payment of `employee
compensation' to guide the buyer to the broker-owned title company, closing service, insurance agency, home warranty
company, and pest control company. The referral fee will not come from the normal real estate commission, but instead
each service generates sufficient income to pay a referral fee to capture the next service, commencing with the CLO
fee.'' The commenter further stated:

 

Information provided through technology is not only valuable, but vital given today's complex and sophisticated
lending; but, to allow a real estate broker to charge a purchaser for providing this information without having adequate
guidelines in place assuring that the consumer will, in fact, receive information that is in the best interest of the
consumer *** is a terrible disservice to the consumer ***.

 

Commenters on the CLO issue had an array of suggestions for revising the RESPA regulations to limit, expand, or otherwise
control the use of homebuyer- or lender-compensated CLO services, and to add suitable definitions of the term ``CLO''.
Among these suggestions were: 
(i) Creating an (unspecified) ``market mechanism'' to keep CLO fees reasonable and closely related to the true value
of the service being performed; 
(ii) Requiring the borrower to pay for CLO services 

at the time the service is being provided

 (a number of commenters believed that such a requirement would help assure that the homebuyer would insist on receipt
of a ``real'' service, ``rather than unknowingly subsidize a disguised referral fee that is buried at the end of escrow'');

(iii) Mandating that a substantial number of lender participants be included in any CLO system, and defining the term
``computer loan origination service'' in such a way as to exclude CLO providers that afford the borrower only limited
information; 
(iv) Requiring CLOs operated by real estate brokers or agents to make special disclosures concerning use of CLO systems,
in greater detail than the disclosures set out in Appendix E to 24 CFR part 3500. (A large number of lender-commenters
asserted that special disclosure was unnecessary when CLOs are used by lenders, arguing that real estate brokers,
``who may be receiving another fee in the transaction,'' were the only parties for whom CLO-related disclosures should
be required.); 



