 

IV


Based on the above, Mr. Mignotte, an employee of the New York Power Authority at the time of the incident, engaged in
deliberate misconduct in violation of 10 CFR 50.5(a)(1) and (2) by deliberately violating 10 CFR 55.53(k), in that
he submitted to the facility licensee information which he knew to be inaccurate in some respect material to the NRC.
Mr. Mignotte, a licensed Senior Reactor Operator at the time of the event, also used illegal substances and performed
licensed duties while under the influence of illegal substances in violation of 10 CFR 55.53(j), and deliberately
failed to participate in the fitness-for-duty program established by the facility licensee in violation of 10 CFR
55.53(k).
The NRC must be able to rely on its licensees and their employees, especially NRC-licensed operators, to comply with
NRC requirements, including the requirement to provide information and maintain records that are complete and accurate
in all material respects. Mr. Mignotte's actions in using illegal drugs and attempting to circumvent fitness-for-duty
requirements have raised serious doubt as to whether he can be relied upon to comply with NRC requirements applicable
to licensed individuals and to provide complete and accurate information to the NRC.
Consequently, I lack the requisite reasonable assurance that Mr. Mignotte will conduct any 10 CFR Part 55 licensed
activities in compliance with the Commission's requirements and that the health and safety of the public will be protected
with Mr. Mignotte engaged in such licensed activities at this time. Therefore, I find that the public health, safety,
and interest require that Mr. Mignotte be prohibited from involvement in 10 CFR Part 55 licensed activities for three
years from the date of this Order. Furthermore, pursuant to 10 CFR 2.202, I find that the significance of the misconduct
described above is such that the public health, safety and interest require that this Order be immediately effective.


V


Accordingly, pursuant to sections 103, 107, 161b, 161i, 161o, 182 and 186 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended,
and the Commission's regulations in 10 CFR 2.202, 10 CFR 50.5, and 10 CFR 55.61, it is hereby ordered, effective immediately,
that:



A. Mr. Mignotte is prohibited for three years from the date of this Order from engaging in licensed operator activities
licensed by the NRC pursuant to 10 CFR Part 55.
B. For a period of three years from the date of this Order, Mr. Mignotte shall provide a copy of this Order to any prospective
employer engaged in activities licensed by the NRC pursuant to 10 CFR Part 50 prior to his acceptance of employment
with such prospective employer so that the employer will have notice of the prohibition against Mr. Mignotte's involvement
in licensed operator activities licensed pursuant to 10 CFR Part 55.
C. For three years from the date of this Order, Mr. Mignotte shall provide notice to the Director, Office of Enforcement,
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555, of the name, address, and telephone number of the employer,
within 72 hours of his acceptance of an employment offer, from an employer who is engaged in activities licensed by
the NRC pursuant to 10 CFR Part 50.



The Director, Office of Enforcement may, in writing, relax or rescind any of the above conditions upon demonstration
by Mr. Mignotte of good cause.


VI


In accordance with 10 CFR 2.202, Mr. Mignotte must, and any other person adversely affected by this Order may, submit
an answer to this Order, and may request a hearing within 20 days of the date of this Order. The answer may consent to this
Order. Unless the answer consents to this Order, the answer shall, in writing and under oath or affirmation, specifically
admit or deny each allegation or charge made in this Order and shall set forth the matters of fact and law on which Mr.
Mignotte or other person adversely affected relies and the reasons as to why the Order should not have been issued.
Any answer or request for a hearing shall be submitted to the Secretary, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ATTN:
Chief, Docketing and Service Section, Washington, DC 20555. Copies also shall be sent to the Director, Office of Enforcement,
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555; to the Assistant General Counsel for Hearings and Enforcement
at the same address; to the Regional Administrator, Region I, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 475 Allendale
Road, King of Prussia, PA 19406; and to Mr. Mignotte, if the answer or hearing request is by a person other than Mr. Mignotte.
If a person other than Mr. Mignotte requests a hearing, that person shall set forth with particularity the manner in
which his interest is adversely affected by this Order and shall address the criteria set forth in 10 CFR 2.714(d).
If a hearing is requested by Mr. Mignotee or a person whose interest is adversely affected, the Commission will issue
an Order designating the time and place of any hearing. If a hearing is held, the issue to be considered at such hearing
shall be whether this Order should be sustained.
Pursuant to 10 CFR 2.202(c)(2)(i), Mr. Mignotee or any person adversely affected, by this Order, may, in addition
to demanding a hearing, at the time that answer is filed or sooner, move the presiding officer to set aside the immediate
effectiveness of the Order on the ground that the Order, including the need for immediate effectiveness, is not based
on adequate evidence but on mere suspicion, unfounded allegations, or error.
In the absence of any request for a hearing, the provisions specified in Section IV above shall be final 20 days from
the date of this Order without further order or proceedings. An answer or a request for a hearing shall not stay the immediate
effectiveness of this order.



Dated at Rockville, Maryland this 28th day of June 1994.




For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.


<SIGNER>
James L. Milhoan,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Executive Director for Nuclear Reactor Regulation, Regional Operations and Research.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9416313 Filed 7594; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M
</BILLING>


