 

D. ``Sponsor'' means the entity that organizes a trust by depositing obligations therein in exchange for certificates.

E. ``Master Servicer'' means the entity that is a party to the pooling and servicing agreement relating to trust assets
and is fully responsible for servicing, directly or through subservicers, the assets of the trust. 
F. ``Subservicer'' means an entity which, under the supervision of and on behalf of the master servicer, services
loans contained in the trust, but is not a party to the pooling and servicing agreement. 
G. ``Servicer'' means any entity which services loans contained in the trust, including the master servicer and any
subservicer. 
H. ``Trustee'' means the trustee of the trust, and in the case of certificates which are denominated as debt instruments,
also means the trustee of the indenture trust. 
I. ``Insurer'' means the insurer or guarantor of, or 
provider of other credit support for, a trust. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person is not an insurer solely because
it holds securities representing an interest in a trust which are of a class subordinated to certificates representing
an interest in the same trust. 
J. ``Obligor'' means any person, other than the insurer, that is obligated to make payments with respect to any obligation
or receivable included in the trust. Where a trust contains qualified motor vehicle leases or qualified equipment
notes secured by leases, ``obligor'' shall also include any owner of property subject to any lease included in the
trust, or subject to any lease securing an obligation included in the trust. 
K. ``Excluded Plan'' means any plan with respect to which any member of the Restricted Group is a ``plan sponsor'' within
the meaning of section 3(16)(B) of the Act. 
L. ``Restricted Group'' with respect to a class of certificates means: 
(1) Each underwriter; 
(2) Each insurer; 
(3) The sponsor; 
(4) The trustee; 
(5) Each servicer; 
(6) Any obligor with respect to obligations or receivables included in the trust constituting more than 5 percent
of the aggregate unamortized principal balance of the assets in the trust, determined on the date of the initial issuance
of certificates by the trust; or 
(7) Any affiliate of a person described in (1)(6) 
above. 
M. ``Affiliate'' of another person includes: 
(1) Any person directly or indirectly, through one 
or more intermediaries, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with such other person; 
(2) Any officer, director, partner, employee, 
relative (as defined in section 3(15) of the Act), a brother, a 
sister, or a spouse of a brother or sister of such other 
person; and 
(3) Any corporation or partnership of which such 
other person is an officer, director or partner. 
N. ``Control'' means the power to exercise a controlling 
influence over the management or policies of a person other than 
an individual. 
O. A person will be ``independent'' of another person only 
if: 
(1) Such person is not an affiliate of that other 
person; and 









