 



Extension of Deadlines:

 The deadline may be extended for all applicants because of acts of God such as floods, hurricanes, etc, or when there
is a widespread disruption of the mails. However, if the granting agency does not extend the deadline for all applicants,
it may not waive or extend the deadline for any applicants. 



C. Instructions for Preparing the Application and Completing 
Application Forms 



The SF 424, 424A, 424B, and certifications have been reprinted for your convenience in preparing the application.
See Appendix A. You should reproduce single-sided copies of these forms from the reprinted forms in the announcement,
typing your information onto the copies. Please do not use forms directly from the 

Federal Register

 announcement, as they are printed on both sides of the page. 

Please prepare your application in accordance with the following instructions: 

1. 

SF 424 Page 1, Application Cover Sheet.

 Please read the following instructions before completing the application cover sheet. An explanation of each item
is included. Complete only the items specified. 



Top of Page.

 Enter the single priority area number under which the application is being submitted. An application should be submitted
under only one priority area. 

Item 1. Type of Submission_Preprinted on the form. 

Item 2. Date Submitted and Applicant Identifier_Date application is submitted to ACYF and applicant's own internal
control number, if applicable. 

Item 3. Date Received By State_State use only (if applicable). 

Item 4. Date Received by Federal Agency_Leave blank. 

Item 5. Applicant Information 
Legal Name_Enter the legal name of the applicant organization. For applications developed jointly, enter the name
of the lead organization only. There must be a single applicant for each application. 

Organizational Unit_Enter the name of the primary unit within the applicant organization which will actually carry
out the project activity. Do not use the name of an individual as the applicant. If this is the same as the applicant organization,
leave the organizational unit blank. 

Address_Enter the complete address that the organization actually uses to receive mail, since this is the address
to which all correspondence will be sent. Do not include both street address and P.O. box number unless both must be
used in mailing. 

Name and telephone number of the person to be contacted on matters involving this application (give area code)_Enter
the full name (including academic degree, if applicable) and telephone number of a person who can respond to questions
about the application. This person should be accessible at the address given here and will receive all correspondence
regarding the application. 

Item 6. Employer Identification Number (EIN)_Enter the employer identification number of the applicant organization,
as assigned by the Internal Revenue Service, including, if known, the Central Registry System suffix. 

Item 7. Type of Applicant_Self-explanatory. 

Item 8. Type of Application_Preprinted on the 
form. 

Item 9. Name of Federal Agency_Preprinted on the form. 

Item 10. Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number and Title_Enter the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance
(CFDA) number assigned to the program under which assistance is requested and its title, as indicated in the relevant
priority area description. 

Item 11. Descriptive Title of Applicant's Project_Enter the project title. The title is generally short and is descriptive
of the project, not the priority area title. 

Item 12. Areas Affected by Project_Enter the governmental unit where significant and meaningful impact could be
observed. List only the largest unit or units affected, such as State, county, or city. If an entire unit is affected,
list it rather than subunits. 





