 



Response:

 Although it may be desirable to do a follow-up, we believe that it is beyond the scope of our statutory authority to require
it. 



Reassessment 





Comment:

 One commenter thought we should reinforce the requirement in 482.43(e) that a hospital reassess its discharge
planning process on an on-going basis; the reinforcement would be a requirement that a hospital document its discharge
planning process, the procedure and the results of the reassessment. 



Response:

 As stated in response to comments on the general opening statement in 482.43, we are requiring that the hospital
have written policies and procedures for its entire discharge planning process, which will include its reassessment.
A specific documentation requirement for 482.43(e) is not needed since it is subsumed by our revision of the
general opening statement in 482.43. We will also reinforce the need for documentation of 482.43(e)
in our interpretive guidelines. 



Comment:

 One commenter believed it would be helpful if the new hospital condition of participation for discharge planning
had built into it measures or parameters for ascertaining when additional discharge planning features and responsibilities
should be added. 



Response:

 Although we do not agree that such measures or parameters should be specified in the regulation at this time, or that
they could be all inclusive, we do believe it is appropriate to mention some factors suggested by commenters to the
regulations that will be included in the interpretive guidelines for 482.43(e). The guidelines will include
assuring_ 

(1) The effectiveness of the identification criteria; 

(2) The quality and timeliness for discharge planning evaluations and discharge plans; 

(3) That the hospital discharge personnel maintain complete and accurate information on community long-term care
services and facilities and use this information to advise patients and their representatives of appropriate options;
and 

(4) That the hospital has a coordinated discharge planning process that integrates discharge planning with other
functional departments, including the quality assurance and utilization review activities of the institution,
and involves the various disciplines responsible for patient care. 

Also, in reviewing this and other comments, we believe 482.43(e) can be strengthened by clarifying that, although
a review of discharge plans must be part of the reassessment requirement, we are not restricting a hospital to that
mechanism alone. For example, a hospital might wish to review a sample of patients who were not identified as likely
to suffer adverse health consequences upon discharge if there was no adequate discharge planning as a means to reassess
the effectiveness of their identification criteria. This clarification of the regulation will remove an unnecessary
restriction on the means used to accomplish reassessment and increase hospital flexibility in meeting the reassessment
standard. Section 482.43(e) is revised to read: 




The hospital must reassess its discharge planning process on an ongoing basis. This reassessment must include a review
of discharge plans to ensure that they are responsive to discharge needs. 



Miscellaneous 





Comment:

 One commenter thought it unfortunate that the two interrelated processes (the development of uniform needs assessment
instruments and discharge planning) have been separated. 



Response:

 Although these two statutory provisions both appear in section 9305 of OBRA '86, they are separate provisions (section
9305(c) is the hospital discharge planning process and section 9305(h) is the development of uniform needs assessment
instrument(s)) with different implementation requirements. The legislation does not specify that implementation
of the hospital discharge planning process is contingent upon development of a uniform needs assessment instrument.
Further, implementation of the hospital discharge planning process requires regulations only while section 9305(h)
required the appointment of and public hearings by a Secretary's Advisory Panel on the Development of Uniform Needs
Assessment Instrument(s), which was to send a report to Congress with its recommendations. The 18-member panel completed
its work, and the recommendations were forwarded to Congress in a report on June 30, 1992. The recommendations to Congress
include recognition of the need for field testing and possible further refinement of the uniform needs assessment
instrument before adoption. Certainly, patients have a current need for an expanded discharge planning process
under the hospital conditions of participation and we do not believe an additional delay of this rule would serve a
useful purpose. 

The commenter may be assured that, although these are separate statutory provisions with separate implementation
requirements, HCFA has and will continue to coordinate these two activities. The discharge planning process has
been structured so that any future instrument requirements can be incorporated by regulation into the discharge
planning requirements. Similarly, the Advisory Panel drafted the framework of the uniform needs assessment instrument
that they believe is compatible with this rule on discharge planning. It is premature, however, to include a requirement
for usage of the instrument in the condition of participation before the instrument's utility is evaluated through
field testing. 



Comment:

 One commenter believed we should mandate the training of all discharge planning personnel in the use of the uniform
needs assessment instrument when it is developed. 



Response:

 The Secretary submitted a report on the uniform needs assessment instrument to Congress on June 30, 1992. The report
includes recommendations on the appropriate use of the instrument. At the present time it would be premature to require
such training. 



Comment:

 One commenter thought we should include direction on how to determine whether someone has been authorized to act on
the patient's behalf, as there may be disputes concerning post-hospital care. 



Response:

 We believe it is best left to the hospital and physician to handle these disputes within the limits of an applicable
State statute. It would be very difficult for us to draft guidelines that are flexible enough to allow all appropriate
hospital procedures to be approved and, since the Federal interest is in the result rather than the process, we elected
to leave this to hospital discretion. 



Comment:

 We received comments from three entities concerning the ``Important Message from Medicare.'' All three thought
the Message to be inadequate for purposes of informing patients of discharge planning. One commenter believed the
Message should have been released at a time that did not preclude public input on the contents of the revised Message
concerning discharge planning. Another commenter thought that patients should, in addition to written notification,
be informed orally of their discharge planning rights. 



Response:

 The statute does not require notice to patients concerning their right to discharge planning. It does require unconditionally
that the hospital provide the service when needed. Moreover, we do not agree that the Message is inadequate for bringing
discharge planning to the attention of patients or their representatives. Although it does not contain the specifics
of the proposed rule as one commenter recommended, its purpose is to emphasize the availability of discharge planning
and the need to consult one's physician or appropriate hospital staff for assistance. To add more detail would, we
believe, add confusion; the Message is already full of other important information and could become overwhelming.




Comment:

 Three commenters believe we should provide more specific guidelines. 



Response:

 There is a need, recognized by Congress, to provide for sufficient flexibility in the requirements for them to be applied
to both small rural facilities and complex urban hospital centers. This approach is also consistent with the focus
of the June 17, 1986 revision of the conditions of participation for hospitals, which eliminated unnecessary regulations
and replaced specific details on maintaining adequate and safe facilities with general comprehensive statements.




