 



(i) Pelagic communities. 

Tier 2 Biological Monitoring for pelagic communities shall include supplemental surveys of similar type to those
in Tier 1, or other surveys as appropriate. 



(ii) Benthic communities. 

Tier 2 Biological Monitoring for benthic communities shall include a comparison of the benthic community within
the dredged material footprint to benthic communities in adjacent areas outside of the dredged material footprint.
An appropriate time-series (ordinal) and community analysis shall be performed using data collected during the
current year and previous years to determine whether there are adverse changes in the benthic populations outside
of the disposal site which may endanger the marine environment. 



(4) Annual reporting. 

The results of any required Tier 2 studies shall be compiled in an annual report which will be available for public review.


(C) 

Tier 3 monitoring activities. 

Tier 3 monitoring activities shall consist of the following: 



(1) Physical monitoring. 

Tier 3 physical monitoring shall consist of advanced oceanographic studies to study the dispersion of dredged material
in the water column and the deposition of dredged material on the seafloor in the vicinity of the SFDODS. Such
physical monitoring may include additional, intensified studies involving the collection of additional current
meter data, deployment of sediment traps, and deployment of surface and subsurface drifters. Such studies may include
additional sampling stations, greater frequency of sampling, more advanced sampling methodologies or equipment,
or other additional increased study measures compared to similar studies conducted in Tiers 1 or 2. 



(2) Chemical monitoring. 

Tier 3 Chemical Monitoring shall consist of analysis of tissues of appropriate field-collected benthic and/or epifaunal
organisms to determine bioaccumulation of contaminants that may be associated with dredged materials deposited
at the SFDODS. Sampling and analysis shall be designed and implemented to determine whether the SFDODS
is a source of adverse bioaccumulation in the tissues of benthic species collected at or outside the SFDODS,
compared to adjacent unimpacted areas, which may endanger the marine environment. Appropriate sampling methodologies
for these tests will be determined and the appropriate analyses will involve the assessment of benthic body burdens
of contaminants and correlation with comparison of the benthic communities inside and outside of the sediment footprint.




(3) Biological monitoring. 

Tier 3 biological monitoring shall have two components: Monitoring of pelagic communities and monitoring of benthic
communities. 



(i) Pelagic communities. 

Tier 3 Biological Monitoring shall include advanced studies of seabirds, marine mammals and mid water column fish
to evaluate how these populations might be affected by disposal site use. Such studies may include additional sampling
stations, greater frequency of sampling, more advanced sampling methodologies or equipment, or other additional
increased study measures compared to similar studies conducted in Tiers 1 or 2. Studies may include evaluation of
sub-lethal changes in the health of pelagic organisms, such as the development of lesions, tumors, developmental
abnormality, decreased fecundity or other adverse sub-lethal effect. 



(ii) Benthic communities. 

Tier 3 Biological Monitoring shall include advanced studies of benthic communities to evaluate how these populations
might be affected by disposal site use. Such studies may include additional sampling stations, greater frequency
of sampling, more advanced sampling methodologies or equipment, or other additional increased study measures compared
to similar studies conducted in Tier 2. Studies may include evaluation of sub-lethal changes in the health of benthic
organisms, such as the development of lesions, tumors, developmental abnormality, decreased fecundity or other
adverse sub-lethal effect. 



(4) Reporting. 

The results of any required Tier 3 studies shall be compiled in a report which will be available for public review. 

(D) 

Periodic confirmatory monitoring. 

At least once every three years, the following confirmatory monitoring activities will be conducted and results
compiled in a report which will be available for public review: Samples of sediments taken from the dredged material
footprint shall be subjected to bioassay testing using one or more appropriate sensitive marine species consistent
with applicable ocean disposal testing guidance (``Green Book'' or related Regional Implementation Agreements),
as determined by the Regional Administrator, to confirm whether contaminated sediments are being deposited at the
SFDODS despite extensive pre-disposal testing. In addition, near-surface arrays of appropriate filter-feeding
organisms (such as mussels) shall be deployed in at least three locations in and around the disposal site for at least
one month during active site use, to confirm whether substantial bioaccumulation of contaminants may be associated
with exposure to suspended sediment plumes from multiple disposal events. One array must be deployed outside the
influence of any expected plumes to serve as a baseline reference. 

(iv) 

Site management actions. 

Once disposal operations at the site begin, the three-tier monitoring program described in paragraphs (b)(70)(iii)
(A) through (C) of this section shall be implemented on an annual basis, through December 31, 1996, independent of
the actual volumes disposed at the site. Thereafter, the Regional Administrator may establish a minimum annual disposal
volume (not to exceed 10 percent of the designated site capacity at any time) below which this monitoring program need
not be fully implemented. The Regional Administrator shall promptly review monitoring reports for the SFDODS
along with any other information available to the Regional Administrator concerning site monitoring activities.
If the information gathered from monitoring at a given monitoring tier is not sufficient for the Regional Administrator
to base reasonable conclusions as to whether disposal at the SFDODS might be endangering the marine ecosystem,
then the Regional Administrator shall require intensified monitoring at a higher tier. If monitoring at a given tier
establishes that disposal at the SFDODS is endangering the marine ecosystem, then the Regional Administrator
shall require modification, suspension or termination of site use. 


