 

Although portions of the San Onofre area and the Santa Margarita River mouth in San Diego County remain relatively
undisturbed, recent survey and small mammal trapping efforts at these locations failed to detect the presence of
the Pacific pocket mouse (P. Brylski, pers. comm., 1993; R. Erickson, 

in litt., 

1993; Erickson 1993; R. Zembal, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, pers. comm., 1993). During the 1930s, Camp Pendleton
Marine Corps Base did not exist and the city of Oceanside was immediately adjacent to the Santa Margarita River estuary.
Much of the southern half of the Santa Margarita River estuary was destroyed in the early 1940s during the establishment
of Camp Pendleton Marine Corps Base and the related construction of a boat basin and harbor facilities. In addition,
the Oceanside area has been extensively developed since the Pacific pocket mouse was last recorded there in 1931,
and little, if any, suitable habitat remains at that location. 

Although the lower Tijuana River Valley evidently supported a relatively large population of the Pacific pocket
mouse in the early 1930s, this area has been substantially altered and currently provides little, if any, suitable
habitat. Recent trapping efforts have failed to detect the Pacific pocket mouse at this location (Taylor and Tiszler
1991; R.T. Miller, pers. comm. to Erickson, 1993). 

Another potential site for the Pacific pocket mouse is Lux Canyon in Encinitas, San Diego County, where an unverified
sighting occurred in 1989. However, the majority of Lux Canyon has already been converted to urban development and
agriculture. The remaining habitat in Lux Canyon is highly fragmented and subject to additional urban development
(F. Roberts, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, pers. comm., 1993). 

Opportunities to find additional populations of the Pacific pocket mouse are limited. Less than 400 hectares (1,000
acres) of about 28,000 hectares (70,000 acres) (1 percent) encompassing the range of the Pacific pocket mouse in Los
Angeles County are undeveloped (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, unpublished data, 1993). About 17,600 hectares
(44,000 acres) of approximately 21,600 hectares (54,000 acres) (81 percent) encompassing the range of the Pacific
pocket mouse in Orange County has been converted to urban uses (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, unpublished data,
1993). Land use patterns in coastal San Diego County are similar. Oberbauer and Vanderwier (1991) reported that 72
percent of coastal sage scrub, 94 percent of native grasslands, 88 percent of coastal mixed chaparral, 88 percent
of coastal salt marsh, 100 percent of coastal strand, and 92 percent of maritime sage scrub habitats in San Diego County
had been converted to urban and agricultural uses by 1988. 

An additional 16 hectares (41 acres) of suitable habitat for the Pacific pocket mouse occurs on the Dana Point Headlands.
However, 13 hectares (32 acres) of this habitat would be eliminated by the same project that threatens the only known
occupied habitat (EDAW 1993b). Additional potential habitat occurs on Pelican Hill in the San Joaquin Hills and along
the coastal bluffs in Crystal Cove State Park. Over 50 percent of the Pelican Hill site was graded in March 1993 with
the remainder approved for development (F. Roberts, pers. comm., 1993). 

Within the remaining undeveloped range of the Pacific pocket mouse, areas that contain suitable habitat for the species
represent less than 10 percent of the remaining habitat. This is exemplified by the situation in Orange County, where
identified suitable habitat for the Pacific pocket mouse is restricted to less than 60 hectares (150 acres) (F. Roberts,
pers. comm., 1993). 

B. 

Overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes. 

Not known to be applicable. 

C. 

Disease or predation. 

Disease is not known to be a factor affecting this species at this time. 

The proliferation of non-native populations of the red fox (

Vulpes vulpes

) in coastal southern California is well documented (Lewis 

et al.

 1993). Erickson (1993) has speculated that the red fox ``may have hastened the demise of the Pacific pocket mouse in
the El Segundo area,'' where the species apparently was well-represented historically. 

Feral and domestic cats are known to be predators of native rodents (Hubbs 1951, George 1974). Pearson (1964) concluded
that the removal of 4,200 mice from a 14 hectare (35 acre) test plot was accomplished largely by 6 cats over an 8-month
period. Feral and/or domestic cats are threatening the only known population of the Pacific pocket mouse. A resident
living immediately adjacent to the only known population has reported that domestic cats had recently and repeatedly
brought home a number of ``tiny gray mice'' (P. Brylski, 

in litt., 

1993). Of all rodent captures at Dana Point Headlands reported by Brylski (1993), 81 percent were Pacific pocket mice.


D. 

The inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms. 

Existing regulatory mechanisms that may provide some protection for the Pacific pocket mouse include: (1) The Federal
Endangered Species Act (Act) in those cases where the pocket mouse occurs in habitat occupied by a listed species;
(2) the California Natural Community Conservation Planning Program; (3) the California Environmental Quality
Act; (4) land acquisition and management by Federal, State, or local agencies or by private groups and organizations;
and (5) local laws and regulations. 

The Pacific pocket mouse is currently classified as a candidate for Federal listing under the Act and as a Species of
Special Concern ``Of Highest Priority'' by the California Department of Fish and Game (Department). However, Federal
candidate species and Department Species of Special Concern have no local status and are afforded no protection under
the Federal or California Endangered Species Acts. 





