 

The logic of the Agency's tampering exemption for aftermarket 
conversions thus indicates that the Agency intended that the 
exemption be conditioned on compliance with all title II 
requirements applicable to the converted vehicle when operating on 
either fuel. Certainly, even if the proposal did not specifically 
make clear that it intended to require compliance with OBD as a 
condition for a tampering exemption, that requirement is a logical 
outgrowth of the discussion in the proposal. The comments of 
interested parties reflect a recognition of EPA's authority to 
require compliance with OBD as a condition of the tampering 
exemption. These comments demonstrate the adequacy of notice.
<FOOTCITE>21</FOOTCITE>



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
21

</FOOTNAME>


See Shell Oil Co. 

v. 

EPA, 

950 F.2nd 741, (Dec. 6, 1991).
</FOOTNOTE>


4. Liability 




Summary of the proposal: 

In the NPRM the Agency proposed that, in 
order to be exempt from the Clean Air Act's tampering prohibition, 
the manufacturers and installers of aftermarket conversions must 
accept in-use liability for warranty and recall as outlined in 
section 207 of the Act and its implementing regulations.
<FOOTCITE>22</FOOTCITE>
 Additionally, EPA proposed that the vehicle's original manufacturer 
remain liable for the in-use performance of any systems which 
retain their original purpose following conversion, except in cases 
where the failure of such a system is determined to be caused by 
the conversion. The Agency proposed that the useful life of a 
conversion be the same as that of the vehicle being converted, and 
requested comment on whether the useful life of the conversion 
should be measured from the time of the conversion or from the time 
of the original vehicle's manufacture.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
22

</FOOTNAME>
40 CFR Part 85.
</FOOTNOTE>




Summary of the comments: 

The Agency received a variety of comments 
on the proposed liability scheme. In general, commenters agreed on 
the need for in-use liability for warranty and recall, but differed 
on where or with whom this liability should be placed. Some 
commenters suggested that the primary liability should be with the 
conversion system manufacturer, and that the installer should only 
be held liable for the proper installation of the conversion 
system. Other commenters agreed with EPA's proposed liability 
suggesting both that this approach would protect the conversion 
consumer in the event that one party went out of business, and that 
it would allow manufacturers and installers to negotiate risk of 
failure between them. Comments received on the issue of liability 
of the vehicle's original manufacturer for the proper functioning 
of original equipment also supported both sides of the issue, with 
some commenters suggesting that the original manufacturer's 
liability should end at the time of conversion and others 
supporting the Agency's proposed approach. Finally, all comments 
received on the issue of when the useful life begins were in favor 
of reducing the useful life requirement of the conversion by the 
amount of the original vehicle's useful life which had already 
passed at the time of conversion. These commenters suggested that, 
because aftermarket conversions generally depend on the original 
vehicle equipment to some extent for emissions performance, it 
would not be appropriate to require the conversion to continue 
meeting applicable emission standards after the original equipment 
had exceeded its useful life.



EPA response to the comments: 

The Agency believes that by holding 
the entity which certifies the conversion system liable for the in-
use performance of the converted vehicle it has the greatest chance 
of assuring quality conversions which will meet applicable emission 
standards throughout their useful lives. If poor installation were 
a defense to liability, then certifiers would have no interest in 
insuring their installers are competent. Such an approach does not 
rely on who manufactures or installs the system, but on who 
certifies the system as meeting applicable standards. At the time 
of vehicle conversion the system certifier assumes liability for 
the converted vehicle's in-use emissions performance. The 
certifier may elect to have outside agents conduct installations. 
However, the certifier will be solely responsible for the converted 
vehicle's in-use emission performance. For this reason the Agency 
recommends that those certifiers electing to have outside agents 
conduct installations work to assure quality system installation. 
EPA believes that it is appropriate to hold the original 
vehicle manufacturer liable for the performance of any parts or 
systems which retain their original function following conversion. 
If the failure of such a part or system could be traced to the 
conversion then the liability would lie with the conversion 
certifier. A good indication of where the liability lies in such 
situations would be whether the failure of a part or system is also 
occurring in non-converted configurations of the same vehicle. 
The Agency agrees with the comments that it is not appropriate 
to extend the useful life of a conversion past that of the original 
vehicle, given that conversions generally rely on many original 
vehicle components for proper operation. Thus, the applicable 
useful life of any conversion will be reduced by the amount of 
mileage on the vehicle at the time of conversion (

i.e., 

the useful 
life of a conversion will end at the same point that the useful 
life of the original vehicle ends). 


IV. Environmental Effects 





