 




<DOCTITLE>Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Request for Relief from a Commitment</DOCTITLE>


Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota (Norwest), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding
Company Act, 12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq., has requested that the Board grant to it relief from a commitment that it made in
connection with the Board's approval of Norwest's application to underwrite and deal in certain securities to a limited
extent through Norwest Investment Services, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota (NISI). 

Norwest Corporation

, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 79 (1990) 

(Norwest Order)

. In the 

Norwest Order

, the Board authorized Norwest to underwrite and deal in, among other things, municipal revenue bonds pursuant to
the prudential limitations and other conditions set forth in 

Citicorp, J.P. Morgan  Co. Incorporated, and Bankers Trust New York Corporation

, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987) as modified by 

Order Approving Modifications to Section 20 Orders

, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989).
Among the conditions to which Norwest is subject pursuant to the 

Norwest Order

 is that the municipal revenue bonds underwritten by NISI must be rated as investment quality (

i.e.

, in one of the top four categories) by a nationally recognized rating agency. Norwest has requested limited relief
from this condition to allow NISI to underwrite issues of municipal revenue bonds that are not rated by a nationally
recognized rating agency so long as each issue of unrated bonds does not exceed $7.5 million.
Norwest supports its request for relief by contending that it is not cost effective for municipalities to obtain ratings
for smaller issues of municipal revenue bonds. Norwest asserts that NISI's participation in underwriting these
unrated municipal revenue bonds will benefit the communities that issue the bonds by providing additional competition
in the market for this service. Norwest believes that the systems and procedures that it has in place to evaluate the
creditworthiness of these issues should substantially mitigate any risk that may be associated with the underwriting
of these bonds.
In publishing the proposal for comment, the Board does not take a position on issues raised by the proposal. Notice
of the proposal is published solely in order to seek the views of interested persons on the issues presented by the request.
Any comments or requests for hearing should be submitted in writing and received by William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551, not later than October 11, 1994. Any request for
a hearing on this application must, as required by  262.3(e) of the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 CFR 262.3(e)), be
accompanied by a statement of the reasons why a written presentation would not suffice in lieu of a hearing, identifying
specifically any questions of fact that are in dispute, summarizing the evidence that would be presented at a hearing,
and indicating how the party commenting would be aggrieved by approval of the proposal.
The request may be inspected at the offices of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Minneapolis
(James M. Lyon, Vice President) 250 Marquette Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480.




Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 16, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Jennifer J. Johnson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary of the Board.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423373 Filed 92094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 621001F
</BILLING>


