 

(2) 

Indirect use. 

In determining whether an issue meets the private business use test, indirect as well as direct use of the proceeds
is taken into account. For example, the issuer's use of the proceeds to engage in a series of financing transactions
for property to be used by nongovernmental persons in their trades or businesses may cause the private business use
test to be met. In addition, proceeds are treated as used in the trade or business of a nongovernmental person in situations
involving other arrangements, whether in a single transaction or in a series of related transactions, whereby a nongovernmental
person uses property acquired with the proceeds of an issue in its trade or business.

(3) 

Ultimate and intermediate use. 

In determining whether an issue meets the private business use test, both the ultimate and intermediate uses of proceeds
are taken into account. For example, a facility is treated as being used for a private business use if it is leased to
a governmental person and then subleased to a nongovernmental person or if it is leased to a governmental person and
subleased to a governmental person, provided in each case that the nongovernmental person's use is in a trade or business.

(4) 

Aggregation of private business use. 

The use of proceeds by all nongovernmental persons is aggregated to determine whether the private business use test
is satisfied.

(b) 

General definition of private business use

_(1) 

In general.

 Proceeds are used for a private business use if they are used in a trade or business carried on by a nongovernmental person.
For this purpose, any activity carried on by a person other than a natural person is treated as a trade or business. See
1.1411(e) relating to certain partnerships.

(2) 

Use of proceeds. 

As further described in this paragraph (b) and except as otherwise provided in this section, a person uses proceeds,
for purposes of the private business use test, if it (i) owns or leases financed property, (ii) is loaned those proceeds,
or (iii) has actual or beneficial use of financed property under a management or incentive payment contract, output
contract, or other arrangement.

(3) 

Agents and employees. 

Use of proceeds by nongovernmental persons in their capacity as agents or employees of a governmental person is not
use for purposes of the private business use test.

(4) 

Ownership. 

Except as provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, ownership of financed property is treated as use of their property
for purposes of the private business use test.

(5) 

Leases.

 Except as provided in paragraphs (b)(3) or (f) of this section, the lease of a financed facility is treated as a use of
that facility for purposes of the private business use test. For this purpose, any arrangement, such as a management
contract, that is properly characterized is a lease for federal income tax purposes is treated as a lease.

(6) 

Management contracts.

 A management contract (as defined in paragraph (c)(6) of this section) results in use of the financed property if_

(i) The contract is not a qualified management contract (as defined in paragraph (c) of this section); or

(ii) The service provider is treated as the lessee of the financed property for federal income tax purposes.

(7) 

Output facilities. 

See 1.1417 for special rules under which contracts for purchase of output of output facilities result
in use of the financed facility.

(8) 

Discharge of primary legal obligation

_(i) 

General rule.

 In general, a nongovernmental person is treated as a user of a financed facility if the financing of that facility discharges
a primary and unconditional legal obligation of that nongovernmental person, even if the nongovernmental person
has no possession or control of the facility. Further, the use resulting from the discharge of a primary legal obligation
is not use as a member of the general public within the meaning of paragraph (e) of this section. A primary legal obligation
does not include a law of general application (for example, an ordinance requiring that all businesses properly dispose
of hazardous waste). An obligation imposed on the owner of a facility is not the primary obligation of any other user
of that facility.

(ii) 

Example. 

The following example illustrates the application of this paragraph (b)(8) (see also 

Example 12

 of paragraph (e) of this section):






Example. 

As a condition to obtaining a permit to construct an industrial development, Developer N unconditionally agrees
that it will construct governmentally owned streets and sidewalks in its development. N and several other developers
undertake to create District, a political subdivision. District issues its tax assessment bonds, the proceeds of
which are used, in part, to construct the street and sidewalk improvements that N is obligated to construct. N's obligation
to construct the improvements is unconditional and, therefore, the discharge of that obligation results in private
business use of the proceeds used to construct those improvements.




