 

15. Feasibility and Validity of the Site Monitoring


Several commentors wrote that the details of the SMMP should be known before the Final Rule is issued in order to assess
its scientific validity 
and the feasibility of surveillance and monitoring. 


Response 


In the Public Notice accompanying the Proposed Rule designating the SFDODS, EPA discussed the broad outlines
of site surveillance and monitoring envisioned by EPA. EPA subsequently supplemented this step by making available
for public review and comment the proposed SMMP (see response above), and by incorporating many specific site management
and monitoring requirements into the 
Final Rule itself as requested by several commentors. In EPA's view, 
the public has had ample opportunity to comment upon the scientific 
validity and the feasibility of EPA's proposed site surveillance and 
monitoring measures, and as a result these measures have been 
strengthened. 
In EPA's view, the surveillance and monitoring measures that EPA 
will require for the SFDODS are feasible and will provide the 
necessary scrutiny of site use for a full evaluation of the potential 
for adverse environmental impacts. The monitoring and surveillance 
measures for the SFDODS are based upon successful measures taken at 
other designated disposal sites in Region 9 and other parts of the 
United States, including those required by EPA to be implemented by 
the U.S. Navy on a project involving the disposal of dredged sediments 
at a temporary dump site in the vicinity of the SFDODS. The 
monitoring measures for the SFDODS were further developed with the 
benefit of conservative (environmentally protective) modeling of post-disposal dispersion of dredged sediments
at the site. This modeling, 
discussed in the Final EIS, has been demonstrated at other ocean 
disposal sites to have a high degree of accuracy in predicting 
dispersion of dumped sediments. 


16. Management Action Trigger Levels and Significance Criteria 


Several commentors stated that the trigger levels or criteria for 
determining when site use can be modified or terminated were 
inappropriate or too vague in the site designation Proposed Rule, and 
appear to limit EPA's ability to take action to restrict ocean dumping 
until significant adverse impacts have already occurred. 


Response 


EPA's authority to protect marine resources in the vicinity 
of a disposal site is described in the Ocean Dumping regulations at 40 
CFR 220.4, 228.3, 228.7, 228.8, 228.9, 228.10, and 228.11. EPA can 
require that site use be modified or terminated based on several 
factors, including: (1) exceedance of Federal water quality criteria 
after disposal within the site or beyond the SF-DODS boundary; (2) 
significant movement of disposed material toward important biological 
resource areas or marine sanctuaries; (3) significant adverse changes 
in the structure of the benthic community outside the disposal site 
boundary; (4) significant adverse bioaccumulation in organisms 
collected from the disposal site or areas adjacent to the site 
boundary, compared to the reference site; and (5) significant adverse 
impacts upon commercial or recreational fisheries resources near the 
site. EPA can take action based on these criteria at any time; the 
site designation Rule in no way restricts EPA's authorities in this 
regard. 
In addition to these existing authorities, the Final Rule now 
includes additional authority for determining management actions, such 
as site use modifications or even site use termination, as warranted 
by site monitoring results. For example, clarifications have been 
made to how sediment chemistry monitoring results would ``trigger'' 
management actions. 
With respect to EPA taking actions before significant adverse 
impacts have occurred, monitoring data will be collected periodically 
(

i.e.,

 there will be annual sampling of monitoring stations) and any 
corrective management action taken following an annual review of 
monitoring data could therefore occur after some impacts have already 
occurred. However, because of extensive physical, chemical, and 
biological testing of the sediments proposed for ocean disposal, 
potential adverse impacts, if any, are expected to be physical in 
nature (

i.e.,

 sediment textural changes and smothering of some 
infauna) and confined within the boundaries of the disposal site. 
Furthermore, if warranted by onboard observations (

i.e.,

 direct 
observations of significant disturbance of marine birds and mammals 
near disposal operations) more immediate action can be taken. 


17. Frequency of Monitoring 


One commentor wrote that the proposed 
frequency of monitoring (after a period of one year or after 6 million 
cubic yards have been dumped), is not adequate and that monitoring 
should be more frequent to determine seasonal differences in the plume 
and sediment footprint. 


Response 


EPA's conservative modeling of the fate of dredged material 
disposed at the alternative sites utilized current meter data from a 
full year's deployment. Seasonal variability of oceanographic 
conditions is therefore generally known, and was considered in the 
site designation Final EIS and in development of the SMMP. The 
existing seasonal data, together with the monitoring requirements of 
the Final Rule, are adequate to address seasonal variation in 
oceanographic conditions. 


18. Need for Periodic Review 


Several commentors objected to the 
designation of the site for a full 50 years without any stringent 
requirement for periodic review. 


Response 


The Final Rule now more clearly states that there will be 
periodic review of monitoring data to determine if the site is 
performing as predicted (

i.e.,

 no significant adverse impacts outside 
of the disposal site boundaries), if site modifications are necessary, 
or if site use should be terminated. Necessary changes in site 
management can be made based on any of these reviews. Site monitoring 
will be a strict requirement of site use. If site monitoring is not 
implemented, disposal of dredged material will be prohibited at the 
ocean site. 


19. Baseline Data 


Several commentors wrote that the proposed SMMP, 
as summarized in the Proposed Rule, is flawed because of inadequate 
baseline data. These commentors urged a rigorous monitoring program 
during the first year of dumping in order to develop a more 
scientifically sound baseline for the site. 


Response 


Although the site designation studies were broad in 
geographic scope, the data collected in these studies serve as an 
appropriate baseline given the variability of biological parameters 
which is typical of this oceanic area. The region, overall, is 
significantly affected by many factors, including: interannual changes 
in regional climate; climate-induced variability in abundance and 
spatial distribution of biological populations, and human-induced 
impacts such as heavy vessel traffic and substantial commercial and 
recreational fishing. A focussed, localized one-year study of the 
site itself ignores the temporal and spatial complexity of the area, 
and would not produce a meaningful ``baseline'' for the site. 






