 



Discussion: 

The Secretaries agree that, in many cases, students do not receive the guidance and counseling needed to make important
decisions related to education and training leading to meaningful employment. It is for this reason that career exploration
and counseling is required as an important activity in the school-based learning component of the notice. States
seeking to receive a grant under this competition must demonstrate that the school-based learning component of their
School-to-Work Opportunities systems will include career exploration and counseling. In addition, however, in
response to the commenter's concerns, the Secretaries have revised the School-based Learning component to require,
among other stated elements, ``career awareness and exploration and counseling (beginning at the earliest possible
age)'' in order to help those students who may be interested, to identify and select or reconsider, their interests,
goals, and career majors, ``including those options that may not be traditional for their gender, race or ethnicity.''
By this change, the Secretaries wish to emphasize the importance of career awareness and exploration at an early age.
The determination of the actual age or grade level at which this activity should begin, has been left to the States.





Changes: 

The School-based Learning component has been revised to require, among other stated elements, ``career awareness
and exploration and counseling (beginning at the earliest possible age)'' in order to help those students who may
be interested, to identify and select or reconsider, their interests, goals, and career majors, ``including those
options that may not be traditional for their gender, race, or ethnicity.'' 




General Program Requirements_Connecting Activities 






Comment: 

One commenter believed that the description of information collection and analysis in the connecting activities
component of the ``General Program Requirements'' of the priority is too general to provide useful information.
The commenter believed that the information should include annual participation and post-program outcomes, and
that the data should be ``disaggregated'' by gender, race, ethnicity, socio-economic background, limited-English
proficiency, and disability, so that any lack of participation or achievement by one group would not be masked by the
success of the program for the general population. 




Discussion: 

The Secretaries agree with the commenters that disaggregated data is likely to be important for determinations of
the success of the program for all groups. They would expect that the information collected and analysis provided
under the connecting activities component to describe student participation in the program. This may include information
on gender, race, ethnicity, socio-economic background, limited-English proficiency, and disability. 




Changes: 

A change has been made to the ``General Program Requirements Connecting Activities'' section of notice so that it
is specified that among the information that may be collected is information on gender, race, ethnicity, socio-economic
background, limited-English proficiency, and disability. 




Comment: 

One commenter requested that the Secretaries add the following additional requirement to the list of connecting
activities in the priority: ``Providing job coaching services to youth with disabilities within a supported employment
model.'' The commenter believed that job coaches could help students acquire job skills and could help employers
achieve the workplace accommodations that may be necessary to job success. 




Discussion: 

As is provided for in the school-based and work-based learning components respectively, career exploration and
counseling, as well as workplace mentoring, must be provided to all students. In addition, the notice requires States
to describe in their applications how they will ensure opportunities for all students, including students with disabilities,
to participate in School-to-Work Opportunities programs. While the Secretaries believe that funds awarded under
this competition may be expended to cover the costs of what the commenter has referred to as job coaching for disabled
students within a supported employment model, States may also seek to utilize funds available from other sources
to meet what may be the special needs of disabled students participating in their School-to-Work Opportunities programs.
Indeed, under paragraph (b)(4) of the priority, States are specifically required to describe how their School-to-Work
Opportunities systems will coordinate the use of education and training funds from State and private sources with
related Federal program funds. 




Changes: 

None. 





