 

Critical Habitat 


Section 4(a)(3) of the Act, as amended, requires that, to the 
maximum extent prudent and determinable, the Secretary propose 
critical habitat at the time the species is proposed to be endangered 
or threatened. The Service finds that designation of critical 
habitat is not presently prudent or determinable for this species. 
Specific habitat used by jaguars in the United States is unknown. It 
would be possible to delineate some general areas that the species 
would be most likely to use. However, the lack of knowledge on the 
species' habitat use makes critical habitat undeterminable. 
The Service's regulations (50 CFR 424.12(a)(1)) state that 
designation of critical habitat is not prudent when one or both of 
the following situations exist: (1) The species is threatened by 
taking or other human activity, and identification of critical 
habitat can be expected to increase the degree of such threat to the 
species; or (2) such designation of critical habitat would not be 
beneficial to the species. As discussed in factor ``B'' above, the 
jaguar is highly threatened by taking. Jaguars are still in demand 
for hunts and as trophies and pelts. The last verified jaguar in 
Arizona was hunted and killed in 1986 approximately one year after it 
was known to be in the area. Publication of detailed critical 
habitat maps and descriptions in the 

Federal Register

 would likely 
make the species more vulnerable to activities prohibited under 
section 9 of the Act. In addition, since the primary threat to the 
species in the United States is direct taking rather than habitat 
destruction, designation of critical habitat would not lessen, and 
may increase, the primary threat to the jaguar. Therefore, it would 
not be prudent to propose critical habitat for the jaguar at this 
time. 


Available Conservation Measures 


Conservation measures provided to species listed as endangered 
or threatened under the Act include recognition, recovery actions, 
requirements for Federal protection, and prohibitions against certain 
practices. Recognition through listing encourages and results in 
conservation actions by Federal, State, and private agencies, groups, 
and individuals. The Act provides for possible land acquisition and 
cooperation with the States and authorizes recovery plans for all 
listed species. The protection required of Federal agencies and the 
prohibitions against taking and harm are discussed, in part, below. 
Section 7(a) of the Act, as amended, requires Federal agencies 
to evaluate their actions with respect to any species that is 
proposed or listed as endangered or threatened and with respect to 
its critical habitat, if any is being designated. Regulations 
implementing this interagency cooperation provision of the Act are 
codified at 50 CFR Part 402. Section 7(a)(4) requires Federal 
agencies to confer informally with the Service on any action that is 
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of a proposed species or 
result in destruction or adverse modification of proposed critical 
habitat. If a species is listed subsequently, Section 7(a)(2) 
requires Federal agencies to ensure that activities they authorize, 
fund or carry out are not likely to jeopardize the continued 
existence of such a species or to destroy or adversely modify its 
critical habitat. If a Federal action may affect a listed species or 
its critical habitat, the responsible Federal agency must enter into 
formal consultation with the Service. Federal actions that may 
affect the jaguar include clearing of habitat, destruction of 
riparian areas, fragmentation or blocking of corridors that jaguars 
may use to cross from Mexico to the United States, and any trapping 
or animal control activities designed to target the jaguar or other 
large predators. 
The Act and its implementing regulations found at 50 CFR 17.21 
set forth a series of general prohibitions and exceptions that apply 
to all endangered wildlife. These prohibitions, in part, make it 
illegal for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United 
States to take (includes harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, 
kill, trap, or collect, or to attempt any of these), import or 
export, ship in interstate commerce in the course of commercial 
activity, or sell or offer for sale in interstate or foreign commerce 
any listed species. It also is illegal to possess, sell, deliver, 
carry, transport, or ship any such wildlife that has been taken 
illegally. Certain exceptions apply to agents of the Service and 
State conservation agencies. 
Permits may be issued to carry out otherwise prohibited 
activities involving endangered wildlife species under certain 
circumstances. Regulations governing permits are at 50 CFR 17.22 and 
17.23. Such permits are available for scientific purposes, to 
enhance the propagation or survival of the species, and/or for 
incidental take in connection with otherwise lawful activities. In 
some instances, permits may be issued for a specified time to relieve 
undue economic hardship that would be suffered if such relief were 
not available. Permits may be sought since there are some zoos that 
have jaguars on display. 
On July 1, 1975, the jaguar was included in Appendix I of the 
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna 
and Flora (CITES). The effect of this listing is that both export 
and import permits are generally required before international 
shipment may occur. Such shipment is strictly regulated by CITES 
party nations to prevent effects that may be detrimental to the 
species' survival. Generally, import or export cannot be allowed if 
it is for primarily commercial purposes. Requests for copies of the 
regulations on protected wildlife and inquiries regarding them may be 
addressed to the Office of Management Authority, U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, 4401 North Fairfax Drive, room 420C, Arlington, 
Virginia 222033507 (703/3582104). 


Public Comments Solicited 


The Service intends that any final action resulting from this 
proposal will be as accurate and as effective as possible. 
Therefore, comments or suggestions from the public, other concerned 
governmental agencies, the scientific community, industry, or any 
other interested party concerning this proposed rule are hereby 
solicited. Comments particularly are sought concerning: 
(1) Biological, commercial trade, or other relevant data 
concerning any threat (or lack thereof) to this species; 




