 

16. For new major stationary sources, Lowest Achievable Emission Rate (LAER) is to apply to each nonattainment pollutant
which the source has the potential-to-emit in major amounts. New Jersey's definition of LAER incorporates all necessary
requirements. New Jersey's regulations specify that LAER applies to sources which have the potential to emit regulated
pollutants above threshold levels. Application of LAER to the equipment constructed or altered is a requirement
for permit issuance. These provisions meet the federal requirements and are approvable.



NSR Requirements for Ozone



The statutory permit requirements for ozone nonattainment areas are generally contained in sections 172 and 173,
and in subpart 2 of part D of the Act. For all classifications of ozone nonattainment areas and for ozone transport regions,
states must adopt the appropriate major source thresholds and offset ratios, and provisions to ensure that any new
or modified major stationary source of nitrogen oxides (NO

X

) satisfies the requirements applicable to any major source of volatile organic compounds (VOC), unless a special
NO

X

 exemption is granted by the Administrator under the provision of section 182(f) of the Act. For serious and severe
ozone nonattainment areas, state plans must implement the requirements of sections 182(c) (6), (7) and (8) with regard
to modifications.

Though New Jersey contains marginal, moderate and severe ozone nonattainment areas, it has elected to treat the entire
State as a severe nonattainment areas for purposes of nonattainment review. Consequently, it has adopted uniform
major source threshold, offset ratio, and NO

X

 provisions for the entire State.

These are:




<TABLE>







1Area classification

1Major source threshold

1Minimum offset ratio

1NO

X

 provisions





Severe

25 tons/year

1.3:1.0

LAER/Emission offsets equivalent to VOC requirements.



</TABLE>




These provisions meet the requirements for severe nonattainment areas at sections 182(d) and (d)(2) of the Act. In
addition, New Jersey has adopted offset ratios for all pollutants, except lead, which increase with distance from
the source. Since this approach is stricter than that required under the Act, these offset ratios are approvable.

New Jersey's rule submittal does not include the additional modification provisions for serious and severe areas
required by sections 182(c) (6), (7) and (8) of the Act. First, the amended Act establishes a de minimis emissions threshold
of 25 tons for both VOC and (where applicable) NO

X

. Second, it requires an aggregation of past net increases over a 5-year period, even when the proposed increase itself
is below the de minimis level. The Act establishes different requirements if the modification occurs at sources emitting
less than 100 tons per year (TPY) of VOC or emitting 100 TPY or more of VOC. New Jersey must revise its rule to conform to
these requirements. Therefore, EPA finds this as a basis for disapproval.



NSR Requirements for Carbon Monoxide



The general statutory permit requirements for carbon monoxide nonattainment areas are contained in revised section
173, and in subpart 3 of part D of the Act. States must adopt the appropriate major source threshold and offset ratio.




