 

In 1910, isolation practices in U.S. hospitals were altered by the introduction of the cubicle system of isolation
which placed patients in multiple-bed wards.6 With the cubicle system, hospital personnel used separate gowns,
washed their hands with antiseptic solutions after patient contact, and disinfected objects contaminated by the
patient. These nursing procedures, designed to prevent transmission of pathogenic organisms to other patients
and personnel, became known as ``barrier nursing.'' Use of the cubicle system of isolation and barrier nursing procedures
provided general hospitals with an alternative to placing some patients in infectious disease hospitals. 
During the 1950s, U.S. infectious disease hospitals, except those designated exclusively for tuberculosis, began
to close. In the mid-1960s, tuberculosis hospitals also began to close, partly because general hospital or outpatient
treatment became preferred for patients with tuberculosis. Thus, by the late 1960s patients with infectious diseases
were housed in wards in general hospitals, either in specially designed, single-patient isolation rooms or in regular
single or multiple-patient rooms. 


CDC Isolation Systems 


CDC Isolation Manual 


In 1970, CDC published a detailed manual entitled 

Isolation Techniques for Use in Hospitals 

to assist general hospitals with isolation precautions;2 a revised edition appeared in 1975.3 The manual could be
applied in small community hospitals with limited resources as well as in large metropolitan university-associated
medical centers. 
The manual introduced the category system of isolation precautions. It recommended that hospitals use one of seven
isolation categories (Strict Isolation, Respiratory Isolation, Protective Isolation, Enteric Precautions,
Wound and Skin Precautions, Discharge Precautions, and Blood Precautions). The precautions recommended for each
category were determined almost entirely by the epidemiologic features of the diseases grouped in the category,
primarily their routes of transmission. Certain isolation techniques, believed to be the minimum necessary to prevent
transmission of all diseases in the category, were indicated for each isolation category. Because all diseases in
a category did not have the same epidemiology (i.e., were not spread by exactly the same combination of modes of transmission),
with some requiring fewer precautions than others, more precautions were suggested for some diseases than were necessary.
This disadvantage of ``over-isolation'' for some diseases was offset by the convenience of having a small number
of categories. More importantly, the simple system required personnel to learn only a few established routines for
applying isolation precautions. To make the system even more user friendly, instructions for each category were
printed on color-coded cards and placed on the doors, beds, and/or charts of patients on isolation precautions. 
By the mid-1970s, 93% of U.S. hospitals had adopted the isolation system recommended in the manual.7 However, neither
the efficacy of the category approach in preventing spread of infections nor the costs of using the system were evaluated
by empirical studies. 
By 1980, hospitals were experiencing new endemic and epidemic nosocomial infection problems, some caused by multidrug-resistant
microorganisms and others caused by newly recognized pathogens, which required different isolation precautions
from those specified by any existing isolation category. There was increasing need for isolation precautions to
be directed more specifically at nosocomial transmission in special-care units, rather than at the intrahospital
spread of infectious diseases acquired in the community.8 Infection control professionals and nursing directors
in hospitals with particularly sophisticated nursing staffs were increasingly calling for new isolation systems
that would tailor precautions to the modes of transmission for each infection and avoid the over-isolation inherent
in the category-specific approach. Further, new facts about the epidemiology and modes of transmission of some diseases
made it necessary for CDC to revise the isolation manual. Toward that end, during 19811983, CDC Hospital Infections
Program personnel consulted with infectious disease specialists in medicine, pediatrics, and surgery; hospital
epidemiologists; and infection control practitioners about revising the manual. 



CDC Isolation Guideline 



In 1983, the CDC Guideline for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals4 (hereafter referred to as the isolation guideline)
was published to take the place of the 1975 isolation manual; it contained many important changes. One of the most important
was the increased emphasis on decision-making on the part of users. Unlike the 1975 manual, which encouraged few decisions
on the part of users, the isolation guideline encouraged decision-making at several levels.

910

 First, hospital infection control committees were given a choice of selecting between category-specific or disease-specific
isolation precautions or using the guideline to develop a unique isolation system appropriate to their hospital's
circumstances and environment. Second, personnel who placed a patient on isolation precautions were encouraged
to make decisions about the individual precautions to be taken, (e.g., whether the patient's age, mental status,
or condition indicated that a private room was needed to prevent sharing of contaminated articles). Third, personnel
taking care of patients on isolation precautions were encouraged to decide whether they needed to wear a mask, gown,
or gloves based on the likelihood of exposure to infective material. Such decisions were deemed necessary to isolate
the infection but not the patient and to reduce the costs associated with unnecessary isolation precautions. 



