 

(iii) Unless described in the application and funded in the approved awards, the subaward, transfer or contracting
out of any work under an award. This provision does not apply to the purchase of supplies, material, equipment or general
support services. 
(4) No other prior approval requirements for specific items may be imposed unless a deviation has been approved by
OMB. 
(5) Except for requirements listed in paragraphs (d)(3)(i) and (d)(3)(ii) of this section, HUD is authorized, at
its option, to waive cost-related and administrative prior written approvals required by Circular A110 and
OMB Circulars A21 and A122. Such waivers may include authorizing recipients to do any one or more of the
following. 
(i) Initiate a one-time extension of the expiration date of the award of up to 12 months unless one or more of the following
conditions apply. For one-time extensions, the recipient must notify HUD in writing with the supporting reasons
and revised expiration date at least 10 days before the expiration date specified in the award. This action may be taken
unless: 
(A) The terms and conditions of award prohibit the extension. 
(B) The extension requires additional Federal funds. 
(C) The extension involves any change in the approved objectives or scope of the project. 
(6) For construction awards, recipients shall request prior written approval promptly from HUD for budget revisions
whenever paragraphs (d)(6)(i) or (d)(6)(ii) of this section apply. 
(i) The revision results from changes in the scope or the objective of the project or program. 
(ii) The need arises for additional Federal funds to complete the project. 
(7) No other prior approval requirements for specific items may be imposed unless a deviation has been approved by
OMB. 
(8) When HUD makes an award that provides support for both construction and nonconstruction work, HUD may require
the recipient to request prior approval from HUD before making any fund or budget transfers between the two types of
work supported. 
(e) 

Non-Federal audits. 

(1) Recipients and subrecipients that are institutions of higher education or other non-profit organizations shall
be subject to the audit requirements contained in OMB Circular A133, ``Audits of Institutions of Higher Education
and Other Non-Profit Institutions,'' as codified in 24 CFR part 44. 
(2) State and local governments shall be subject to the audit requirements contained in the Single Audit Act (31 U.S.C.
75017) and HUD regulations implementing OMB Circular A128, ``Audits of State and Local Governments,''
at 24 CFR part 45. 
(3) Hospitals are covered by the audit provisions of OMB Circular A133, as codified in 24 CFR part 44. 
(4) Commercial organizations shall be subject to the audit requirements of HUD or the prime recipient as incorporated
into the award document. 


84.83

Property standards. 


(a) 

Purpose of property standards.

 Paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section set forth uniform standards governing management and disposition of property
furnished by the Federal Government whose cost was charged to a project supported by a Federal award. HUD shall require
recipients to observe these standards under awards and shall not impose additional requirements, unless specifically
required by Federal statute. The recipient may use its own property management standards and procedures provided
it observes the provisions of paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section. 
(b) 

Insurance coverage. 

Recipients shall, at a minimum, provide the equivalent insurance coverage for real property and equipment acquired
with Federal funds as provided to property owned by the recipient. Federally-owned property need not be insured unless
required by the terms and conditions of the award. 
(c) 

Real property. 

HUD prescribes the following requirements for recipients concerning the use and disposition of real property acquired
in whole or in part under awards: 
(1) Title to real property shall vest in the recipient subject to the condition that the recipient shall use the real
property for the authorized purpose of the project as long as it is needed and shall not encumber the property without
approval of HUD. 
(2) The recipient shall obtain written approval by HUD for the use of real property in other federally-sponsored projects
when the recipient determines that the property is no longer needed for the purpose of the original project. Use in
other projects shall be limited to those under federally-sponsored projects (i.e., awards) or programs that have
purposes consistent with those authorized for support by HUD. 



