 

(19) Certification regarding Lobbying. Section 319 of the Department of the Interior Appropriations Act, Public
Law 101121, approved October 23, 1989 (31 U.S.C. 1352) (the ``Byrd Amendment'') generally prohibits recipients
of Federal contracts, grants, and loans from using appropriated funds for lobbying the Executive or Legislative
Branches of the Federal Government in connection with a specific contract, grant or loan. The Department's regulations
on these restrictions on lobbying are codified at 24 CFR part 87. To comply with 24 CFR 87.110, any PHA submitting an
application under this announcement for more than $100,000 of budget authority must submit a certification and,
if applicable, a Disclosure of Lobbying Activities (SF-LLL form). 
(20) A certification that: 
(a) The PHA will include in any contract for renovation or conversion (including combining of units) on the premises
of the PHA development to accommodate the provision of supportive services under this program, a requirement that
all laborers and mechanics (other than volunteers under the conditions set out in 24 CFR part 70) shall be paid not less
than the wages prevailing in the locality, as predetermined by the Secretary of Labor pursuant to the Davis-Bacon
Act (40 U.S.C. 276a-276a5); 
(b) The PHA will include in such contracts a requirement that all architects, technical engineers, draftsmen, and
technicians (other than volunteers) shall be paid not less than the wages prevailing in the locality as determined
by HUD. 
(c) If new construction is undertaken, the PHA has looked at other appropriate facilities and cannot make those usable
for FIC purposes. 
 


IV. Corrections to Deficient Applications 


After the submission deadline date, HUD will screen each application to determine whether it is complete. If an application
lacks certain technical items, such as certifications or assurances, or contains a technical error, such as an incorrect
signatory, HUD will notify the applicant in writing that it has 14 calendar days from the date of HUD's written notification
to cure the technical deficiency. If the applicant fails to submit the missing material within the 14-day cure period,
HUD will disqualify the application. 
This 14-day cure period applies only to nonsubstantive deficiencies or errors. Deficiencies capable of cure will
involve only items not necessary for HUD to assess the merits of an application against the ranking factors specified
in this NOFA. 


V. Other Matters 


A. Other Federal Requirements 


In addition to the Equal Opportunity Requirements set forth in Section III, Checklist of Application Submission
Requirements, of this NOFA, grantees must comply with the following requirements: 
(1) 

Ineligible contractors. 

The provisions of 24 CFR part 24 relating to the employment, engagement of services, awarding of contracts, or funding
of any contractors or subcontractors during any period of debarment, suspension, or placement in ineligibility
status. 
(2) 

Flood insurance. 

No building proposed for acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, or improvement to be assisted under
this program may be located in an area that has been identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as
having special flood hazards, unless the community in which the area is situated is participating in the National
Flood Insurance Program and the regulations thereunder (44 CFR parts 5979), or less than a year has passed since
FEMA notification regarding such hazards, and the grantee ensures that flood insurance on the structure is obtained
in compliance with section 102(a) of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.). 

(3) 

Lead-based paint. 

The requirements, as applicable, of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 48214846),
and implementing regulations at 24 CFR parts 35, 965 and 968. 

(4) 

Applicability of OMB Circulars. 

The policies, guidelines, and requirements of OMB Circular Nos. A110 and A122 with respect to the acceptance
and use of assistance by private nonprofit organizations. 

(5) 

Relocation and Real Property Acquisition. 

The Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 and HUD Handbook 1378, Tenant
Assistance, Relocation and Real Property Acquisition, apply to the acquisition of real property for an assisted
project and the displacement of any person (family, individual, business, nonprofit organization, or farm) as a
direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for the project. 



B. Environmental Review 



A finding of no significant impact with respect to the environment has been made for the NOFA for Public and Indian Housing
Family Investment Centers (FR3397) in accordance with HUD regulations in 24 CFR part 50 that implement section
102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. (42 U.S.C. 4332) and applies equally to this NOFA. The
finding of no significant impact is available for public inspection and copying Monday through Friday during regular
business hours at the Office of the Rules Docket Clerk, Office of General Counsel, room 10276, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20410. 



C. Executive Order 12612, Federalism 



The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under section 6(a) of Executive Order 12612, 

Federalism, 

has determined that the policies contained in this notice will not have substantial direct effects on States or their
political subdivisions, or the relationship between the Federal government and the States, or on the distribution
of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government. As a result, the notice is not subject to review
under the Order. The notice announces the availability of funds to provide youth living in public housing, or with
children living in public housing, with better access to education and job opportunities to achieve self-sufficiency
and independence. 



