 

Multiyear plans may be for two or three years. The action plan for each year of the multiyear plan must be a viable project
on its own. The multiyear plans will be rated competitively against each other. Multiyear plans that are selected
will be funded for the first year of the plan. HUD intends to fund succeeding years of the plan on a non-competitive basis,
subject to acceptable performance, submission of an acceptable application and certifications, and the provision
of adequate appropriations for the HUD-administered Small Cities Program. HUD reserves the right to lower the amount
of funds for succeeding years if nonentitled areas are not in compliance with performance requirements and applicable
regulations. 
b. 

Grant Limits and Funding Requirements.

 The maximum annual grant for a multiyear plan is $900,000. The maximum funding for implementing an entire multiyear
plan is $1,800,000 for a two year multiyear plan, and $2,700,000 for a three year multiyear plan. Grant funds requested
must be sufficient, either by themselves or in combination with funds from other sources, to complete the project
within a reasonable amount of time. If other sources of funds are to be used with respect to a project, the source of those
funds must be identified and the level of commitment indicated. 



E. Selection Criteria/Ranking Factors and Final Selection 


1. General 


Complete applications received from eligible applicants by the application due date are rated and scored by HUD.
Regardless of the type of grant sought (Single Purpose or Comprehensive), applications are rated and scored against
four factors. These four factors are discussed in more detail in subsection 3 of this Section E. Previous grantees
of Small Cities Program 
CDBG grants also undergo a performance evaluation. The criteria for determining adequacy of performance are discussed
in subsection 2 of this Section E. 


2. Performance Evaluation 


As noted in Section C of this NOFA, previous grantees of Small Cities Program CDBG grants are subject to an evaluation
of performance and capacity to undertake the proposed program. 
For purposes of making performance evaluations, HUD will use any information available as of the application due
date. Performance also will be evaluated using information which may be available already to HUD, including previously
submitted performance reports, site visit reports, audits, monitoring reports and annual in-house reviews. Grantees
may be requested to submit additional information, if generally available facts raise a question as to capacity to
undertake the proposed program. No grants will be made to an applicant that does not have the capacity to undertake
the proposed program. A performance determination will be made by evaluation of the following areas: 
a. 

Community Development Activities.

 The following thresholds for performance in expending CDBG funds have been established for FY 1995 and pertain to
all Single Purpose and Comprehensive Grants: 



<TABLE>





1

1





FY 1989 and earlier 
Grants must be closed out 
FY 1990 
Grant funds 100% expended 
FY 1991 
Grant funds 75% expended 
FY 1992 
Grant funds 30% expended 
FY 1993 
Recipients must be on target with respect to the latest Small Cities Program Schedule received by HUD. 



Note:

 These standards will be used as benchmarks in judging program performance, but will not be the sole basis for determining
whether the applicant is ineligible for a grant due to a lack of capacity to carry out the proposed project or program.
Any applicant that fails to meet the percentages specified above may wish to provide updated data to HUD, either in
conjunction with the application submission or under separate cover, but in no case will data received by HUD after
the application due date be accepted. 



</TABLE>

