 

This rule changes paragraph 220.8(c) by replacing the current twelve billing categories with a billing method based
on diagnostic related groups (DRGs), as specifically authorized by 10 U.S.C. 1095(f)(3). The DRG-based method for
determining reasonable costs of inpatient care will produce more accurate and equitable billings. Billings will
more accurately reflect the costs associated with the actual services provided. This rule models the DRG-based cost
methodology, the basis for the DRG-based payment system for hospital care under the Civilian Health and Medical Program
of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS). However, in some respects, this rule simplifies CHAMPUS methods, with authority
to introduce the additional refinements at a later date.

For example, initially this rule uses a single national standardized amount, rather than the three standardized
amounts (large urban, other urban, and rural) used by CHAMPUS. The three amounts do not differ significantly and are
probably not as relevant in connection with a unified federal hospital system, such as DoD's. However, the rule allows
us to adopt the multiple standardized amounts at a later date.

The standardized amount is the result of dividing total system-wide costs of inpatient care by the total number of
discharges system-wide. With respect to DRG relative weights, this rule uses the same weights as are used for the CHAMPUS
DRG-based payment method. The CHAMPUS weights were calculated from a data base of actual CHAMPUS claims filed by civilian
hospitals. Because the patient population under military treatment facilities and CHAMPUS are quite similar, we
believe it is appropriate to use the same weights.

The CHAMPUS DRG-based payment method uses a number of adjustments to the product of standardized amount multiplied
by the relative weight of the appropriate DRG. The adjustments relate to outlier cases, area wage differences and
indirect medical education. Initially, this rule does not use these adjustments, but allows all related costs to
be reflected in the standardized amount. This approach has the advantage of simplicity and predictability for payers.
However, the final rule allows these adjustments to be introduced at a later date.

In accordance with current practice, the standard DRG-based rate is divided into two categories: Hospital charges,
which includes ancillary charges, and Professional charges.

The effective date for implementation of a multiple rate schedule will be the effective date of this rule, barring
unforeseen difficulties in automation support. The specific rates will be published in the 

Federal Register

.



B. Outpatient Services



As with the inpatient rates, the outpatient rates are based on the actual costs of rendering healthcare services as
reflected in the Medical Expense and Performance Reporting System (MEPRS). MEPRS is the standard expense reporting
system for all fixed medical treatment facilities (MTFs) within the Department of Defense (DoD) and is the accepted
source of healthcare information for Congress and offices and agencies of the Executive Branch. The reimbursement
categories are selected based on board certified specialties/subspecialties widely accepted by graduate medical
accrediting organizations such as the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) or the American
Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS).

Rates are established but need not be limited to each of the following clinical reimbursement categories: Internal
Medicine, Allergy, Cardiology, Diabetic, Endocrinology, Gastroenterology, Hematology, Hypertension, Nephrology,
Neurology, Nutrition, Oncology, Pulmonary Disease, Rheumatology, Dermatology, Infectious Disease, Physical
Medicine, General Surgery, Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Neurosurgery, Ophthalmology, Organ Transplant,
Otolaryngology, Plastic Surgery, Proctology, Urology, Pediatric Surgery, Family Planning, Obstetrics, Gynecology,
Pediatrics, Adolescent Pediatrics, Well Baby, Orthopaedics, Cast, Orthotic Laboratory, Hand Surgery, Podiatry,
Psychiatry, Psychology, Child Guidance, Mental Health, Social Work, Substance Abuse Rehabilitation, Family Practice,
and Occupational and Physical Therapy. This rule does not necessarily establish a separate rate for each of these
clinical reimbursement categories. Similar categories may be combined for purposes of billing.

Another revision to section 220.8 involves the expansion of a single outpatient rate to multiple reimbursement category
rates similar to that for inpatient care. The Department of Defense adopts a methodology for computing rates for outpatient
care similar to that used for computing multiple rates for inpatient care. Thus, collections for most outpatient
services will be based on a standard per visit fee to a specialty/subspecialty which is representative of the average
cost in facilities of the Uniformed Services of an outpatient visit to that specialty clinic. Multiple outpatient
visits on the same day to different clinics will result in one charge for each clinic visit. Multiple visits on the same
day to the same clinic will result in only one charge. As a general rule, each standard per visit amount to the specialty/subspecialty
clinic will be all-inclusive. No additional charge will be made for routine laboratory, radiology, pharmacy or other
ancillary or overhead services provided in conjunction with an outpatient visit.
Although most outpatient services will be billed based on the standard per visit fee for a specialty/subspecialty,
there are several special rules for particular types of care. One special rule is that a separate charge for same day/ambulatory
surgery will be published annually.
The effective date of the expanded number of billing categories is targeted for October 1, 1994. The specific rates
will be published in the 

Federal Register.




C. Miscellaneous Healthcare Services


Initial implementation of the Third Party Collection Program was somewhat limited in scope and concentrated on inpatient
and ambulatory care areas. This final rule expands the program to include outpatient services which may not traditionally
be provided in hospitals or which are not traditional clinical specialties or subspecialties. This includes, but
is not limited to, ambulance service, hyperbaric treatments, dental care services and immunizations. We intend
to recover the cost of these services to the extent they are generally applicable coverage provisions of a third party
payer.
We intend to recover the cost of ambulance service which includes the cost of providing emergency aid and then transportation
of beneficiaries to a medical treatment facility. It would also include the transport of patients to other medical
facilities or to specialized clinics for diagnostic or therapeutic services which is frequently necessary. We intend
to recover costs on the basis of the length of time the ambulance is in service with one hour to be the minimum amount billed.
The reimbursement rates for ambulance care will only cover the costs of operating the vehicle, including labor costs
(driver and attendant), supplies, fuel, and overhead.


