 

1408.25 

Coordinating offset with other Federal agencies. 


(a)(1) Any creditor agency which requests the Corporation to impose an offset against amounts owed to the debtor shall
submit to the Corporation a claim certification which meets the requirements of this paragraph. The Corporation
shall submit the same certification to any agency that the Corporation requests to effect an offset. 
(2) The claim certification shall be in writing. It shall certify the debtor owes the debt and that all of the applicable
requirements of 31 U.S.C. 3716 and 4 CFR part 102 have been met. If the intended offset is to be a salary offset, a claim
certification shall instead certify that the debtor owes the debt and that the applicable requirements of 5 U.S.C.
5514 and 5 CFR part 550, subpart K, have been met. 
(3) A certification that the debtor owes the debt shall state the amount of the debt, the factual basis supporting the
determination of indebtedness, and the date on which payment of the debt was due. A certification that the requirements
of 31 U.S.C. 3716 and 4 CFR part 102 have been met shall include a statement that the debtor has been sent a Notice of Intent
to Collect by Administrative Offset at least 31 calendar days prior to the date of the intended offset or a statement
that pursuant to 4 CFR 102.3(b)(5) said Notice was not required to be sent. A certification that the requirements of
5 U.S.C. 5514 and 5 CFR part 550, subpart K, have been met shall include a statement that the debtor has been sent a Notice
of Intent to Collect by Salary Offset at least 31 calendar days prior to the date of the intended offset or a statement
that pursuant to 4 CFR 102.3(b)(5) said Notice was not required to be sent. 
(b)(1) The Corporation shall not effect an offset requested by another Federal agency without first obtaining the
claim certification required by paragraph (a) of this section. If the Corporation receives an incomplete claim certification,
the Corporation shall return the claim certification with notice that a claim certification which complies with
the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section must be submitted to the Corporation before the Corporation will
consider effecting an offset. 
(2) The Corporation may rely on the information contained in the claim certification provided by a requesting creditor
agency. The Corporation is not authorized to review a creditor agency's determination of indebtedness. 
(c) Only the creditor agency may agree to enter into an agreement with the debtor for the repayment of the claim. Only
the creditor agency may agree to compromise, suspend, or terminate collection of the claim. 
(d) The Corporation may decline, for good cause, a request by another agency to effect an offset. Good cause includes
that the offset might disrupt, directly or indirectly, essential Corporation operations. The refusal and the reasons
shall be sent in writing to the creditor agency. 


1408.26 

Stay of offset. 


(a)(1) When a creditor agency receives a debtor's request for inspection of agency records, the offset is stayed for
10 calendar days beyond the date set for the record inspection. 
(2) When a creditor agency receives a debtor's offer to enter into a repayment agreement, the offset is stayed until
the debtor is notified as to whether the proposed agreement is acceptable. 
(3) When a review is conducted, the offset is stayed until the creditor agency issues a final written decision. 
(b) When offset is stayed, the amount of the debt and the amount of any accrued interest or other charges will be withheld
from payments to the debtor. The withheld amounts shall not be applied against the debt until the stay expires. If withheld
funds are later determined not to be subject to offset, they will be promptly refunded to the debtor. 
(c) If the Corporation is the creditor agency and the offset is stayed, the Corporation will immediately notify an
offsetting agency to withhold the payment pending termination of the stay. 


1408.27 

Offset against amounts payable from Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund. 


The Corporation may request that monies payable to a debtor from the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund
be administratively offset to collect debts owed to the Corporation by the debtor. The Corporation must certify that
the debtor owes the debt, the amount of the debt, and that the Corporation has complied with the requirements set forth
in this part, 4 CFR 102.3, and the Office of Personnel Management regulations. The request shall be submitted to the
official designated in the Office of Personnel Management regulations to receive the request. 




