 

It may, however, require additional effort for the employer to determine whether a new employee has received training
that meets the requirements of the final rule. An employer cannot merely ask the new employee whether he has been trained.
Rather, under the training certification requirements of this paragraph (see paragraph (i)(10)), the employer
must make a determination of whether and when the past training was adequate to satisfy the requirements of this paragraph.

To determine whether past training was adequate, the employer will have to go through two steps. First, the employer
must inquire whether the new employee had training in each of the elements specified in paragraph (i)(3). When the
new employee indicates that he has not received training in a particular element, the employer will need to provide
training in that element. Second, when the employee indicates that he had received training in each of the required
elements, the employer must then determine whether the particular training was adequate. Most likely, the employer
will make that determination while the new employee is working under close supervision of a designated person, as
required by this paragraph. When the new employee, who has been previously trained, can demonstrate the ability to
safely perform the job independently, the employee can then determine and certify that previous training had been
adequate. 
At paragraph (i)(6) of the final rule, OSHA requires that each new employee and each employee who is required to be trained
by this paragraph, to work under the close supervision of a designated person until the employee is able to demonstrate
the ability to safely perform the new job independently. The proposed rule contained two provisions specifying initial
close supervision. One provision specified initial close supervision for all power tool and machine operators and
associated maintenance personnel. The second provided initial close supervision for each new employee, and each
newly trained employee. In addition, the State of Oregon logging standard requires initial close supervision for
new employees and requires experienced new employees to demonstrate their competence before being allowed to perform
the job independently (Ex. 38K). 
Several commenters supported this provision (Ex. 522, 542, 533, 539, 553, 555,
563, 99; Tr. W1 9192, 17273, OR 15152, 216, 373, 377, 410). NIOSH said it was important
in the logging industry to have an adequate balance of classroom and on-the-job training (Ex. 542). NIOSH said
working with a designated person would be especially effective for pointing out poisonous plants to inexperienced
workers (Ex. 542). Several commenters also supported limiting this provision to only inexperienced workers
(Ex. 533, 539, 553, 562, 574 through 592). 
OSHA has carefully considered the comments and has decided for several reasons that it is necessary in the final rule
to retain the requirement that each new and each newly-trained employee work under the close supervision of a designated
person initially. There are several reasons for this determination. First, this requirement acts as a final check
on the competency of a newly-trained employee by allowing the employer to measure in practical terms how well the employee
has absorbed the training. Second, this provision is also a measure of the general effectiveness and adequacy of the
employer's training program. When employees are not able to demonstrate the ability to perform the job safely, the
employer needs to review and correct the training program and retrain the workers. 
Third, OSHA believes this provision is essential given the inclusion of an initial training exception in the final
rule for previously trained workers. As discussed earlier, more than 60 percent of all loggers who reported injuries
in the WIR survey had been previously trained (Ex. 21). This data supports the need for safeguards to integrating
new employees into the workplace if initial training of each new employee is not required. Finally, this provision
is also a safeguard for integrating newly-trained employees and employees whose unsafe job performance has necessitated
retraining. 
Paragraph (i)(7) of the final rule specifies various requirements regarding first-aid training for each employee,
including supervisors. Paragraph (i)(7)(i) of the final rule requires that the employer assure that each employee
receives or has received first-aid and CPR training. This provision also requires that first-aid training meet at
least the requirements of Appendix B. The proposed rule would have required only supervisors, fellers and at least
one additional person in each operating area to have first-aid training. The proposed rule also would have required
that the first-aid training content meet the training programs of the American Red Cross, the Mine Safety and Health
Administration (MSHA) or other equivalent program. 





