 

Crystal River National Wildlife Refuge is probably the best of 
the thermal refuges and undoubtedly the only one capable of supplying 
all the needs for over 200 manatees through the winter. The springs 
are fed by underwater artesian springs deep under the insulating 
surface of the earth, holding the temperature constant. Unlike 
industrial discharges, this natural water source is not subject to 
mechanical breakdowns or power failures. Unlike most artificial 
refuges, a readily available food source is available close by and in 
abundant supply. Bengtson (1981) observed manatees remaining in 
thermal refuges for up to a week without feeding during cold spells. It appears it was more energy efficient for them
to fast rather than 
risk feeding in colder waters. In Crystal River, fasting is probably 
rarely necessary for long periods, and the enormous outflow from the 
springs can moderate the temperature of much of the bay, depending on 
tidal and wind factors. 

If left alone, manatees would use the resources of Kings Bay 
according to their individual needs. However, research has shown 
that the presence of boaters and divers causes manatees to leave the 
spring heads in favor of the sanctuaries regardless of weather 
conditions. On days when there is low diver turnout, a greater 
proportion of manatees remain in the springs (Buckingham 1990). 
Observations of other wintering areas, such as Blue Spring State 
Park, show that, left to their own devices, most manatees will remain 
in warm water throughout the day during cold weather periods. 
Activities that cause manatees to leave a natural thermal refuge can, 
therefore, be considered ``harassment'' because those activities 
interfere with normal ``sheltering'' habits of the animal. Harassment 
of manatees is a violation of both the Endangered Species Act and the 
Marine Mammal Protection Act. 

Currently, manatees are able to move away from divers by going 
into three sanctuaries, Banana Island, Sunset Shores, and Magnolia 
Springs, established in 1980. The Banana Island sanctuary is located 
near the main spring, Kings Spring, and is relatively warm in 
relation to surrounding waters. Sunset Shores sanctuary is still 
within the southern part of the bay and provides a feeding and 
resting area in fairly warm water. The Magnolia Springs sanctuary is 
located in a canal development adjacent to Kings Bay and contains a 
smaller spring. Since 1980, the number of manatees using Kings Bay 
has increased from 100 to 246 in 1990. Although it might appear from 
the increasing numbers of manatees that additional protection is not 
needed, this is not the case. As manatee habitat is lost elsewhere 
on the Florida peninsula, Kings Bay is becoming more important. 
Kings Bay is one of the last 

natural

 warm-water areas with abundant 
food resources. Additional sanctuaries are essential to insure 
adequate undisturbed natural areas in Kings Bay where manatees may 
meet their needs, including warm water, food, and areas for resting 
and socializing. 

The economic importance of Kings Bay and especially the refuge's 
main spring to Crystal River and Citrus County centers around 
recreational SCUBA diving, snorkeling and boating. The area is 
internationally known as a desirable location for winter diving. The 
presence of manatees creates a special attraction which dive shop 
owners exploit by advertising their facilities as a place where one 
can ``swim with the manatees''. The tourism industry created by divers 
coming to Crystal River is significant and total sales at five dive 
shops and three motels more than doubled between 1980 and 1986, with 
the ``manatee season'' accounting for 28 to 53 percent of their sales 
for the entire year (Milon in prep). Due in part to national and 
international publicity manatees have received in recent years, the 
number of divers visiting Kings Bay has increased to about 
60,00080,000 in the winter of 199091, double the number in 1980 
(FWS unpublished data). This rapid increase in popularity is likely 
to continue, significantly affecting manatees. 

The Service intends to provide manatees needed winter protection 
without adversely affecting diving and other waterborne activities so 
important to Crystal River's economy. Aerial survey data available 
on manatee distribution within Kings Bay suggest that strategically 
placed manatee sanctuaries could provide manatees warm-water refugia 
and feeding and resting areas free from harassment without causing a 
major disruption of current recreational patterns (Kochman 

et al.

 
1985, Buckingham 1990). It is important to note that, although a few 
local business people feared losses of revenue following the 
implementation of the sanctuary additions, no evidence of any losses 
have been observed during the 2 years the sanctuaries were in effect 
under emergency rules. 

Therefore, the Service, by this rule, is expanding the sanctuary 
area in Kings Bay to provide manatees additional undisturbed habitat 
during the cold weather months. These sanctuaries will exclude all 
waterborne activities by humans from November 15 through March 31 
each year. The total sanctuary area, consisting of less than 10 
percent of the area of Kings Bay, allows the remaining 90 percent of 
the bay to remain open to recreational and commercial waterborne 
activities. The sanctuary areas were carefully selected to provide 
maximum protection for manatees and minimum impact on divers. Public 
input into the selection of sanctuary areas was obtained during a 
workshop held in Crystal River on March 21, 1991. The Service 
believes that, given these added refugia, manatees will not be forced 
to leave the warm water necessary for their survival and will be able 
to feed, rest, and socialize without being harassed. 

The sanctuary addition at Magnolia Springs adds 1.5 acres to the 
previous Magnolia Springs Sanctuary. This short, horseshoe-shaped 
section of canal joins a canal that feeds directly into Kings Bay. 
The addition extends the protected area around a significant artesian 
spring within the original sanctuary, providing additional protection 
for the small but consistent number of manatees, most notably cows 
and calves, that use the area for giving birth, resting, and as a 
warm-water refuge. 





