 

Applicants' Legal Analysis


1. Applicants request an exemption under section 6(c) of the Act, that would exempt the Funds from sections 18(f)(1),
18(g) and 18(i) of the Act to permit the issuance of an unlimited number of classes. Applicants believe that the multi-class
distribution system does not raise any of the concerns that prompted the adoption of section 18 (

i.e.,

 underfunded debt, preference stocks, and convertible securities). The proposal does not involve borrowings and
does not affect the Fund's existing assets or reserves. In addition, the proposed arrangement will not increase the
speculative character of the shares of the Funds.
2. Applicants also request an exemption under section 6(c) from sections 2(a)(32), 2(a)(35), 22(c), and 22(d) of
the Act, and rule 22c1 thereunder, to the extent necessary to permit the Funds to assess, waive, reduce or defer
a CDSC with respect to certain redemptions of shares. The applicants believe that the imposition of the CDSC on a class
of shares is fair and in the best interests of their shareholders, because the shares would have the advantage of greater
investment dollars working for them from the time of their purchase of such shares of the Funds than if a sales load were
imposed at the time of purchase.


Applicants' Conditions


Applicants agree that any order granting the requested relief shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Each class of shares will represent interests in the same portfolio of investments of a Fund, and be identical in
all respects, except as set forth below. The only differences among the classes of shares of the Fund will relate solely
to: (a) Different expenses which the board of directors of a Fund determines to allocate to a specific class (``class
specific expenses''), which are limited to: (i) Transfer agent fees; (ii) printing and postage expenses related
to preparing and distributing materials such as shareholder reports, prospectuses and proxies to current shareholders
of a specific class; (iii) Blue Sky registration fees incurred by a class of shares; (iv) SEC registration fees incurred
by a class of shares; (v) the expense of administrative personnel and services required to support the shareholders
of a specific class; (vi) litigation or other legal expenses relating solely to one class of shares; and (vii) directors;
fees incurred as a result of issues relating to one class of shares; (viii) other expenses that are subsequently identified
and determined to be properly allocated to a particular class of shares which shall be approved by the SEC pursuant
to an amended order; (b) expenses assessed to a class pursuant to a 12b1 plan and shareholder services plan (c)
the fact that the classes will vote separately with respect to a Fund's rule 12b1 distribution plan, except
as provided in condition 7 below; (d) the different exchange privileges of each class of shares; (e) the fact that only
certain classes may have a conversion feature; and (f) the designation of each class of shares of a Fund.
2. The directors of the Company, including a majority of the independent directors, shall have approved the multi-class
distribution system, prior to the implementation of the multi-class distribution system. The minutes of the meetings
of the directors of the Company regarding the deliberations of the directors with respect to the approvals necessary
to implement the multi-class distribution system will reflect in detail the reasons for determining that the proposed
multi-class distribution system is in the best interests of both the Funds and their respective shareholders.
3. The initial determination of the class-specific expenses, if any, that will be allocated to a particular class
of a Fund and any subsequent changes thereto will be reviewed and approved by a vote of the directors of the affected
Fund, including a majority of the independent directors. Any person authorized to direct the allocation and disposition
of monies paid or payable by a Fund to meet class-specific expenses shall provide to the directors, and the directors
shall review, at least quarterly, a written report of the amounts so expended and the purpose for which the expenditures
were made.
4. The shareholder services plan will be adopted and operated in accordance with the procedures set forth in rule 12b1
(b) through (f) as if the expenditures made thereunder were subject to rule 12b1, except that shareholders
need not enjoy the voting rights specified in rule 12b1.
5. On an ongoing basis, the directors of the Company, pursuant to their fiduciary responsibilities under the Act and
otherwise, will monitor each Fund for the existence of any material conflicts between or among the interests of the
classes of shares offered. The directors, including a majority of the independent directors, shall take such action
as is reasonably necessary to eliminate any such conflicts that may develop. The Adviser and the Underwriter will
be responsible for reporting any potential or existing conflicts to the directors. If a conflict arises, the Adviser
and the Underwriter at their own costs will remedy such conflict up to and including establishing a new registered
management investment company.
6. Any class of shares (``Purchase Class'') with a conversion feature will convert into another class of shares (``Target
Class'') on the basis of the relative net asset values of the two classes, without the imposition of any sales load,
fee, or other charge. After conversion, the Target Class shares will be subject to an asset-based sales charge and/or
service fee (as those terms are defined in Article III, Section 26 of the NASD's Rules of Fair Practice), if any, that
in the aggregate are lower than the asset-based sales charge and service fee to which they were subject prior to the
conversion.

