 

Certain work practices that have been required since OSHA's earlier asbestos standards (e.g., wet handling and the
collection and disposal of waste in sealed, impermeable bags) are not included as cost elements. 

For each major provision of the revised construction standard, below, OSHA presents cost estimates by type of engineering
or administrative control, work practice or personal protective equipment, where appropriate.



(c) Permissible exposure limits.

 The revised asbestos construction standard lowers the permissible exposure limit from 0.2 fiber per cubic centimeter
to 0.1 fiber per cubic centimeter of air as an eight-hour time-weighted average. The revised standard retains the
current excursion limit of 1.0 fiber per cubic centimeter of air as averaged over a sampling period of thirty minutes.

After reviewing both (1) the literature on risk to asbestos in the construction industry and (2) the earlier OSHA rulemaking
record (Docket H033c), CONSAD [CONSAD, 1990, Table 2.8] reported representative exposure levels by construction
activity that formed the basis of OSHA's risk estimates in the PRIA. CONSAD presented the range of exposure levels
in the absence of respiratory protection for each construction activity. From the raw exposure data, OSHA [1986,
1990] developed arithmetic mean estimates, against which the proposed PELs were compared. OSHA then assigned engineering
and respiratory controls as required and implied by the earlier rules.

For this final regulatory impact analysis, OSHA adjusted CONSAD's baseline (pre-1986) exposure levels to reflect
likely controls applied since OSHA promulgated final asbestos rules in 1986 and 1988. In adjusting exposures from
baseline levels, OSHA attempted to represent realistic reductions in fiber levels under a regulatory regime consisting
of a 0.2 
f/cc eight-hour PEL, a 0.1 f/cc eight-hour action level, a 1.0 f/cc thirty-minute excursion level, and ancillary
controls and procedures. OSHA's adjusted baseline exposures were presented in Section D. 

OSHA's revised PEL is expected to lead to wider use of respirators in construction. In particular, OSHA anticipates
increased usage of half-mask and full-face cartridge respirators as a result of the revised PEL. For some activities
where 

average

 exposures are projected to be below the PEL due to the use of engineering controls and work practices, respirators
may be necessary where peak exposures occur. OSHA conservatively applied half-mask cartridge respirators, with
a protection factor of 10, where peak exposures can exceed ten times the revised PEL; OSHA applied full-facepiece
cartridge respirators for activities where peak exposures can exceed 50 times the revised PEL. In all, annual respirator
costs will total $24.9 million. Included in this total cost are expenditures for the respirator unit, accessories,
filters, training (costs assigned under Paragraph (k) Communication of hazards), cleaning and fit testing.



(d) Multi-employer worksites.

 Revised Paragraph (d) expands upon the current requirement that an employer performing asbestos work in a regulated
area inform other employers on the site of the nature of the employer's work with asbestos and the existence of, and
rules pertaining to, regulated areas. In addition, Paragraph (d) requires

&bull;Abatement of asbestos hazards by the contractor controlling the source of the contamination_(d)(2)

&bull;Protection of employees adjacent to asbestos worksite_(d)(3)

&bull;Daily assessment by adjacent employers of integrity of enclosures or effectiveness of other control methods
relied on by the primary asbestos contractor_(d)(4)

&bull;Supervisory authority by general contractors over the work of the asbestos contractor on the asbestos worksite_(d)(5).

OSHA anticipates significant compliance costs for three of the four additional requirements in the revised paragraph
on multi-employer worksites. For provisions (d)(2) and (d)(3), OSHA believes that compliance with the requirements
for PELs [Paragraph (c)] and initial exposure assessment [Paragraph (j)] will ensure compliance with these areas.
Regarding daily assessment of work areas, required by (d)(4), OSHA considers these duties to fall under the supervision
of competent persons. Compliance costs for competent persons are discussed below under Paragraph (o).

For Paragraph (d)(5), OSHA assumes that after promulgation of the revised standard, asbestos contractors will achieve
full compliance and, therefore, that general contractors will rarely need to exercise authority over employee protection.



(e) Regulated areas.

 Paragraph (e) specifies the controls required for construction activities designated as regulated areas. OSHA
anticipates incremental costs for all construction work defined in the revised standard as Class I, II or III. Incremental
costs for regulated areas will stem from the need for caution and warning signs and caution tape at the perimeter of
work areas, as required by (e)(2) Demarcation and (k)(6) Signs. OSHA anticipates total costs of $15.8 million for
caution and warning signs.



(f) Exposure assessments and monitoring.

 Revised Paragraph (f) alters current requirements for initial exposure monitoring, periodic monitoring, termination
of monitoring, additional monitoring, employee notification of sampling results, and observation of monitoring.
OSHA anticipates that following promulgation of this revised standard, many employers will initially monitor higher-risk
sites_under conditions of full application of controls_in order to establish compliance with the revised PEL of
0.1 f/cc. Results from initial monitoring can be used as historical, objective data for compliance purposes, consistent
with revised (f)(1)(iii) Negative initial exposure assessment.

To estimate monitoring costs in construction, OSHA assumed_for activities where objective data has not been established_that
employers conducting Class I, II or III work, will purchase monitoring equipment, train a supervisor to conduct monitoring,
and have three representative exposure samples analyzed by a laboratory. OSHA assumed that employers conducting
Class IV activities will hire an outside industrial hygiene technician to monitor workers and collect three exposure
samples. Basing cost analysis on these assumptions, OSHA projects total incremental compliance costs of $40.1 million
for exposure monitoring.



(g) Methods of Compliance.

 In revised Paragraph (g) Methods of compliance, OSHA has significantly expanded the structure and content of the
regulatory text in the current standard. Revised Paragraph (g) prescribes specific engineering controls and work
practices for each of the four asbestos construction classes defined in the standard. To satisfy the requirements
for ancillary controls, employers are expected to purchase or otherwise adopt the following types of controls and
practices: HEPA vacuum/ventilation systems; HEPA vacuums; wet methods; airtight (negative-pressure) regulated
areas; drop cloths; mini enclosures; critical barriers; and glove bag systems (with HEPA vacuums). Included in the
cost of each control are expenditures for basic equipment, accessories, construction supplies (for barriers and
enclosures), smoke testers (for negative-pressure enclosures), and incremental labor resources needed to implement
the control, to smoke test (where necessary) and to disassemble the control. 

Incremental compliance costs associated with engineering controls and work practices are anticipated for all construction
activities affected by the revised standard. The combination of controls vary by activity, depending on current
exposure levels, the extent of current compliance assumed by OSHA, and the construction class (as defined in the revised
standard) for the work activity. OSHA projects the following annual compliance costs for methods of compliance:

&bull;HEPA vacuum/ventilation systems_$15.3 million

&bull;HEPA vacuums_$32.5 million

&bull;Wet methods_$55.2 million

&bull;Airtight regulated areas_$2.2 million

&bull;Drop cloths_$13.8 million

&bull;Mini enclosures_$41.6 million

&bull;Critical barriers_$22.2 million

&bull;Glovebag systems_$4.5 million.




