 

Regulatory Flexibility Act 


ASCS is not required by 5 U.S.C. 553 or any other provision of law to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking with respect
to the subject matter of this final rule. Therefore this action is exempt from the provision of the Regulatory Flexibility
Act and no Regulatory Flexibility Analysis was prepared. 


Executive Order 12778 


This final rule has been reviewed in accordance with Executive Order 12778. It is not retroactive and preempts State
and local laws. Before any judicial action may be brought regarding the provisions of this final rule, administrative
appeal remedies set forth at 7 CFR parts 24 and 780 must be exhausted. 


Executive Order 12372 


This action will not have a significant impact specifically upon area and community development; therefore, review
as established by Executive Order 12372 (July 14, 1982) was not used to assure that units of local government are informed
of this action. 


Background 


The Federal Claims Collection Act of 1966 (the Act), as amended by the Debt Collection Act of 1982 (31 U.S.C. 3711, et
seq.), and the joint regulations promulgated thereunder by the Comptroller General and the Attorney General (4 CFR
parts 101105) provide minimum standards for the administrative collection of claims by the United States.
The Federal Claims Collection Standards (FCCS) require each Federal agency to take aggressive action to collect
debts owed it, and to cooperate with other Federal agencies in their debt collection activities. Federal agencies
are required to promulgate regulations consistent with the standards. 

Currently, ASCS follows the Department of Agriculture's debt collection procedures at 7 CFR part 3. However, 7 CFR
part 3 provides that the head of any agency of the Department may adopt separate regulations to be followed for the collection
of claims and debts. ASCS requires separate regulations for the following reasons: 

(1) In order to make ASCS regulations consistent with Commodity Credit Corporation's debt settlement policies and
procedures at 7 CFR part 1403 to the extent that it would not conflict with the Act or the FCCS, such as providing for hearings
and reviews to our National Appeals Division; 

(2) In order to set our priority for collecting debt by offset; 
(3) In order to allow ASCS to depart from 7 CFR part 3 in those areas where it would not conflict with the Act or the FCCS,
such as the requirement in 7 CFR part 3 to send notice by personal delivery or certified mail; and, 

(4) To allow any amendments or revisions necessitated by statutory or program changes to be made at the agency level
rather than the departmental level. 

This regulation is necessary to protect the financial integrity of many Federal agricultural programs by ensuring
the Government will be able to collect, or otherwise settle, debts owed it by any person, organization, corporation,
or other legal entity. 

Two comments were received in response to the proposed rule published in the 

Federal Register

 on June 15, 1993 (58 FR 33029). The first commenter questioned why ASCS failed to address the use of alternative dispute
resolution, as required by Pub. L. 101552. Pub. L. 101552 requires the Secretary of Agriculture, with
respect to each program under the Secretary's jurisdiction that makes, guarantees, or insures agricultural loans,
to prescribe rules requiring each such program to participate in State agricultural loan mediation programs. However,
since ASCS does not make, guarantee or insure agricultural loans, this provision does not apply to it. Rules governing
mediation of Commodity Credit Corporation agricultural loan programs administered by ASCS employees to which this
provision does apply are contained in 7 CFR part 1405. 

This commenter also objects to the provision of 7 CFR 792.8 which provides that all debts due ASCS or CCC may be offset
without regard to assignments which may have been filed. This provision was developed to increase the ability of ASCS
and CCC to recoup delinquent debts and to deter the circumvention of offset by such practices as the assignment of payments
to friends, relatives, partners, or subsidiary corporations. Taking an assignment of an ASCS or CCC program payment
as security for a debt has never been without risk. There has always been the possibility that a payment will not be made,
e.g., if a producer fails to comply with contract requirements. Therefore, it was determined that any heightened
risk to lenders is outweighed by the benefit to the Government in the increased ability to collect delinquent debts.


This commenter further takes exception to the provision in 7 CFR 792.10(b) which states that ASCS will assess late
payment interest on the full amount of delinquent debts, which means the sum of the principal, accrued program interest
and any other charges which are due and owing at the time the late payment interest is assessed. The commenter states
that this provision is illegal under North Dakota law and has the effect of charging a rate in excess of that which is
disclosed to the borrower. Since ASCS programs are not loan programs, debts due ASCS are not based on amounts borrowed.
Instead they are generally based on failure to comply with contract provisions. Further, agencies of the Federal
Government are not bound by State laws regarding debt collection activities. 






