 

FSIS proposed that, if the statistical evidence indicated that a production lot was not in compliance with the calcium
requirement, the lot must be labeled as MS(S) and meet the requirements for MS(S) in 9 CFR 319.5. FSIS indicated that
in this situation, it believed that the process was out of control, and that there was the likelihood that too much calcium
had been incorporated in the recovered meat, and, therefore, it should be identified as MS(S).

FSIS proposed that at least 1 pound of product be sampled each week during production of a lot for conformance with protein
quality criteria. It was proposed that once three consecutive results from three production lots were in compliance
with the criteria on protein quality (i.e., a protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score or essential amino
acid content), sampling of production lots could be reduced to a monthly basis. It was also proposed that after 6 months,
sampling of production lots could be reduced to a quarterly basis.

10

 Subsequently, if samples are out of compliance, sampling each week would be repeated until the results are in compliance.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


10

</FOOTNAME>
This sampling schedule ensures the statistical representation of the production lots is achieved in regard to measuring
protein quality.

</FOOTNOTE>


A major concern of FSIS is the assurance that consumers receive the quality of meat they expect in terms of the value
of protein needed to sustain good nutrition. Therefore, FSIS proposed that product from advanced meat/bone separation
machinery and recovery systems that did not meet the requirements of the criteria for protein quality be identified
as ``(species) fat'' or ``(species) connective tissue,'' and labeled in accordance with the applicable provisions
in 9 CFR part 317. Protein quality values less than the proposed criteria are comparable to those associated with ``(species)
fat'' and ``(species) connective tissue.''



3. Handling Requirements



FSIS proposed to specify requirements for the handling of material that is to be processed into meat derived from advanced
meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems and for handling such product. FSIS proposed that the handling
of such material comply with the same provisions as are currently prescribed in 9 CFR 318.18 for handling material
for mechanical processing. These requirements would provide that material to be processed into meat derived from
advanced meat/bone separation machinery and meat recovery systems be processed within 1 hour from the time it is cut
or separated from livestock carcasses or parts of carcasses, except that such product may be held for no more than 72
hours at 40 
&cir;F (4 
&cir;C) or less, or held indefinitely at 0 
&cir;F (^18 
&cir;C) or less. It was proposed that meat from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems must
be used as an ingredient in a meat food product directly after being processed, except that it may be held prior to such
use for no more than 72 hours at 40 
&cir;F (4 
&cir;C) or less or indefinitely at 0 
&cir;F (^18 
&cir;C) or less.



Discussion of Comments



FSIS received 30 comments in response to the proposed rule. Fifteen comments were submitted by consumers, 9 by food
manufacturers/distributors, 4 by trade associations, 1 by a member of academia, and 1 by a machinery manufacturer.
The majority of the comments supported the proposed rule, provided that some modification or deletion is made with
regard to the proposed requirements for protein quality, quality control, and handling.



Consumers Comments



All 15 consumers supported the proposed rule and stated that the new nutritional labeling on meat and poultry will
help satisfy the informational needs of consumer's regarding the nutrient contents of meat and meat products containing
meat as an ingredient, including meat produced by advanced meat/bone separation and meat recovery systems.


