 

3. DOT References 



(1) Department of Transportation Radiological Emergency Response Plan for Non-Defense Emergencies, August 1985.


(2) DOT Order 1900.8, Department of Transportation Civil Emergency Preparedness Policies and Program(s). 

(3) DOT Order 1900.7D, Crisis Action Plan. 

(4) Transportation Annex (Emergency Support Function 

#

1), Federal Response Plan. 



4. DOT Specific Authorities 



(1) 49 U.S.C. 301. 

(2) 44 CFR 351, Radiological Emergency Planning and Preparedness Final Regulations, 351.25, the Department
of Transportation. 



K. Department of Veterans Affairs 



1. Summary of Response Mission 



The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) can assist other Federal agencies, State and local governments, and individuals
in an emergency by providing immediate and long-term medical care, including management of radiation trauma, as
well as first aid, at its facilities or elsewhere. VA can make available repossessed VA mortgaged homes to be used for
housing for affected individuals. VA can manage a system of disposing of the deceased. VA can provide medical, biological,
radiological, and other technical guidance for response and recovery reactions. Generally, none of these actions
will be taken unilaterally but at the request of a responsible senior Federal official and with appropriate external
funding. 



2. Capabilities and Resources 



In addition to the capabilities listed above, VA: 

(1) Operates almost 200 full-facility hospitals and outpatient clinics throughout the United States; 

(2) Has almost 200,000 employees with broad medical, scientific, engineering and design, fiscal, and logistical
capabilities; 

(3) Manages the National Cemetery System in 38 States; 

(4) May have a large inventory of repossessed homes (this inventory varies according to economic trends); 

(5) Is one of the Federal managers of the National Disaster Medical System; 

(6) Is a participant in the VA/DOD contingency plan for Medical Backup in times of national emergency; 

(7) Has the capability to manage the medical effects of radiation trauma using the VA's Medical Emergency Radiological
Response Teams (MERRTs); and 

(8) Has a fully equipped emergency center with multi-media communications at the Emergency Medical Preparedness
Office (EMPO). 



3. VA References 



MP1, Part II, Chapter 13 (Emergency Preparedness Plan), March 20, 1985, as revised. 



4. VA Specific Authorities 



(1) Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, as amended. 

(2) National Security Decision Directive Number 47 (NSDD47), July 22, 1982, Emergency Mobilization Preparedness.


(3) National Security Decision Directive Number 97 (NSDD97), June 13, 1982, National Security Telecommunications
Policy. 

(4) National Plan of Action for Emergency Mobilization Preparedness. 

(5) Veterans Administration and Department of Defense Health Resources Sharing and Emergency Operations Act, Pub.
L. 97174, May 4, 1982. 

(6) E.O. 12656, Assignment of Emergency Preparedness Responsibilities, November 18, 1988. 

(7) E.O. 12657, Federal Emergency Management Agency Assistance, Emergency Preparedness Planning at Commercial
Nuclear Power Plants, November 23, 1988. 



L. Environmental Protection Agency 



1. Summary of Response Mission 

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) assists Federal, State, and local governments during radiological emergencies
by providing environmental and water supply monitoring, recommending protective actions, and assessing the consequences
of radioactivity releases to the environment. These services may be provided at the request of the Federal or State
Government, or EPA may respond to an emergency unilaterally in order to fulfill its statutory responsibility. EPA
actively participates with USDA and HHS on the Advisory Team when convened. 



2. Capabilities and Resources 



EPA can provide personnel, resources, and equipment (including mobile monitoring laboratories) from its facilities
in Montgomery, AL, and Las Vegas, NV, and technical support from Headquarters and regional offices. EPA has capability
to do the following: 

(1) Direct environmental monitoring activities and assess the environmental consequences of radioactivity releases.


(2) Develop Protective Action Guides. 

(3) Recommend protective actions and other radiation protection measures. 

(4) Recommend acceptable emergency levels of radioactivity and radiation in the environment. 

(5) Prepare health and safety advice and information for the public. 

(6) Assist in the preparation of long-term monitoring and area restoration plans; and recommend clean-up criteria.


(7) Estimate effects of radioactive releases on human health and environment. 

(8) Provide nationwide environmental monitoring data from the Environmental Radiation Ambient Monitoring Systems
for assessing the national impact of the emergency. 

