 




<RINDOCK>[BPO126N] </RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Quarterly Listing of Program Issuances and Coverage Decisions_First Quarter 1994
</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), HHS. 


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice. 



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This notice lists HCFA manual instructions, substantive and interpretive regulations and other 

Federal Register

 notices, and statements of policy that were published during January, February, and March of 1994 that relate to the
Medicare and Medicaid programs. Section 1871(c) of the Social Security Act requires that we publish a list of Medicare
issuances in the 

Federal Register

 at least every 3 months. Although we are not mandated to do so by statute, for the sake of completeness of the listing,
we are including all Medicaid issuances and Medicare and Medicaid substantive and interpretive regulations (proposed
and final) published during this timeframe. 


We are also providing the content of revisions to the Medicare Coverage Issues Manual published between January 1,
and March 31, 1994. On August 21, 1989 (54 FR 34555), we published the content of the Manual and indicated that we will
publish quarterly any updates. Adding to this listing the complete text of the changes to the Medicare Coverage Issues
Manual allows us to fulfill this requirement in a manner that facilitates identification of coverage and other changes
in our manuals.

 
</SUMMARY>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 


Margaret Cotton, (410) 9665260 (For Medicare 
instruction information) 
Walter Rutemueller, (410) 9665395 (For Medicare coverage 
information) 
Pat Prete, (410) 9663246 (For Medicaid instruction 
information) 
Michael Robinson, (410) 9665633 (For all other information) 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
I. Program Issuances 


The Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) is responsible for administering the Medicare and Medicaid programs,
which pay for health care and related services for 36 million Medicare beneficiaries and 33 million Medicaid recipients.
Administration of these programs involves (1) Providing information to Medicare beneficiaries and Medicaid recipients,
health care providers, and the public; and (2) effective communications with regional offices, State governments,
State Medicaid Agencies, State Survey Agencies, various providers of health care, fiscal intermediaries and carriers
who process claims and pay bills, and others. To implement the various statutes on which the programs are based, we
issue regulations under authority granted the Secretary under sections 1102, 1871, and 1902 and related provisions
of the Social Security Act (the Act) and also issue various manuals, memoranda, and statements necessary to administer
the programs efficiently. 
Section 1871(c)(1) of the Act requires that we publish in the 

Federal Register

 at least every 3 months a list of all Medicare manual instructions, interpretive rules, statements of policy, and
guidelines of general applicability not issued as regulations. We published our first notice June 9, 1988 (53 FR 21730).
Although we are not mandated to do so by statute, for the sake of completeness of the listing of operational and policy
statements, we are continuing our practice of including Medicare substantive and interpretive regulations (proposed
and final) published during the 3-month timeframe. Since the publication of our quarterly listing on June 12, 1992
(57 FR 24797), we decided to add Medicaid issuances to our quarterly listings. Accordingly, we are listing in this
notice Medicaid issuances and Medicaid substantive and interpretive regulations published from January 1 through
March 31, 1994. 


II. Medicare Coverage Issues 


We receive numerous inquiries from the general public about whether specific items or services are covered under
Medicare. Providers, carriers, and intermediaries have copies of the Medicare Coverage Issues Manual, which identifies
those medical items, services, technologies, or treatment procedures that can be paid for under Medicare. On August
21, 1989, we published a notice in the 

Federal Register

 (54 FR 34555) that contained all the Medicare coverage decisions issued in that manual. 
In that notice, we indicated that revisions to the Coverage Issues Manual will be published at least quarterly in the


Federal Register

. We also sometimes issue proposed or final national coverage decision changes in separate 

Federal Register

 notices. Readers should find this an easy way to identify both issuance changes to all our manuals and the text of changes
to the Coverage Issues Manual. 
Revisions to the Coverage Issues Manual are not published on a regular basis but on an as-needed basis. We publish revisions
as a result of technological changes, medical practice changes, responses to inquiries we receive seeking clarifications,
or the resolution of coverage issues under Medicare. If no Coverage Issues Manual revisions were published during
a particular quarter, our listing will reflect that fact. 
Not all revisions to the Coverage Issues Manual contain major changes. As with any instruction, sometimes minor clarifications
or revisions are made within the text. We have reprinted manual revisions as transmitted to manual holders. The new
text is shown in italics. We will not reprint the table of contents, since the table of contents serves primarily as
a finding aid for the user of the manual and does not identify items as covered or not. 


III. How to Use the Addenda 


This notice is organized so that a reader may review the subjects of all manual issuances, memoranda, substantive
and interpretive regulations, or coverage decisions published during the timeframe to determine whether any are
of particular interest. We expect it to be used in concert with previously published notices. Most notably, those
unfamiliar with a description of our Medicare manuals may wish to review Table I of our first three notices (53 FR 21730,
53 FR 36891, and 53 FR 50577) and the notice published March 31, 1993 (58 FR 16837), and those desiring information on
the Medicare Coverage Issues Manual may wish to review the August 21, 1989, publication (54 FR 34555). 




</SUPPLEM>
