 

As to the use of the ``less than 10 percent LEL'' as the level to be achieved before employees may work in a space, that
level is adopted from the applicable national consensus standard (NFPA 306, Appendix A), which reflects current
practices and sampling technology. The shipyard industry has followed this standard for the past 23 years, and OSHA
believes that it provides a sufficient margin of safety. Of course, employers are free to use a lower level in their
workplaces for additional margins of safety. 

Paragraph (b)(4) of the final rule requires that the flammability tests be conducted by a competent person ``as often
as necessary'' during cleaning or cold work to determine the concentration of flammable or combustible vapors present
in the work space. This provision in the final rule is based on the proposal (53 FR 48098, 48102; Specific Issue 7). The
previous standard required a competent person to test prior to commencement of cold work and with sufficient frequency
thereafter, in accordance with temperature, volatility of the residues, and other existing conditions in and about
the spaces to ensure that the concentrations of flammable vapors were below ten (10) percent of the LEL. As explained
in the preamble to the proposal, some interested parties requested clarification of the term ``frequently'' contained
in the previous 1915.13(a)(3). (53 CFR 48098) They asked OSHA to specify in the regulation how often tanks should
be checked. However, many more commenters (Ex. 63, 65, 610, 612, 613, 615,
624, 628, 633, 634) urged the Agency to keep the standard flexible enough to enable employers
and employees to take into consideration all the factors which may influence the need to recheck space conditions,
including temperature, work being performed in the space, time elapsed, unattended tanks, work breaks, and ballasting
or trimming. For example, Bay Shipbuilding Corp. (Ex. 615) stated: 




Frequency of testing must be based on the area conditions and complexity of the hazard. Ventilation capability is
also a major factor in hazard control. Once an area has been made safe, and air quality can be maintained with natural
or mechanical ventilation, there are no further steps needed unless the condition is modified by some events such
as a spill, leak, or injection of an environmentally altering element. Otherwise, the only thing to do is to continue
monitoring (which is cost prohibitive); or base the checks on the HMIS scale for health, flammability, and reactivity
of the product. The higher the HMIS rating, the more frequent the checks. 




The Department of the Navy (Ex. 631) commented: 




The term frequently is too vague and should be redefined to specify that, re-testing should be dependent on alteration
of specific atmospheric conditions, manipulation of valves, or opening of manholes at the worksite. 




Another commenter, Bath Iron Works Corporation (Ex. 628), also in support of flexibility, stated: 




No easy definition exists for all circumstances requiring additional ``frequent'' testing. This is a situation
which requires the judgment of the Marine Chemist, based on his knowledge of the last three cargoes, their properties
and the effectiveness of the cleaning procedures used. Some cargoes, such as alcohols, light fuel oils, etc., leave
no harmful residues after adequate tank cleaning and ventilation. Under such situation, testing every 24 hours is
adequate. Other cargoes leave residues, or, particular tank coatings partially absorb cargo residues, only to release
vapors slowly over time, regardless of how the cleaning operations were conducted. These conditions require atmospheric
testing more frequently. 




OSHA agrees with the commenters' views that the frequency of testing an atmosphere is best determined by the specific
situation encountered and that a requirement to recheck a tank at specified intervals would not necessarily raise
the level of safety. However, it is imperative that the atmosphere be checked often enough to ensure that it is safe
for workers. To that end, Appendix A to Subpart B in the final rule provides supplementary information to assist employers
and employees in determining the frequency with which a tank must be tested in order to ensure atmospheric conditions
are being maintained. The six most common factors (temperature, work in the tank, period of time elapsed, unattended
tanks, work breaks, and ballasting or trimming) are discussed, and examples are provided as guidance. Appendix A
is unchanged from the proposal (53 FR 48110). 

Paragraph (b)(5) requires releases of flammable, combustible, toxic, corrosive, irritant, and fumigant materials
to be cleaned up as work progresses. The requirement that liquid residues of flammable and toxic materials, which
includes all of the contaminants described above, were to be cleaned up as work progresses was brought forward from
the previous provision 1915.13(a)(1). In this final rule, OSHA has listed additional materials, corrosive,
and irritant, that must be cleaned up as work progresses because they can be dangerous to employees working in these
hazardous atmospheres. 

Paragraph (b)(6) prohibits entry into spaces where the concentration of flammable or combustible vapors equals
or exceeds 10 percent of the lower explosive limit and specifies the limited exceptions under which an employee may
enter or work in such spaces. The exception is unchanged from the previous rule, 1915.12(d), but has been placed
in the cleaning and other cold work section for clarification. An employee may enter the space for emergency rescue
or for a short duration to install the ventilation required to start operations. In those instances there must be no
ignition sources present, the space must be monitored continuously, the atmosphere in the space must be maintained
above the UEL, and appropriate personal protective equipment must be provided. A note has been added as a reminder
that other provisions for work in IDLH and other dangerous atmospheres are located in Subpart I, Personal Protective
Equipment, of this part. 









