 

g. Whenever it is relevant, care must be taken to insure to the extent possible that 
subjects are blind to the variate of interest (Benignus, 1993). 



3.6.1.1. Sensitivity. 



Individual neurobehavioral tests and test batteries have detected 
differences between exposed and nonexposed populations in epidemiologic studies and in 
laboratory studies. Effects have been detected by neurobehavioral methods at concentrations 
thought by other kinds of evaluation not to produce neurotoxicity. Workplace exposure 
limits to many chemicals have been set on the basis of neurobehavioral studies. While the 
overall sensitivity of neurobehavioral methods is sufficient to be useful in neurotoxicology 
risk assessment, some methods are notably insensitive across several chemical classes while 
the sensitivity of other neurobehavioral tests varies according to the spectrum of neurotoxic 
effects of the chemical or drug. 

Sensitivity is sometimes negatively correlated with reliability; selecting for tests that 
show little change over time may also select for tests that are not sensitive to neurotoxic 
insult. 

Having more control over the testing environment and using a repeated measures 
design may decrease variability and increase statistical power, but these tactics may introduce 
other problems. There is some suggestion that experience in highly structured laboratory 
environments with explicit stimulus conditions may reduce the sensitivity of humans and 
animals to the effects of drugs and chemicals, and the sensitivity of neurobehavioral 
measures to impairment by a chemical or drug may depend on neurobehavioral training 
history (Terrace, 1963; Brady and Barrett, 1986). Sensitivity may also be decreased if 
baseline behaviors are stable and well practiced or an escape/avoidance procedure is 
employed. 

The systematic introduction of stimulus or response changes to induce transitional 
behaviors, such as in a transitional state or repeated learning paradigms, may be one way to 
retain the advantage of a stable baseline, have sufficient sensitivity, and avoid practice effects 
(Anger and Setzer, 1979). 



3.6.1.2. Specificity. 



There are two kinds of specificity in neurobehavioral assessment of 
chemical or drug neurotoxicity. Chemical specificity refers to the ability of a test to reflect 
chemical or drug effects and to be relatively resistant to the influence of nonchemical 
variables. The second type of specificity refers to the ability of a test method to measure 
changes in a single neurobehavioral function (e.g., dexterity) or a restricted number of 
functions, rather than a broad range of functions (attention, reasoning, dexterity, and vision). 

The neurobehavioral expression of neurotoxic chemical or drug effects is a function of 
the joint interaction of ongoing nervous system processes with the chemical substance and 
with biopsychosocial variables that also influence nervous system activity. In laboratory 
exposure studies numerous environmental, behavioral, and biologic variables can influence 
the type or magnitude of neurotoxic effects of chemical agents and drugs (MacPhail, 1990). 
These variables include ambient temperature, physical workload, task difficulty, the social 
and tangible reward characteristics of the laboratory setting, redundancy of stimuli, the rate 
and form of the behavioral response, conditioning factors, and the interoceptive stimulus 
properties of the chemicals. 

The laboratory research participant's history and habits outside the laboratory also 
may affect chemical-neurobehavioral interactions by influencing the baseline level of 
performance on neurobehavioral tests or directly affecting the response of the CNS to the 
exposure. Age, gender, educational level, intellectual functioning, economic status, acute 
and chronic health conditions (including developmental or current neurologic conditions), 
alcohol/drug/tobacco effects or withdrawal, emotional status or significant life events, sleep 
deprivation, fatigue, and cultural factors are only a few of the variables that may affect 
performance in laboratory studies (Williamson, 1991; Cassitto et al., 1990). 

The influence of these selection and biopsychosocial variables on the neurobehavioral 
effects of workplace chemicals is poorly understood, although their effects on drug-behavior 
interactions have been more thoroughly explored. Controlling or understanding chemical and 
nonchemical variables will be important for ensuring adequate specificity for risk assessment 
purposes. 



3.6.1.3. Reliability and validity. 



Reliability refers to the ability of a given test to produce 
closely similar results when administered more than once over a period of time or in similar 
populations. Reliability is meaningful only with respect to the measurement of functions that 
would not be expected to change significantly over the time period. Test-retest reliability 
coefficients are between 0.6 and 0.9 (Beaumont, 1990) for most of the tests in the NCTB. 
With notable exceptions, other neurobehavioral tests have similar reliabilities. Reliabilities in 
the 0.8 to 0.9 range are usually thought acceptable. As reliability decreases, measurement 
error is more likely to mask neurotoxic chemical effects. 





