 



Non-elderly disabled person 

means a person with a disability who is less than 62 years of age. 



Person with disabilities 

means a person who_

(a) Has disability as defined in section 223 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 423), or 

(b) Is determined to have a physical, mental, or emotional impairment that_

(1) Is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration, 

(2) Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently, and 

(3) Is of such a nature that such ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions, or 

(c) Has a developmental disability as defined in section 102 of the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill
of Rights Act (42 U.S.C. 6001(5)). 




The term ``person with disabilities'' does not exclude persons who have the disease of acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome or any conditions arising from the etiologic agent for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. 





Portion of project 

includes: One or more buildings in a multi-building project; one or more floors of a project or projects; a certain
number of dwelling units in a project or projects. (Designation of a portion of a project does not require that the buildings,
floors or units be contiguous.) 



Project 

means low-income housing developed, acquired, or assisted by a PHA under the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (other than section
8) for which there is an Annual Contributions Contract (ACC) between HUD and the PHA. For purposes of this part, the
terms 

housing 

and 

public housing

 mean the same as project. Additionally, as used in this part, and unless the context indicates otherwise, the term


project 

when used in the singular includes the plural, and when used in the plural, includes the singular, and also includes
a ``portion of a project,'' as defined in this section. 



Public housing 

or 

public housing project. 

See definition of ``project'' in this section. 



Public housing agency 

or 

PHA. 

See 24 CFR 913.102. 



Secretary 

means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 



Service provider 

means a person or organization qualified and experienced in the provision of supportive services, and that is in compliance
with any licensing requirements imposed by State or local law for the type of service or services to be provided. The
service provider may provide the service on either a for-profit or not-for-profit basis. 



Single person 

means a person who lives alone or intends to live alone, who is not an elderly person, a person with disabilities, a displaced
person, or the remaining member of a tenant family. 



Supportive service plan. 

See 945.205. 



Supportive services 

means services available to persons residing in a development, requested by disabled families and for which there
is a need, and may include, but are not limited to, meal services, health-related services, mental health services,
services for nonmedical counseling, meals, transportation, personal care, bathing, toileting, housekeeping,
chore assistance, safety, group and socialization activities, assistance with medications (in accordance with
any applicable State laws), case management, personal emergency response, and other appropriate services. 



Subpart B_Application and Approval Procedures 



945.201 

Approval to designate housing. 



(a) 

Designated housing for elderly families. 

To designate a project for occupancy by elderly families, a PHA must have a HUD-approved allocation plan that meets
the requirements of 945.203. 

(b) 

Designated housing for disabled families. 

To designate a project for occupancy by disabled families, a PHA must have a HUD-approved allocation plan that meets
the requirements of 945.203, and a HUD-approved supportive service plan that meets the requirements of 945.205.







