 

(h) In making their annual reports to the Commission on their costs in administering Part I of the Federal Power Act,
the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service are to deduct any amounts that
were deposited into their Treasury accounts during that year as reimbursements for conducting studies and reviews
pursuant to section 30(e) of the Federal Power Act. 

(i) 

Definition. 

As used in paragraph (c) of this section, 

authorized installed capacity

 means the lesser of the ratings of the generator or turbine units. The rating of a generator is the product of the continuous-load
capacity rating of the generator in kilovolt-amperes (kVA) and the system power factor in kW/kVA. If the licensee
or exemptee does not know its power factor, a factor of 1.0 kW/kVA will be used. The rating of a turbine is the product
of the turbine's capacity in horsepower (hp) at maximum head gate opening under the manufacturer's rating head times
a conversion factor of 0.75 kW/hp. If the generator or turbine installed has a rating different from that authorized
in the license or exemption, or the installed generator is rewound or otherwise modified to change its rating, or the
turbine is modified to change its rating, the licensee or exemptee must apply to the Commission to amend its authorized
installed capacity to reflect the change. 

(j) 

Transition rules. 

(1) For a license having the capacity of the project for annual charge purposes stated in horsepower, that capacity
shall be deemed to be the capacity stated in kilowatts elsewhere in the license, including any amendments thereto.


(2) During the first three fiscal years in which annual charges are assessed after [INSERT DATE ON WHICH THE FINAL RULE
BECOMES EFFECTIVE], the annual charges will be determined as follows. The assessments will include (and be limited
to) all licenses and exempted projects that have been constructed or whose construction has been commenced, and will
be subject to the minimum and maximum charges specified in paragraph (f) of this section. Subject to those parameters,
the Commission will determine the charge that would have been assessed pursuant to the regulations in effect prior
to [INSERT DATE ON WHICH THE FINAL RULE BECOMES EFFECTIVE], the charge that would have been assessed pursuant to the
regulations in effect subsequent to that date, and the difference between those two assessments. In the first fiscal
year after [INSERT DATE ON WHICH THE FINAL RULE BECOMES EFFECTIVE], the Commission will adjust the assessment that
would otherwise be payable under the regulations in effect after that date by an amount equal to 75 percent of the difference
between the amount that would have been payable under the regulations that were previously in effect and the amount
that would have been payable under those regulations after they were amended. In the second fiscal year after [INSERT
DATE ON WHICH THE FINAL RULE BECOMES EFFECTIVE], the Commission will adjust the assessment by 50 percent of that difference.
In the third fiscal year after [INSERT DATE ON WHICH THE FINAL RULE BECOMES EFFECTIVE], the Commission will adjust
the assessment by 25 percent of the difference. 

3. In 11.6, the title, the introductory sentence of paragraph (a), and paragraph (i), are revised, and the cross-reference
at the end of the section is removed, to read as follows: 



11.6 

Exemption of State and municipal licensees and exemptees. 



(a) 

Bases for exemption. 

A State or municipal licensee or exemptee may claim total or partial exemption from the assessment of annual charges
upon one or more of the following grounds: 



* * * * * 



(i) 

Application for exemption. 

Applications for exemption from payment of annual charges shall be signed by an authorized executive officer or chief
accounting officer of the licensee or exemptee and verified under oath. An original and three copies of such application
shall be filed with the Commission within the time allowed (by 11.28) for the payment of the annual charges.
If the licensee or exemptee, within the time allowed for the payment of the annual charges, files notice that it intends
to file an application for exemption, an additional period of 30 days is allowed within which to complete and file the
application for exemption. The filing of an application for exemption does not by itself alleviate the requirement
to pay the annual charges, nor does it exonerate the licensee or exemptee from the assessment of penalties under 11.21.
If a bill for annual charges becomes payable after an application for an exemption has been filed and while the application
is still pending for decision, the bill may be paid under protest and subject to refund. 

4. Section 11.20 is revised to read as follows: 


11.20 

Time for payment. 



Annual charges must be paid no later than 30 days after rendition of a bill by the Commission. If the licensee or exemptee
believes that the bill is incorrect, no later than 30 days after its rendition the licensee or exemptee may file an appeal
of the bill with the Chief Financial Officer. No later than 30 days after the date of issuance of the Chief Financial
Officer's decision on the appeal, the licensee or exemptee may file a request for rehearing of that decision pursuant
to 385.713 of this chapter. In the event that a timely appeal to the Chief Financial Officer or a timely request
to the Commission for rehearing is filed, the payment of the bill may be made under protest, and subject to refund pending
the outcome of the appeal or rehearing. 



PART 381_FEES 



5. The authority citation for part 381 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 15 U.S.C. 717717w; 16 U.S.C. 791828c, 26012645; 31 U.S.C. 9701; 42 U.S.C. 71017352; and
49 U.S.C. 127. 



381.601 

[Removed]



6. Section 381.601 is removed, and subpart F is reserved.



