 




<USBUREAU>Health Resources and Services Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Final Funding Preferences for Scholarships for Disadvantaged Students </DOCTITLE>



The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) announces the final funding preferences for fiscal year
(FY) 1994 for the Scholarships for Disadvantaged Students (SDS) program authorized under the authority of section
737 of the Public Health Service Act (the Act), title VII, Part B, as amended by the Health Professions Education Extension
Amendments of 1992, Pub. L. 102408, dated October 13, 1992. 



Purpose 



The SDS program is a program of grants to health professions and nursing schools for the purpose of assisting such schools
in providing scholarships to individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds who are enrolled (or accepted for enrollment)
as full-time students in the schools, as well as to undergraduate students who have demonstrated a commitment to pursuing
a career in health professions. 



Statutory Preference 



The law requires that in providing SDS scholarships, the school give preference to students who are from disadvantaged
backgrounds and for whom the cost of attending an SDS school would constitute a severe financial hardship. Severe
financial hardship will be determined by the school in accordance with standard need analysis procedures prescribed
by the Department of Education for its Federal student aid programs. 



Final Funding Preference 



A proposed funding preference was published in the 

Federal Register

 on June 20, 1994, at 59 FR 31643, for public comment. Three comments were received during the 30-day comment period
which were in support of the proposed funding preference. One commentor called attention to congressional report
language which directs the Department to give highest priority, among allied health applicants, to dental hygiene
programs. 

In accord with the Congress' directive, the final funding preference will be revised as follows: 

For fiscal year 1994, among allied health schools or programs, preference will be given to the following baccalaureate
and graduate programs: dental hygiene, medical laboratory technology, occupational therapy, physical therapy
and radiologic technology. The priority for dental hygiene will be implemented by taking the total funds allocated
to the allied health disciplines in the initial allocation and recalculating this part of the allocation. Dental
hygiene schools will receive double credit for their disadvantaged enrollments in the reallocation of the allied
health funds. 



Additional Information 



Programmatic questions should be directed to: Mr. Bruce Baggett, Chief, Student and Institutional Support Branch,
Division of Student Assistance, Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and Services Administration, Parklawn
Building, Room 834, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20857, Telephone: (301) 4434776, FAX:
(301) 5946911.

The 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 

Number for the Scholarships for Disadvantaged Students program is 93.925. This program is not subject to the provisions
of Executive Order 12372, Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs (as implemented through 45 CFR part 100).


This program is not subject to the Public Health System Reporting Requirements. 




Dated: August 23, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
Ciro V. Sumaya, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrator. 
 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9421291 Filed 82994; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416015P 
</BILLING>



