 

(a) Each fuel tank must be supported so that tank loads are not concentrated on unsupported tank surfaces. In addition_
(1) There must be pads, if necessary, to prevent chafing between each tank and its supports;
(2) The padding must be nonabsorbent or treated to prevent the absorption of fuel;
(3) If flexible tank liners are used, they must be supported so that it is not necessary for them to withstand fluid loads;
and
(4) Each interior surface of tank compartments must be smooth and free of projections that could cause wear of the liner
unless_
(i) There are means for protection of the liner at those points; or
(ii) The construction of the liner itself provides such protection.
(b) Any spaces adjacent to tank surfaces must be adequately ventilated to avoid accumulation of fuel or fumes in those
spaces due to minor leakage. If the tank is in a sealed compartment, ventilation may be limited to drain holes that prevent
clogging and excessive pressure resulting from altitude changes. If flexible tank liners are installed, the venting
arrangement for the spaces between the liner and its container must maintain the proper relationship to tank vent
pressures for any expected flight condition.
(c) The location of each tank must meet the requirements of 27.1185 (a) and (c).
(d) No rotorcraft skin immediately adjacent to a major air outlet from the engine compartment may act as the wall of
the integral tank.
6. Section 27.973 is revised to read as follows:


27.973

Fuel tank filler connection.


(a) Each fuel tank filler connection must prevent the entrance of fuel into any part of the rotorcraft other than the
tank itself during normal operations and must be crash resistant during a survivable impact in accordance with 27.952(c).
In addition_
(1) Each filler must be marked as prescribed in 27.1557(c)(1);
(2) Each recessed filler connection that can retain any appreciable quantity of fuel must have a drain that discharges
clear of the entire rotorcraft; and
(3) Each filler cap must provide a fuel-tight seal under the fluid pressure expected in normal operation and in a survivable
impact.
(b) Each filler cap or filler cap cover must warn when the cap is not fully locked or seated on the filler connection.
7. Section 27.975 is amended by revising paragraph (b) to read as follows:


27.975

Fuel tank vents.


* * * * *


(b) The venting system must be designed to minimize spillage of fuel through the vents to an ignition source in the event
of a rollover during landing, ground operation, or a survivable impact, unless a rollover is shown to be extremely
remote.


PART 29_AIRWORTHINESS STANDARDS: TRANSPORT CATEGORY ROTORCRAFT


8. The authority citation for part 29 continues to read as follows:





Authority:

 49 U.S.C. 1344, 1354(a), 1355, 1421, 1423, 1424, 1425, 1428, 1429, 1430; and 49 U.S.C. 106(g).



9. A new 29.952 is added to read as follows:


29.952

Fuel system crash resistance.


Unless other means acceptable to the Administrator are employed to minimize the hazard of fuel fires to occupants
following an otherwise survivable impact (crash landing), the fuel systems must incorporate the design features
of this section. These systems must be shown to be capable of sustaining the static and dynamic deceleration loads
of this section, considered as ultimate loads acting alone, measured at the system component's center of gravity
without structural damage to the system components, fuel tanks, or their attachments that would leak fuel to an ignition
source.
(a) 

Drop test requirements

. Each tank, or the most critical tank, must be drop-tested as follows:
(1) The drop height must be at least 50 feet.
(2) The drop impact surface must be nondeforming.
(3) The tanks must be filled with water to 80 percent of the normal, full capacity.
(4) The tank must be enclosed in a surrounding structure representative of the installation unless it can be established
that the surrounding structure is free of projections or other design features likely to contribute to rupture of
the tank.
(5) The tank must drop freely and impact in a horizontal position 

#

10
&cir;.
(6) After the drop test, there must be no leakage.
(b) 

Fuel tank load factors

. Except for fuel tanks located so that tank rupture with fuel release to either significant ignition sources, such
as engines, heaters, and auxiliary power units, or occupants is extremely remote, each fuel tank must be designed
and installed to retain its contents under the following ultimate inertial load factors, acting alone.
(1) For fuel tanks in the cabin:
(i) Upward_4g.
(ii) Forward_16g.
(iii) Sideward_8g.
(iv) Downward_20g.
(2) For fuel tanks located above or behind the crew or passenger compartment that, if loosened, could injure an occupant
in an emergency landing:
(i) Upward_1.5g.





