 

641.311

Enrollee wages and fringe benefits.


(a) 

Wages.

 Upon engaging in part-time community service employment assignments, including orientation and training in preparation
for community service employment assignments, each enrollee shall receive wages at a rate no less than the highest
applicable rate:
(1) The minimum wage which would be applicable to the enrollee under the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938;
(2) The State or local minimum wage for the most nearly comparable covered employment; or
(3) The prevailing rates of pay for persons employed in similar public occupations by the same employer.
(b) 

Fringe benefits.

 (1) The recipient or subrecipient shall ensure that enrollees receive all fringe benefits required by law.
(2) Within a project or subproject, fringe benefits shall be provided uniformly to all enrollees, unless the Department
agrees to waiver this provision due to a determination that such a waive is in the best interests of applicants, enrollees,
and the project administration.
(3) 

Physical assessment.

 A physical examination shall be regarded as a fringe benefit and its use will be limited to determining the need for
supportive services. A copy of the physical examination shall be provided to the enrollee. A physical examination
is a program benefit and shall not be interpreted as an eligibility criterion.
(i) Each individual selected for enrollment shall have a physical assessment within the 2-month period immediately
before the first day of compensated participation which shall be used as part of the assessment process following
eligibility determination. [Section 502(b)(1)(N).] Exceptions are provided in paragraph (b)(3)(iv) of this section.
(ii) Enrollees should be provided a physical examination every twelve months, but no enrollee may participate in
community service employment for more than 15 months without a physical examination or a waiver, as provided by paragraph
(b)(3)(iv) of this section.
(iii) An enrollee who is terminated may be reenrolled without an additional physical assessment, provided that the
time elapsed since the last physical assessment does not exceed 15 months, and provided that a schedule of one examination
within each 15-month period shall be resumed, based on the date of the last examination.
(iv) Notwithstanding paragraphs (b)(3) (i), (ii), and (iii) of this section, when an individual objects to a physical
examination, the recipient or subrecipient shall obtain a signed waiver prior to the first day of compensated participation.
Thereafter, an additional signed waiver shall be obtained from each enrollee before providing any compensated participation
more than 15 months after the date of the enrollee's latest waiver. Failure to receive such waiver within the 15-month
timeframe will result in the enrollee's preclusion from further participation in an assignment.
(c) 

Retirement.

 Expenditures of grant funds for contributions into a retirement system or plan are prohibited, unless the recipient
has documentation on hand showing that:
(1) The costs are allowable under the appropriate cost principles indicated at 641.403(b); and
(2) Such contributions bear a reasonable relationship to the cost of providing such benefits to enrollees because:
(i) the benefits vest at the time contributions are made on behalf of the enrollees; or
(ii) the charges to SCSEP funds are for contributions on behalf of enrollees to a ``defined benefit'' type of plan which
do not exceed the amounts reasonably necessary to provide the specified benefit to enrollees, as determined under
a separate actuarial determination.
(d) 

Workers' compensation.

 Where an enrollee is not covered by the State workers' compensation law, the recipient or subrecipient shall provide
the enrollee with workers' compensation benefits equal to that provided by law for covered employment. [Section
504(b).]
(e) 

Unemployment compensation.

 The recipient is authorized to pay the cost of unemployment insurance for covered enrollees, where required by law.
[Section 502(b)(1)(O).]


641.312

Enrollee supportive services.


