 

The filing of requests for hearing and petitions for leave to intervene is discussed below.
By October 31, 1994, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respect to issuance of the amendment to the subject
facility operating license and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and who wishes to participate
as a party in the proceeding must file a written request for a hearing and a petition for leave to intervene. Requests
for a hearing and a petition for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rules of Practice
for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. Interested persons should consult a current copy of 10 CFR 2.714
which is available at the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington,
DC 20555 and at the local public document room located at the University of Texas at Arlington Library, Government
Publications/Maps, 702 College, P.O. Box 19497, Arlington, Texas 76019. If a request for a hearing or petition for
leave to intervene is filed by the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designated by
the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and Licensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition;
and the Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a notice of hearing or an appropriate
order. As requested by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall set forth with particularity the interest
of the petitioner in the proceeding, and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding. The petition
should specifically explain the reasons why intervention should be permitted with particular reference to the following
factors: (1) The nature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made party to the proceeding; (2) the nature and
extent of the petitioner's property, financial, or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect
of any order which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest. The petition should also identify
the specific aspect(s) of the subject matter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Any person
who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has been admitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting
leave of the Board up to 15 days prior to the first prehearing conference scheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended
petition must satisfy the specificity requirements described above. Not later than 15 days prior to the first prehearing
conference scheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to the petition to intervene which must
include a list of the contentions which are sought to be litigated in the matter. Each contention must consist of a specific
statement of the issue of law or fact to be raised or controverted. In addition, the petitioner shall provide a brief
explanation of the bases of the contention and a concise statement of the alleged facts or expert opinion which support
the contention and on which the petitioner intends to rely in proving the contention at the hearing. The petitioner
must also provide references to those specific sources and documents of which the petitioner is aware and on which
the petitioner intends to rely to establish those facts or expert opinion. Petitioner must provide sufficient information
to show that a genuine dispute exists with the applicant on a material issue of law or fact. Contentions shall be limited
to matters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. The contention must be one which, if proven, would
entitle the petitioner to relief. A petitioner who fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirements
with respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participate as a party.
Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subject to any limitations in the order granting leave
to intervene, and have the opportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, including the opportunity
to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determination on the issue of no significant hazards consideration.
The final determination will serve to decide when the hearing is held.
If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration,the Commission
may issue the amendment and make it immediately effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing
held would take place after issuance of the amendment.
If the final determination is that the amendment request involves a significant hazards consideration, any hearing
held would take place before the issuance of any amendment.
A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filed with the Secretary of the Commission, U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Services Branch, or may be delivered
to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20555, by the above
date. Where petitions are filed during the last 10 days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitioner promptly
so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to Western Union at 1(800) 2485100 (in Missouri
1(800) 3426700). The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number N1023
and the following message addressed to William D. Beckner, Director, Project Directorate IV1: petitioner's
name and telephone number, date petition was mailed, plant name, and publication date and page number of this 

Federal Register

 notice. A copy of the petition should also be sent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
Washington, DC 20555, and to George L. Edgar, Esq., Newman and Holtzinger, 1615 L Street, NW., Suite 1000, Washington,
D.C. 20336, attorney for the licensee.
Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions, supplemental petitions and/or requests
for hearing will not be entertained absent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or the presiding
Atomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or request should be granted based upon a balancing of the
factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)(v) and 2.714(d).
For further details with respect to this action, see the application for amendment dated September 19, 1994, which
is available for public inspection at the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,
NW., Washington, DC 20555 and at the local public document room located at the University of Texas at Arlington Library,
Government Publications/Maps, 702 College, P.O. Box 19497, Arlington, Texas 76019.



Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 26th day of September 1994.



For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.


<SIGNER>
Thomas A. Bergman,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Project Manager, Project Directorate IV1, Division of Reactor Projects_III/IV, Office of Nuclear Reactor
Regulation.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9424207 Filed 92994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M
</BILLING>


