 

Additionally, within the context of today's final provisions amending the regulations governing improvident permit
issuance, OSM has made explicit that a permittee may challenge the existence of the violation at the time it was cited.
A permittee may make such challenge if the challenge is not otherwise precluded by a permittee's previous failure
to take advantage of a prior opportunity to challenge or by a prior administrative or judicial determination concerning
the existence of the violation. See 773.20 and 773.25.

Nevertheless, the industry commenters questioned whether the ability to challenge a violation after permit denial
is illusory because OSM may attempt to argue that the owner or controller failed to take advantage of a prior opportunity
to challenge the violation at the time that it was issued or that the challenger was bound by a prior administrative
or judicial determination. This is not OSM's intent. Each specific case must be evaluated on its merits. In general,
a challenge would be precluded only when the facts indicate that a potential challenger has already had the opportunity
to challenge and has squandered it, or when the potential challenger is bound by a prior determination. The purpose
of this portion of the proposed rules and the final rules as adopted is to eliminate multiple repetitive opportunities
for challenge for those who have already had a substantive opportunity to challenge, either directly or through a
controlled entity. It is not OSM's intention to assert these defenses to a challenge unless such defenses are supported
by the facts of a particular case.

Industry commenters argued that a State's decision to deny a permit based upon violation information contained in
AVS is also not subject to challenge. OSM disagrees. The existence of the violation at the time it was cited, along with
any other bases for permit denial, may be challenged in a proceeding under 30 CFR part 775, or the equivalent State programs,
subject to the defenses discussed above. To the extent that a regulatory authority has based its permit denial decision
upon violation information contained in AVS, that information would be an integral part of the challenge proceeding.
When administrative and judicial tribunals consider appeals of permit denials, it is probable that evidence related
to violations which form the basis of a permit denial will be relevant to the tribunal. OSM will work with State regulatory
authorities to provide supporting documentation if required for appeals of State permitting decisions. OSM anticipates
that State regulatory authorities will similarly cooperate with OSM and with each other in making such evidence related
to violation information available to administrative and judicial tribunals.

Industry commenters also asserted that the proposed rules, along with the ownership and control rules promulgated
in 1988, deny due process in that they retroactively impose responsibilities for violations upon owners and controllers.
Again, OSM must reject this characterization of the effect of the proposed rules and 1988 ownership and control rules.
OSM must further reject this characterization with respect to the final regulations adopted today. The ownership
and control rules published in 1988, the AVS-related proposed rules published in September, 1991, and the final rules
published today subject the owners or controllers of violations to permit denial for currently outstanding violations,
rather than past, abated violations. This obligation follows the clear mandate of section 510(c) of the Act which
requires the denial of permits when ``any surface coal mining operation owned or controlled by the applicant is currently
in violation'' of the Act or other laws cited.

Moreover, the presumptions of ownership and control provided by 30 CFR 773.5 and the final rules merely reflect the
reality that owners or controllers have the authority, by reason of their control at the time that the violations are
committed or during any period when the violations remained outstanding, to be aware of violations, to compel their
controlled entities to undertake timely challenges of violations, and to compel their controlled entities to abate
violations of the Act. Under these circumstances, there is no retroactive application of responsibility.



