 

The agency believes that further safety improvements could be gained through providing consumers with information
about additional aspects of new vehicle safety performance. NHTSA recently conducted a series of 15 focus groups,
comprised of members of the public, to examine the type and format of desired consumer information about vehicle safety.
(See ``Focus Groups on Traffic Safety Issues: Public Response to NCAP,'' S.W. Morris  Company, Inc., August
1993, which can be found in Docket No. 7917, Notice 01, or ``New Car 
Assessment Program_Response to the NCAP FY 1992 Congressional Requirements,'' Report to the Congress, December
1993, which can be found in Docket No. 9717, Notice 39). One of the topics examined was the current NCAP and how
it could be improved. In response to the results of the focus group work, the agency has changed the format for NCAP test
results. The new format responds to consumer demand for reporting results in a way that is less technical and easier
to understand. 

The focus groups also indicated that the agency's consumer safety information activities should be expanded to include
additional kinds of crashes, including side impacts and rollovers. The potential importance of providing broader
safety information about new light duty vehicle performance 
can be seen from figures regarding the proportion of fatalities in each of the three most important types of crashes.
In 1991, frontal crashes accounted for 39 percent of all fatalities involving light duty vehicle occupants, rollover
crashes for 30 percent, and side impact crashes for 25 percent. Together, these three types of crashes account for
94 percent of all fatalities. Information on performance in all three types of crashes could provide consumers with
a comprehensive, balanced picture of the safety of new vehicles. 

As part of its efforts to expand its consumer safety information programs, NHTSA has sought participation and guidance
from the general public on the types and format of safety information to be provided to consumers. On January 3, 1994,
the agency published a request for comments on whether to supplement the agency's efforts by holding a public meeting
to discuss, among other items, the expansion of the NCAP program to other crash modes (59 FR 104). 

Based on the foregoing, the agency plans to supplement this rollover proposal with a future proposal for requiring
that each new vehicle have a window sticker providing information not only on vehicle rollover resistance, but also
on frontal and side impact crash performance. 



III. Background 



A. Statutory Requirement for Rulemaking 



The NHTSA Authorization Act of 1991 (the Act) (part of the Intermodel Surface Transportation Efficiency Act) requires
the agency to address several vehicle safety subjects through rulemaking. One of the subjects, set forth in section
2503(1), is protection against unreasonable risk of rollovers of passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles,
and trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds
or less. 

Section 2502(b)(2)(A) of the Act required that NHTSA publish, no later than May 31, 1992, an ANPRM or a notice of proposed
rulemaking (NPRM) on this subject. The January 3, 1992, ANPRM fulfilled this mandate. 

Section 2502(b)(2)(B)(i) of the Act provides that the agency must complete a rulemaking action on rollover within
26 months of publishing the ANPRM. The ANPRM was published on January 3, 1992; thus, this rulemaking action was to have
been completed by March 3, 1994. Section 2502(b)(2)(B)(ii) of the Act provides that this rulemaking will be considered
completed when NHTSA either publishes a final rule or decides and announces that it is not promulgating a rule. 



B. ANPRM and Planning Document 



NHTSA announced in its January 3, 1992 ANPRM on the rollover problem that it was considering various regulatory actions
to reduce the frequency of vehicle rollovers and/or the number and severity of injuries resulting from vehicle rollovers
(57 FR 242). The agency requested comments on potential regulatory actions in the areas of: (1) Improved stability;
(2) improved crashworthiness; and (3) consumer information. NHTSA said that it might issue a rule or rules in any one
of these three categories, or in any combination of 
them. 

