 

5. Procedures for Collecting a Publication Fee



If the legislation provides for charging a publication fee, how should the fee be collected, and what safeguards should
be provided to ensure timely publication and prevent unnecessary loss of potential patent rights? The PTO contemplates
that such a publication fee, if instituted, will be required prior to 15 months from the earliest filing date for which
a benefit is sought, or, on filing, whichever is later, and that failure to timely submit this fee will result in abandonment
and nonpublication of the application. The PTO may institute a regimen under which (1) an application will not be published
unless the applicant affirmatively requests publication by paying the publication fee, or alternatively, (2) an
application will be published unless the applicant affirmatively indicates that the application is not to be published,
regardless of whether the publication fee is timely submitted. The PTO recognizes that provisions for the acceptance
of an unavoidably/unintentionally delayed payment of this fee, 

vis-a-vis

 37 CFR 1.316, would be desirable.

Under either option, any applicant who did not timely submit the publication fee must petition for acceptance of a
late publication fee to revive the application. Under option (2), the costs of publishing applications lacking the
publication fee, but also lacking an affirmative statement that the applicant does not desire publication, will
be passed to other applicants, unless the application is subsequently revived; however, this option will avoid the
delay in publication inherent where an application is not published until a delayed publication fee is submitted
for the application. See Question 

#

7. Finally, there is a question as to whether the PTO should develop procedures for the withdrawal (and abandonment)
of an application from publication subsequent to payment of the publication fee.



C. Priority Rights



It had been proposed in S. 2488 that ``each application for patent shall be published *** as soon as
possible after the expiry of a period of 18 months from the earliest filing date for which a benefit is sought under this
title.'' Both 35 U.S.C. 119 and 120, as proposed in S. 2488, provided that the Commissioner (PTO) may
determine the period within which a claim for priority must be filed; however, 35 U.S.C. 119 expressly requires that
this period be during the pendency of the application. To enable the PTO to publish applications as soon as possible
after 18 months from the earliest priority date, the PTO must be aware of any claims for priority under 35 U.S.C. 119
or 120 as early as possible, preferably on filing of the application. The PTO contemplates requiring applicants to
state any claim for priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 or 120 on filing, but accepting late claims for priority with a surcharge.
The PTO further contemplates establishing, by regulation, a fixed period, such as within 3 months of filing, within
which late claims for priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 or 120 will be accepted with a surcharge to avoid the loss of such claim
for priority. The time period for claiming priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 should be distinguished from the time period
for perfecting such claims, 

i.e.

, submitting a certified copy of the priority document, which would remain as set forth in 37 CFR 1.55(a). In view of
the potential for delaying the publication of an application by delaying the filing of a claim for priority, the PTO
is considering a requirement that any late claim for priority be accompanied by a verified statement that the delay
in submitting such claim was unintentional. See Question 

#

8.



D. Prior Art Effect of Published Application




It had been proposed in S. 2488 that 35 U.S.C. 102(e) will include ``an application for patent, published pursuant
to section 122(b), by another filed in the United States before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent''
within its scope. Accordingly, a published application would have constituted prior art under 35 U.S.C. 102(e) by
the express terms in S. 2488. A published application will also constitute prior art for its entire disclosure as a
``printed publication'' under 35 U.S.C. 102(a) and (b) as of its publication date. Thus, a published application
would have constituted prior art under 35 U.S.C. 102(e) by the express terms in S. 2488 as of its filing date, and also
it would constitute prior art under 35 U.S.C. 102(a) and (b) as of its publication date. Of course, the published application
also would be available as prior art under 35 U.S.C. 103. While the PTO does not currently contemplate publication
of the entire application, the application content will be accessible to the public. In addition, the Gazette Entry
in the Gazette of Patent Application Notices will categorize the application (title, abstract and/or claim, U.S.
classification) so as to make the application sufficiently accessible to those interested in the art. 

In re Hall

, 781 F.2d 897, 900, 228 USPQ 453, 456 (Fed. Cir. 1986); 

see also, In re Wyer

, 655 F.2d 221, 210 USPQ 790 (CCPA 1981) (application available to the public as prior art, with an abstract, claim,
and classification published); 

and compare, In re Cronyn

, 890 F.2d 1158, 13 USPQ2d 1070 (Fed. Cir. 1989) (undergraduate student thesis not available as prior art where the
thesis, while accessible to the public, was indexed or categorized only by the author's name, rather than by subject
matter).

As discussed above, it is currently contemplated that a Patent Application Notice will be placed in the search files.
The PTO is undecided as to whether this Patent Application Notice should be removed from the search files if and when
the application issues as a patent, or whether to include publication information on the issued patent. See Question


#

9.



