 




<DOCTITLE>Little Paint Creek Watershed, Allamakee County, IA</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Soil Conservation Service.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of finding of no significant impact.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

Pursuant to section 102(2)(c) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969; the Council on Environmental Quality
Regulations (40 CFR part 1500); and the Soil Conservation Service Regulations (7 CFR part 650); the Soil Conservation
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, gives notice than an environmental impact statement is not being prepared
for the Little Paint Creek Watershed, Allamakee County, Iowa.



</SUMMARY>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Jeffrey R. Vonk, State Conservationist, Soil Conservation Service, Federal Building, 210 Walnut St., ste. 693,
Des Moines, IA 50309.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The environmental assessment of this federally assisted action indicates that the project will not cause significant
local, regional, or national impacts on the environment. As a result of these findings, Jeffrey R. Vonk, State Conservationist,
has determined that the preparation and review of an environmental impact statement are not needed for this project.



The project purposes are to reduce floodwater damages and water quality impairments. The planned works of improvement
include 12 single purpose floodwater detention structures, spring protection at one site, two livestock waste management
systems, and land treatment practices on 880 acres.

The Notice of a Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) has been forwarded to the Environmental Protection Agency
and to various Federal, State, and local agencies and interested parties. A limited number of copies of the FONSI are
available to fill single copy requests at the above address. Basic data developed during the environmental assessment
are on file and may be reviewed by contacting Jeffrey R. Vonk.

No administrative action on implementation of the proposal will be taken until 30 days after the date of this publication
in the 

Federal Register

.


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Leroy Brown,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting State Conservationist.



Introduction



The Little Paint Creek Watershed is a federally assisted action authorized for planning under Public Law 83566,
the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act. An environmental assessment was undertaken by the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS) in conjunction with the development of the watershed plan. This assessment was conducted in consultation
with local, State and other Federal agencies as well as with interested organizations and individuals. Data developed
during the assessment are available for public review at the following location: Soil Conservation Service, Federal
Building, 210 Walnut St., ste. 693, Des Moines, Iowa 503092180.





Recommended Action



Proposed is the installation of 880 acres of land treatment measure to be applied on farms for reduction of sheet, rill,
and steambank erosion; storage and management of animal waste at 2 locations, 12 single purpose floodwater detention
structures and one spring protection.



Effects of Recommended Action



The proposed plan will stabilize 800 acres of excessively eroding cropland, grassland and forestland, reduce flooding
on a 160 acre floodplain, and protect one coldwater trout stream. Animal waste management facilities and application
practices will prevent livestock wastes from two locations from entering the stream.

The recommended actions will protect the watershed hydrologically by improving the soil cover condition and reducing
overland flow velocities. Streamflow will be stabilized to the extent that peak flood flow rates will be greatly reduced.

The proposed actions will have no effect on wetlands.

An initial management summary of cultural resources as they relate to the planned components has been developed.
The survey concludes that no significant adverse impacts will occur to cultural resources in the watershed should
the plan be implemented. The SCS has consulted with the State Historic Preservation Office on the effects that planned
measures will have on significant cultural resources. However, construction of manure storage units, floodwater
detention structures and land treatment measures do have the potential for seriously disrupting individual sites.
Therefore, caution shall be exercised in planning and installing such measures to avoid serious disruption of areas
having potential as individual cultural sites.


</SIGNJOB>
