 

&bull;Decontaminate all persons who may possibly have been contaminated with a chemical warfare agent before they
are transported to a hospital. 
&bull;Decontamination substances should be readily available. Suitable decontamination substances include
soap, water, and 5% hypochlorite. 
&bull;To protect the environment, include in State and local disaster plans a method for containing and disposing
of contaminated runoff. CDC does not recommend establishing fixed decontamination units in prehospital areas because
of the expense and inflexibility of such units. 


5. Level of Medical Preparedness Training 


&bull;

At a minimum, 

train persons designated as prehospital medical responders in evaluating patients exposed to chemical warfare
agents, managing patients' airways (excluding intubation), transporting patients, and decontaminating patients.


&bull;Train prehospital responders who have been designated in State or local disaster plans to operate in environments
contaminated by a chemical warfare agent in the proper use of PPE in accordance with OSHA guidelines (2). 

&bull;Ensure that, 

at a minimum

, physicians who have been designated in State and local disaster plans to provide medical supervision for prehospital
emergency responders and medical care for victims of a chemical agent release receive specialized training through
continuing education in the emergency response areas specified for prehospital responders. 



6. Patient Triage 



&bull;The basic premise of patient triage, to provide maximum benefit to the greatest number of victims, is of utmost
importance during a mass-casualty event involving chemical agents. 


&bull;Have the most experienced responder conduct triage operations. 

&bull;Base decisions regarding patient triage on local resources, the extent of patient contamination, the type
of chemical warfare agent to which the patient is exposed, the patient's clinical status, and the likelihood of additional
traumatic injuries. 



7. Public Information 



&bull;Inform the public appropriately, accurately, and rapidly about chemical agent exposures that have or may
have occurred. 

&bull;Establish, through the local emergency medical services (EMS) and hospital community, a coordinated public
information policy for chemical emergencies. 

&bull;Contact local and regional news media in advance to establish an accurate and rapid way of disseminating critical
information to the public concerning a chemical agent emergency. 

&bull;Ensure that hospital and EMS personnel coordinate their plans to provide public information with the plans
of those who have overall responsibility for emergency response. 



8. Communication 



Medical personnel must have access to the emergency communication network 24 hours a day. Such a network should link
the chemical agent depot, local and regional EMS, and all potential receiving hospitals. 

&bull;Have medical personnel demonstrate the ability to access the emergency communications network during any
evaluation of preparedness for a chemical warfare release into civilian communities. 

&bull;Ensure that the hospitals' emergency communications system allows hospital personnel to verify rapidly
whether a chemical warfare agent release has occurred. 



9. Transporting Exposed Victims 



&bull;Coordinate the transportation of chemical agent-exposed victims with the overall disaster response plan,
and include a method for tracking transported patients during an emergency response. 

&bull;Transport patients only after they have been properly decontaminated. 
&bull;Transport decontaminated patients to medical facilities (e.g., hospitals, clinics, and urgent care centers).


&bull;Formal agreements such as memorandums of understanding (MOUs) between organizations that transport patients
and the medical facilities that receive them must be part of the planning process. Medical facilities designated
to receive should be capable of evaluating and managing patients exposed to chemical agents as described later in
the hospital section (Section IV) of this document. 

&bull;Base decisions regarding urgent and emergency transfers of decontaminated patients on the capabilities
of the receiving facilities, transportation resources, demand for hospital services, and the clinical condition
of the patients. Certain medical care (e.g., for burns, pediatric emergencies, trauma, or pulmonary complications)
might require prearrangements for patients to be transferred to a tertiary treatment center. CDC recommends that
transfer and evacuation 

plans 

for victims exposed to chemical warfare agents call for land_rather than air_transportation. 



 

