 



Federal share

 of real property, equipment, or supplies means that percentage of the property's acquisition costs and any improvement
expenditures paid with Federal funds.



Funding period

 means the period of time when Federal funding is available for obligation by the recipient.



Intangible property and debt instruments 

means, but is not limited to, trademarks, copyrights, patents and patent applications and such property as loans,
notes and other debt instruments, lease agreements, stock, and other instruments of property ownership, whether
considered tangible or intangible.



Obligations 

means the amounts of orders placed, contracts and grants awarded, services received, and similar transactions during
a given period that require payment by the recipient during the same or a future period.



Outlays or expenditures 

means charges made to the project or program. They may be reported on a cash or accrual basis. For reports prepared on
a cash basis, outlays are the sum of cash disbursements for direct charges for goods and services, the amount of indirect
expense charged, the value of third party in-kind contributions applied, and the amount of cash advances and payments
made to subrecipients. For reports prepared on an accrual basis, outlays are the sum of cash disbursements for direct
charges for goods and services, the amount of indirect expense incurred, the value of in-kind contributions applied,
and the net increase (or decrease) in the amounts owed by the recipient for goods and other property received, for services
performed by employees, contractors, subrecipients and other payees, and other amounts becoming owed under programs
for which no current services or performance are required.



Personal property

 means property of any kind except real property. It may be tangible, having physical existence, or intangible, having
no physical existence, such as copyrights, patents, or securities.



Prior approval 

means written approval by an authorized official evidencing prior consent.



Program income 

means gross income earned by the recipient that is directly generated by a supported activity or earned as a result
of the award (see exclusions in 74.24(e) and (h)). Program income includes, but is not limited to, income from
fees for services performed, the use or rental of real or personal property acquired under federally-funded projects,
the sale of commodities or items fabricated under an award, license fees and royalties on patents and copyrights,
and interest on loans made with award funds. Interest earned on advances of Federal funds is not program income. Except
as otherwise provided in ED regulations or the terms and conditions of the award, program income does not include the
receipt of principal on loans, rebates, credits, discounts, etc., or interest earned on any of them.



Project costs 

means all allowable costs, as established in the applicable Federal cost principles, incurred by a recipient and
the value of the contributions made by third parties in accomplishing the objectives of the award during the project
period.



Project period

 means the period established in the award document during which Federal sponsorship begins and ends.



Property 

means, unless otherwise stated, real property, equipment, intangible property and debt instruments.



Real property 

means land, including land improvements, structures and appurtenances thereto, but excludes movable machinery
and equipment.



Recipient 

means an organization receiving financial assistance directly from ED to carry out a project or program. The term
includes public and private institutions of higher education, public and private hospitals, and other quasi-public
and private non-profit organizations such as, but not limited to, community action agencies, research institutes,
educational associations, and health centers. The term may include commercial organizations, foreign or international
organizations (such as agencies of the United Nations) which are recipients, subrecipients, or contractors or subcontractors
of recipients or subrecipients at the discretion of the Secretary. The term does not include government-owned contractor-operated
facilities or research centers providing continued support for mission-oriented, large-scale programs that are
government-owned or controlled, or are designated as federally-funded research and development centers.




