 

E. Bonfire Test 


1. Performance Requirements 



In the NPRM, NHTSA proposed performance requirements for CNG 
fuel containers to address the need to withstand high 
temperatures and pressures without catastrophic failure. Large 
pressure increases due to exposure to flames could cause the CNG 
to escape catastrophically and result in an explosive fire. The 
agency proposed that the ability to withstand high temperatures 
and pressures be provided by a pressure relief device. More 
specifically, it proposed that compliance would be determined by 
first pressurizing the fuel container to 100 percent of service 
pressure with nitrogen or air and placing it over a bonfire until 
the container's contents are completely vented through a pressure 
relief device. A pressure relief device can prevent a container 
from experiencing high pressure for long periods of time. The 
agency proposed a second test to be conducted in the same manner, 
except the container would be pressurized to 25 percent of the 
service pressure. The second test would evaluate container 
performance when containers are partially filled. The purpose of 
the test is to reduce the explosion potential of CNG containers 
when exposed to high temperatures and pressures. 

The proposed requirements were based on NGV2. However, 
there were two differences between the agency's proposal and 
NGV2. First, under the NPRM, the container would be pressurized 
with nitrogen or air; in NGV2, it is pressurized by CNG. Second, 
under the NPRM, all fuel containers would be required to use a 
pressure relief device to completely vent the container's 
contents; in NGV2, the test is run for 20 minutes or until the 
container is completely vented, whichever comes first. 
Therefore, under NGV2, a manufacturer could establish compliance 
either by a container successfully withstanding the test 
conditions for 20 minutes without bursting or by completely 
venting its contents by means of a pressure relief device at some 
point during that 20 minute period. In the NPRM, the agency 
sought comment about whether to allow an alternative way of 
demonstrating compliance with the bonfire test that did not 
depend upon a pressure relief device. Under the alternative, a 
container would be considered to have passed the test if it did 
not burst during the test period. Compliance with the 
alternative would be achieved by designing a container so that it 
has sufficient strength to enable it to sustain the heat and 
pressure buildup during the test. 

Eleven commenters addressed the issue of whether containers 
should be required to have a pressure relief device. NGVC, EDO, 
ARC, Flxible, Manchester, Thomas, and MSBA agreed with the 
proposal to require containers to be equipped with such a device. 
They stated that a pressure relief device is an integral part of 
a CNG container and that its importance warrants a requirement 
that each container have one. In contrast, Brunswick, Comdyne, 
Pressure Technology, and AAMA stated that containers should not 
be required to have a pressure relief device because such a 
requirement would be design restrictive. Brunswick and Pressure 
Technology stated that the container should be required to 
``safely vent'' its contents without rupturing, whether the venting 
is done through a pressure relief device or the container wall. 
AAMA stated that a container should pass the requirement if it 
possesses enough strength to retain its contents throughout the 
test. ARC believed that the container sidewalls should not be 
permitted to rupture during the bonfire test. 

After reviewing the comments, NHTSA has determined that each 
CNG container must be equipped with a pressure relief device. 
This is necessary because each CNG fuel container needs to 
possess a means of releasing its contents in case the internal 
pressure or temperature reaches a dangerous level. By requiring 
containers to be equipped with a pressure relief device, the 
agency will ensure the safety of individuals, such as vehicle 
occupants and rescue personnel, who would be near a CNG vehicle 
in a fire. The agency notes that the conditions experienced in 
the bonfire test may be less severe than certain real-world crash 
situations. Therefore, the agency is adopting a more 
conservative approach and requiring a pressure relief device for 
all containers. In addition, such a requirement is consistent 
with the practice of most container manufacturers and NGV2 which 
requires such a device on all containers. 

Based on the comments, NHTSA has decided to adopt NGV2's 
test criteria that allows the test to be completed after 20 
minutes or when the container has completely vented, whichever 
comes first. Adopting these criteria alters the test in that 
while still requiring a pressure relief device, a container could 
comply with the bonfire test if it either completely vents its 
contents by means of a pressure relief device at some point 
during that 20 minute period or by successfully retaining the 
container's entire contents without bursting for the duration of 
the bonfire test (i.e., 20 minutes). The agency believes that 
each criterion appropriately measures a container's ability to 
withstand high temperature and pressure because the bonfire test 
represents extreme conditions. The agency emphasizes that in 
either case the CNG container must be equipped with a pressure 
relief device. 

NHTSA disagrees with the approach advocated by AAMA, 
Brunswick and Pressure Technology to allow containers to ``safely 
vent'' their contents from an area other than the pressure relief 
device such as the sidewall. The agency acknowledges that, as an 
alternative to a pressure relief device, pressure relief can be 
accomplished by allowing the overpressurized container to vent 
its contents at a controlled rate, without fragmentation, through 
the container's sidewall. However, there would be significant 
problems with this approach. First, it would not afford as high 
a degree of safety as requiring a pressure relief device. The 
agency continues to believe that the safest way to release CNG 
from an overpressurized container is through a pressure relief 
device because some sidewall ruptures could result in fragments 
being propelled from the container. Second, it would raise 
potential enforceability problems since the concepts of ``release 
its contents at a controlled rate'' and ``rupture without 
fragmentation'' are difficult to define objectively. Based on the 
above considerations, NHTSA has decided to require each CNG fuel 
container to either completely vent its contents through a 
pressure relief device or not burst when tested in accordance 
with the test conditions. 



2. Types of Pressure Relief Devices 



The proposal did not specify the use of a particular type of 
pressure relief device. The agency is aware of three types of 
devices currently being used: (1) The rupture disc, which is 
designed to release CNG in the container when it reaches a 
specific pressure, (2) the fusible plug, which is designed to 
release CNG in the container when it reaches a specific 
temperature, and (3) a device that combines these two devices. 




