 

Several aviculturists commented that the approved list of captive-bred species should include species where captive
breeding of the species is needed to conserve the species. The Service recognizes the contribution that captive breeding
may make to the conservation of some species, but the statute does not instruct the Secretary to list a species on the
approved list of captive-bred species using such criteria. If an ex-situ captive-breeding program is needed for
a species' conservation, wild-caught or captive-bred birds may be imported from approved overseas breeding facilities,
from countries with approved management plans, and for scientific research, zoological breeding, and approved
cooperative breeding programs under WBCA permits available from the Service. The Service notes that cooperative
breeding programs encourage such conservation efforts.

Several aviculturists commented that the approved list of captive-bred species would cause a loss of genetic diversity
in captive populations of birds in the U.S. and restrict access to new bloodlines for a species' conservation. The
Service disagrees and notes that birds which are not on the approved list of captive-bred species may still be imported
into the U.S. under the WBCA in several other ways: from approved overseas breeding facilities, from countries with
approved management plans, and for scientific research, zoological breeding, and approved cooperative breeding
programs. Congress included the exemptions for zoological breeding and cooperative breeding programs for just
this purpose. The Service notes that it is not the intent of approval of captive-bred species to enhance conservation
of a species, but rather to facilitate imports of specimens that in no way impact wild populations.

Numerous aviculturists (including 2318 represented by form letters), a representative of the pet industry, avicultural
groups, and several importers commented that any species that is regularly captive-bred, and that is prohibited
from export for the pet trade by its country of origin, should be listed on the approved list of captive-bred species
(regardless of enforcement concerns). For example, they recommend that all species which are regularly bred in captivity
and are indigenous solely to Australia, a country from which there is no legal avian trade in wild-caught birds, should
be listed on the approved list of captive-bred species. The Service disagrees. There remain problems in adequate
regulatory and enforcement mechanisms in many countries of origin for species which are subject to illegal trade.
Adoption of this recommendation would lead to the logically absurd conclusion to list all indigenous parrots of Mexico
on the approved list of captive-bred species because Mexico bans their export. Since there exists a flourishing domestic
trade in wild-caught parrots in Mexico and their subsequent illegal export to the U.S., such inclusion on the approved
list would undermine species conservation, as well as Mexico's enforcement efforts. We cannot adopt this recommendation,
which is counter to the purpose of the statute and the intent of Congress.



