 

With the publication of the final rule of November 16, 1993, imports of all CITES-listed birds (as defined in the final
rule) are prohibited, except for species included in an approved list, or for which an import permit has been issued.
The approved list, which will include species (by country) and/or specific captive-breeding facilities, is proposed
herein. The Service also has the emergency authority to suspend imports of any CITES-listed bird species at any time
based on a series of criteria. 
This notice of proposed rulemaking proposes regulations called for in the WBCA that will accomplish the following:
(1) For wild-caught CITES-listed birds to be on an approved list, the Service must determine that: CITES is being effectively
implemented for the species for each country of origin from which imports will be allowed; CITES-recommended measures
are implemented; there is a scientifically based management plan for the species that provides for the conservation
of the species and its habitat, includes incentives for conservation, ensures that the use of the species is biologically
sustainable and maintained throughout its range at a level consistent with its role in its ecosystem, and addresses
factors that include illegal trade, domestic trade, subsistence use, disease, and habitat loss; and that the methods
of capture, transport, and maintenance of the species minimize the risk of injury or damage to health. 
(2) For captive-bred birds to be imported from other countries, in order to be listed in an approved list, the Service
is required to determine either that the species is regularly bred in captivity and no wild-caught birds of the species
are in trade, or that the species is bred in a qualifying facility. 
The Service is also required to review trade in all non-CITES avian species, and establish a moratorium on the import
of any species, by country of origin, if any of a series of findings cannot be made. The procedures for such findings
will be proposed in a future notice of proposed rulemaking. 


Section-by-Section Analysis 


In the 

Federal Register

 notice of November 16, 1993, the Service included the regulations implementing the WBCA in 50 CFR part 15, subparts
AF. This proposed rulemaking proposes text for subparts D and E only, along with additional definitions for
subpart A. A future notice of proposed rulemaking will propose regulations for subpart F. 


Subpart D_Approved List of Species Listed in the Appendices to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 


Section 15.31Criteria for Including Species in the Approved List for Captive-Bred Species 


Pursuant to Section 106 of the WBCA, the Secretary is required to publish a list of species of exotic birds that are listed
in an appendix to the Convention and that are not subject to a prohibition or suspension of importation otherwise applicable
under the WBCA. In order to list a species as exclusively captive-bred, the Service is required to determine that the
species is regularly bred in captivity and no wild-caught birds of the species are in trade, legally or illegally.
These captive-bred species can be imported into the United States without meeting any additional requirements of
the Wild Bird Conservation Act or this part 15; however, all of the existing requirements in parts 13 and 14, part 17
(species listed as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act (ESA)), part 21 (Migratory Bird Treaty
Act) and part 23 (species listed in the Appendices to the Convention, or CITES) must still be complied with. 
This section establishes the criteria for the approval of the importation of captive-bred species. In the House of
Representatives Committee Report for the WBCA, the Secretary was instructed ``to use the standards adopted by the
State of New York with respect to importation of captive-bred species, and include such species on the approved list
under this section, as long as the Secretary believes that trade based on these standards will not result in harm to
species in the wild.'' These standards direct the Secretary to include species of exotic birds in the approved list
if the species is regularly bred in captivity and none are taken from the wild for the trade. In order to comply with such
standards, the Service proposes the following criteria for the approval of the importation of foreign captive-bred
species: (a) All specimens of the species known to be in trade (legal or illegal) must be captive-bred; (b) No specimens
of the species can be known to be removed from the wild for the pet bird market; (c) Any importation of specimens of the
species must not be detrimental to the survival of the species in the wild; and (d) Adequate enforcement controls must
be in place in countries of export to ensure compliance with the aforementioned paragraphs. 
If a species is bred in captivity in large numbers, but individual birds of that species are frequently, sometimes,
or even rarely taken from the wild, or if there are enforcement concerns that illegal trade occurs in the species, that
species cannot be included as a captive-bred species. Thus, that species would not be approved as a captive-bred species.
However, individual captive-bred birds may still be imported into the United States under one of the following conditions:
(1) The foreign breeding facility could be approved pursuant to subpart E of this part 15; or (2) a permit for an individual
import could be obtained pursuant to subpart C, if the requirements of that subpart are met. 


