 




<CFRNO>40 CFR Part 185</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[OPP260053B; FRL48969]</RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN 2070AB78</RINDOCK>


Benomyl, Trifluralin, Mancozeb, and Phosmet; Revocation of Certain Food Additive Regulations 




<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule; Denial of Stay Petitions.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 EPA is responding to objections and hearing and stay requests filed in response to a final rule revoking certain food
additive regulations (tolerances) under section 409 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. EPA is denying the
objections and hearing and stay requests on the following section 409 tolerances: (1) Benomyl_raisins and processed
tomato products; (2) trifluralin_peppermint and spearmint oil; (3) mancozeb_bran of wheat; and (4) phosmet_cottonseed
oil. The denial of the objections and hearing and stay requests effect the removal of corresponding sections from
the Code of Federal Regulations. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

This regulation is effective June 30, 1994. The portion of this rule denying the objections and hearing requests will
be effective September 28, 1994. The denial of the petitions to stay the revocation of the food additive regulations
is effective June 30, 1994. For purposes of judicial review, this rule shall be entered 1 p.m. eastern daylight time
on July 14, 1994. 



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 By mail: Niloufar Nazmi or Lisa Engstrom, Special Review and Reregistration Division (7508W), Environmental Protection
Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460. Office location and telephone number: Crystal Station #1, 2800 Crystal
Drive, Arlington, VA. Telephone: (703)-308-8010. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 This Order is one in a series of orders issued in response to a petition filed with EPA in 1989 seeking the revocation
of 14 tolerances as violative of the Delaney anti-cancer clause in section 409(c) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act (FFDCA), 21 U.S.C. 348(c). In its first Order on the petition issued in 1990, 55 FR 17560 (April 25, 1990), EPA refused
to revoke several of the tolerances on the ground that even though the pesticides involved were animal carcinogens,
the Delaney clause contains an exception for 

de minimis

 risks. Following EPA's affirmance of that Order after an administrative appeal (56 FR 7750, Feb. 25, 1991), EPA's
decision was set aside by a court in 1992 based on the court's finding that the Delaney clause was not subject to an exception
for 

de minimis

 cancer risks. 

Les v. Reilly

, 968 F.2d 985 (9th Cir. 1992), 

cert. denied

, 113 S. Ct. 1361 (1993). Then in 1993, EPA issued a revised Order consistent with the court's holding, stating that
the pesticides are animal carcinogens but this time revoking the tolerances as inconsistent with the Delaney clause
(58 FR 37862, July 14, 1993). Manufacturers of the subject pesticides and a trade association filed objections to
the revised Order, as well as requests for hearings on, and stays of, the revocation Order. This final Order addresses
those objections and requests for hearings and stays.


In summary, most of the objections submitted address the issue of whether the subject pesticides ``induce cancer''
within the meaning of the Delaney clause. However, EPA concludes herein that this issue was resolved in an earlier
Order and the objectors are precluded from raising issues already finally decided. EPA finds that the objectors do
not make an adequate case for reopening that issue. Therefore, objections and requests for hearings focused on whether
the subject pesticides induce cancer are denied by this Order. Other objections and a request for a hearing on an issue
other than whether the pesticides induce cancer are also denied. In sum, this Order denies the objections and hearing
and stay requests pertaining to revocation of the following section 409 tolerances: (1) Benomyl_raisins and processed
tomato products (40 CFR 185.350); (2) trifluralin_peppermint and spearmint oil (40 CFR 185.5900); (3) mancozeb_bran
of wheat (40 CFR 185.6300); and (4) phosmet_ cottonseed oil (40 CFR 185.3950). 
The July 14, 1993 final rule (58 FR 37862) is withdrawn as to the section 409 tolerance for mancozeb on raisins because
EPA has published another final rule elsewhere in this issue of the 

Federal Register

 revoking that tolerance on other grounds. Persons adversely affected by that Order may file objections with EPA within
the period provided by that Order.


I. Statutory Background


The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), 21 U.S.C. 301 et seq., authorizes the establishment by regulation
of maximum permissible levels of pesticides in foods. Such regulations are commonly referred to as ``tolerances.''
Without such a tolerance or an exemption from the requirement of a tolerance, a food containing a pesticide residue
is ``adulterated'' under section 402 of the FFDCA and may not be legally moved in interstate commerce. 21 U.S.C. 331,
342. EPA was authorized to establish pesticide tolerances under Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1970. 5 U.S.C. App. at
1343 (1988). Monitoring and enforcement of pesticide tolerances are carried out by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) and the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).
The FFDCA has separate provisions for tolerances for pesticide residues on raw agricultural commodities (RACs)
and tolerances on processed food. For pesticide residues in or on RACs, EPA establishes tolerances, or exemptions
from tolerances when appropriate, under section 408. 21 U.S.C. 346a. EPA regulates pesticide residues in processed
foods under section 409, which pertains to ``food additives.'' 21 U.S.C. 348. Maximum residue regulations established
under section 409 are commonly referred to as food additive tolerances or food additive regulations. Section 409
food additive regulations are needed, however, only for certain pesticide residues in processed food. Under section
402(a)(2) of the FFDCA, a pesticide residue in processed food generally will not render the food adulterated if the
residue results from application of the pesticide to a RAC and the residue in the processed food when ready to eat is
below the RAC tolerance. This exemption in section 402(a)(2) is commonly referred to as the ``flow-through'' provision
because it allows the section 408 raw food tolerance to flow through to the processed food form. Thus, a section 409
food additive regulation is only necessary to prevent foods from being deemed adulterated when the concentration
of the pesticide residue in a processed food when ready-to-eat is greater than the tolerance prescribed for the RAC,
or if the processed food itself is treated or comes in contact with a pesticide.
Prior to establishing a food additive regulation under section 409, EPA must determine that the ``proposed use of
the food additive [pesticide], under the conditions of use to be specified in the regulation, will be safe.'' 21 U.S.C.
348(c)(3). Section 409 specifically addresses the safety of carcinogenic substances in the so-called Delaney clause,
which provides that ``no additive shall be deemed safe if it has been found to induce cancer when ingested by man or animal
or if it is found, after tests which are appropriate for the evaluation of the safety of food additives, to induce cancer
in man or animal * * * .'' 

Id

.
Section 409 food additive regulations may be established or revoked by EPA by order in response to petitions from any
person. 21 U.S.C. 348(b). Adversely affected parties may object to an order issued in response to a petition and such
parties may seek an administrative hearing on the order. 21 U.S.C. 348(f). Only an order responding to objections
is subject to judicial review. 21 U.S.C. 348(g).


II. Regulatory Background


This proceeding was initiated on May 25, 1989, by a petition filed by the State of California, the Natural Resources
Defense Council, Public Citizen, the AFL-CIO, and several individuals (the ``California petition'') requesting
that EPA revoke 14 food additive regulations for the pesticides trifluralin (in spearmint and peppermint oil), 40
CFR 185.5900; benomyl (in raisins and tomato products), 40 CFR 185.350; phosmet (in cottonseed oil), 40 CFR 185.3950;
mancozeb (in raisins and bran of barley, oats, rye, and wheat), 40 CFR 185.6300; dicofol (in dried tea), 40 CFR 185.410;
DDVP (in packaged and bagged nonperishable processed foods and dried figs), 40 CFR 185.1900; and chlordimeform (in
dried prunes), 40 CFR 185.750. Petitioners argued that these food additive regulations should be revoked because
the seven pesticides to which the regulations applied were animal carcinogens and thus the regulations violated
the Delaney anticancer clause in section 409 of the FFDCA. 54 FR 27700 (June 30, 1989).

In the 

Federal Register

 of June 30, 1989 (54 FR 27700), EPA issued the California petition in its entirety in the 

Federal Register

 and sought comments on the action proposed by the petitioners. EPA received numerous comments on the petitioners'
proposal, including several comments addressing the petitioners' conclusion that EPA had found that the referenced
pesticides induced cancer within the meaning of the Delaney clause.

EPA issued an Order responding to the petition on April 25, 1990 (``April 1990 Order''). 55 FR 17560 (April 25, 1990).
EPA agreed with the petitioners that it had found that the seven pesticides were ``animal carcinogens'' within the
meaning of the Delaney clause, 55 FR 17566, and rejected comments to the contrary by several commenters. 55 FR 17570,
17572-73. As required by section 409, the Order provided adversely affected parties the right to file objections
and requests for hearings. EPA noted that ``[i]f objections and requests for hearings are 


submitted, * * * the issues of whether the chemicals listed by the petition induce cancer * * * could be potential factual
matters for resolution at an administrative hearing.'' 55 FR 17570.



Although EPA agreed with the petitioners that all of the referenced pesticides induce cancer within the meaning of
the Delaney clause, EPA refused to revoke most of the challenged food additive regulations based on the determination
either that: (1) that the residues allowed by the food additive regulation pose a 

de minimis

 cancer risk; (2) there was insufficient information to determine whether the residues allowed by the food additive
regulation pose a 

de minimis

 cancer risk, and EPA believed that data to be submitted in the future would show that the cancer risk is 

de minimis

; or (3) action under FFDCA was appropriately withheld pending completion of an ongoing FIFRA proceeding addressing
similar cancer risk issues. EPA also announced that it had already revoked the chlordimeform food additive regulation
for dried prunes on October 25, 1989, 54 FR 43424, and agreed to revoke the food additive regulation for residues of
DDVP on dried figs, 55 FR 17567. EPA revoked the food additive regulation for DDVP on dried figs on June 26, 1991, 56 FR
29182.

On May 22, 1990, the original submitters of the California petition filed objections to EPA's response to their petition.
The petitioners' central objection was that EPA had incorrectly interpreted section 409 by reading a 

de minimis

 exception into the Delaney clause. Petitioners also contended that ongoing review of a pesticide under the FIFRA
did not provide grounds for refusing to rule on their petition. EPA received no other objections, and no party requested
a hearing on any matter, including whether any of the pesticides involved induce cancer.

In the 

Federal Register

 of February 25, 1991 (56 FR 7750), EPA responded to the petitioners' objections by issuing an Order (1) denying the
petition to revoke the trifluralin, benomyl, mancozeb, and phosmet food additive regulations; and (2) stating that
revocations for the DDVP and dicofol regulations would be forthcoming. (``February 1991 Order''). EPA denied the
request to revoke the trifluralin and benomyl regulations because, although it had found the pesticides to ``induce
cancer,'' it further concluded that the residues allowed by the food additive regulations pose a 

de minimis

 cancer risk. EPA denied the request to revoke the mancozeb regulations because the cancer risk was being addressed
in a parallel proceeding under FIFRA. Finally, EPA denied the request to revoke the phosmet regulation because EPA's
cancer finding on phosmet was only ``tentative.''

The original petitioners sought judicial review of EPA's ruling on their objections concerning the benomyl, trifluralin,
mancozeb, and phosmet food additive regulations. On July 8, 1992, the United States Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit,
set aside EPA's Order. 

Les v. Reilly

, 968 F.2d 985 (9th Cir. 1992), 

cert denied

, 113 S. Ct. 1361 (1993). Determinative to the court was that EPA had found that the subject pesticides induce cancer
within the meaning of the Delaney clause. The court dismissed EPA's various arguments on why food additive regulations
for pesticides which are animal carcinogens could be maintained. Specifically, as to benomyl and trifluralin, the
court held that the Delaney clause prohibited the establishment of food additive regulations for pesticides which
induce cancer no matter how infinitesimal the human cancer risk. For mancozeb and phosmet, the court held that the
ongoing FIFRA cancellation action concerning mancozeb and the EPA reevaluation of 2carcinogenicity data on phosmet
did not overcome the induce cancer findings. 968 F.2d at 990 n.3. The Supreme Court declined to review the decision
on February 22, 1993. 

Les v. Reilly

, 968 F.2d 985 (9th Cir. 1992), 

cert. denied

, 113 S. Ct. 1361 (1993).

Subsequent to the Supreme Court's action, but prior to EPA's issuance of a revised Order responding to the California
petition, DuPont Agricultural Products (``DuPont''), the producer of benomyl, the Mancozeb Task Force (comprising
DuPont, Elf Atochem North America, Inc., and Rohm and Haas Co.), and the National Agricultural Chemicals Association
(NACA), each contacted EPA requesting that EPA respond to the 

Les v. Reilly

 decision procedurally by issuing a proposed order responding to the California petition. They argued that the induce
cancer issue, among others, was not ``adequately explored or raised for comment.'' (Ref. 1 ). DuPont and NACA specifically
claimed that the ``proponents of the maintenance of the section 409 regulations were never `adversely affected'
by an EPA position [in the April 1990 Order], because no change was ever made or proposed to the existing food additive
regulations.'' (Ref. 2).

DuPont, the Mancozeb Task Force, and DowElanco also took several actions related to the challenged food additive
regulations in this time period. DuPont petitioned EPA to revoke the food additive regulations for benomyl on processed
tomato products and raisins (58 FR 29318, May 19, 1993; 58 FR 63575, Dec. 2, 1993). DuPont contended that the food additive
regulation on tomato products was not necessary because benomyl did not concentrate during the processing of tomatoes.
DuPont sought the revocation of the raisin food additive regulation on the ground that raisins should be classified
as a ``raw agricultural commodity,'' and thus this regulation should be repromulgated under section 408. The Mancozeb
Task Force petitioned EPA for the revocation of the mancozeb food additive regulations on bran of wheat and raisins
on the grounds that those tolerance regulations were unnecessary based on lack of concentration during processing
(58 FR 29318, May 19, 1993). Finally, DowElanco requested that EPA cancel DowElanco's registration under FIFRA for
the use of trifluralin on peppermint and spearmint (57 FR 7752, March 4, 1992).


III. The Order in Dispute


On July 14, 1993, EPA issued a revised Order responding to the California petition in light of the decision in 

Les v. Reilly

 (58 FR 37862, ``July 1993 Order''). In that Order, EPA stated that the four pesticides in question, benomyl, trifluralin,
mancozeb, and phosmet, induce cancer within the meaning of the Delaney clause, and, based on the Ninth Circuit's interpretation
of the Delaney clause, EPA ordered that the challenged regulations for these pesticides be revoked. As provided in
section 409, any person adversely affected was given 30 days to file written objections to the Order and a written request
for an evidentiary hearing on the objections. Adversely affected parties were also given 30 days to file a petition
for a stay of the effective date of the Order (58 FR 37865). EPA set an effective date of August 30, 1993, for the revocations.


Id

. EPA announced that, if it received a request for a stay of the effective date for a particular regulation, it would
stay the effective date as to that regulation for such time as would be necessary to review and respond to the stay petition.


Id

.


IV. Stay Petitions



A. Stay Petitions Filed With EPA


EPA received stay petitions from DuPont, DowElanco, the Mancozeb Task Force, and NACA covering each of the regulations
revoked by the July 1993 Order. Because EPA determined that the stay requests were properly filed, on September 16,
1993, it issued an Order (``the September Stay Order'') staying the revocations announced in the July 1993 Order for
such time as would be necessary to review the stay requests. 58 FR 48456. In the September Stay Order, EPA announced
that it would accept comments on the stay requests for fifteen days from publication of the stay. EPA received within
the comment period one comment from Gowan Inc. addressing the request for stay of the revocation of the phosmet food
additive regulation submitted by NACA. NRDC submitted comments outside the comment period. In the September Stay
Order, EPA also announced that it would publish in the 

Federal Register

 its determination on each stay request, and, if denying a particular stay request, that the revocation of the affected
regulation would become effective upon publication of EPA's determination.



B. EPA Response To Petitions To Stay


This Order announces EPA's denial of each of the petitions to stay the referenced food additive regulations. EPA's
consideration of whether to grant the requested stays for the pendency of the administrative proceedings has been
rendered moot by the fact that elsewhere in this Order EPA has denied each of the objections filed to the July 1993 Order,
as well as the hearing requests. As a result of EPA's denial of the requests to stay the revocations of the food additive
regulations for benomyl, mancozeb, trifluralin, and phosmet, the July 1993 Order becomes effective June 30, 1994.

Gowan Co. and NRDC filed comments in response to the petitions to stay the revocations announced in the July 1993 Order.
Gowan Co., the manufacturer of phosmet, submitted comments in support of a stay arguing that phosmet was wrongly classified
as an animal carcinogen. If Gowan Co. had substantive objections to EPA's Order, it should have filed a timely objection.
Gowan Co. cannot surmount the 30-day deadline for filing objections by couching its objections as a ``comment'' on
a stay request. NRDC commented that the stay should be denied citing the length of these proceedings and arguing that
the objectors submitted no new evidence justifying further delay of the effective date of these revocations.



V. Summary of Objections and Hearing Requests


EPA received objections from NACA, DuPont, DowElanco, and the Mancozeb Task Force. NACA submitted objections to
the revocation of each of the food additive regulations affected by the July 1993 Order. NACA asserted that the pesticides
involved did not induce cancer and that EPA's July 1993 Order was procedurally defective. EPA also received separate
objections on the revocations of the food additive regulations for benomyl (DuPont), mancozeb (DuPont and the Mancozeb
Task Force), and trifluralin (DowElanco). DuPont objected to the July 1993 Order arguing that (1) benomyl does not
induce cancer; (2) the benomyl and mancozeb tolerances should be revoked on other grounds; and (3) the July 1993 Order
was procedurally defective. DowElanco claimed that trifluralin does not induce cancer and that the July 1993 Order
was procedurally defective. The Mancozeb Task Force asserted that (1) the July 1993 Order was procedurally defective;
(2) EPA had failed to promulgate criteria for making an induce cancer finding; and (3) the mancozeb tolerances should
be revoked on other grounds.

In addition, DuPont filed a request for a hearing on whether benomyl induces cancer and on whether the benomyl regulations
should be revoked on other grounds, and DowElanco filed a request for a hearing on whether trifluralin induces cancer.


VI. EPA Response to Hearing Requests and Objections


Most of the objections submitted challenge EPA's finding that the subject pesticides ``induce cancer'' within the
meaning of the Delaney clause. However, EPA believes that the issue of whether the named pesticides induce cancer
is closed, and the objectors have not raised new evidence justifying a reopening of that issue. Therefore, EPA is denying
the objections and requests for hearings relying upon the induce cancer issue. All other objections and the remaining
hearing request are addressed and denied on other grounds.

In part VI.A. of this preamble below, EPA explains why the objectors are precluded from raising the induce cancer issue.
In part VI.B., EPA addresses the remaining objections and hearing request and explains its grounds for denying each.



A. The Induce Cancer Determination


Under the doctrines of res judicata, collateral estoppel, and law of the case, issues finally resolved may not be resurrected
absent manifest injustice. These doctrines are as important in the administrative context as in the judicial. In
the interest of administrative efficiency and economy, final determinations in administrative proceedings deserve
to be treated with finality. Based on the procedural requirements of FFDCA section 409 and the specific facts involved
in this proceeding, EPA believes that the issue of whether the named pesticides induce cancer under the Delaney clause
was laid to rest once the objectors failed to file objections to EPA's April 1990 Order finding that the named pesticides
induce cancer. As a result, under these doctrines, the objectors may not now rely on that issue to support a challenge
to EPA's July 1993 Order. The following sections discuss EPA's reasoning.

1. 

The Finality of FFDCA Section 409(c) Orders

. The doctrines of res judicata, collateral estoppel, and law of the case share a common theme, finality of decisions
in the interest of efficiency and economy. Generally, these doctrines preclude a party from resurrecting issues
that were finally decided in the same or a prior case. Depending on the circumstances, any of the three doctrines may
be invoked to preclude a party from raising an issue in an administrative setting that had been finally decided in another
or related administrative or judicial proceeding. (Ref. 3 ). Furthermore, application of any of the three doctrines
is especially appropriate in an administrative setting when the organic statute in question is specifically designed
to ensure finality of certain issues. The FFDCA is such a statute.

Under section 409 of the FFDCA, any person may file a petition for the establishment, amendment, or revocation of a
food additive regulation. 21 U.S.C. 348(b) and (h). EPA must publish a summary of the petition within 30 days of its
filing. 21 U.S.C. 348(b)(5). By order issued pursuant to section 409(c) of the FFDCA, the Administrator may either
grant or deny, in whole or in part, that petition. A section 409(c) order is effective upon publication unless EPA,
in its discretion, determines that a stay of the order is appropriate. 21 U.S.C. 348(e). In addition, any person adversely
affected by a decision issued pursuant to section 409(c) of the FFDCA may file objections, specifying the reasons
for the objections, and request an administrative hearing on the objections. 21 U.S.C. 348(f). Section 409(f) requires
the Administrator to issue an order responding to the issues raised by any objections and, if a hearing is held, such
order must be based upon a fair evaluation of the entire record at the hearing. Only challenges to a section 409(f) order
are judicially reviewable. 21 U.S.C. 348(f). (Ref.4).
This procedural framework is designed to further optimal public participation while ensuring finality of issues
that remain unopposed either at the administrative or appellate level. In sum, the FFDCA permits persons adversely
affected by a section 409(c) order to challenge that order, first at the administrative level, and then at the appellate
level. Persons adversely affected by a section 409(c) order may challenge that order through the submission of objections
and requests for a hearing. Section 409(c) orders that are not challenged by persons adversely affected by such orders
are final. 

Id

. Likewise, the FFDCA permits persons adversely affected by a section 409(f) order that responds to objections and
to requests for a hearing to challenge the Agency's findings in an appellate court. Again, if such orders are not challenged
at this stage by persons adversely affected by such orders, they are final and no longer reviewable. 

Id

. As noted by the court in 

Nader v. EPA

, 




[i]n the FFDCA, Congress constructed an elaborate yet consistent administrative design for the proposal, consideration,
promulgation and review of regulations. The Act provides a number of well defined avenues for participation by members
of the public and review by appellate courts. These provisions permit the maximum citizen input consistent with the
Agency's need for consistency and finality.




(Ref. 5). Failure, by a person adversely affected by an Agency determination, to follow the procedures prescribed
by the FFDCA must necessarily result in determinations that are final and no longer reviewable. (Ref. 6).


Under the doctrines of res judicata, collateral estoppel, and law of the case, objectors may not resurrect final decisions
necessary or essential to an ultimate decision and on which objectors had the opportunity to be heard. (Ref. 7). EPA
believes that it is appropriate to apply these doctrines in proceedings it administers under the FFDCA. Parts 2, 3,
and 4 describe the final Order EPA issued making an ``induce cancer'' finding on all the subject pesticides, the adverse
effect experienced by the objectors, and why precluding the objectors from raising that issue now is appropriate
in this proceeding.

2. 

EPA's April 1990 Order Under FFDCA Section 409(c)

. On April 25, 1990, EPA issued a final Order (April 1990 Order) subject to objections and requests for a hearing in response
to petitioners' request to revoke the 14 food additive regulations. In that Order, EPA concluded that the subject
pesticides induce cancer within the meaning of the Delaney clause. EPA stated that it agreed with the petitioners
``that the pesticides named in the petition are animal carcinogens * * * .'' 55 FR 17566. EPA also responded to comments
submitted on the petitioners' proposal from the National Food Processors Association (NFPA), 55 FR 17570, NACA,
55 FR 17570, 17571, Rohm and Haas, 55 FR 17572, and Industria Prodotti Chimici, 55 FR 17573, arguing that the named pesticides
do 

not

 induce cancer. In each case, EPA confirmed that the named pesticides induce cancer and provided a summary of the data
supporting each finding.

For example, in the April 1990 Order, EPA summarized the NFPA comments on the California petition as follows:




First, NFPA claims that EPA has not determined that any of the seven pesticides listed by the petition ``induce cancer''
within the meaning of the Delaney Clause. According to NFPA, an ``induce cancer'' finding under section 409 must be
supported by sufficient evidence of animal or human carcinogenicity; in the view of the commenter, limited evidence
of animal carcinogenicity is not necessarily sufficient to support such a finding. Moreover, NFPA contends that
the characterization of pesticides as probable or possible carcinogens does not constitute a finding under the Delaney
Clause. To determine whether any of the seven pesticides ``induce cancer'' within the meaning of the Delaney Clause
would, in the view of NFPA, involve complex and disputed factual issues that cannot be appropriately resolved in the
context of the petition. (55 FR 17570)




In its response, EPA explicitly disagreed with NFPA's conclusions that the induce cancer determinations had not
been made for the pesticides and that the evidence did not support such a finding. Further, EPA specifically responded
to NFPA's comment regarding resolution ``in the context of the petition,'' by inviting objections to its findings.
EPA stated,





EPA has taken a different position than that espoused by NFPA on the carcinogenicity of the chemicals named in the petition.
As discussed [in the chemical by chemical review of the cancer data], the available data provide at least limited evidence
that the seven pesticides induce cancer in test animals. This conclusion was reached by a weight-of-the-evidence
approach in evaluating the potential carcinogenicity of a chemical which takes into account all available data for
the chemical (see Unit II of this notice).
If objections and request for hearing are submitted, the Administrator will determine whether there are factual
issues appropriate for resolution at an evidentiary hearing. The issues of whether the chemicals listed by the petition
induce cancer and whether the risks attributable to the uses identified in the petition are 

de minimis

 could be potential factual matters for resolution at an administrative hearing. 

Id

.




(The phrase ``limited evidence'' in the quote above is a term of art under EPA's Cancer Assessment Guidelines (51 FR
33992, Sept. 24, 1986) specifying the quantum of evidence necessary to find a substance to be a ``possible human carcinogen.'')


EPA's response to each of the other commenters was similar. Thus, EPA left no room for doubt in its response to the commenters
that it agreed with the petitioners' conclusion that the pesticides named by the petition induce cancer.

To support the claim that EPA did not find that the pesticides named in the California petition induce cancer within
the meaning of the Delaney clause, the objectors cite an EPA policy statement on emergency exemptions under FIFRA
and a 1993 EPA press release. The policy statement noted that ``EPA has not made formal induce cancer determinations
on many pesticides.'' (Ref. 8). This statement is in no way inconsistent with EPA having made an induce cancer finding
on a few pesticides_the pesticides in the April 1990 Order. The press release, dated February 5, 1993, listed dozens
of pesticides, including the pesticides here involved, that are potentially affected by the Delaney clause. It stated
that EPA had not made an induce cancer finding for the listed pesticides. (Ref. 9). Thus, petitioners are correct in
pointing out an inconsistency between the press release and the April 1990 Order. However, EPA would note that press
releases are informal documents which do not have the status of an FFDCA Order or a policy statement. Moreover, press
releases cannot amend an FFDCA Order.

3. 

The Adversely Affected Party Requirement.

 As discussed above, the FFDCA is specifically designed to ensure finality of decisions that remain unchallenged
as to all persons that were adversely affected by those decisions. Earlier in these proceedings, EPA issued a decision
stating that the subject pesticides induce cancer. If the objectors were adversely affected by that decision, the
decision should be accorded finality and preclusive effect.

The following sections address why EPA believes the objectors were adversely affected by EPA's 1990 determination
that the named pesticides induce cancer.

a. 

The Adversely Affected Standard.

 The phrase ``adversely affected'' is a fairly common statutory phrase used to describe, in general, the standing
of persons to challenge agency decisions. That phrase is used in a number of FFDCA provisions as well as in many other
statutes, including the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). In the preamble to the procedural rule for FFDCA actions,
40 CFR parts 177, 178, and 179, EPA states that the adversely affected standard should be interpreted broadly and not
limited to ``narrow categories of persons.'' 55 FR 50285 (Dec. 5, 1990). This interpretation is in accordance with
the interpretation adopted by the Supreme Court in construing the same standard under the APA and by FDA in its implementation
of the FFDCA. According to the Supreme Court, the APA adversely affected standard ``is not meant to be especially demanding.''
(Ref. 10) In addition, as early as 1979, FDA adopted procedural regulations defining the adversely affected standard
used in the FFDCA. That definition states that adversely affected persons ``include any interested person.'' 21
CFR 10.3; 44 FR 22318, 22319 (April 13, 1979). FDA agreed that the result of its interpretation was to make the phrase
``adversely affected'' in its regulation ``superfluous.'' 

Id

. That interpretation of the adversely affected standard continues in FDA's regulations today.

b. 

Were The Objectors Adversely Affected By The April 1990 Order

? In their filings on the July 1993 Order, the objectors argue that they are injured by the stigma attached to an induce-cancer
finding. They claim that this stigma causes them not merely an adverse effect, but irreparable harm. Moreover, the
objectors do not limit this impact to the uses that are the subject of the revocation Order; rather, they extend this
impact to all uses of the affected pesticide and, in fact, to all products manufactured by their companies. By their
own admission, thus, the objectors have identified themselves as persons adversely affected by the induce-cancer
finding announced in the April 1990 Order.
For example, in its filings, DuPont argues that as a result of EPA's revocation of the benomyl food additive regulations,
``the use of benomyl on tomatoes and other crops could be dramatically curtailed because of the `taint' of the Delaney
Clause.'' (Ref. 11). DuPont states that




[b]eyond the significant loss in sales to DuPont, this revocation could create long-term irreparable harm to DuPont
because of the stigma attached to the unfounded allegation that benomyl ``induces cancer.'' This stigma not only
has the potential to cause ill-will against DuPont by customers and consumers, but also will adversely affect the
ability of DuPont to offer fungicide products to meet the needs of growers, thereby creating further ill-will for
the company. Customers who abandon DuPont products as a result of the adverse publicity caused by the ``induce cancer''
finding made by this Order will not likely return to using DuPont products. (Ref. 12).




DowElanco admits that the revocation action itself would have no impact. DowElanco asserts that




[s]ince DowElanco and the other U.S. registrants of trifluralin have each independently requested the voluntary
cancellation of the use of trifluralin on peppermint and spearmint, this tolerance revocation action will not directly
effect (sic) the use of trifluralin on peppermint and spearmint in this country. (Ref. 13). 





However, DowElanco argues that it is adversely affected by the stigma attached to EPA's induce cancer finding. According
to DowElanco:




the Agency's so-called ``induce cancer'' finding for trifluralin puts this chemical in the same league with the very
small number of chemicals found by FDA to ``induce cancer'' within the meaning of the Delaney Clause, and constitutes
a direct attack by EPA on the safety of trifluralin in the eyes of growers, processors, and consumers, and on the credibility
of DowElanco in selling and distributing a product which allegedly ``induces cancer.'' * * * DowElanco will not only
directly experience lost sales of trifluralin as a result of the adverse publicity caused by the ``induce cancer''
finding made by this Order, but will also be subject to a ``taint'' which will likely adversely effect its reputation
and entire business. (Ref. 14).



The Mancozeb Task Force makes similar admissions. The Task Force claims that EPA's induce cancer finding 




will irreparably injure the Task Force members. Such a finding will taint the pesticide, and in all probability will
lead to substantial reduction in mancozeb's use by growers, both for those commodities involved in this proceeding
as well as for other registered uses. (Ref. 15).




They advise that




[t]he Agency must recognize that determining that a pesticide ``induces cancer'' within the meaning of the Delaney
clause has significant adverse consequences for registrants, both in the regulatory context and the marketplace.
(Ref. 16).




Finally, NACA's submission is in the same vein. According to NACA:




NACA and its members have built an enviable reputation of reliably providing to its customers and the public safe and
efficacious crop protection products. They have devoted significant time, money, and effort to building the very
reputation which EPA's unfounded action will irreparably damage by suggesting that NACA's members sell products
which ``induce cancer.'' The crop protection industry's credibility with its customers and NACA's effectiveness
in the public debate on food safety legislation and regulation will be hurt.
* * * Incorrectly designating these pesticides as carcinogens will cast doubt and suspicion on NACA and the entire
pesticide industry such that complete recovery_when the original determination is eventually reversed_will be
unlikely. (Ref. 17).




In sum, based on these statements provided by the objectors, it is clear that all the objectors believe that a finding
that a pesticide induces cancer, in and of itself, has an irreparable and adverse effect. EPA believes that the objectors
have overstated the size of the impact from the induce cancer finding. EPA has regulated each of these pesticides for
years based on EPA's published conclusion that they pose a cancer risk. (Ref. 18). Nonetheless, given the breadth
of the adversely affected standard, EPA cannot conclude that an induce cancer finding in a rulemaking did not have
some additional adverse impact. Thus, EPA concludes that the objectors were adversely affected by EPA's induce cancer
finding announced in the April 1990 Order.

Notwithstanding the broad adversely affected standard, the objectors apparently argue that they were not adversely
affected by the April 1990 induce cancer finding. They suggest that they could not have been adversely affected in
1990 because EPA never proposed to change the status quo; and because EPA's 1993 Order proposes to change the status
quo, they are now irreparably injured. According to DuPont, for example,




[t]he proponents of the maintenance of the 409 regulations were never ``adversely affected'' by an EPA position,
because no change was ever made or proposed to the status quo. (Ref. 19). 




Several other objectors make similar assertions. (Ref. 20).
EPA finds this argument disingenuous. Having themselves made the case in their objections that the impact of an induce
cancer finding extends far beyond the specific legal consequences resulting from the revocation of a few tolerances,
the objectors cannot then cite the lack of direct legal consequences from the April 1990 Order on the regulations concerned
as the sole criterion for determining whether they were adversely affected by that Order.

Moreover, EPA believes that any additional injury to objectors based on the revocation of a food additive regulation
is merely additive to what the objectors already describe as an irreparable injury. As is evidenced by the nature of
the objections quoted herein, none of these objectors argue injury based on the fact that farmers or other users would
cease to purchase their product because of a fear that use of the product would result in over-tolerance residues on
processed food. The objectors link the total of their injury to a Delaney clause taint. For example, DuPont, at one
point asserts that the revocation would cause ``confusion'' in the marketplace. But even here, DuPont tied that to
the Delaney clause taint:




The revocation of a 409 regulation under the Delaney clause in a situation where there is no concentration necessitating
a 409 tolerance will result in unwarranted concern and confusion among growers, food processors, consumers,
and the country's international trading partners. As a result, the use of benomyl on tomatoes and other crops could
be dramatically curtailed because of the ``taint'' of the Delaney Clause. (Ref. 21).




Thus, the objectors' statements clearly show that the stigma allegedly caused by an induce cancer finding is their
predominant, and possibly only, concern and thus the objectors' had sufficient incentive to challenge the April
1990 Order. Given that fact, the potentially greater effect linked to the more recent Orders does not excuse failure
to challenge the April 1990 Order.
4. 

The Essentiality of the Induce Cancer Finding in the April 1990 Order

. Under the doctrines permitting preclusion of issues finally decided, preclusion is appropriate when the resolution
of an issue was necessary or essential in the prior action and the persons being precluded from raising that issue had
a full and fair opportunity to challenge its prior resolution. EPA's April 1990 finding that the pesticides named
in the petition induce cancer within the meaning of the Delaney clause was necessary for the Agency to respond to the
petition and the comments raised, and EPA specifically noted the opportunity to object to EPA's conclusions that
the named pesticides induce cancer. Thus, the objectors' failure to challenge EPA's resolution of that issue results
in a final determination, and the objectors must be barred from relitigating that issue. EPA believes that the objectors
may not now rely on that issue to support their challenge to EPA's July 1993 Order.

Under the preclusion doctrines, findings necessary to an ultimate decision may be accorded finality and preclusive
effect in the same manner the ultimate decision would be if a fair and full opportunity to challenge the findings was
made available. (Ref. 22). Many of the objectors, however, argue that EPA's 1990 finding that the named pesticides
induce cancer was not necessary for EPA to respond to the petition and that the objectors were not afforded an opportunity
to challenge such a finding. According to DuPont,



[t]he basic issue of whether the pesticides subject to the NRDC petition ``induce cancer'' within the meaning of the
Delaney Clause was not critical to the Agency's response to the petition, because the regulations at issue fell within
de minimis levels, whether or not these chemicals ``induce cancer.'' (Ref. 23). 


Several other objectors make similar objections. (Ref. 24).
The objectors apparently claim that EPA theoretically applied the 

de minimis

 doctrine_that EPA applied the doctrine only in the event that it later found any one of the named pesticides to be carcinogens.

EPA disagrees with the objectors' characterization of EPA's actions. An induce cancer finding was essential and
necessary to EPA's decision in response to the California petition. The California petition sought revocation of
various food additive regulations asserting that the pesticides covered by such regulations were animal carcinogens
and therefore the regulations violated the Delaney clause. EPA denied the petition on the ground that there was an
exception to the literal terms of the Delaney clause. Of course, EPA could not have reached the question of whether
there was an exception to the literal terms of the Delaney clause unless EPA first found that the literal terms of the
clause applied. EPA made it abundantly clear in its April 1990 Order and response to comments that EPA agreed with the
petitioners that the pesticides named in the petition are animal carcinogens. As noted earlier in this document,
at several points throughout its April 1990 Order, EPA explicitly corrected comments that the named pesticides do
not induce cancer. 55 FR 17566-67; see also 55 FR 17570, 17572-73.
Further, it is apparent that the Ninth Circuit likewise considered the induce cancer issue an essential element of
EPA's Order when reaching its conclusion in 

Les v. Reilly

. 

Les v. Reilly

, 968 F.2d 985 (9th Cir. 1992), 

cert denied

, 113 S. Ct. 1361 (1993). In its opinion, the Ninth Circuit recited facts found by EPA which the court adopted:



In 1988, * * * the EPA found these pesticides to be carcinogens. Notwithstanding the Delaney clause, the EPA refused
to revoke the earlier regulations, reasoning that, although the chemicals posed a measurable risk of causing cancer,
that risk was ``de minimis.'' (Ref. 25).


Thus, the court concluded that the induce cancer determination had been made even before the April 1990 Order. Significantly,
the court also rejected _on the ground that the induce cancer finding had already been made_EPA's refusal to revoke
the phosmet and mancozeb food additive regulations. EPA had argued in the February 1991 Order, that, because the carcinogenicity
classification of phosmet was tentative and because EPA's Special Review would address the cancer risks posed by
mancozeb, immediate revocation of either set of regulations under the Delaney clause was inappropriate. The court
concluded, however, that EPA's ongoing review of data relating to the carcinogenicity of phosmet and mancozeb ``cannot
countermand the application of the Delaney clause in light of the 1988 declaration, never revoked, that both of these
pesticides are carcinogenic.'' (Ref. 26).

The objectors also advance a somewhat circular argument to support their claim that EPA never provided the opportunity
to challenge its 1990 induce cancer finding. The objectors argue that they never had the opportunity to challenge
EPA's induce cancer findings because EPA relied on the 

de minimis

 theory to deny the request to revoke the regulations and EPA never proposed the revocation of the regulations. Essentially,
the objectors are suggesting that although they are irreparably injured by the more recent induce cancer finding,
they were not adversely affected by EPA's 1990 induce cancer finding. Thus, the right to challenge EPA's 1990 finding
was never triggered.

As noted earlier, EPA believes that the objectors themselves make the case that they were adversely affected by the
1990 induce cancer finding and may not now create a post hoc rationalization for the failure to challenge that finding.
Moreover, EPA finds both bases for the objectors' argument to be irrelevant given that EPA explicitly noted the opportunity
for objections on the induce cancer issue. In its response to comments on the induce cancer issue, EPA specifically
announced that it would consider objections and requests for a hearing on the issue of whether the named pesticides
induce cancer:



[i]f objections and requests for hearing are submitted, the Administrator will determine whether there are factual
issues appropriate for resolution at an evidentiary hearing. The issues of whether the chemicals listed by the petition
induce cancer and whether the risks attributable to the uses identified in the petition are de minimis could be potential
factual matters for resolution at an administrative hearing. 1055 FR 17570.




See also 55 FR 17572, 17573. (EPA references above-quoted response in its response to other similar comments). In
fact, it is clear that the commenters understood the controversial nature of EPA's findings. As noted by several commenters,
an induce cancer finding may result in disputed factual issues, 55 FR 17570, and involve material issues of fact. 55
FR 17571. A strategic choice not to challenge such an admittedly controversial finding in an FFDCA proceeding is one
that bears many risks. One obvious and pertinent risk under FFDCA section 409 is that the finding will be accorded finality
and referenced in related administrative or judicial proceedings.



Thus, EPA clearly provided the objectors the opportunity to object and file hearing requests on the issue of whether
any of the named pesticides induce cancer. The objectors' apparently risky assumption that EPA would prevail in a
judicial setting on legal theories untested by the Agency does not excuse them from the responsibility to challenge
findings which they believe adversely affect them when the first opportunity to challenge arises.

5. 

New Evidence On the Induce Cancer Issue.

 As detailed above, EPA believes that, based on the objectors' own arguments, they were adversely affected by EPA's
April 1990 Order finding that the named pesticides induce cancer within the meaning of the Delaney clause. Precluding
the objectors from relying on the induce cancer issue to support a challenge to the later revocation Order is appropriate
because EPA's induce cancer findings were essential to its ultimate response to the petition and because the objectors
were provided an opportunity to challenge the Agency's conclusions. To ensure no manifest injustice by precluding
relitigation of these findings, EPA has reviewed the objectors' submissions to determine whether the objectors
submitted any new data justifying the reopening this issue. EPA believes that none of the submissions are sufficient
to grant a rehearing on this issue.

Only one of the objectors, DuPont, specifically argues that there is ``new'' evidence justifying a hearing on EPA's
finding that benomyl induces cancer. DuPont's claim that it has submitted ``new'' evidence regarding the cancer
determination on benomyl does not justify reopening this issue. DuPont's ``new'' evidence falls into four basic
categories: (1) a reexamination of the tumors from several cancer bioassays in mice; (2) an extensive discussion
of data on the mutagenicity of benomyl and several recent mutagenicity studies; (3) a short-term feeding study directed
at determining benomyl's mechanism of action; and (4) a literature survey concerning hepatoblastomas in Swiss mice.
Little of this evidence is new because, as discussed below, DuPont was aware of the data before it had lost its opportunity
to challenge EPA's induce cancer finding in the April 1990 Order. Objections and hearing requests on the April 1990
Order were required to be submitted by May 25, 1990. What little of the evidence may be ``new'' is merely cumulative
to the then existing database, or, at best, ``further support[s]'' that database. (Ref. 27).



Reread of Tumor Slides

. DuPont has submitted a report dated June 19, 1990, documenting a reexamination of the liver sections from two benomyl
cancer bioassays completed in the early 1980s. The report was prepared by an independent pathologist. (Ref. 28).
Even if it is conceded that a reexamination of older data could be classified as ``new data,'' DuPont clearly had substantial
information concerning what that reread of the tumor slides would disclose before the expiration of the period for
objections to the April 1990 Order. The report submitted by the independent pathologist reveals that (1) DuPont scientists
reread the tumor slides initially and presented their conclusions to the independent pathologist for review, (Ref.
29); (2) the independent pathologist received a ``project sheet'' for the tumor slide review from DuPont no later
than April 18, 1990 (Ref. 30); and (3) the independent pathologist agreed for the most part with the earlier conclusions
of the DuPont scientists (Ref. 31). Additionally, DuPont's scientists prepared a report on the reread of the tumor
slides by both the DuPont scientists and the independent pathologists. That report explicitly states that the scientists
``findings'' were given to ``management'' on May 18, 1990. (Ref. 32). Thus, DuPont's own submission shows that the
this evidence is not ``new.'' In any event, even assuming that DuPont somehow did not ``know'' the results of the reread
of the tumor slides until the June 19, 1990 completion date, by the exercise of due diligence DuPont should have know
by May 25, 1990. DuPont was put on notice in June 1989 by the California petition that the question of benomyl's carcinogenicity
was at issue. When DuPont did contract for an independent evaluation of the tumor slides that independent evaluation
appears to have been completed in roughly 2 months. (Ref. 33). Thus, there is no reason this information could not have
been prepared prior to the expiration of the objection period. Certainly, there is no scientific reason for the delay
because the scientific justification for the reexamination of the tumor slides_that the criteria for classifying
benign and malignant tumors had changed_had been extant since at least 1987. (Ref. 34). DuPont's delay in reevaluating
existing data cannot justify their failure to file a timely objection to the April 1990 Order.



Mutagenicity Report

. DuPont has submitted two related reports addressing whether benomyl is mutagenic. (Ref. 35). DuPont also submitted
several mutagenicity studies for review which are dated later than May 25, 1990. (Ref. 36). The reports discuss hundreds
of mutagenicity studies done on benomyl and similar compounds over the last twenty years. The newly submitted studies
add little to the vast data already compiled by April 1990 on whether benomyl is mutagenic. Thus, the major thrust of
this mutagenicity report could have been raised in objections to the April 1990 Order.



28-Day Mouse Feeding Study

. DuPont has submitted a short-term feeding study with mice, dated June 27, 1990, which attempted to assess possible
mechanisms of liver tumor induction caused by benomyl. (Ref. 37). DuPont concluded that the ``results of this study
suggest that benomyl causes induction of a normal adaptive response that results in an increase in cell proliferation
and thus acts indirectly by modulating a high spontaneous incidence of mouse hepatic tumors through physiological
mechanisms and not as a direct acting carcinogen.'' (Ref. 38). Even assuming this information is relevant to the induce
cancer finding, this study is not so definitive as to justify reopening the induce cancer determination. Moreover,
this was a study conducted in-house by DuPont for which the actual experimental work was completed by March 30, 1990.
(Ref. 39). If the results of this study were indeed critical, DuPont had ample time to raise them in objections to EPA's
April 1990 Order.



Literature Review Regarding Hepatoblastomas

. DuPont submitted a review of scientific literature discussing hepatoblastomas in mice. (Ref. ). All of the nine
articles cited were published prior to May 25, 1990. Thus, this submission did not constitute new evidence.

Accordingly, all of the ``new'' evidence either could have been raised in objections to the April 1990 Order or is merely
cumulative to evidence which could have been raised in objections to that Order.

6. 

Conclusion.

 As adversely affected parties, the objectors' failure to file a challenge with EPA to the April 1990 Order bars them
from now challenging a finding essential to that Order_that the named pesticides are animal carcinogens. The objectors
must accept the consequences of the decision not to object to that April 1990 Order.

B. 

Remaining Hearing Requests and Objections.

 The objectors raise several other objections and a hearing request pertaining to issues other than EPA's induce cancer
finding that are not necessarily barred by EPA's April 1990 Order. These objections and hearing requests are summarized
and addressed below.
1. 

Concentration.

 DuPont and the Mancozeb Task Force have objected to the revocation of the benomyl tolerance on raisins (DuPont) and
the mancozeb tolerances on raisins and bran of wheat (DuPont and Mancozeb Task Force) on the ground that these food
additive tolerances should be revoked because there is no concentration of residues for these pesticides in these
processed foods. Under existing EPA policy, EPA does not consider food additive tolerances necessary unless residues
of a pesticide concentrate during processing and therefore could exceed the raw food tolerance. DuPont and the Mancozeb
Task Force, contend that the respective benomyl and mancozeb regulations are not necessary under this policy and
EPA must make a determination on the concentration issue prior to reaching the Delaney clause question. DuPont has
also requested a hearing on the question of whether benomyl concentrates in tomato products. EPA disagrees with the
objectors on both legal and practical grounds.

First, these objections and hearing requests suffer from a basic flaw: a challenge to an order under FFDCA section
409 must ``go to the legality of the agency's order.'' (Ref. 41). Arguing that there is an alternate ground for a revocation
action based on information or claims not resolved by EPA in the revocation does not challenge the legal basis of the
revocation. Here, EPA revoked the benomyl and mancozeb tolerances on the ground that these tolerances are barred
by the Delaney clause. That was the sole issue addressed by the July 1993 Order. EPA did not address whether the tolerances
were needed due to a concentration of residues during processing except to mention the irrelevancy of the issue to
that Order. Unlike the induce cancer issue, the question of whether benomyl concentrates during processing was not
an essential element of the July 1993 Order.

The objectors appear to be contending that, even when EPA finds that a tolerance violates the core safety standard
in FFDCA section 409, EPA is legally barred from acting on that finding prior to determining whether there are some
other grounds for revoking the tolerance. DuPont claims that ``[t]he Agency must make a threshold determination
if a 409 regulation is necessary before even reaching the question of the applicability of the Delaney clause.'' (Ref.
42). DuPont cites three reasons why such a threshold determination is mandated. None has merit.

DuPont first argues that ``if data demonstrate that there is no concentration of residues in processed food, there
is no reason to retain the 409 food additive regulations.'' (Ref. 43) True, there may be ``no reason'' under
EPA's existing policy or given the flow-through provision of section 402 to retain such a food additive regulation,
but the regulation would not be barred as a legal matter by the flow-through provision. The flow-through provision
simply creates a safe harbor for residues in processed food which are at or below the section 408 raw food tolerance.
Thus, revocation of a food additive regulation where the pesticide does not concentrate in the processed food is driven
by policy not legal considerations. Second, DuPont asserts that a threshold determination on concentration must
be made because of the taint attached to the Delaney clause finding. This reason may explain why DuPont seeks revocation
on another ground; however, as stated above, it is not legal support for requiring EPA to first make a concentration
determination. Finally, DuPont claims that relying on the Delaney clause grounds to revoke the tolerance may cause
FDA to misallocate its enforcement resources because of public fears about cancer. Even assuming this to be true,
this reason is again nothing more than a policy reason for relying on lack of concentration rather than the Delaney
clause.

The Mancozeb Task Force makes similar policy arguments as to why EPA should revoke the mancozeb food additive tolerances
on concentration grounds. Like the arguments of DuPont, the Task Force's contentions do not attack the legal basis
for the revocation.

At bottom, DuPont and the Mancozeb Task Force are objecting because EPA has not taken action on their later petitions
to revoke these tolerances on lack of concentration grounds. EPA is acting on the one food additive tolerance (mancozeb
on raisins) where EPA had data which had already been reviewed showing that the tolerance was not needed under existing
policy. EPA, however, has not yet acted on the portions of the petitions filed by DuPont and the Mancozeb Task Force
which are inadequately supported by data or are premised on a change in a longestablished EPA policy. EPA sees no error
in acting first on the California petition since it was submitted nearly four years prior to the DuPont and Mancozeb
Task Force petitions.

EPA denies DuPont's and the Mancozeb Task Force's objections to EPA's failure to revoke these tolerances on concentration
grounds and DuPont's hearing request on the same issue because they do not attack the legal basis of the July 1993 Order.
None of the policy arguments made by the objectors convince EPA that it would be appropriate to delay responding to
the California petition until the issues surrounding their petitions can be resolved.

2. 

The Classification of Raisins as a Processed Food.

 DuPont has objected to the revocation of the benomyl food additive tolerance for raisins claiming that that tolerance
should be revoked because raisins are not a processed food but a raw agricultural commodity. DuPont argues raisin
tolerances should be established under section 408, not section 409. This objection is denied for the same reason
as the objection involving the concentration issue_proposing an alternate ground for revocation based on information
or claims not resolved in the revocation does not attack the legal basis of the July 1993 Order. Similarly, EPA does
not believe that it is obligated to rule on DuPont's petition to reclassify raisins prior to ruling on the California
petition, given that DuPont's petition was filed 4 years later.

3. 

Procedural Objections.

Several of the objectors have raised various related procedural objections to EPA's July 1993 Order. Because these
alleged procedural errors all involve EPA's determination on the induce cancer question and because each of the objectors
are precluded from relitigating that issue, EPA believes if it committed any error, the error was harmless. Nevertheless,
because the objections raised call into question the operating procedures of both EPA and FDA over the last 40 years,
EPA will respond to them in some detail.

The objectors' basic complaint is that following the decision in 

Les v. Reilly,

 EPA immediately issued a final order rather than a proposal seeking public comment on revoking the tolerances. The
objectors claim this violated EPA's regulations and the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). They are mistaken.

Section 409 of the FFDCA contains an elaborate procedure for the establishment, amendment, and revocation of food
additive tolerances. 21 U.S.C. 348; see 

Nader

. It is basically a hybrid rulemaking scheme that marries some aspects of informal rulemaking with the adjudicative
hearing requirements of formal rulemaking.

As explained above, the statute establishes a petition procedure whereby any person may request EPA to establish
a tolerance. 21 U.S.C. 348(b). It also requires EPA to establish, by regulation, the procedure for the amendment or
repeal of food additive tolerances. 21 U.S.C. 348(h). ``[S]uch procedure shall conform to the procedure provided
[in section 409] for the promulgation of such regulations.'' 

Id

.; 

see

 40 CFR parts 177, 178 (establishing such regulations). When a petition is submitted, EPA is required to publish ``[n]otice
of regulation proposed by the petitioner * * * in general terms.'' 21 U.S.C. 348(b)(5); 21 CFR 177.88. EPA is commanded
to act on the petition by order within 180 days either establishing a tolerance regulation or denying the petition.
40 U.S.C. 348(c). EPA regulations allow EPA to issue a proposal prior to issuing a final order on the petition. Once
a final order is issued, adversely affected parties are allowed 30 days to file objections and request an adjudicative
hearing. Any EPA decision on the objections is then subject to judicial review.

The steps followed by EPA in acting on the California petition have been described in detail above. These steps were
clearly in accordance with FFDCA section 409, and the objectors do not claim that they were not. However, as noted above,
the objectors argue that EPA violated its own regulations and the APA. The objectors claim that EPA regulations require
EPA to issue a proposal, in addition to a notice of a petition, prior to revoking a food additive regulation in response
to a petition from a member of the public.

EPA disagrees. EPA's regulations clearly make it discretionary with the Administrator whether to issue a proposal
where it has received a petition. The pertinent regulation states: ``The Administrator may publish in the Federal
Register a proposal to establish a food additive regulation or to modify or revoke an existing food additive regulation,
on his or her own initiative or in response to a petition.'' (40 CFR 177.130(a); see 40 CFR 177.125(b); 53 FR 41128).
The objectors' allegations to the contrary have no basis.
EPA also rejects the objectors' claim that the APA required a proposal in this case. Essentially, the objectors are
contending that, despite Congress' express inclusion in the FFDCA of an intricate procedural scheme involving both
an initial notice procedure and opportunity for a full 

de novo

 administrative hearing on the government's action, APA notice and comment rulemaking requirements must be followed
as well. As support for this argument, DuPont relies on the fact that EPA has generally issued proposals prior to revoking
a tolerance in the past. While this is true, it is a fact with little effect here because previous revocation actions
have nearly always been initiated by the Administrator. In those circumstances, both section 408 and 409 of the FFDCA
requires issuance of a proposal. 21 U.S.C. 346a(e) and 348(d). The more appropriate analogy for the revocations at
issue here are those procedures EPA follows generally when it receives a petition to establish, modify, or revoke
a food additive regulation. In those cases, as stated above, in accordance with FFDCA sections 408 and 409 and EPA regulations,
EPA issues a notice summarizing the petition followed by a final order. For example, nearly all of the roughly eight
to ten thousand tolerances and exemptions from a tolerance under section 408 and 409 were established in response
to petitions. In the overwhelming majority of cases, including the regulations involved in this Order, (Ref. 44),
EPA published a brief summary of the petition followed by a final rule. See, e.g., 44 FR 23932 (April 23, 1979) (notice
of filing of petition to establish a food additive regulation for phosmet (imidan) on cottonseed oil). Having taken
advantage of this procedure for over 30 years, see, e.g., 23 FR 118, and 2402 (January 7, 1958; April 12, 1958) (Rohm
 Haas Co. petition on dicofol), the objectors quite understandably do not argue that this procedure violates
the APA and have not objected to EPA using it to establish tolerances established subsequent to the filing of objections
in this case. See, e.g., 59 FR 5108 (Feb. 3, 1994). (DuPont petition for tolerance for hexakis.) Yet, unless they take
that position, they necessarily must be contending that industry is entitled to more process under the rulemaking
provisions of the APA on tolerance revocation petitions than the public is on petitions seeking the establishment
of a tolerance legalizing pesticide residues in food.

Finally, the objectors are in a poor position to argue they should have been given an additional opportunity to file
written comments with EPA. The objectors chose not to challenge EPA's April 1990 Order. A timely and proper objection
to the April 1990 Order would have entitled them to a full 

de novo

 administrative hearing on the induce cancer issue not merely an opportunity to file comments.

4. 

Substantive Due Process

. DuPont argues that EPA's revocation action violates the constitutional doctrine of substantive due process because
the revocation is without scientific basis and thus is arbitrary. (Ref. 45). DuPont, however, already has a statutory
right to challenge the substance of EPA's action under the FFDCA. The Constitution provides nothing further in this
regard. EPA thus denies DuPont's constitutional argument for the same reasons it has denied DuPont's substantive
challenge to EPA's induce cancer finding.


VII. References


1. Letter from Jay J. Vroom, President, NACA, to Linda J. Fisher, Assistant Administrator, EPA, at 4 (January 12, 1993)
(hereinafter cited as ``NACA Letter''); Letter from Edward M. Ruckert, Attorney for Mancozeb Task Force, to Carol
M. Browner, Administrator, EPA at 2 (March 5, 1993); Letter from Stanley H. Abramson, Attorney for DuPont, to Raymond
B. Ludwiszewski, General Counsel, EPA at 1 (February 17, 1993) (hereinafter cited as ``DuPont Letter'').
2. DuPont letter at 8; NACA Letter at 4.
3. 

Nader v. EPA.

 859 f.2d 747, 752-754 (9th Cir. 1988), 

cert. denied

, 490 U.S. 1931 (1989); 

Rutherford v. U.S.

, 806 F. 2d 1455, 1459-60 (10th Cir. 1896); 

CNI V. Young

, 773 F. 2d 1356 (1985); 

Retail Clerks Union, Local 1401 R.C.I.A. v. N.L.R.B., (463 F.2d 316, 322 (D.C. Cir. 1972). 
4. Nader

, 859 F.2d 752-754.
5. 

Nader

, 859 F.2d at 754.
6. 

Id.


7. 

Rutherford v. U.S.

 806 F.2d 1455, 1459-60 (10th Cir. 1986); 

CNI v. Young

, 773 F.2d 1356 (1985); 

Retail Clerks Union, Local 1401 R.C.I.A. v. N.L.R.B., 463 F.2d 316, 322 (D.C. Cir. 1972).
8. U.S. EPA and FDA Statement of Policy, ``The Delaney Clause and Emergency Exemptions Under FIFRA,'' p. 4 (May 7, 1993).
9. EPA, Note to Correspondents (Feb. 2, 1993). Contrary to the calim by DuPont these lists and the language quoted by
Dupont in its objections were not published in the 

Federal Register

. 

See

 DuPont Agricultural Products' Objections to ``Induce Cancer'' Finding for Benomyl and to Revocations of Section
409 Food Additive Regulations for Benomyl in Processed Tomato Products and Raisins and Mancozeb in Bran of Wheat and
in Raisins, at 43 (August 13, 1993) (hereinafter cited as ``DuPont Objections''). 
10. 

Clarke v. Securities Indstry Ass'n

, 107 S. Ct 750, 757 (1987). 
11. DuPont Agricultural Products' Request for a Hearing on Issues Pertaining to Whether Benomyl ``Induces Cancer''
and Whether Benomyl Concentrates in Processed Tomato Products, at 13-14 (August 13, 1993) (hereinafter cited as
``Dupont Hearing Request''); Petition of DuPont Agricultural Products to Stay the Effective Date of the Revocation
of the Section 409 Food Additive Regulations for Benomyl in Processed Tomato Products and Raisisns and Mancozeb in
Bran of Wheat and Raisins, at 9 (August 13, 1993) (hereinafter cited as ``Dupont Stay Petition''). 
12. DuPont Stay Request at 9.
13. DowElanco's Objections to ``Induce Cancer'' finding for Trifluralin and to Revocation of Section 409 Food Additive
Regulations for Trifluralin in or on Peppermint Oil and Spearmint Oil, at 9-10 (August 13, 1993) (hereinafter cited
as ``DowElanco Objections'').
14. DowElanco Objections at 9-10.
15. Mancozeb Task Force Petition to Stay Effective Date, at 13 9August 13, 1993) (hereinafter cited as ``MTF Stay Petition'').
16. MTF Stay Request at 11.
17. Petition of the National Agricultural Chemicals Association to Stay the Revocation of Food Additive Regulations
for Benomyl, Mancozeb, phosmet, and Trifluralin, at 2 (August 13, 1993) (hereinafter cited as ``NACA Stay Petition'').

18. Benomyl Special Review, 47 FR 46747, 46749 (1982); ``EBDCs, Notice of Intent to Cancel and Conclusion of Special
Review,'' 57 FR 7483 (March 2, 1992); Trifluralin, Position document 4, 47 FR 33777 (July 1982); ``Guidance for the
Reregistration of Pesticide Products Containing Trifluralin as the Active Ingredient'' (April 1987);``Guidance
for the Registration of Pesticide Products Containing Trifluralin as the Active Ingredient'' (1987); ``Guidance
for the reregistration of Pesticide products Containing Phosmet as the Active Ingredient.'' (September 1986).

19. DuPont Objections at 72.
20. 

See

 DowElanco Objections at 62 and 65; Objections of the Mancozeb Task Force, at 10 (August 13, 1993) (hereinafter cited
as ``MTF Objections'').

21. DuPont Hearing Request at 13-14.
22. 

Synanon Church v. U.S.,

 806 F.2d 1455, 1459-60 (10th Cir. 1986); 

CNI v. Young

, 773 F.2d 1356 (1985); 

Retail Clerks Union, Local 1401 R.C.I.A. v. N.L.R.B.

, 463 F.2d 316, 322 (D.C. Cir. 1972).
23. DuPont Objections at 74.
24. 

See

 DowElanco Objections at 62 and 65; MTF Objections at 10.
25. 

Les

 968 F.2d at 986.
26. 

Les

, 968 F.2d at 990 n.3.
27. Letter from Ronald A. Hamen, DuPont, to Dr. Janet Anderson, U.S. EPA, (August 17, 1990) (letter submitting mutagenicity
data, reread of tumor slides, and 28-day mouse study). (Dupont Exhibit #61). 
28. Oncogenicity Studies with Benomyl and MBC in Mice, Peer Review of Liver Neoplasms, Experimental Pathology Laboratories,
Inc. (June 19, 1990) (Dupont Exhibit #57).
29. 

Id.

 at 1.
30. 

Id.

 App. Quality Assurance Final certification.
31. 

Id.

 at 3.
32. Oncogenicity Studies with Benomyl and MBC in Mice, Supplemental Peer Review; Supplement to Haskell Laboratory
Report Nos. 20-82 and 70-82, Quality Assurance Documentation at 4 (June 28, 1990). (Dupont Exhibit #58).
33. 

See

 Reference 31.
34. Oncogenicity Studies with Benomyl and MBC in Mice, Peer Review of Liver Neoplasms, Experimental Pathology Laboratories,
Inc., at 4 (June 19, 1990) (Dupont Exhibit #57) (citing criteria on proliferative hepaocellular lesions, published
in R.R. Maronpot, J.K. Haseman, G.A. Boorman, S.E. Eustis, G.N. Rao, and J.E. Huff, ``Liver Lesions in B6C3F1 Mice:
The National Toxicology Program, Experience and Position,'' Archives of Toxicology: Mouse Liver Tumors (1987)).

35. V. Reynolds, A. Sariff, ``A Review of the Genetic Toxcity Studies on Benomyl and Carbendazim'' (January 1, 1993);
and A. Sarrif, ``Assment of the Genetic Toxicological Studies on Benomyl and Carbendazim: A Review'' (January 31,
1993). (Dupont Exhibits Nos. 64 and 65).
36. 

See

 DuPont Exhibits Nos. 105, 108, 109, 110.
37. 28-Day Feeding Study with Benomyl in Mice, Haskell Laboratory Report No. 324-90 (August 15, 1990). (Dupont Exhibit
#60).
38. 

Id.

 at 12.
39. 

Id.

 at 5.
40. Memorandum from C.S. Van Pelt, DuPont, to R.A. Hamlen, Dupont, ``Review of TNO Mouse Feeding Study and Interpretational
Significance of Hepatoblastomas in Mouse Liver,'' (August 15, 1999). (Dupont Exhibit #59).

41. 

CNI v. Young

, 773 F.2d at 1364.
42. DuPont objections at 59.
43. DuPont objections at 59.
44. 45 FR 8979 (February 11, 1980) (phosmet food additive regulation established on petition of Stauffer Chemical
co.); 38 FR 26447 (September 21, 1973) 9benomyl food additive regulation established on petition of DuPont); 34 FR
531 (January 15, 1970) (trifluralin food additive regulation established on petition of Elanco Products Co.); and
32 FR 7523 (May 23, 1967) (mancozeb food additive regulation established on petition of Rohm 7 Haas Co.).

145. DuPont objections at 83. 



VIII. Conclusion


For the reasons detailed above, all objections and hearing requests filed in response to the July 1993 Order are denied.
All of the stay requests are denied as well. This Order is issued under section 409(f) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act (21 U.S.C. 348(f)) and is subject to judicial review as provided in section 409(g) of the act (21 U.S.C. 348(g)).


List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 185


Environmental protection, Administrative practice and procedure, Food additives, Pesticides and pests, Reporting
and recordkeeping requirements. 




Dated: June 17, 1994.



</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Lynn R. Goldman, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Administrator for Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances. 




Therefore, 40 CFR part 185 is amended as follows:


PART 185_[AMENDED]


1. The authority citation for part 185 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 21 U.S.C. 346a and 348.




185.350

 [Removed]


2. By removing 185.350 

Benomyl

.


185.3950 

[Removed]


3. By removing 185.3950 

N-(Mercaptomethyl)phthalimide S-(O,O-dimethyl phosphorodithioate) and its oxygen analog

.


185.5900 

[Removed]


4. By removing 185.5900 

Trifluralin

.


185.6300 

[Amended]


5. By amending 185.6300 

Zinc ion and maneb coordination product

 in the list at the end of the section by removing the words ``, and wheat'' in the second entry.



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9415922 Filed 62894; 11:46 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>

