 

Existing paragraph (a)(4) would be redesignated as paragraph (c)(5)(ii). As amended, this paragraph would state
that if the borrower or lender insurance premium is not paid within 60 days of disbursement of the loan, the Secretary
may deny insurance coverage on the loan. This paragraph also would state that if the school premium is not paid within
60 days of the date of the quarterly billing notice, the Secretary may immediately suspend the school and may initiate
termination proceedings against the school. Finally, if the holder premium is not paid within 60 days of the loan transfer,
the Secretary may cancel the insurance coverage on the loan. 
Existing paragraph (a)(5), which addresses refunds of premiums, would be redesignated as paragraph (c)(6) and would
be amended to clarify that premiums are not refundable except in cases of error, or unless the loan, including any accrued
interest, is canceled within 120 days of the date of disbursement. Previously, the regulations did not provide for
the refund of the insurance premium once a loan was disbursed, even if it was canceled soon thereafter. Accordingly,
this amendment is intended to assure that if cancellation of the loan, including any accrued interest, occurs within
a reasonable period of time, a full refund of the premium(s) may be made. This is consistent with Department of Education
policies governing the Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL) programs. 
Existing paragraph (c)(3), which addresses the charging of premiums for loans disbursed in multiple installments,
would be redesignated as new paragraph (d). 


Section 60.15Other Charges to the Borrower 


Paragraph (c) of this section would be amended to clarify that, in making a HEAL loan, the lender may pass on to the borrower
only the cost of the borrower's insurance premium. 


Section 60.17Security and Endorsement 


Paragraph (b) of this section would be amended by deleting the first sentence, which requires a HEAL loan to be made
without endorsement unless the borrower is a minor. In addition, a new paragraph (c) would be added to this section
to state that a credit worthy parent or other responsible individual, other than a spouse, may cosign the loan note.
This is consistent with section 708(c) of the Act, which allows a HEAL borrower to obtain a cosigner to reduce the cost
of the borrower insurance premium by 50 percent. 

