 

6. Buildings With Indoor Air Problems 



Many published reports on building wellness describe buildings in terms of two general categories, sick or well buildings.
Some of the published categories, in addition to the terms sick or well are: problem buildings and non-problem buildings,
healthy buildings; buildings with high and low rates of IAQ related complaints; sick building syndrome (SBS). 

The SBS symptom complex is characterized by a range of symptoms including but not limited to, eye, nose and throat irritation,
dryness of mucous membranes and skin, nose bleeds, skin rash, mental fatigue, headache, cough, hoarseness, wheezing,
nausea and dizziness [Ex. 4159]. Within a given building there will usually be some commonality among the symptoms
manifested as well as temporal association between occupancy in the building and appearance of symptoms. Many people
who work in buildings characterized as having SBS typically exhibit health symptoms that disappear when the person
is no longer in the building. In most cases, a physical basis for the occurrence of the SBS can be found: lack of proper
maintenance, changes in thermal or contaminant loads imposed during the building's life, changes in control strategies
to meet new objectives (e.g., energy conservation) or inadequate design. 

Building-related illnesses (BRI), on the other hand, are medically diagnosed diseases that present symptoms that
can last for weeks, months, years or even a lifetime. Examples include nosocomial infections, humidifier fever,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and legionellois. BRI can develop as a result of poor building systems operation
and maintenance and uncontrolled point sources of contaminants. 

No building has a complete absence of problems, but those that function with minimal occupant complaints and comply
with acceptable criteria for occupant exposure, system performance, maintenance procedures and economic objectives
may be characterized as healthy buildings. Figure VI1 below presents the classification of buildings by stages
of performance. 

Based on the information submitted to the docket, OSHA assumed that 30 percent of the buildings have indoor air quality
problems [Ex. 3745]. 




<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 451026P

</BILLING>






<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEP05AP94.000





</IMPORT>



<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 451026C

</BILLING>



Therefore, as presented in Table VI3, the total number of problem buildings is estimated to be 1.4 million buildings.




7. Number of Employees Affected



The commercial building energy consumption survey estimates that there are 70.7 million employees. However, survey
data do not provide information by two-digit SIC. OSHA examined data obtained through the Bureau of Labor Statistics
to estimate the number of employees by two-digit SIC affected by the proposed standard. The data from the Bureau provided
occupational breakdown of the labor force by detailed industry categories (two-digit SIC) and major occupational
groupings. 




