 

(e) With respect to multifamily housing projects operated by HUD, but in which HUD does not have an ownership interest,
alterations under this section need not be made if doing so would impose undue financial and administrative burdens
on the operation of the multifamily housing project. 



9.153

Distribution of accessible dwelling units. 



Accessible dwelling units required by 9.152 shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be distributed throughout
projects and sites and shall be available in a sufficient range of sizes and amenities so that a qualified individual
with disabilities' choice of living arrangements is, as a whole, comparable to that of other persons eligible for
housing assistance under the same agency conducted program. This provision shall not be construed to require (but
does allow) the provision of an elevator in any multifamily housing project solely for the purpose of permitting location
of accessible units above or below the accessible grade level. 



9.154

Occupancy of accessible dwelling units. 



(a) The agency shall adopt suitable means to assure that information regarding the availability of accessible units
in PDP housing facilities reaches eligible individuals with disabilities, and shall take reasonable nondiscriminatory
steps to maximize the utilization of such units by eligible individuals whose disability requires the accessibility
features of the particular unit. To this end, when an accessible unit becomes vacant, the agency (or its management
agent) before offering such units to an applicant without disabilities shall offer such unit: 

(1) First, to a current occupant of another unit of the same project, or comparable projects under common control,
having disabilities requiring the accessibility features of the vacant unit and occupying a unit not having such
features, or, if no such occupant exists, then 

(2) Second, to an eligible qualified applicant on the waiting list having a disability requiring the accessibility
features of the vacant unit.

(b) When offering an accessible unit to an applicant not having disabilities requiring the accessibility features
of the unit, the agency may require the applicant to agree (and may incorporate this agreement in the lease) to move
to a non-accessible unit when available. 



9.155

Housing adjustments. 



(a) The agency shall modify its housing policies and practices as they relate to PDP housing facilities to ensure that
these policies and practices do not discriminate, on the basis of disability, against a qualified individual with
disabilities. The agency may not impose upon individuals with disabilities other policies, such as the prohibition
of assistive devices, auxiliary aids, alarms, or guides in housing facilities, that have the effect of limiting the
participation of tenants with disabilities in any agency conducted housing program or activity in violation of this
part. Housing policies that the agency can demonstrate are essential to the housing program or activity will not be
regarded as discriminatory within the meaning of this section if modifications would result in a fundamental alteration
in the nature of the program or activity or undue financial and administrative burdens. 

(b) The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or burdens must be made by the Secretary or his or her
designee after considering all agency resources available for use in the funding and operation of the conducted program
or activity, and must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. If an action
required to comply with this section would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any other
action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum
extent possible, individuals with disabilities receive the benefits and services of the program or activity. 




