 




<CFRNO>50 CFR Part 651 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 9405524152; I.D. 051294A] </RINDOCK>


Northeast Multispecies Fishery 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Commerce.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 NMFS issues this final rule to implement measures 
contained in Framework Adjustment 4 to the Northeast Multispecies 
Fishery Management Plan (FMP). The measures contained in this 
rule are a series of time and area closures for sink gillnet gear 
to reduce bycatch of harbor porpoise. These measures replace 
blocks of time during each month during which all sink gillnets 
would be required to be removed from the water. The intent of 
this rule is to reduce significantly the bycatch of harbor 
porpoise in the Gulf of Maine sink gillnet fishery.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 May 20, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Copies of Amendment 5, its regulatory impact review 
(RIR) and the final regulatory flexibility analysis (FRFA) 
contained with the RIR, its final supplemental environmental 
impact statement (FSEIS), and Framework Adjustment 

#

4 and its 
environmental assessment are available upon request from Douglas 
G. Marshall, Executive Director, New England Fishery Management 
Council, 5 Broadway, Saugus, MA 019061097.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 E. Martin Jaffe, NMFS, Fishery 
Policy Analyst, 5082819272. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


The New England Fishery Management Council (Council) 
submitted Amendment 5 to NMFS on September 27, 1993. One of its 
principal objectives was to reduce the bycatch of harbor porpoise 
in the Gulf of Maine sink gillnet fishery by the end of year 4 of 
implementation of the Amendment to a level not to exceed 2 percent 
of the population, based on the best estimates of abundance and 
bycatch. 
The Council was requested by NMFS in October 1992 to take 
action to reduce the harbor porpoise bycatch within the context of 
Amendment 5. The Council agreed to develop fishery management 
measures that would address the issue on the basis that the sink 
gillnet fishery was subject to regulation under the FMP, there 
were no existing regulatory mechanisms to reduce porpoise takes, 
and the current level of bycatch in the fishery was not 
sustainable. 
Additionally, on January 7, 1993, NMFS published a proposed 
rule (58 FR 3108) to list the Gulf of Maine population of harbor 
porpoise as threatened under the Endangered Species Act (ESA), due 
primarily to the level of incidental takes in the sink gillnet 
fishery and the lack of an adequate regulatory mechanism to 
accomplish bycatch reductions. As NMFS noted in the rule, the 
Marine Mammal Exemption Program contained in the 1988 amendments 
to the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) did not set bycatch 
limits. 
The Council subsequently adopted the goal of achieving 
reductions in harbor porpoise bycatch, so that the actual amount 
of harbor porpoise caught as bycatch in the sink gillnet fishery 
would not exceed 2 percent of the estimates of the harbor porpoise 
population, in part to avoid the pending ESA listing. This 
objective was based on a recruitment rate for harbor porpoise that 
is about 4 percent per year, and a conservative fisheries bycatch 
level that should not exceed 50 percent of the recruitment rate 
for marine mammals. The 1991/1992 pooled harbor porpoise 
population abundance estimate is 47,200. Using the lower bound of 
the 95-percent confidence interval for that estimate, 39,500, the 
1990, 1991, and 1992 ratios of bycatch to average population 
abundance were approximately 6 percent, 4.3 percent and 
2.2 percent, respectively. A 2-percent goal allocated solely to 
the Gulf of Maine sink gillnet fishery did not take into account 
the unknown level of harbor porpoise takes in the Mid-Atlantic 
region and in adjacent Canadian waters. 
Because the 1992 abundance and bycatch information was not 
available until June 1993, however, development of effective 
measures based on the best scientific information lagged behind 
the formulation of the overall Amendment 5 package. The harbor 
porpoise bycatch mitigation measure implemented by the final rule 
for the Amendment required the removal of all sink gillnets from 
the water during 4-day blocks of time each month in year 1 after 
implementation of Amendment 5. Years 2 and 3 of Amendment 5 
called for 8-day blocks each month. Year 4 required 12-day blocks 
and year 5 required 16-day blocks. The Council supported, and 
NMFS approved, the use of blocks of time as an interim measure on 
the assumption that appropriate time and area management measures 
would be developed as soon as possible. 
The rationale for the interim measure was based largely on 
the lack of information concerning the sink gillnet fishery. By 
``masking'' periods of time monthly, during which all sink gillnets 
must be removed from the water, the time during which harbor 
porpoise would be exposed to that gear would be reduced. In a 
simulation analyzing the effect of closing the Gulf of Maine sink 
gillnet fishery for 4 consecutive random days per month, 
approximately 8.5 percent of the fish would not be landed and 9.3 
percent of the harbor porpoise bycatch would be avoided. The 
effect of choosing random days, however, produced very different 
values of harbor porpoise bycatch for the different trials. 



</SUPPLEM>
