 

(f) 

Request for return of certificates. 

A U.S. exporter may be requested by a foreign importer to return an unused or partially used International Import Certificate,
People's Republic of China End-User Certificate, Indian Import Certificate, or Bulgarian, 
Czech, Hungarian, Polish, Romanian, or Slovak Import Certificate. To meet such requests, exporters should adhere
to the following procedures: 




* * * * * 



(g) ***

(1) 

Change in consignee or purchaser. 

The applicant must obtain a new Statement by Ultimate Consignee and Purchaser, or an appropriately amended International
Import Certificate, People's Republic of China End-User Certificate, Indian Import Certificate, or Bulgarian,
Czech, Hungarian, Polish, Romanian, or Slovak Import Certificate before submitting a request for an amendment of
an export license that proposes a change in consignee or purchaser in the transaction named in the export license if
the proposed amendment is not in accordance with the Statement or Certificate already on file with the applicant or
the Office of Export Licensing. The original copy of the new Statement or Certificate be: 


* * * * * 



(2) *** (i) 

Increase not supported by existing Statement or Certificate obtained in support of license application. 

The applicant shall obtain a new Statement by Ultimate Consignee and Purchaser, or an appropriately amended International
Import Certificate, People's Republic of China End-User Certificate, Indian Import Certificate, or Bulgarian,
Czech, Hungarian, Polish, Romanian, or Slovak Import Certificate before submitting a request for an amendment of
an export license that proposes any increase in the quantity set forth in the export license if the proposed amendment
is not in accordance with the Statement or Certificate already on file with the applicant or the Office of Export Licensing.
The original copy of the new Statement or Certificate shall be: 




* * * * * 



(ii) 

Increase supported by existing Statement or Certificate obtained in support of license application. 

(A) If a proposed quantitative amendment is in accordance with the single transaction Statement by Ultimate Consignee
or Purchaser or Certificate obtained by the applicant in support of the original export license application, the
amendment shall include the following certification, as appropriate:





I (We) certify that this request for amendment of export license number 

XXXXX

, if granted, will not exceed the total quantity covered by the Statement By Ultimate Consignee and Purchaser against
which this export license was issued. 


I (We) certify that this request for amendment of export license number 

XXXXX

, if granted, will not exceed the total quantity authorized under the (

name of country

) International Import Certificate, People's Republic of China End-User Certificate, Indian Import Certificate,
or Bulgarian, Czech, Hungarian, Polish, Romanian, or Slovak Import Certificate number 

XXXXX

.




(B) Where the export license is based on a multiple transactions Statement by Ultimate Consignee and Purchaser, an
additional Statement is not required from the consignee or purchaser to support a proposed license amendment for
an increase in quantity. In lieu thereof, the following certification shall be placed on the amendment request:





I (We) certify that the license listed above is supported by a Statement by Ultimate Consignee and Purchaser.

 




(h) *** (1) 

Types of request. 

A request for exception to a requirement for obtaining an International Import Certificate, People's Republic of
China End-User Certificate, Indian Import Certificate, or Bulgarian, Czech, Hungarian, Polish, Romanian, or Slovak
Import Certificate

4

 may involve either a single transaction or, where the reason necessitating the request is continuing in nature, multiple
transactions. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
 See 775.2(c) for exceptions to the consignee/purchaser statement requirement where applicant is unable
to obtain this statement. 

</FOOTNOTE>


* * * * * 





