 




<RINDOCK>[OPP300224A; FRL47513]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Abandoned and Incomplete Pesticide Petitions; Policy Statement </DOCTITLE>




<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 EPA is announcing that it will subject to a final review all pesticide petitions for tolerances, exemptions from the
requirement of a tolerance, and food or feed additive regulations currently pending with the Agency where the petitioner
has failed to respond to a notice of deficiency within 75 days of receipt of the notice. At the time of a final review,
pesticide petitions that do not provide sufficient evidence for the Agency to find that the tolerance or exemption
is protective of the public health will be denied. The policies reflected in this Statement will be applied by the Agency
on a case-by-case basis.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 The policies announced in this Statement are currently in effect. 



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 By mail: James A. Tompkins or Melissa L. Chun, Registration Division (7505W), Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental
Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460. Office location and telephone numbers: 6th Fl., Westfield
Building, 2800 Crystal Drive, Arlington, VA 22202, (703)-308-8358 (Tompkins) or (703)-308-8318 (Chun). 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 


I. Introduction


In the 

Federal Register

 of September 4, 1991 (56 FR 43759), EPA issued a Policy Statement concerning its procedures for reviewing petitions
for tolerances, exemptions from the requirement of a tolerance, and food or feed additive regulations under section
408 or 409 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) (as amended). In the Statement, EPA said it would subject
certain pesticide petitions to a final review unless, within a specified period, the petitioner submits the necessary
data or a reasonable timetable for supplying data to correct deficiencies. Additionally, EPA announced that it would
subject all other pending and future petitions to such a final review annually. If, at the time of any final review,
there is insufficient scientific data before the Administrator to establish a tolerance, exemption from a tolerance,
or a food or feed additive regulation capable of protecting the public health, the petition will be denied.
EPA received comments from the Mobay Corp. (Mobay) in response to the Policy Statement. This notice clarifies the
intent of the previous policy statement and responds to the comments. Mobay's primary concern appeared to be that
EPA would deny petitions simply for failure to comply with timeframes for responding to notices of deficiency or for
submitting data, but this was not EPA's intent, and the timeframes outlined in the Statement are for etablishing internal
administrative guidelines for final rulings on petitions.


II. Background and Clarification of Policy


EPA is responsible for processing tolerance petitions for residues of pesticides in or on raw agricultural commodities
under section 408 of the FFDCA and petitions for food additive regulations for residues of pesticides in or on processed
food or feed under section 409 of the FFDCA. Under section 408(d) of the act, the Administrator may establish a tolerance
or an exemption from the requirement of a tolerance for a raw agricultural commodity upon the request of a person who
has submitted an application for registration of a pesticide under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act (FIFRA). Under FFDCA sec. 408(e), the Administrator may on his or her own initiative or upon the request of an interested
person, establish a tolerance or an exemption from the requirement of a tolerance. Under FFDCA sec. 409(c), the Administrator
may establish a food additive regulation for pesticide residues in or on food or feed upon the request of any person,
or the Administrator may deny a petition.

Over the last 20 years, EPA has accumulated a large inventory of pending petitions for pesticide tolerances, exemptions
from the requirement of a tolerance, and food or feed additive regulations (hereafter referred to collectively in
this notice as ``pesticide petitions''). By the end of 1989 the Agency had in its inventory approximately 1,000 pending
petitions. Although the Agency has reviewed 750 of these petitions and notified the petitioners that these petitions
lack sufficient data to establish the requested tolerance, exemption or food or feed additive regulation, petitioners
have failed to respond in the case of 386 petitions. As a matter of course, EPA has treated such deficient petitions
as pending until the petitioner either provides the required information or withdraws the petition.

Until the petitioner provides EPA with the required data, the Agency cannot establish an exemption from the requirement
of a tolerance or establish a tolerance above zero for the use described in the petition. While it may establish zero
tolerances, EPA is reluctant to do so for the uses described in the hundreds of deficient pesticide petitions. Use
of the zero tolerance concept for so many deficient pesticide petitions would cause the Agency to establish hundreds
of unnecessary tolerances and clutter the tolerance regulations.

EPA's former policy, which allowed deficient pesticide petitions to remain extant, and its general reluctance to
establish unnecessary zero tolerances have resulted in a backlog of hundreds of pending petitions. This backlog
has created serious administrative problems for the Agency. (See 56 FR 43759; Sept. 4, 1991.) To alleviate these problems,
EPA has revised its internal administrative procedures for reviewing pesticide petitions.

To restate and clarify the policy announced, the Agency requested that petitioners who had filed petitions that had
been pending with EPA for 5 years or more and for which 4 years had passed since the petitioner has responded to the Agency's
last correspondence to provide the Agency with a reasonable timetable within 75 days of that notice for submitting
the missing information. If the petitioner did not respond to the notice, submitted a response found inadequate,
or requested that the petition be reviewed ``as is,'' the Agency announced that it would generally exercise its discretion
and subject the petition to a final review. EPA may make internal policy decisions, such as when to subject a pesticide
petition to a final review, on a case-by-case basis. In the Policy Statement, EPA identified in a table those petitions
for which it was requesting some response within 75 days.

In addition, for all other pending and future petitions, as soon as the Agency identifies a petition as being deficient,
the Agency will notify the petitioner, either by letter or by notice in the 

Federal Register

, requesting that the petitioner respond within 75 days by providing a reasonable timetable for supplying the Agency
with the needed data. If the petitioner demonstrates in his or her response that it will supply the data to the Agency
within a reasonable period of time, the Agency may in its discretion postpone a final review. However, if the petitioner
does not respond or does not respond adequately, EPA will generally schedule a final review of the petition.

If at the time of any final review there are insufficient scientific data before the Administrator to establish a tolerance,
exemption from a tolerance, or a food or feed additive regulation capable of protecting the public health, the petition
will be denied. 


III. Response to Mobay's Comments 


A. Authority to Deny Petitions Under Section 408 of FFDCA.


Mobay comments that unlike FFDCA sec. 409(c)(1)(B), the FFDCA provides the Agency with no authority to deny petitions
submitted pursuant to section 408(d) or 408(e) of the act.
EPA disagrees with Mobay's conclusion. First, section 408(e) of the FFDCA states that on its own initiative or upon
request by an interested person, ``the Administrator may *** propose the issuance of a regulation establishing a
tolerance'' or an exemption from a tolerance requirement. Proposal of a tolerance under FFDCA sec. 408(e), even one
requested by interested persons, is entirely discretionary to the Administrator. If the Agency is free not to propose
a requested tolerance, it is also permitted to deny such a requested tolerance. According to the Court in 

Nader v. EPA

, ``[s]o deferential is subsection (e) that the Administrator is not only free to deny the requested regulation, she
need not even propose it. See 40 CFR 180.29(a) (1987).'' 859 F.2d 747, 752 (d.c. Cir. 1988).
Further, although the FFDCA does not provide explicit authority for denial of section 408(d) petitions, neither
does it or its legislative history discuss whether EPA may deny pesticide petitions that do not provide sufficient
information to establish a tolerance or exemption capable of protecting the public health. Due to Congress' silence
on this precise issue, any reasonable interpretation that is consistent with the purpose of the statute is valid.


Chevron v. EPA

, 467 U.S. 837, 842-844 (1984). See also 

Young v. Community Nutrition Institute

, 476 U.S. 974, 981-982 (1986). Even while Mobay argues against EPA's denial authority, it admits that denial is a reasonable
means for responding to what it has classified as ``abandoned'' section 408 petitions.


B. Basis for Denial of Section 408 or 409 Petitions


Mobay argues that, even if there is an implicit authority ``to deny petitions for tolerances under section 408(b),
EPA cannot deny a petition on the basis of administrative convenience and to enhance the Agency's revenues.'' Mobay
also maintains that EPA may deny a petition for a food additive regulation under section 409 of the FFDCA only if the
scientific data ``fails to establish that the proposed use of the food additive *** will be safe *** or shows that the
proposed use of the additive would promote deception of the consumer ***.''

Contrary to Mobay's conclusion, EPA does not intend to deny petitions for administrative convenience or to raise
revenues. Rather, EPA is changing its internal procedures for reviewing pesticide petitions due to the large number
of petitions still pending with the Agency. EPA will be reviewing the pending petitions identified in Table 1 of the
Policy Statement (56 FR 43759; Sept. 4, 1991). In addition, it will attempt to make a final review of all other pending
and future petitions after 75 days from the receipt of the notice of deficiency if EPA receives no response or an inadequate
response from the petitioner, or if the petitioner requests that EPA review the petition ``as is.'' Subsequent to
such reviews some petitions will be denied where there is insufficient information for the Agency to find that the
proposed tolerance or exemption is protective of the public health. However, at no time will pesticide petitions
be denied for administrative convenience or to raise revenues.


C. The Impact of Denial of a Petition Versus Setting a Zero Tolerance


Mobay disagrees with the Agency's position that denial of a tolerance petition is equivalent, for practical purposes,
to setting a zero tolerance. Mobay provided no explanation as to how the two actions could have a different impact from
a petitioner's perspective.

EPA believes there is no functional difference between the denial of a petition and establishing a zero tolerance.
A commodity bearing a pesticide residue for which a tolerance has been denied or for which a zero tolerance has been
established would be considered unsafe under section 408 of the FFDCA and adulterated under section 402(a)(2)(B)
of the FFDCA. No rights or burdens would be created, imposed, or removed by denying a petition rather than setting a
zero tolerance. The legal and practical implications of both actions are the same. 


D. Compliance With Rulemaking Procedures Set Forth in the Administrative Procedures Act (APA)


Mobay states that ``EPA's decision to deny petitions under Sections 408 and 409 of the FFDCA if a petitioner either
fails to (1) respond to EPA's notice of deficiency within 75 days, or (2) supplement the data within a 4 year time period
is clearly a rule under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA).'' According to Mobay, EPA's intended action is a substantive
rule requiring compliance with the notice and comment opportunities provided in section 553 of the APA because EPA's
intended action is of future effect and of general applicability, and acts as an amendment to 40 CFR 180.7(d) which
``provides a petitioner with an indefinite period of time to supplement a deficient petition after notification
of deficiencies.''

Contrary to Mobay's assertions, EPA's publication of this policy is designed to establish internal guidelines for
identifying ``stale'' petitions that require formal action. It does not affect any rights of petitioners or bind
EPA's discretion. EPA is not under any obligation to publish for comment its internal guidelines for review of petitions
and could at any time, and at its sole discretion, take formal action denying a petition failing to meet statutory criteria.

EPA does not, as Mobay assumed, intend to deny petitions for failure to comply with the 75 day or 4 year timeframes. As
previously mentioned, these timeframes are internal guidance as to when a petition is probably stale and thus should
be considered for formal action removing it from the pending status. Any formal action will be based on the applicable
statutory criteria.

This policy does not amend the EPA regulation which allows petitioners to supplement deficient petitions. While
40 CFR 180.7(d) permits a petitioner to correct a deficiency prior to filing, nothing in that section prescribes when
EPA can or must make a decision on a pesticide petition that has been filed. Neither the statute nor regulations in 40
CFR part 180 give a petitioner the right to maintain a deficient petition before the Agency indefinitely. In fact,
FFDCA sec. 408 anticipates EPA final action on petitions in 180 days, a considerably shorter timeframe than those
outlined in this policy for scheduling a final review. The goal of reviewing petitions within 4 years and the proposed
internal procedure of sending deficiency notices with a request for a response do not affect in any meaningful way
the petitioner's ability to supplement deficient petitions. An adequate response to the Agency's request within
75 days preserves the petitioner's right to provide supplemental data for up to 4 years without the Agency's taking
formal action to review the petition. Given that the statute contemplates an Agency decision within 180 days, the
Agency's policy of allowing a petition to remain extant up to 4 years from the date EPA approves the schedule for generation
of data is reasonable, even generous.


E. Incomplete Petitions and the Potential for Error in EPA's Files


Mobay argues that the Agency has not presented any compelling reason why incomplete versus abandoned petitions should
be denied. Further, Mobay comments that, even should the Agency have some compelling reason to deny incomplete petitions,
the inaccuracy of the Agency's files and records is evidence that the ``potential for erroneous decisions far outweighs
any need the Agency may have to cleanse its records.''
Mobay's comment assumes a distinction between incomplete and abandoned pesticide petitions not made by EPA in this
policy, and Mobay does not explain the distinction. As previously noted, EPA is applying the policy announced in this
Notice to reform its internal procedures for timing the final review of all pesticide petitions. At the point at which
EPA determines that a petition is deficient, it will notify the petitioner. Failing an adequate response, the deficient
petition will be subject to a final review. Upon a final review, EPA will deny those pesticide petitions which do not
provide sufficient data to establish a tolerance, exemption from a tolerance, or food or feed additive regulation
capable of protecting the public health.
Further, the potential inaccuracies in EPA's files argue in favor of instituting this policy rather than against
it. One of the main objectives of the policy is to ensure that EPA has accurate records to determine which pending petitions
are still active and what their deficiencies may be. The accuracy of EPA's files will be increased by regularizing
the Agency's monitoring of the status of pesticide petitions. If EPA has made an error, then the petitioner has the
opportunity to notify EPA of the error well before a final review of the petition.


IV. Implementation


EPA will be subjecting to a final review those pending petitions identified at 56 FR 43759 in Table 1 of the Policy Statement
for which it received no response, an inadequate response, or a request to review the petition ``as is.'' In addition,
EPA will notify all other petitioners of any deficiencies in their petitions and allow 75 days to respond to the notification.
EPA will attempt to make a final review of all other pending and future petitions after 75 days from the receipt of the
notice of deficiency if EPA receives no response or an inadequate response from the petitioner, or if the petitioner
requests that EPA review the petition ``as is.'' If EPA determines, upon a final review, that a petition does not include
sufficient information to find that the requested tolerance or exemption from a tolerance is protective of the public
health, it will notify the petitioner by letter or FR notice that the petition is being denied. 


V. Format of Submissions 


A. Request to Withdraw a Pesticide Petition


All requests to withdraw a pesticide petition should be submitted on company letterhead and specify the pesticide
petition number which the Agency assigned to the petition, the active ingredient of the chemical, and the raw agricultural
commodities and food or feed items involved.


B. Requests to Retain Petitions


All requests to retain a pesticide petition should be submitted on company letterhead and specify the pesticide petition
number which the Agency assigned to the petition, the active ingredient of the chemical, and raw agricultural commodities
and food or feed items involved. The request should contain a timetable listing data deficiencies identified by EPA
letters and the date the company expects to submit these data. This timeframe should not exceed a 4-year period.


C. Where to Send Requests


All requests should be submitted to the following address: Front End Processing Staff, Registration Division (7505C),
401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460.


List of Subjects


Environmental protection, Agricultural commodities, Food additives, Feed additives, Pesticides and pests.




Dated: December 23, 1993.



</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Stephen L. Johnson, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Director, Registration Division, Office of Pesticide Programs.



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 943758 Filed 21894; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>

