 

1.0Policy and Structure



1.1Introduction



The Committee on National Accreditation of Environmental Laboratories (CNAEL) in its final report of September
1992 recommended the establishment of a national environmental laboratory accreditation program (NELAP). The
States function as the primary accrediting authorities and may contract with a third party as the accrediting body
for purposes of carrying out some parts of the accrediting functions, e.g. on-site inspections. As accrediting authorities,
the states would maintain the authority to grant accreditation, enforce compliance, etc. EPA shall oversee and approve
the state's compliance with all standards applicable to an accrediting authority. The recommended key elements
for NELAP include on-site assessments, performance evaluation testing, and data audits. To achieve the stated goals
of the CNAEL report, it is proposed to establish a National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Conference (NELAC),
which is modeled after the National Conference on Weights and Measures. NELAC membership shall be voluntary and shall
be open to environmental laboratory accrediting authorities. The NELAC shall serve as the organization that shall
establish and modify the accreditation standards. Broad participation in NELAC shall identify laboratories which
are capable of providing reliable, uniform laboratory data which are acceptable to both Federal and State environmental
programs. National accreditation standards and procedures shall provide a level playing field where reciprocity
among the States in environmental laboratory accreditation shall be practicable. The creation of a National Environmental
Laboratory Accreditation Program allows coordination of the current accreditation activities of different States
or other governmental agencies, and reduces the number of on-site inspections, performance evaluation tests, and
related requirements with which the accredited organizations must comply. It is intended that NELAP function in
a manner which minimizes negative effects on the current accreditation operations of the States, requires minimum
outlay of State and Federal funds to implement, and that is self supporting.



1.2Purpose of the Conference



The National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Conference shall be a standards setting body. NELAC shall,
through the process described, establish consensus uniform standards on which the national accreditation program
shall be based. These uniform standards shall include, but are not limited to, quality systems, performance evaluation,
audit programs, and other key elements as established by the standing committees of NELAC. It is NOT the purpose of
NELAC to function as an accrediting body, oversee or approve accrediting bodies, or administer any of the main elements
of the accreditation program.



1.3Structure of the Conference



The structure of the Conference is shown in Figure 11. The Board of Directors shall assume the overall supervisory,
administrative, and procedural duties. The Standing Committees and Administrative Committees are overseen by
the Board of Directors. The Standing Committees shall receive input regarding standards and test procedures, then
process this input into resolutions which shall be put before the Membership at the Annual Conference. These resolutions
shall be voted on by Active Members. The non-voting Contributors shall also have the opportunity to make presentations
and comments on the resolutions throughout the process and at the Annual Conference. The NELAC may also take into consideration
advice and comment provided to the Environmental Protection Agency through the Environmental Laboratory Advisory
Board (ELAB) chartered under the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA). The composition and relationships of these
bodies is described below.



1.3.1The Board of Directors




