 

In addition to the Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing requirements described below, the Department has since 1971
attempted to translate the affirmatively furthering mandate through policy mechanisms such as the Site and Neighborhood
Standards, Tenant Selection and Assignment and Equal Housing Opportunity Plans, and other program and project-specific
strategies. In recent months the Department has recognized that these project and program-specific mechanisms
do not fully address the broad-based fair housing problems which actually exist. The Department has also identified
the problem of concentration of persons by race and income as a major barrier to the achievement of the objectives of
fair housing in the United States. The Department is in the process of formulating appropriate responses that will
be tested in the near future through special demonstration projects similar to this lab, including the feasibility
of implementing a metropolitan areawide affirmative fair housing marketing plan through a clearinghouse mechanism.



(2) The FHIP Program 


Section 561 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987, 42 U.S.C. 3616 note, established as a demonstration
program the Fair Housing Initiatives Program (FHIP) to strengthen the Department's enforcement of the Fair Housing
Act and to further fair housing. This program assists projects and activities designed to enforce and enhance compliance
with the Fair Housing Act and substantially equivalent State and local fair housing laws. Implementing regulations
are found at 24 CFR part 125. 
Three general categories of activities were established at 24 CFR part 125 for FHIP funding under section 561 of the
Housing and Community Development Act of 1987: The Administrative Enforcement Initiative, the Education and Outreach
Initiative, and the Private Enforcement Initiative. Section 905 of the Housing and Community Development Act of
1992 (HCDA 1992) (Pub. L. 102550, approved October 28, 1992), amended section 561 by adding specific eligible
applicants and activities to the Education and Outreach and Private Enforcement Initiatives, as well as an entirely
new Fair Housing Organization Initiative. Section 905 also gave the program permanent status. 
The regulations at 24 CFR part 125, subpart C, describe the purpose and eligible activities under the Education and
Outreach Initiative, the segment of the FHIP program under which the activity proposed in this NOFA is to be funded.
Section 125.303(b) describes eligible outreach projects that may be funded under this initiative, including but
not limited to the following: 
``(1) Developing national, regional and local media campaigns; 
(2) Bringing housing industry and civic or fair housing groups together to identify illegal real estate practices
and to determine how to correct them; 
(3) Designing specialized outreach projects to inform all persons of the availability of housing opportunities;

(4) Developing and implementing a response to new or more sophisticated housing practices that may result in discriminatory
housing practices; and 
(5) Developing mechanisms for the identification of and quick response to housing discrimination cases that involve
physical harm.'' 
The activities set forth in this NOFA are eligible activities under the Education and Outreach Initiative of the FHIP
program, since they relate to various eligible activities of this initiative. Other sections of this NOFA will specifically
illustrate how this relationship is facilitated. 


(3) Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Requirements


The Fair Housing Act states that it is the policy of the United States to provide, within constitutional limitations,
for fair housing throughout the United States. The Act also states at Section 808(e)(5) that the Department of Housing
and Urban Development shall administer its programs in a manner affirmatively to further the objectives of the Fair
Housing Act. Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing has, since 1972, been one of the means by which the Department has
carried out Section 808(e)(5) of the Act through the programs it has administered. The purpose of Affirmative Fair
Housing Marketing as stated in the regulations at 24 CFR 200.600, is to ``achieve a condition in which individuals
of similar income levels in the same housing market area have a like range of housing choices available to them regardless
of their race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.'' These regulations also apply
to all applicants for participation in HUD insured subsidized or unsubsidized housing programs whose applications
are approved for: 
Multifamily projects and manufactured home parks of five or more lots, units or spaces, and initial submissions by
a lender for an application for mortgage insurance on a single family property, where the property is located in a subdivision
and the builder or developer intends to sell five or more properties in the subdivision;

1

 and dwelling units when the applicant's participation would exceed five or more HUD-insured single-family homes
within the preceding twelve-month period. Such participants are required to develop an affirmative marketing program
on a HUD-approved form. The regulations describe the specific components of an Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing
Plan (AFHM) at 24 CFR 200.620. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
 See the 

Federal Register

 of August 3, 1993, HUD Systems for Approval of Single-Family Subdivisions. This Final Rule included amendments to
the Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Regulations that added handicap and familial status as protected classes
under these Regulations. 




</FOOTNOTE>

