 

Two provisions have been added to the proposed rule regarding incentive-based grazing fees. First, the proposed
rule provides for a 30 percent reduction in the grazing fee to those permittees and lessees who meet the applicable
eligibility criteria to be established in a separate rule. Second, the proposed rule provides that if separate final
regulations necessary to implement the incentive-based fee are not issued prior to the start of grazing fee year 1997,
implementation of the $3.96 base value would be delayed. The Department believes that a 30 percent reduction in the
grazing fee would be a valuable tool in promoting good stewardship. However, the effectiveness of this incentive
would rest on the criteria for qualification. These criteria would focus primarily upon those permittees and lessees
who agree to participate in special rangeland improvement programs characterized by best management practices,
the furtherance of resource condition objectives, and comprehensive monitoring. The Department has not found general
agreement on the criteria necessary to qualify for the fee reduction and, accordingly, has decided to consider that
aspect of the incentive-based fee through a separate rulemaking. The proposed delay in implementation of the $3.96
base value, in the event that final rule on these criteria has not been issued, is intended to demonstrate the Department's
commitment to expeditious implementation of the incentive-based fee. The Department anticipates that eligibility
criteria would require the permittee or lessee to undertake management practices beyond those otherwise required
by law and regulation to benefit the ecological health of the public rangelands. 

In the absence of completed regulations establishing the criteria for qualification for the reduced fee, and beginning
in the grazing fee year 1997, a base value of $3.50 would be substituted in the formula. The $3.50 base value would continue
until such time as the incentive-based fee regulations are completed. This provision would not affect the phase-in
of the fee in the grazing fee years 1995 and 1996, or the 25 percent cap on annual changes in the calculated fee. 

The proposed rule would provide for collecting a surcharge for certain authorized leasing and subleasing activities
associated with a Federal permit or lease attached to base property. It would retain the provision for legal transfer
of base leases and permits and the pasturing of livestock owned by persons other than the permittee or lessee. 

The initial proposal in the advance notice has been modified to exclude from the surcharge sons and daughters of permittees
or lessees grazing livestock on public lands as part of an educational or youth programs pertaining to livestock rangeland
management, or when establishing a livestock herd in anticipation of assuming part or all of the family ranch operation.
This change was made in recognition of the public concern that the surcharge could unduly restrict opportunities
for young persons learning or entering the livestock business. 

The issue of subleasing or pasturing livestock owned by others in connection with public land grazing permits or leases
has been controversial and there has been much concern expressed in the West by the livestock industry and conservation
organizations, alike. The concern is easily understood when one considers that past Federal grazing fees have been
sufficiently low as to present opportunities for substantial profit when a permittee or lessee pastures another
party's livestock or leases the base property. Also, the short-term nature of agreements for pasturing livestock
owned by persons other than the permittee or lessee presents less incentive for stewardship of the land. 

In developing an approach to address these concerns the BLM queried departments responsible for the management of
State lands in most of the western States to determine how they were addressing this issue and if they were collecting
a share of the lease or service fees being charged. The BLM found that most of the States that allow subleasing or pasturing
of livestock owned by persons other than the permittee or lessee require the payment of a service fee or surcharge,
or a portion of the amount in excess of the State's rental fee. 




