 

The proposed experimental area does not currently support reproducing pairs of wolves, nor is it likely that 2 pairs
of naturally dispersing wolves from northwestern Montana would, within the next 3 years, move into the area and establish
a breeding population of wolves. In 3 years, the number of reintroduced wolves should be growing and potentially dispersing
into other areas, including Montana and the proposed Yellowstone reintroduction area. Except for an established
and growing population of gray wolves in northwestern Montana, only gray wolf individuals have been documented in
the remainder of the northern Rocky Mountains in the United States. Thus, the central Idaho reintroduction site is
consistent with provisions of section 10(j) of the Act that requires that an experimental population be wholly separate
geographically from nonexperimental populations of the same species. An occasional, solitary wolf has been reported,
killed, or otherwise documented in Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, and other western States, and single packs occasionally
have been reported throughout the northern Rocky Mountains. However, these reported wolves and groups of wolves,
if all reports are factual, apparently disappeared for unknown reasons and did not establish recoverable ``populations''
as defined by wolf experts (Service 1994). However, it is possible that prior to 2002, other wolves may appear in the
wild, and be attracted to the experimental area by the presence of the reintroduced wolves, or by other factors. These
``new'' wolves that appear in the experimental population area might contribute to recovery of the experimental
population, and they also would be classified as part of the nonessential experimental population. 

It is anticipated that some wolves may disperse from the experimental area and contribute to wolf recovery in northwestern
Montana. If so, these wolves would be classified as endangered, as in the case of wolves that recolonized an area near
Glacier National Park in 1982. It is also possible, but not probable, that during the next 3 years, movements between
recovery areas may result in some genetic exchange between wolves resulting from natural recovery and those resulting
from the reintroduction. It is not anticipated that such exchange will significantly affect the rate of recovery
in the central Idaho experimental population area. 

For the purposes of establishment of this experimental population, the Service has determined that there is no existing
wolf population in the recovery area that would preclude reintroduction and establishment of an experimental population
in the central Idaho area. A wolf population is defined as at least two breeding pairs of naturally occurring gray wolves
that successfully raise at least two young to December 31 of their birth year for two consecutive years (Service 1994).
If a wolf population were discovered in the proposed recovery area, no reintroduction would occur. Instead, the success
of the naturally occurring wolf population would be monitored to determine if population recovery was continuing.
If this event occurs before the effective date of the experimental population rule, those wolves would be determined
to be, and managed as, endangered wolves under the full authority of the Act. In this case, the experimental rule would
not be implemented, and no wolves would be reintroduced in that experimental area. If wolf population growth does
not continue, and within 5 years the wolf population has not doubled from the original founding animals, reintroduction
would proceed. Wolves will not be reintroduced if, prior to introduction of wolves, breeding groups of wolves are
discovered. However, once the experimental population rule is established and the reintroduction begun by the actual
release of wolves into a recovery area, the experimental population rule would remain in effect until wolf recovery
occurs or after a scientific review indicates that modifications in the experimental rule are necessary to achieve
wolf recovery. 

If a wolf population (2 breeding pairs successfully raising two young each for two consecutive years) were discovered
in the proposed central Idaho experimental population area, reintroduction under an experimental population rule
would not occur in that area and any such wolf population would be managed as a natural recovering population in that
area. The boundaries of the proposed experimental population area would be changed, as needed, to encourage recovery
of any naturally occurring, breeding wolf population if such natural population is discovered prior to the establishment
of the experimental population, and before wolf reintroduction occurs. No experimental population area will contain
a portion of the home range of any active breeding pairs of wolves that have successfully raised young. Any changes
in the boundaries of the nonessential experimental population area, required because of the above conditions, would
be reflected in a final rule. 





