 

Section 4201(c) of that same law provided for payment for EPO furnished to ESRD patients by Medicare approved dialysis
facilities to be made at the rate of $11 per 1,000 units, rounded to the nearest 100 units, effective January 1, 1991.
Section 13566 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA '93, Pub. L. 10366) sets the rate at $10
per 1,000 units effective January 1, 1994. 
Typically, EPO is administered at the end of the dialysis treatment. Therefore, unless medical documentation shows
that it is necessary to administer EPO at a time other than during dialysis, payment for patients who dialyze at a facility
is made only to the facility. 
The change made by section 13555(b) of OBRA '93, which provides for coverage of EPO self-administered by any dialysis
patient (not limited to those who dialyze at home) will be implemented by separate regulations. 
For home use of EPO supplied to a home dialysis patient competent to administer the drug without medical supervision,
HCFA pays only a Medicare approved dialysis facility or a supplier of home dialysis equipment and supplies, if the
patient obtains the drug directly from the supplier. In either case, payment for home use of EPO is made at the rate described
above. 
If a home patient is competent to use EPO without supervision and the drug has been prescribed, generally the patient's
dialysis facility would furnish it. If a physician administers EPO to the patient, it should be the physician who receives
the Monthly Capitation Payment (MCP) for furnishing the beneficiary's renal-related services. If a physician other
than the MCP physician furnishes EPO, this physician must look to the MCP physician for payment for EPO administration.
In this latter case, HCFA pays on a reasonable charge basis for the drug, but makes no additional payment to the physician
for administration. 
HCFA will announce annually, for public comment, whether an update in the EPO allowance is appropriate. By statute,
any increase will not exceed the percentage increase (if any) in the implicit price deflator for the gross national
product for the second quarter of the preceding year over the implicit price deflator for the second quarter of the
second preceding year. 


III. Provisions of the Interim Final Rule 


In the interim final rule with comment period, published on September 4, 1991, we made the changes discussed below:

A. Major changes. 
We amended subpart U of part 405 of the HCFA rules, which sets forth the conditions for coverage of services furnished
to ESRD beneficiaries, as follows: 
1. Patient selection. 
To ensure the safe and effective use of EPO by home dialysis patients, we amended 405.2163 to require that the
patient's dialysis facility or the physician responsible for all dialysis-related services make a comprehensive
assessment of the patient and the patient's needs at the time of selection for EPO therapy. 
We emphasized that proper patient selection is necessary for a safe, effective program of EPO therapy at home. It is
necessary for the dialysis facility or the physician responsible for all dialysis-related services to assess_



&bull;Whether the patient will actually be able to administer the drug or have available the necessary assistance
from a care-giver; and 
&bull;Whether the patient complies with certain elements necessary for successful EPO therapy. 

 

Accordingly, we required that, in order to be selected for home use of EPO, a patient must_ 

 

&bull;Be a home dialysis patient (either peritoneal or hemodialysis method). 
&bull;Have a hematocrit (or comparable hemoglobin) of less than 30 percent unless medical documentation justifies
a patient's need for EPO with a hematocrit higher than 30 percent. For example, a patient with severe angina, severe
pulmonary disease, or severe hypotension may require EPO to prevent adverse symptoms even though the patient has
a higher hematocrit. 
&bull;Be under the care of the physician who is responsible for the dialysis-related services and who prescribes
EPO, and under the care of the renal dialysis facility that establishes the plan of care for the services and monitors
the progress of the home EPO therapy. 
&bull;Be trained by the facility to inject EPO or have an appropriate caregiver who is trained to inject EPO. 

 

In addition, as part of the assessment, we required the following: 
a. The patient's hematocrit (or hemoglobin), serum iron, transferrin saturation, serum ferritin, and blood pressure
must be measured. 
b. An appropriate protocol, developed by the patient's physician or facility and including monitoring of blood pressure,
must be given to the patient for the safe and effective use of the drug. 
c. The patient must be capable of performing self-administration of EPO, be able to learn aseptic technique, and be
able to read the drug labeling, or must have a primary care-giver who can perform these tasks. 
d. The patient must be able to adhere to a disciplined medical regimen. 
2. Patient care plan. 
To ensure adequate monitoring of home EPO therapy, we amended 405.2137(b) to add a new paragraph (b)(7) which
requires that the patient plan for a home dialysis patient who uses EPO in the home include the following: 

 

&bull;Review of diet and fluid modifications to monitor iron stores and hyperkalemia related to dietary indiscretion
or elevated blood pressure. 
&bull;Reevaluation of the patient's dialysis prescription taking into account the patient's increased appetite
and red blood cell volume. 
&bull;A method of teaching the patient to identify the signs and symptoms of hypotension and hypertension. 
&bull;The decrease or discontinuance of EPO if hypertension is uncontrolled. 
&bull;A method of followup on blood work and a means to keep the physician informed of the results. 



3. Other concerns. 
In order to minimize possible abuse of EPO, we revised 405.2163(g)(4) to require that the physician or facility
ensure that ``on hand'' EPO is limited to a two-month supply. 

