 

(x) 

Individualized family service plan (IFSP)

. A written statement for an infant or toddler with a disability and his or her family that is based on a multidisciplinary
assessment of the unique needs of the infant or toddler and concerns and the priorities of the family, and an identification
of the services appropriate to meet such needs, concerns, and priorities.

(y) 

Individuals with disabilities

. Infants and toddlers with disabilities, preschool children with disabilities, and children with disabilities,
collectively, ages birth to 21 years (inclusive) who are either entitled to enroll in a Section 6 School Arrangement
or would, but for their age, be so entitled.

(z) 

Infants and toddlers with disabilities

. Individuals from birth to age 2 years (inclusive), who need early intervention services because they:

(1) Are experiencing a developmental delay, as measured by appropriate diagnostic instruments and procedures,
of 25 percent (or 2 standard deviations below the mean), in one or more areas, or 20 percent (or 11/2 standard deviations
below the mean), in two or more of the following areas of development: Cognitive, physical, communication, social
or emotional, or adaptive development.

(2) Are at-risk for a developmental delay; i.e., have a diagnosed physical or mental condition that has a high probability
of resulting in developmental delay; e.g., chromosomal disorders and genetic syndromes.

(aa) 

Intercomponent

. Cooperation among the DoD Components and programs so that coordination and integration of services to individuals
with disabilities and their families occur.

(bb) 

Medically related services. 

(1) Medical services (as defined in paragraph (cc) of this section) and those services provided under professional
medical supervision that are required by a CSC either to determine a student's eligibility for special education
or, if the student is eligible, the special education and related services required by the student under this part
in accordance with 32 CFR part 345.

(2) Provision of either direct or indirect services listed on an IEP as necessary for the student to benefit from the
educational curriculum. These services may include: Medical; social work; community health nursing; dietary;
psychiatric diagnosis; evaluation, and follow up; occupational therapy; physical therapy; audiology; ophthalmology;
and psychological testing and therapy.

(cc) 

Medical services. 

Those evaluative, diagnostic, and supervisory services provided by a licensed and credentialed physician to assist
CSCs and to implement IEPs. Medical services include diagnosis, evaluation, and medical supervision of related
services that by statute, regulation, or professional tradition are the responsibility of a licensed and credentialed
physician.

(dd) 

Mental retardation. 

Significantly subaverage general intellectual functioning, existing concurrently with deficits in adaptive
behavior and manifested during the developmental period, that adversely affects a preschool child's or child's
educational performance.

(ee) 

Multidisciplinary

. The involvement of two or more disciplines or professions in the provision of integrated and coordinated services,
including evaluation and assessment activities, and development of an IFSP or IEP.

(ff) 

Native language

. When used with reference to an individual of limited English proficiency, the language normally used by such individuals,
or in the case of an infant, toddler, preschool child or child, the language normally used by the parent of the infant,
toddler, preschool child or child.

(gg) 

Natural environments

. Settings that are natural or normal for the infant or toddler's same age peers who have no disability.



