 

These emission models, however, reflect currently-available information and hence do not allow refiners to take
advantage of emission benefits derived from new fuel additives or changes in fuel parameters not contained in the
models. To allow for fuel technology development and innovation, the Agency also believes that testing has a role
in certification as a means of supplementing the models. This section contains a detailed discussion of the provisions
EPA is promulgating regarding the conditions under which testing is permitted, the manner in which test results can
be used to supplement the models, and the minimum requirements for vehicle testing programs. As was first outlined
in the February 1993 NPRM, the vehicle testing process described in this section has undergone significant changes
since it was first proposed in the April 1992 SNPRM. These changes have been made in response to changes in EPA's approach
to modeling the relationship between fuel properties and emissions, as described in Section IV, and comments received
in response to the April 1992 and February 1993 proposals. The following discussion addresses the major substantive
comments received by EPA regarding certification of fuels by vehicle testing. A detailed summary and analysis of
comments can be found in Section IV.G of the RIA. 



A. Applicability of Testing 



Vehicle testing is the primary way that the effects of various gasoline formulations on motor vehicle emissions can
be determined. As described above, data from vehicle testing programs forms the bulk of the basis for the simple and
complex models. 

EPA believes that fuel certification through single test programs is inherently less reliable than certification
through a testing-based model. The simple and complex models developed by EPA are based on a far greater amount of testing
than would be available from any single test program. These models incorporate and balance the varying and conflicting
results of numerous test programs. The statistical variation associated with an individual test program may cause
a fuel to show emission effects during testing that would not occur in-use. Therefore, EPA proposes that testing only
be permitted to augment the models for fuel effects that are not covered in the models. 



B. Augmenting the Simple Model 



Due to the belief that fuels certified by vehicle testing should be evaluated in conjunction with the most complete
emission model available to more accurately determine the emission benefits of the fuels being tested, EPA proposed
that vehicle testing be permitted to augment the simple model only for the effect of oxygenates on NO

x

 emissions beyond the simple model's oxygen caps. All other testing was to have been performed to augment the complex
model. Based on data collected since the time of the proposal on the effect of oxygenates on NO

x

, EPA no longer believes it appropriate to augment the simple model even in the limited manner described above. Considerably
more data are available in the complex model database regarding the effect of oxygenates on NO

x

 emissions than would be provided by any individual test program. Therefore, testing can only be performed to augment
the complex model. Fuels with oxygen concentrations in excess of 2.7 weight percent must be certified using the complex
model. 



C. Augmenting the Complex Model 



EPA believes that the objective of testing under the complex model should be to evaluate the emission effects of fuels
whose emission effects cannot be adequately represented by the model. Such fuels would include fuels claiming emission
effects from parameters not included in the complex model and fuels containing complex model parameters at levels
beyond the range covered by the model. Without this constraint, it may be possible for a fuel producer to use the statistical
variation associated with testing to claim emission effects through testing which would not be demonstrated in-use,
when tested to a greater degree, or when modeled. For example, a fuel that would fail to meet the VOC requirement by a
small margin when evaluated under the complex model could be tested and shown to meet the VOC requirement due to the
testing error associated with any vehicle testing program. In addition, allowing testing of existing modeled parameters
essentially would make the complex model, and the associated emission performance standards, a fluid target. Fuel
producers would lose the certainty associated with a fixed model and the confidence that their capital investments
will be useful for a fixed amount of time. Therefore, vehicle testing can be used only to determine the emission effects
of parameters not adequately represented by the complex model. The emission effects of the fuel parameter in question
will be determined by combining the emission effects determined through vehicle testing with the emission effects
predicted by the complex model. Furthermore, each testing program can be used to identify the effects of only one new
fuel parameter, unless the changes in other fuel parameters are a natural and inherent consequence of the primary
fuel modification. Without this constraint, EPA believes that accurate determination of the effects of specific
fuel parameters would be more difficult due to the inherent variability in testing programs and the increased opportunities
for gaming. 




