 

Public Comments 



The public was given 60 days in which to submit comments to the interim rule published on July 27, 1992, at 57 FR 33252,
and comments were received from three commenters: One nonprofit organization, one certified public accounting
firm, and one national association of certified public accountants. Below is a listing of the issues raised by the
commenters and the Department's response and resolution of those issues. 



Comment: 

The requirements for a compliance audit performed by an independent accountant seem to be redundant, time-consuming,
and costly, especially where municipal and county requirements include monthly financial and compliance reports,
and both municipal and county officials perform inspection of the records, programs and procedures. Nonprofit organizations
that are subrecipients should be allowed to continue adherence to the guidelines in Circular A110. [one nonprofit
organization and one certified public accounting firm] 



Response: 

Accommodation of this comment is not feasible. OMB issued Circular A133 to supersede portions of Circular
A110 and clearly included, under the A133 coverage, funds received as a subrecipient. The Department
is implementing the provisions of the circular and has no flexibility in this matter. 



Comment:

 The rule should be effective for years beginning on or after August 26, 1992, the effective date stated for the rule.
However, the revisions to paragraph 45.1(d) state that the requirements are applicable to fiscal years beginning
on or after January 1, 1990. An effective date of January 1, 1990 requires institutions to retroactively apply OMB
Circular A133, creating an undue hardship on those institutions and their auditors. [one national association
of certified public accountants]



Response: 

The date in the summary of the interim rule (August 26, 1992) relates to when the audit is conducted, and the date in section
45.1 (fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 1990) relates to the period audited. Circular A133 specifies
that audits of periods beginning on or after January 1, 1990 will be covered. The Department is merely implementing
OMB policy. 



Comment:

 The revisions to paragraph 45.1(b) state that the requirements apply to nonprofit institutions ``***
as defined in OMB Circular A133 (including hospitals that are not affiliated with an institution of higher
education) ***.'' However, section 1.k. of the Attachment to Circular A133 excludes hospitals
that are not affiliated with an institution of higher education. Clarification is needed. [one national association
of certified public accountants] 



Response: 

The substitution of Circular A133, Audits of Institutions of Higher Education and Other Nonprofit Institutions,
for Circular A110, Attachment F, subparagraph 2h (which covered grants to universities, hospitals, and other
nonprofit organizations) left open the issue of coverage of hospitals. The explanation for this omission, advanced
by OMB, was that most hospitals receive reimbursement from the federally funded Medicaid and Medicare programs,
each of which has its own statutory audit requirements. Albeit hospitals which are affiliated with universities
are covered by Circular A133 by reason of that affiliation and non-university affiliated hospitals, which
receive federal funds pursuant to research contracts, are subject to contract closing audits, there still remained
a policy decision of coverage of non-university affiliated hospitals that may be receiving HUD assistance. Therefore,
under section 45.1(b) of the interim rule, the coverage was continued under Circular A133 for non-university
affiliated hospitals that receive HUD assistance. The decision to extend coverage to this group of hospitals receiving
HUD assistance was made as a matter of policy. Any hospital receiving Federal funds should, as a matter of sound fiscal
management, receive audit reviews of the use of those funds. 



This Final Rule 



This rule makes final the interim rule that is discussed above. The following four programs are added to its coverage
by this final rule, since the regulations for these programs were developed after the publication of the interim rule:
PART 92_HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIPS PROGRAM, PART 572_HOPE FOR HOMEOWNERSHIP OF SINGLE FAMILY HOMES PROGRAM (HOPE
3), PART 889_SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY, and PART 890_SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
As discussed earlier in this preamble, the projects under parts 889 and 890 are required to complete project-specific
audits. 



Other Matters 





Executive Order 12866. 



This rule was reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under Executive Order 12866 on Regulatory Planning
and Review, issued by the President on September 30, 1993. Any changes made in the rule subsequent to its submission
to OMB are identified in the docket file, which is available for public inspection in the Office of the Rules Docket
Clerk, room 10276, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410. 



Environmental Determination.



The content of this rule does not constitute a development, nor affect the physical condition of project areas or building
sites, but relates only to auditing and fiscal functions. Thus, the authorities and standards of 50.4 of 24
CFR part 50 (the regulations implementing Section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969) are
inapplicable to this rule; therefore, it is categorically excluded from the NEPA requirements pursuant to 50.20(k).








