 

FSIS recognizes that not all products sold to consumers at the retail level will carry nutrition labeling. FSIS's
final regulation on nutrition labeling provided for certain exemptions including products produced by small businesses
and products in individually wrapped packages of less than 1/2 ounce net weight, provided that the labels for these
products bear no nutrition claims or nutrition information. However, labeling will be required on most processed
products purchased by consumers in retail stores so that, together with the voluntary program for retail store information
on single-ingredient, raw products, consumers will have information on calcium and cholesterol for most products
purchased for consumption at home.

Regarding the comments FSIS received in response to its June 15, 1993, ANPR on the presence of kidneys in poultry products
produced by mechanical deboning, FSIS requires the removal of kidneys of mature turkeys and chickens from their carcasses
before the eviscerating operations during the slaughtering process (9 CFR 381.65(d)). Kidneys of mature poultry
pose a potential health concern because of the possibility of the presence of certain heavy metals. Further, in regard
to the comments made about lungs and sex glands, these are precluded from being present in ``ready-to-cook'' poultry
(i.e., poultry subsequent to the slaughtering process) by the poultry products inspection regulations (9 CFR 381.1(b)(44)).

FSIS acknowledges that many of the reasons provided by commenters for maintaining the Agency's current policy on
labeling poultry products produced by mechanical deboning are valid. However, a substantial number of comments
reflect the consumer's ``right to know'' that poultry product produced by mechanical deboning is in their food because
of the unexpected presence of bone. FSIS believes that these comments refer to the boneless poultry product produced
by mechanical deboning which has greater than 0.6 bone solids content, but no more than one percent bone solids content.

FSIS is now considering issues in regard to the lack of a regulatory definition and standard for certain poultry products
produced by mechanical deboning_products which are deemed to be similar to mechanically separated (species) (MS(S)),
for which a regulatory definition and standard exist (9 CFR 319.5). (``Species'' refers to the species of livestock,
e.g., beef or pork.) MS(S) is defined as ``any finely comminuted product resulting from the mechanical separation
and removal of most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle of livestock carcasses and parts of carcasses'' and meeting
the other provisions specified in 9 CFR 319.5. Provisions in the Federal meat inspection regulations provide, among
other things, a definition and standard that classifies MS(S) as a meat food product and a requirement that MS(S) be
separately identified in the ingredients statement of a meat food product in which it is used as an ingredient (9 CFR
317.2 (c) and (f), 319.1, and 319.5). FSIS's 1982 final rulemaking on MS(S) (47 FR 28214) indicates that the Agency
determined that material differences in the consistency and the composition of MS(S) place it outside the scope of
the product traditionally defined as meat (9 CFR 301.2(rr)), and that its differences are such that it should be defined
as a distinctive standardized product. As such, it should be identified by a name that adequately differentiates
it from meat, viz., MS(S). When MS(S) is used in meat food products, it must be separately listed in the ingredients
statement by its standardized name, e.g., ``mechanically separated beef (or pork).''

Over the years, the meat and poultry industries have referred to poultry produced by mechanical deboning as ``mechanically
deboned poultry'' and ``comminuted poultry,'' and have declared the product as poultry or poultry meat (e.g., ``chicken''
and ``turkey meat'') in the ingredients statement of the labels of products in which it is used as ingredients. Several
red meat sausage manufacturers have alleged that, without a regulatory definition and standard for poultry products
produced by mechanical deboning, a disparate situation exists between labeling certain poultry products produced
by mechanical deboning and MS(S) which poses an unfair advantage for the manufacturers of poultry products and may
deny consumers useful information.

FSIS has considered the appropriate course for addressing these issues, and has initiated two actions in response
to them. FSIS is contemplating proposing regulations on poultry products produced by mechanical deboning, and is
soliciting comments and requesting data on various tentative positions in this advance notice of proposed rulemaking.
The other action is a proposal found elsewhere in this issue of the 

Federal Register

 which amends the Federal meat inspection regulations by amending the definition of meat to include, as meat, product
derived from the advances in meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems that do not crush, grind, or pulverize
bones to remove attached skeletal tissue of livestock carcasses and parts of carcasses from livestock bones.



Purpose of the ANPR: 

FSIS's Intent to Pursue the Development of Amendments to the Federal Poultry Products Inspection Regulations to
Define and Standardize, or Establish Other Requirements for Poultry Products Produced by Mechanical Deboning,
Including Possible Provisions for Composition, Characteristics, and Use, and Requirements for Manufacturing
and Labeling Such Products.



