 

D. Fate of the 

kan

r

 Gene in the Environment 



1. Potential Transfer of the 

kan

r

 Gene From Crops to Microorganisms 



One comment posited a connection between ``the prophylactic use of antibiotics [resulting] in antibiotic-resistant
bacteria reaching the human population'' with a health risk from the possible addition of up to ``10 antibiotic genes
[sic] in most of the cells of major crops.'' The comment agreed with Calgene's documentation that the widespread use
of antibiotics has led to an increase in antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the environment, but went on to postulate
that this was evidence that introducing antibiotic-resistance genes into plants has human health implications.


The comment further asserted that the ``scientific question is whether the resistance genes in the crops can be transferred
by any mechanism [to] organisms that might be human pathogens,'' and that the company should be required experimentally
to ``determine the rates of gene transfer to soil bacteria from plant debris, the persistence or selection of organisms
containing such genes in soil ecosystems, and other important factors in the assessment of the likelihood of releases
compromising the use of antibiotics.'' The comment noted that Calgene analyzed these issues ``in some detail,''
but with ``arm chair calculations, most based on extrapolations from experiments done with other organisms under
other circumstances.'' 

A second comment noted that Calgene had supplied information that three kinds of bacteria, with and without plasmids

7

 carrying antibiotic resistance genes, had little effect on several measures of soil ecosystems, but wrote that the
``relevance of experiments on bacteria to releases of plants is marginal, at best.'' A third comment asserted, without
any supporting evidence, that ``genetic resistance to antibiotics in these plants could be transferred by plasmids
to microorganisms in the soil and elsewhere in the food chain.'' 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


7

</FOOTNAME>
Plasmids are self-replicating units of DNA commonly found in bacteria and are responsible for transfer of antibiotic
resistance between bacteria. 

</FOOTNOTE>


FDA agrees that increasing the number and prevalence of antibiotic-resistant microbes may have serious human health
implications if those microbes are themselves pathogens of humans or domesticated animals, or share the same microenvironment
as such pathogens. FDA considers the relevant scientific question to be whether there would be a meaningful increase
in antibiotic-resistant pathogenic microbes in the human environment due to transfer of the 

kan

r

 gene from plants to microbes. This issue was also the subject of considerable discussion at the April 1994 Food Advisory
Committee meeting. As discussed in detail above, FDA has determined, based on the body of evidence presented by Calgene
and based on the discussions of the Food Advisory Committee (Ref. 1), that the transfer of the 

kan

r

 gene from plants to microbes will not occur at a detectable frequency and overall will result in no significant increase
in the numbers of antibiotic-resistant microbes. Regarding whether Calgene should be required to determine experimentally
the rate of transfer, the agency notes that Calgene's calculations represent worst-case scenarios, and the agency
believes it would not be useful to do experiments to attempt to measure that which is too small to measure. 

Regarding the relevance of experiments on bacterial releases to the environment, FDA finds that information concerning
the lack of an environmental effect from the release of microbes with and without antibiotic resistance genes is of
limited direct relevance to the environmental effects of plants with antibiotic resistance genes. The agency did
not rely on this information in reaching its determination that there will be no significant increase in the antibiotic-resistant
microorganism population of the soil. 

Finally the claim that the 

kan

r

 gene could be transferred from plants to bacteria by plasmids is without basis because there is no evidence that plasmids
exist in plants. 



2. Potential Transfer of the 

kan

r

 Gene to Other Crops and to Wild Relatives 



Comments were also received on the potential transfer of the 

kan

r

 gene to other crops and wild relatives. These comments address environmental issues and do not bear on the safety of
APH(3
&rsquo;)II for its proposed food additive use and are therefore addressed in section VII. of this document. 


