 

F. Availability of the ICD9CM 





Comment:

 Two commenters expressed concern that the Government Printing Office (GPO) does not stock a sufficient supply of
the ICD9CM coding books, which results in a 4-to-8 week delay in receiving the books. 



Response:

 ICD9CM books are in stock at the special address mentioned elsewhere in this preamble. We are aware of
the potential demand and have an adequate supply. All orders are sent by priority mail. 



V. Impact Analysis 



Unless the Secretary certifies that a final rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number
of small entities, we generally prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis that is consistent with the Regulatory
Flexibility Act (RFA) (5 U.S.C. 601 through 612) . For purposes of the RFA, all physicians are considered to be small
entities. 

The statutory requirement that physicians use diagnostic coding has been in effect since April, 1989, and we believe
that the vast majority of physicians were already using ICD9CM coding even before that time. Thus, the
economic impact of this final rule on the physician community should be minimal. 

In the proposed rule, we prepared a voluntary impact analysis and voluntary regulatory flexibility analysis because
of our inability to quantify with any degree of precision the estimated costs of these provisions and the large number
of physicians who were affected by the provisions of section 1842(p) of the Act. These provisions require that each
bill or request for payment for a service furnished by a physician include appropriate diagnostic coding related
to the illness or injury for which the Medicare beneficiary received treatment. Under section 1842(p) of the Act,
a physician who is to be paid on an assignment-related basis will not be paid if he or she fails to include appropriate
diagnostic coding on the bill. In this final rule we have revised the impact analysis based on public comment. 

With one exception, any effects of this final rule will be a direct result of the legislative provisions in section
1842(p) of the Act. The exception is a result of the discretion that section 1842(p)(1) of the Act provides the Secretary
in the choice of which system to use to code diagnoses. We chose to use ICD9CM because it is the only comprehensive
coding system that includes all possible diagnoses for Medicare beneficiaries. For that reason, it is already widely
used by physicians. Furthermore, we are already using ICD9CM in the Medicare program for classifying
DRGs for payment under the inpatient hospital prospective payment system. Therefore, we believe that it is the easiest
coding system for physician use. 

Before April 1, 1989, physicians were not required to provide ICD9CM or any other type of diagnostic
codes on their Medicare bills or requests for payment. Therefore, we believe that physicians who were not coding before
the provisions of section 1842(p) of the Act were affected through increased paperwork, the cost of training themselves
and their staff, and the probable need to purchase Volumes 1 and 2 of the ICD9CM, fourth edition. 

As of December 31, 1986, there were 569,160 physicians practicing in the United States (Physician Characteristics
and Distribution in the U.S., 1986. Department of Data Release Services, Division of Survey and Data Resources, American
Medical Association, 1987). In the proposed rule, we estimated that at least 30 percent of physicians used ICD9CM
codes before the requirements of section 1842(p) were established, presumably because of requirements of other
third party payers that ICD9CM diagnosis or procedure codes be used on their claims. Thus, we estimated
that up to 70 percent of practicing physicians did not report codes before the requirement was established (that is,
approximately 398,000 physicians). 



