 

(5) Other Older Americans Act Mandates 


5.1Responding to the Needs of Minority Elderly through National Minority Aging Organizations 
5.2National Volunteer Senior Aides/Family Friends Projects 
5.3Volunteer Service Credit Demonstrations 
5.4AoA Dissemination Projects 
5.5Field-Initiated Project Applications 


(1) Home and Community-Based Long Term Care 


1.1Consumer Participation in Home and Community Based Care 


To develop effective and efficient systems of home and community based care (HCBC), States must promote the informed
participation of consumers in the planning, development and delivery of services. For consumers to have meaningful
input, they need information and better organization. Consumers need to be informed about the complex issues relating
to governance and management of the HCBC system, including linkages with the institutional and acute care systems;
resource allocation and cost controls; access to services, including eligibility, assessment, and care planning
and coordination; and the scope, organization and quality of services. This information should serve to empower
consumers to become partners in the planning and implementation of state and community HCBC systems. 
Of critical importance is the mobilization and organization of consumers at state and community levels. Effective
input into systems development and implementation can be achieved only through the collaboration of individuals
and interest groups at all levels within the State. Collective action by consumers, based on sound information, will
result in consumer-driven HCBC which is available, accessible and appropriate in relation to defined needs within
allocated resources. 
The Administration on Aging is interested in receiving applications for conducting statewide demonstration projects
resulting in replicable models of consumer involvement in the design, development, and implementation of home and
community based care systems. Such models of consumer-driven HCBC may be targeted to the elderly, or to the elderly
in concert with other target populations (e.g. persons with disabilities). 
Proposed projects should emphasize empowering individuals and groups at state and community levels to participate
in the development of consumer-driven systems of home and community-based care. Applicants must identify the resources
and mechanisms for developing and disseminating information, and for the mobilization and organization of individuals
and groups to impact on HCBC policy, programs and services. Applicants should also focus on the development and implementation
of mechanisms that would allow formal consumer input. Applications should address how proposed strategies will
be targeted or modified to reach special populations such as low income and minority individuals and residents of
rural areas. Innovative approaches are highly encouraged. 
Proposals are invited from public and private non-profit organizations with demonstrated experience in representing
and serving consumers of home and community based care. The Administration on Aging plans to make 46 awards
with an approximate federal share of $125,000 per year for an estimated project period of two (2) years. The 

deadline date 

for applications under this priority area is 

July 12, 1994. 


1.2Capacity Building and Mentoring Program in Home and Community Based Care 


In the absence of a cohesive federal policy on long-term care, States have been in the forefront of developing home
and community-based care infrastructures. The staff of certain State Agencies on Aging and Area Agencies on Aging
have significant knowledge and experience in the design, promotion, and implementation of home and community based
systems. At the same time, the development of state systems has been an uneven process, with some States having achieved
comprehensive statewide programs of home and community-based care while others are just now beginning. 
As highlighted in Part I of this Announcement, home and community based care is one of the Assistant Secretary for Aging's
priorities. In the past, the Administration on Aging has funded substantial demonstration and research projects
in this area and continues to do so. However, an understanding of, and experience in, the development of state home
and community based care infrastructures constitute a unique body of knowledge. It encompasses creating systems
to assure quality of care, maximizing consumer choice and participation, developing financing mechanisms and budgetary
systems, and understanding the pertinent policy environment. AoA's 1993 Home and Community Based Care Survey of
all fifty States documented a variety of technical assistance and capacity-building needs in these areas. 





