 

One railroad association recommended that, if adopted, internal control procedures should apply initially to only
the larger railroads (Class I railroads). It was further suggested that regulations crafted particularly for smaller
railroads should be adopted in order to reduce the inequities that such railroads seemingly confront when implementing
safety regulations in general. 

One railroad opined that FRA should require railroads to implement some specific internal control procedures, 

i.e.

, reporting data should be validated by at least one other internal railroad department source. As an alternative
to specific, prescribed procedures, it was recommended that railroads develop and file an ``action plan'' describing
how the railroad would validate its data with another impartial internal source. 

Most commenters did not support GAO's recommendation for civil penalties for inaccurate reporting due to internal
control weakness. A few stated that civil penalties should be assessed only for violations that are recurring, willful,
or grossly negligent. 



Section Analysis and FRA Conclusions (Proposed 225.33) 



FRA's Operating Practices inspectors have significantly increased the amount of time spent reviewing railroad
accident reporting records. The internal control procedures of all the large railroads and a sampling of the small
railroads have been reviewed and analyzed by these inspectors and the results compared with GAO's earlier findings.
FRA found that these railroads have generally improved their internal control procedures and their accident/incident
reporting. 

FRA's recent review of the accident/incident reporting procedures of all of the major railroads and a large number
of smaller railroads supports the GAO findings that errors in reporting resulted principally from the railroads'
lack of internal control procedures. Railroads with specific internal control procedures in place had far more accurate
reporting records. FRA also found that most non-reporting or inaccurate reporting was due to a communication breakdown
between the claims department, which maintained medical records, and the other railroad departments, 

e.g.

, operating, mechanical, and maintenance-of-way. 

FRA therefore proposes, in new 225.33(a), that each railroad must prepare and maintain an Internal Control
Plan, that requires institution of proper internal control procedures for reporting. Such a Plan would ensure the
reconciliation and incorporation of accident/incident and injury/illness data from the various departments within
the railroad for submission to the railroad reporting officer. The reporting office must have access to all pertinent
claims records, including medical records and payroll records. Further, the reporting office must be notified by
claims and medical departments of each new case/claim opened by a railroad worker. Identification of offices and
responsible railroad officers would also aid FRA in identification of procedural weaknesses in reporting. 

FRA believes that requiring railroads to establish an Internal Control Plan for reporting would ensure more accurate
injury and accident reporting. Once in place, FRA inspections would focus on the procedures the railroads use to report
injuries and accidents. This periodical review of the Plan by FRA would detect procedural deficiencies and would
enable the railroad to correct any identified problems. Thus, new 225.33(b) proposes that each railroad not
only have an Internal Control Plan, but also that all reasonable effort is made to adhere to that Plan. If FRA should
find the railroad to be in noncompliance, FRA may cite that railroad for violating procedural requirements and require
the railroad to correct the procedural weakness. 

Additionally, this NPRM proposes, in new 225.41, that the Internal Control Plan shall, upon request, be made
available to any FRA or State safety inspector for examination and photocopying in a reasonable manner during normal
business hours. Proposed 225.41 is discussed in greater detail in this NPRM under the heading ``Miscellaneous
Amendments.'' 



B. Computer Magnetic Media Transfer (Proposed 225.37) 



In order to resolve the discrepancies between the annual report for lost workdays and the monthly submission of lost
workdays, FRA began in January 1990 to allow the railroads to update their portion of the accident and casualty database
using magnetic media. In this NPRM, the term ``magnetic media'' means computer diskettes and magnetic tapes. Currently,
railroads are allowed to update certain fields on existing records (``Days Lost,'' ``Restricted Days,'' ``Cause
Code,'' ``Alcohol and Drug Code,'' ``Damages,'' ``Total Injuries,'' and ``Total Killed''). New submissions must
be submitted on existing paper forms as existing provisions of part 225 do not allow transfer of data by means of magnetic
media as an alternative means of compliance. Updating the information via a magnetic medium remained voluntary on
the part of the railroad, and this procedure, along with paper form updates, has improved the overall accuracy of information
submitted monthly particularly with respect to the number of lost workdays. 



Comments 



FRA solicited comments in the ANPRM regarding a proposal to allow railroads the option to report accidents/incidents
by way of magnetic media transfer in lieu of the paper (``hard copy'') forms currently submitted. Most commenters
expressed an interest in implementing some kind of electronic transmission and exchange of data from the railroads
to FRA. One railroad suggested that FRA implement the program to ensure timely and accurate changes to the hard copy
``Rail Equipment Accident/Incident Report'' (Form FRA F 6180.54), rather than submitting a corrected hard copy
report. Another railroad emphasized that implementation of a magnetic media program was a concept long overdue and
predicted a reduction in the amount of annual key-punching labor cost. One rail association encouraged implementation
of a magnetic media program as it would ensure timely reporting and a less expensive medium than submission of hard
copies. It was also suggested that FRA should provide smaller railroads the appropriate software for their personal
computers. Another railroad recommended that FRA review the feasibility of reporting accidents/incidents telephonically
as well as by magnetic media. In reference to the initial cost to implement the program, the majority of the railroads
anticipated a one-time start-up cost which would be necessary to implement the data transfer process. 



Section Analysis and FRA Conclusions (Proposed 225.37) 



In light of the favorable responses to the ANPRM, FRA proposes, in new 225.37, to amend the current reporting
requirements and allow railroads the option of using magnetic media to transmit both the initial and updated versions
of the following reports: (a) the ``Rail Equipment Accident/Incident Report'' (Form FRA F 6180.54), (b) the ``Railroad
Injury and Illness Summary (Continuation Sheet)'' (Form FRA F 6180.55a), and (c) the ``Highway-Rail Grade Crossing
Accident/Incident Report'' (Form FRA F 6180.57). Reporting requirements for magnetic media transfer would be similar
to the current hard copy reporting requirements currently stated in 225.11; 

i.e.

, reports submitted via magnetic media would be due within 30 days after expiration of the month in which the accident/incident
occurred. 



