 




<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 71</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Airspace Docket No. 94ASW04]</RINDOCK>


Modification of Class D Airspace and Establishment of Class E Airspace


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule; request for comments.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This action modifies the Class D airspace areas at Fayetteville, AR; Fort Smith, AR; Lake Charles, LA; Monroe, LA;
New Orleans, LA; Clovis, NM; Farmington, NM; Oklahoma City, OK; Beaumont, TX; Brownsville, TX; College Station,
TX; Corpus Christi, TX; Laredo, TX; McAllen, TX; San Angelo, TX; San Antonio, TX; Waco, TX; and Wichita Falls, TX, by
amending the areas' effective hours to coincide with the associated control tower's hours of operation. This action
also establishes Class E airspace at these areas when the associated control tower is closed. The intended effect
of this action is to clarify when two-way radio communication with these air traffic control towers is required and
to provide adequate Class E airspace for instrument approach procedures when these control towers are closed.




</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Effective Date:

_0901 UTC, June 23, 1994.




Comment Date: 

Comments must be received on or before June 16, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Send comments on the rule in triplicate to Manager, System Management Branch, Air Traffic Division, Southwest Region,
Docket No. 94ASW04, Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Fort Worth,
TX 761930530.


The official docket may be examined in the Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel, Southwest Region, Federal Aviation
Administration, 2601 Meacham Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX, between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m., Monday through Friday, except
Federal holidays. An informal docket may also be examined during normal business hours at the System Management Branch,
Air Traffic Division, Southwest Region, Federal Aviation Administration, 2601 Meacham Boulevard, Fort Worth,
TX.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Alvin DeVane, System Management Branch, Air Traffic Division, Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation
Administration, Fort Worth, TX 761930530; telephone: (817) 2225595.

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Request for Comments on the Rule


Although this action is a final rule, and was not preceded by notice and public procedure, comments are invited on the
rule. This rule will become effective on the date specified in the DATES

 section. However, after the review of any comments and, if the FAA finds that further changes are appropriate, it will
initiate rulemaking proceedings to extend the effective date of the rule or amend the regulation.
Comments that provide the factual basis supporting the views and suggestions presented are particularly helpful
in evaluating the effects of the rule, and in determining whether additional rulemaking is required. Comments are
specifically invited on the overall regulatory, aeronautical, economic, environmental, and energy-related aspects
of the rule that might suggest the need to modify the rule.


The Rule


This amendment to part 71 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 71) modifies the Class D airspace areas at
Fayetteville, AR; Fort Smith, AR; Lake Charles, LA; Monroe, LA; New Orleans, LA; Clovis, NM; Farmington, NM; Oklahoma
City, OK; Beaumont, TX; Brownsville, TX; College Station, TX; Corpus Christi, TX; Laredo, TX; McAllen, TX; San Angelo,
TX; San Antonio, TX; Waco, TX; and Wichita Falls, TX, by amending the areas' effective hours to coincide with the associated
control tower's hours of operation. This action also establishes Class E airspace at these areas when the associated
control tower is closed. Prior to Airspace Reclassification, an airport traffic area (ATA) and a control zone (CZ)
existed at these airports. However, Airspace Reclassification, effective September 16, 1993, discontinued the
use of the term ``airport traffic area'' and ``control zone,'' replacing them with the designation ``Class D airspace.''
The former CZ was continuous, while the former ATA was contingent upon the operation of the air traffic control tower.
The consolidation of the ATA and CZ into a single Class D airspace designation makes it necessary to modify the effective
hours of the Class D airspace to coincide with the control tower's hours of operation. This action also establishes
Class E airspace during the hours the control tower is closed. The intended effect of this action is to clarify when
two-way radio communication with these air traffic control towers is required and to provide adequate Class E airspace
for instrument approach procedures when these control towers are closed.
The coordinates for this airspace docket are based on North American Datum 83. Class D and E airspace designations
are published in Paragraphs 5000 and 6002, respectively, of FAA Order 7400.9A dated June 17, 1993, and effective September
16, 1993, which is incorporated by reference in 14 CFR 71.1 (58 FR 36298; July 6, 1993). The Class D and E airspace designations
listed in this document will be published subsequently in the Order. Under the circumstances presented, the FAA concludes
that there is an immediate need to modify these Class D and establish these Class E airspace areas in order to promote
the safe and efficient handling of air traffic in these areas. Therefore, I find that notice and public procedures
under 5 U.S.C. 553(b) are impracticable and contrary to the public interest.
The FAA has determined that this regulation only involves an established body of technical regulations that need
frequent and routine amendments to keep them operationally current. It, therefore: (1) Is not a ``significant regulatory
action'' under Executive Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures
(44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979); and (3) does not warrant preparation of a regulatory evaluation as the anticipated
impact is so minimal. Since this is a routine matter that will only affect air traffic procedures and air navigation,
it is certified that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities
under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.


List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 71


Airspace, Incorporation by reference, Navigation (air).


Adoption of the Amendment


In consideration of the foregoing, the Federal Aviation Administration amends 14 CFR part 71 as follows:

</SUPPLEM>
