 

(1) 

Tentative position: Product name. 

FSIS's tentative position is to consider amending the Federal poultry products inspection regulations to define
the standardized product that results from the mechanical separation and removal of most of the bone from poultry
carcasses and parts of carcasses by a distinctive name. FSIS is tentatively considering that ``Mechanically Separated
(Kind) (MS(K))'' is an appropriate, nonmisleading name for this product. It appears to accurately and concisely
describe the product, indicating the nature of the process by which and the kind of poultry from which it is made, distinguishing
it from poultry product ingredients produced by traditional hand-deboning techniques. The name under consideration
includes ``(kind)'' rather than ``poultry'' to make it clear that the kind of poultry (9 CFR 381.1(b)(40)) from which
the product is made is specified (e.g., ``Mechanically Separated Chicken''). 

As previously indicated, FSIS believes that MDP differs sufficiently from boneless poultry products produced by
traditional hand-deboning techniques that it should be regulated as a separate, standardized ingredient. As such,
this product would be defined by its own, distinctive name, and it would be referred to by that name in relevant regulations
and in labeling. In this regard, FSIS is requesting public input on other names that would accurately and appropriately
describe MDP as a distinct ingredient. 

FSIS is aware that other descriptions have been associated with poultry products produced by mechanically deboning.
In addition to the use of terminology such as ``finely comminuted'' poultry to specify the form of the product and ``mechanically
deboned'' poultry, such product has been referred to as mechanically separated poultry within the meat and poultry
industries. FSIS believes that where a primary distinguishing characteristic of a standardized product is its bone
content, it would be inappropriate to define it by a name that includes the term ``deboned'' and use of this term in labeling
might mislead consumers by implying such product contains no bone. 

Persons commenting on this portion of the ANPR should be aware that FSIS does not consider that current familiarity
with terminology or its appeal to consumers is dispositive on the question of what terminology is most likely to achieve
its objectives for the name of a standardized product: instantaneous consumer familiarity and acceptance cannot
and should not be expected when labels declare the presence of a product for the first time. However, consumer perceptions
are important in determining whether or not terminology that is technically accurate nevertheless may be confusing
or even misleading. When FSIS establishes a definition and standard for a product with respect to which a specified
name is deemed appropriate, the product must be called by that name in labeling. 

(2) 

Tentative position: Bone solids content. 

FSIS is considering that a definition and standard for MDP would incorporate the existing restriction on the bone
solids content of mechanically deboned poultry products, viz., not more than one percent (9 CFR 381.117(d)). Because
this restriction is enforced by limiting calcium content, FSIS is considering that the definition and standard for
MDP should include maximum calcium content levels of not more than 0.235 percent in product made from turkeys or mature
chickens or 0.175 percent in product made from other poultry, as a measure of bone solids content_based on the weight
of product that has not been prepared with heat treatment. 

As previously discussed, FSIS adopted the one percent bone solids restriction after appraising the operating results
in a series of poultry plants using mechanical deboning equipment, analyzing 485 samples of raw product, and concluding
that existing equipment can be operated under commercial conditions to produce product which meets this limit (34
FR 13991, 13992). When processors applied the mechanical deboning technology to poultry products such as fowl frames
that have been heat treated using various cooking methods, FSIS modified its procedures to take into account weight
loss that can occur with cooking. Thus, the practice has been to permit an allowance for weight loss in order to reflect
the bone solids content that would have been present if heat treatment has not occurred; and the adjusted level may
not exceed one percent. The ``Chemistry Laboratory Guidebook,'' U.S. Department of Agriculture (section 6.010F,
page 633),
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 currently includes procedures for different degrees of adjustment depending on whether conventional cooking methods
(i.e., open kettle) or other heat treatment (e.g., pressure cooking) are used. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
Document is available for public inspection at the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office. 

</FOOTNOTE>


After evaluating data on substances of potential concern that may tend to concentrate in bone, the 1979 report on health
and safety aspects of the use of mechanically deboned poultry did not recommend any change in the existing bone solids
limit. (The report did, however, recommend limitations on the use of product made from fowl because of bone constituents
like fluoride; FSIS's tentative position is to amend the poultry products inspection regulations accordingly,
as discussed below.) Because enforcement is based on calcium content analyses, rather than direct measurements
of bone solids, FSIS is considering that an amended regulation would include the maximum amount of calcium permitted
in determining whether mechanically deboned poultry is in compliance. As discussed below, FSIS is also considering
that production under an approved quality control program is needed to assure that such product is manufactured to
comply with regulatory requirements on a consistent basis and that implementation of a quality control program would
increase the effectiveness of enforcement of the restriction on bone solids content. 



