 



Response: 

Western disagrees. Western complies with requirements of 
the CRSP Act of 1956, other relevant legislation, and DOE Order 
RA 6120.2 in assuring repayment of all CRSP costs assigned to power. 
Legislation takes precedence when there is conflict with DOE Order 
RA 6120.2. 
Treatment of depletions in the same manner has been approved by FERC 
twice prior to the present rate adjustment. Two of FERC's criteria 
for rate approval are whether the proposed rate will repay all 
obligations assigned to power in full and on time consistent with 
requirements of the CRSP Act and whether the methodology which 
achieves this result is in compliance with DOE Order RA 6120.2. The 
requested FY 1995 rate adjustment meets these criteria and satisfies 
all repayment requirements. 


b. Comment: 

If power rates are set without providing for future 
depletions, it will affect Upper Basin development under the (Colorado River and Upper Colorado River Basin) compacts.
Every time 
someone wants to build a project or open a business that will deplete 
water, the power rates will have to go up if those increased depletions have not already been factored into the rates.

Can full repayment be truly represented by rates derived assuming 
water is available for release through powerplants when that water 
will not be available because of depletions by the Upper Division 
States above the powerplants? 


Response: 

Total depletions forecasted by the Basin States for the 
use of Colorado River water have been included in the proposed rate. 
The water has been allocated by compacts for use by the Upper Basin 
States. Furthermore, Western is obligated to assure that funds are 
available on schedule to meet repayment requirements regardless of 
depletion schedules. 
In its proposed treatment (deferral) of uncertain depletions, Western 
assumes that greater amounts of Colorado River water will be available for release through CRSP powerplants than
would be suggested by 
current rapid-growth forecasts of water development projects and 
their associated depletions. 
Western's experience has been that out-year depletion estimates are 
subject to frequent revision. It is reasonable, therefore, to give 
more weight to near-term projections. Western prepares an annual PRS 
for every project to assure that repayment is proceeding satisfacto- 
rily. Thus, there will be many future opportunities to revise the 
Integrated Projects rate appropriately as the near-term projections 
are changed and more accurate long-term estimates are made available. 
Western has determined that depletions affect the firm power rate, at 
most, by 0.32 mills/kWh (composite). The impact is small enough so 
that power rates could (and would) be adjusted to assure full repayment, if more rapid depletions take place in the
Upper Basin States. 
It is not likely that this small impact on power rates would constrain water depletions. 



