 

IX. Renewal Funding Procedures and Requirements 


The Institute recognizes two types of renewal funding as described below_``continuation grants'' and ``on-going
support grants.'' The award of an initial grant to support a project does not constitute a commitment by the Institute
to renew funding. The Board of Directors anticipates allocating no more than $3 million of available FY 1995 grant
funds for renewal grants. 


A. Continuation Grants 


1. Purpose and Scope 


Continuation grants are intended to support projects with a limited duration that involve the same type of activities
as the previous project. They are intended to enhance the specific program or service produced or established during
the prior grant period. They may be used, for example, when a project is divided into two or more sequential phases,
for secondary analysis of data obtained in an Institute-supported research project, or for more extensive testing
of an innovative technology, procedure, or program developed with SJI grant support. 
In order for a project to be considered for continuation funding, the grantee must have completed the project tasks
and met all grant requirements and conditions in a timely manner, absent extenuating circumstances or prior Institute
approval of changes to the project design. Continuation grants are not intended to provide support for a project for
which the grantee has underestimated the amount of time or funds needed to accomplish the project tasks. 

A continuation grant may be awarded for either a single project or for more than one project as a package grant (see sections
III.J., V.C.1 and 3, and V.D.1 and 3). 


2. Application Procedures_Letters of Intent 


In lieu of a concept paper, a grantee seeking a continuation grant must inform the Institute, by letter, of its intent
to submit an application for such funding as soon as the need for renewal funding becomes apparent but no less than 120
days before the end of the current grant period. 
a. A letter of intent must be no more than 3 single-spaced pages on 81/2 by 11 inch paper and must contain a concise but
thorough explanation of the need for continuation; an estimate of the funds to be requested; and a brief description
of anticipated changes in scope, focus or audience of the project. 
b. Letters of intent will not be reviewed competitively. Institute staff will review the proposed activities for
the next project period and, within 30 days of receiving a letter of intent, inform the grantee of specific issues to
be addressed in the continuation application and the date by which the application for a continuation grant must be
submitted. 


3. Application Format 


An application for a continuation grant must include an application form, budget forms (with appropriate documentation),
a project abstract conforming to the format set forth in section VII.B., a program narrative, a budget narrative,
a disclosure of lobbying form from (applicants other than units of State or local government), and certain certifications
and assurances. 

The program narrative should conform to the length and format requirements set forth in section VII.C. However, rather
than the topics listed in section VII.C., the program narrative of an application for a continuation grant should
include: 
a. 

Project Objectives. 

A clear, concise statement of what the continuation project is intended to accomplish. 
b. 

Need for Continuation. 

An explanation of why continuation of the project is necessary to achieve the goals of the project, and how the continuation
will benefit the participating courts or the courts community generally. That is, to what extent will the original
goals and objectives of the project be unful-filled if the project is not continued, and conversely, how will the findings
or results of the project be enhanced by continuing the project? 
A continuation application requesting a package grant to support more than one project should explain, in addition,
how the proposed projects are related; how their operation and administration would be enhanced by the grant; the
advantages of funding the projects as a package rather than individually; and the disadvantages, if any, that would
accrue by considering or funding them separately. 



