 

(E) If the guaranty agency determines that a borrower identified in paragraph (d)(6)(ii)(C) or (D) of this section
has satisfied all of the conditions required for a discharge, the agency shall notify the borrower in writing of that
determination within 30 days after making that determination. 

(F) If the guaranty agency determines that a borrower identified in paragraph (d)(6)(ii)(C) or (D) of this section
does not qualify for a discharge, the agency shall notify the borrower in writing of that determination and the reasons
for it within 30 days after the date the agency_

(

1

) Made that determination based on information available to the guaranty agency; 

(

2

) Was notified by the Secretary that the school had not closed; 

(

3

) Was notified by the Secretary that the school had closed on a date that was more than 90 days after the borrower (or student)
withdrew from the school; 

(

4

) Was notified by the Secretary that the borrower (or student) was ineligible for a closed school discharge for other
reasons; or 

(

5

) Received the borrower's completed application and sworn statement. 

(G) Upon receipt of a closed school discharge claim filed by a lender, the agency shall review the borrower's request
and supporting sworn statement in the light of information available from the records of the agency and from other
sources, including other guaranty agencies, state authorities, and cognizant accrediting associations, and shall
take the following actions_

(

1

) If the agency determines that the borrower satisfies the requirements for discharge under paragraph (d) of this
section, it shall pay the claim in accordance with 682.402(h) not later than 90 days after the agency received
the claim; or 

(

2

) If the agency determines that the borrower does not qualify for a discharge, the agency shall, not later than 90 days
after the agency received the claim, return the claim to the lender with an explanation of the reasons for its determination.


(H) If a borrower fails to submit the written request and sworn statement described in paragraph (d)(3) of this section
within 60 days of being notified of that option, the lender or guaranty agency shall resume collection and shall be
deemed to have exercised forbearance of payment of principal and interest from the date it suspended collection activity.
The lender or guaranty agency may capitalize, in accordance with 682.202(b), any interest accrued and not
paid during that period. 

(I) A borrower's request for discharge may not be denied solely on the basis of failing to meet any time limits set by
the lender, guaranty agency, or the Secretary. 

(7) 

Lender responsibilities. 

(i) A lender shall comply with the requirements prescribed in paragraph (d) of this section. In the absence of specific
instructions from a guaranty agency or the Secretary, if a lender receives information from a source it believes to
be reliable indicating that an existing or former borrower may be eligible for a loan discharge under paragraph (d)
of this section, the lender shall immediately notify the guaranty agency, and suspend any efforts to collect from
the borrower on any loan received for the program of study for which the loan was made (but may continue to receive borrower
payments). 

(ii) If the borrower fails to submit the written request and sworn statement described in paragraph (d)(3) of this
section within 60 days after being notified of that option, the lender shall resume collection and shall be deemed
to have exercised forbearance of payment of principal and interest from the date the lender suspended collection
activity. The lender may capitalize, in accordance with 682.202(b), any interest accrued and not paid during
that period. 

(iii) The lender shall file a closed school claim with the guaranty agency in accordance with 682.402(g) no
later than 60 days after the lender receives the borrower's written request and sworn statement described in paragraph
(d)(3) of this section. If a lender receives a payment made by or on behalf of the borrower on the loan after the lender
files a claim on the loan with the guaranty agency, the lender shall forward the payment to the guaranty agency within
30 days of its receipt. The lender shall assist the guaranty agency and the borrower in determining whether the borrower
is eligible for discharge of the loan. 

(iv) Within 30 days after receiving reimbursement from the guaranty agency for a closed school claim, the lender shall
notify the borrower that the loan obligation has been discharged, and request that all credit bureaus to which it previously
reported the status of the loan delete all adverse credit history assigned to the loan. 


