 

(iii) Appropriate action shall be taken to protect occupants, especially young children and pregnant women, from
lead hazards associated with abatement. Occupants may not enter spaces undergoing abatement. In most circumstances,
occupants must be temporarily relocated during abatement, in accordance with 35.28. 
(iv) All abatement procedures must be concluded with a thorough cleaning of all surfaces in the affected dwelling
units and common areas in order to remove lead dust. Cleanup shall be accomplished by vacuuming with a HEPA vacuum and
washing surfaces with a trisodium phosphate detergent, followed by another high efficiency vacuuming. The waste
generated by abatement shall be safely disposed of in accordance with Federal, State, and local laws. 
(v) In the case of defective paint spots of one square foot or less, misted scraping and repainting of the defective
spot is considered adequate treatment. However, treatment of defective paint spots shall include proper containment
and cleanup. If the total area of defective paint spots on any one surface exceeds one square foot, or if there are defective
paint spots on more than two surfaces in any one room or space (hallways, pantry, etc.), misted scraping and repainting
of the defective spots is not acceptable treatment. In such circumstances, the entire defective paint surface must
be abated in accordance with paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section. 


* * * * * 


A new 35.28 would be added to subpart C, to read as follows: 


35.28 

Temporary relocation. 


(a)

 Protection of occupants. 

Appropriate action shall be taken to protect occupants, especially young children and pregnant women, from lead
hazards associated with abatement. Occupants may not enter spaces undergoing abatement. Except as provided in paragraphs
(b) and (c) of this section, occupants must be temporarily relocated during abatement. 
(b) 

Exterior abatement. 

Relocation of occupants is not required if abatement is only on the exterior of a structure and the interior is sealed
and safe entry and egress can be assured. 
(c) 

Interior abatement. 

Relocation of occupants is not required if abatement is on the interior and either: 
(1) Abatement and cleanup can be completed in one 8-hour working day, and the following conditions are met: 
(i) Dust caused by abatement is contained within the work area; and 
(ii) Occupants have safe access to bathrooms and kitchens; or 
(2) If all of the following conditions are met, even though abatement and cleanup cannot be completed in one 8-hour
working day: 
(i) Abatement is of limited scope (e.g. limited to no more than one or two rooms at a time); 
(ii) The work area is secured against entry during nonworking hours; 
(iii) Dust caused by abatement is contained within the work area; and 
(iv) Occupants have safe access to bathrooms, kitchens and sleeping areas. 
(d)

 Personal belongings.

 Personal belongings that are in work areas must be relocated or sealed to protect the belongings from contamination
from lead dust. 
8. Section 35.56 would be amended by revising the first sentence in paragraph (a)(1) and by revising paragraph (a)(2),
to read as follows: 


35.56 

Requirements. 


(a) * * * 
(1) All painted surfaces of residential structures constructed before 1978 shall be inspected to determine whether
defective paint surfaces exist. * * * 




