 




<USBUREAU>Health Resources and Services Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Program Announcement, Proposed Minimum Percentages for ``High Rate'' and ``Significant Increase in the Rate''
for Implementation of the General Statutory Funding Preference and Proposed Funding Priority for Grants for Establishment
of Departments of Family Medicine for Fiscal Year 1994 </DOCTITLE>



The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) 
announces that applications for fiscal year (FY) 1994 Grants for 
Establishment of Departments of Family Medicine are being 
accepted under the authority of section 747(b), (previously section 780) of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act,
title VII, as amended by the Health Professions Education Extension Amendments of 1992, Public Law 102408,
dated October 13, 1992. Comments are invited on the proposed minimum percentage for ``High Rate'' and ``Significant
Increase in the Rate'' for Implementation of the General Statutory Funding Preference, and proposed funding priority
stated below. 

Approximately $9.4 million will be available for the Grants for Establishment of Departments of Family Medicine
program in FY 1994. Total continuation support recommended is $5.7 million. It is anticipated that $3.7 million will
be available to support approximately 22 competing awards averaging $170,000. 



Purpose 



Section 747(b) of the PHS Act authorizes support to schools of medicine and osteopathic medicine to meet the costs
of projects to establish, maintain, or improve family medicine academic administrative units (which may be departments,
divisions, or other units) to provide clinical instruction in family medicine. Funds awarded will be used to: (l)
Plan and develop model educational predoctoral, faculty development and graduate medical education programs in
family medicine which will meet the requirements of section 747(a), by the end of the project period of section 747(b)
support; and (2) support academic and clinical activities relevant to the field of family medicine. 

The program may also assist schools to strengthen the administrative base and structure that is responsible for the
planning, direction, organization, coordination, and evaluation of all undergraduate and graduate family medicine
activities. Funds are to complement rather than duplicate programmatic activities for actual operation of family
medicine training programs under section 747(a). 



Previous Funding Experience 



Previous funding experience information is provided to assist potential applicants to make better informed decisions
regarding submission of an application for this program. 

In FY 1993, HRSA reviewed 50 competing applications for the Grants for Departments of Family Medicine program. Of
those applications 82 percent were approved and 18 percent were disapproved. Twelve projects, or 24 percent of applications
received, were funded. 

In FY 1992, HRSA reviewed 71 competing applications. Of those applications, 66 percent were approved and 34 percent
were disapproved. Thirty-six projects, or about 50 percent of the applications received, were funded. 



Eligibility 



To be eligible to receive support for this grant program, the applicant must be a public, or nonprofit private, accredited
school of medicine or osteopathic medicine. 

To receive support, programs must meet the requirements of final regulations as set forth in 42 CFR part 57, subpart
R, 
and section 791(b) of the PHS Act. 

The period of Federal support will not exceed 5 years. 



National Health Objectives for the Year 2000 



The Public Health Service urges applicants to submit work plans that address specific objectives of Healthy People
2000. Potential applicants may obtain a copy of Healthy People 2000 (Full Report; Stock No. 017001004740)
or Healthy People 2000 (Summary Report; Stock No. 017001004731) through the Superintendent
of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 204029325 (Telephone (202) 7833238). 



Education and Service Linkage 



As part of its long-range planning, HRSA will be targeting its efforts to strengthening linkages between U.S. Public
Health Service education programs and programs which provide comprehensive primary care services to the underserved.




Review Criteria 



The review of applications will take into consideration the following criteria: 

1. The degree to which the proposed project adequately provides for the project requirements in section 57.1704;


2. The administrative and management capability of the applicant to carry out the proposed project in a cost 
effective manner; 

3. The qualifications of the proposed staff and faculty of 
the unit; and 

4. The potential of the project to continue on a self-sustaining basis. 



Other Considerations 



In addition, the following funding factors may be applied in determining funding of approved applications: 

1. Funding preference is defined as the funding of a specific category or group of applications ahead of other categories
or groups of approved applications such as competing continuation projects ahead of new projects. 

2. Funding priority is defined as the favorable adjustment of aggregate review scores when applications meet specified
criteria. 




