 

2. EPA will lead the signatory agencies in establishing interagency oversight teams at the state level to conduct
periodic review of wetland delineations conducted under the provisions of this MOA. These reviews will include delineations
done by SCS pursuant to Sections IV.A, IV.B, and IV.C of this MOA and delineations done by EPA or the Corps pursuant to
Section IV.K. of this MOA. These reviews also will include changes to wetland delineations resulting from the SCS
appeals process, as well as disagreements regarding allocation of responsibility. These reviews will occur, at
a minimum, on a quarterly basis for the first year, on a semi-annual basis for the second year, and annually thereafter.
In addition, a review will be initiated whenever one or more of the signatory agencies believes a significant issue
needs to be addressed. The purpose of each review will be to evaluate the accuracy of an appropriate sample of wetland
delineations. When feasible, this will include actual field verifications of wetland delineations. Should the
interagency oversight team identify issues regarding implementation of this MOA or wetland delineations conducted
under the provisions of this MOA, the team will work to resolve those issues and reach agreement on any necessary corrective
actions. Each review, and any necessary corrective action, will be documented in a report to be distributed to the
signatory agencies' appropriate field and Headquarters offices. 

3. In situations in which the interagency oversight team identifies and reports unresolved issues concerning wetland
delineations conducted under the provisions of this MOA, including changes to wetland delineations resulting from
the SCS appeals process, the Headquarters offices of the signatory agencies will informally review the issue and
work to reach agreement on any necessary corrective actions. This informal process notwithstanding, the EPA Regional
Administrator or the Corps District Engineer may, at any time, propose to designate a geographic area as a ``special
case''. 

4. Similar to the terms of the current Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of the Army and the EPA Concerning
the Determination of the Geographic Jurisdiction of the Section 404 Program and the Application of the Exemptions
under Section 404(f) of the CWA, the EPA Regional Administrator or the Corps District Engineer may propose to designate
a geographic area, or a particular wetland type within a designated geographic area, as a special case. A special case
may be designated only after the interagency oversight team (EPA, Corps, SCS, and FWS) has reviewed the relevant issues
and been unable to reach a consensus on an appropriate resolution. Special cases will be designated by an easily identifiable
political or geographic subdivision, such as a township, county, parish, state, EPA Region, or Corps division or
district, and will be marked on maps or using some other clear format and provided to the appropriate EPA, Corps, FWS,
and SCS field offices. Proposed designations of special cases will not be effective until approved by EPA or Corps
Headquarters, as appropriate. 



