 

BSC claims that due to consistent manufacturing and waste treatment processes, the analytical data obtained from
the two sampling events are representative of any variation in the chemically stabilized wastewater treatment filter
cake constituent concentrations. BSC further explained in its petition that the samples collected in January and
February 1992 represent filter cake generated specifically when different combinations of the three plating lines
were operating. 


C. Agency Analysis 


BSC used SW846 Method 7000 to quantify the total constituent concentrations of arsenic, barium, cadmium,
lead, nickel, selenium, silver, and zinc in the filter cake samples. BSC used an Agency approved Bethlehem Steel Standard
Method
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 to quantify the total constituent concentration of chromium in the filter cake samples. BSC used SW846 Method
3060 to digest the samples, and then followed Method 7195 to analyze/quantify hexavalent chromium concentrations
in the dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake samples. BSC used ``Determination of Mercury in Water By Gold-Film Analyzer'',
to quantify the total constituent concentration of mercury in the filter cake samples. BSC used SW846 Method
9010 to quantify the total constituent concentration of cyanide in the filter cake samples. BSC used ``Methods for
Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes'' Method 376.1 to quantify the total constituent concentration of sulfide
in the filter cake samples. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
Bethlehem Steel Standard Method. ``Methods of Sampling and Analysis Vol. I Iron and Steel'' - Chromium by the Persulfate
Oxidation Method. Additional descriptive information about this method is included in the RCRA public docket for
today's notice. 
</FOOTNOTE>


Using SW846 Method 9071, BSC determined that its stabilized filter cake had a maximum oil and grease content
of 0.099 percent; therefore, the leachate analyses did not have to be modified in accordance with the Oily Waste EP
methodology (i.e., wastes having more than one percent total oil and grease may either have significant concentrations
of constituents of concern in the oil phase, which may not be assessed using the standard leachate procedures, or the
concentration of oil and grease may be sufficient to coat the solid phase of the sample and interfere with the leaching
of metals from the sample). 
BSC used SW846 Method 1310 (EP)/Method 7000 to quantify the EP leachable concentrations of arsenic, cadmium,
chromium, lead, mercury, nickel, and silver in the filter cake samples, and used modified SW846 Method 1310
(using distilled waster, instead of acetate buffer, in the extraction) and Method 9010 to quantify the EP leachable
concentration of cyanide in cured stabilized samples. BSC used SW846 Method 1311 (TCLP)/Method 7000 to quantify
the TCLP leachable concentrations of arsenic, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, nickel, and silver in the filter
cake samples. BSC used SW846 Method 1320 (MEP)/Method 7000 to quantify the MEP leachable concentrations of
the TC metals (except for barium and selenium) and nickel in the cured stabilized filter cake. 
Table 1 presents the maximum total constituent concentrations of the eight TC metals, nickel, cyanide, zinc, and
sulfide for the dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake and stabilized filter cake. 




