 

191.1 

Applicability and definitions.



(a) This part governs the release, by the Federal Aviation Administration and by other persons, of records and information
that has been obtained or developed during security activities or research and development activities.

(b) For purposes of this part, ``record'' includes any writing, drawing, map, tape, film, photograph, or other means
by which information is preserved.

(c) The authority of the Administrator under this part is also exercised by the Assistant Administrator for Civil
Aviation Security and the Deputy Assistant Administrator for Civil Aviation Security, and any individual formally
designated to act in their capacity. For matters involving the release or withholding of information and records
containing information described in 191.7(a) through (i), the authority may be further delegated. For matters
involving the release or withholding of information and records containing information described in 191.7(j),
the authority may not be further delegated.



191.3

Records and information withheld by the Federal Aviation Administration.



(a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, and notwithstanding 5 U.S.C. 552 or other laws, the records
and information described in paragraph (b) of this section are not available for public inspection or copying, nor
is information contained in those records released to the public.

(b) The Administrator prohibits disclosure of information developed in the conduct of security or research and development
activities under 49 U.S.C. App. Chapter 20, Subchapter III, if, in the opinion of the Administrator, the disclosure
of such information would:

(1) Constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy (including, but not limited to, information contained in any personnel,
medical, or similar file);

(2) Reveal trade secrets or privileged or confidential information obtained from any person; or

(3) Be detrimental to the safety of persons traveling in air transportation.

(c) If a record contains information that the Administrator determines cannot be disclosed under this part, but also
contains information that can be disclosed, the latter information, on proper FOIA request, will be provided for
public inspection and copying. However, if it is impractical to redact the requested information from the document,
the entire document will be withheld from public disclosure.



191.5 

Prohibition on release of sensitive security information.



(a) Each airport operator, air carrier, indirect air carrier, foreign air carrier, and each individual employed
by, contracted to, or acting for an airport operator, air carrier, indirect air carrier, or foreign air carrier shall
restrict disclosure of and access to sensitive security information to persons with a need to know, and shall refer
requests from other persons for such information to the Administrator.

(b) A person has a need to know sensitive security information when the information is necessary to carry out FAA-approved
or directed aviation security duties. For some specific information, the Administrator may specify which persons,
or classes of persons, have a need to know.

(c) When sensitive security information is released to unauthorized persons, any air carrier, airport operator,
indirect air carrier, foreign air carrier, or individual with knowledge of the release shall inform the Administrator.

(d) Violation of this section is grounds for a civil penalty or other enforcement or corrective action by the FAA.



191.7 

Sensitive security information.



Except as otherwise provided in writing by the Administrator, the following information and records containing
such information constitute sensitive information:

(a) Any approved or standard security program for an air carrier, foreign air carrier, indirect air carrier, or airport
operator, and that portion of the security program of the United States Postal Service that relates to security of
parcel mail to be transported by air; and any comments, instructions, or implementing guidance pertaining thereto.

(b) Security Directives, Information Circulars, and any comments, instructions, or implementing guidance pertaining
thereto.

(c) Any profile used in any security screening process, including for persons, baggage, or cargo.

(d) Any security contingency plan or information and any comments, instructions, or implementing guidance pertaining
thereto.

(e) Technical specifications of any device used for the detection of any explosive, incendiary, or deadly or dangerous
weapon.

(f) Technical specifications of objects used to test screening equipment and equipment parameters.

(g) Technical specifications of any security communications equipment and procedures.

(h) As to the release of information by the FAA only:

(1) Any information pertaining to threats of any criminal acts directed against air transportation.

(2) The details of an alleged violation of parts 107, 108, 109, or 129 of this chapter, including the airport name, the
location of the gate or access point; the air carrier, indirect air carrier, or foreign air carrier, and any information
that could reasonably lead to the disclosure of such details.

(i) Any draft, proposed, or recommended change to the information and records identified in this part.

(j) Any other information, the disclosure of which the Administrator has prohibited under the criteria in 191.3(b).




Issued in Washington, DC, November 4, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Bruce R. Butterworth,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Office of Civil Aviation Security Policy and Planning.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9427912 Filed 12594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491013M
</BILLING>

