 

(1) Offerors may not supply a nondesignated country end product unless it is a qualifying country end product, NAFTA
country end product, or Caribbean Basin country end product, or a national interest waiver has been granted under
section 302 of the Trade Agreements Act of 1979 (see FAR 25.402(c)).

(2) An offer certifying that a qualifying country end product, a designated country end product, a NAFTA country end
product, or a Caribbean Basin country end product will be supplied, requires the Contractor to supply a qualifying
country end product, a designated country end product, a NAFTA country end product, or a Caribbean Basin country end
product, whichever is certified, or, at the Contractor's option, a U.S. made end product.

(d) The offered price of end products listed and certified under paragraphs (c)(2)(i) and (vi) of the Buy American
Act_Trade Agreements_Balance of Payments Program Certificate provision of the solicitation must include all applicable
duty. The offered price of qualifying country end products, designated country end products, NAFTA country end products,
and Caribbean Basin country end products for line items subject to the Trade Agreements Act or the North American Free
Trade Agreement Implementation Act, should not include customer fees or duty. (End of clause)




16. Section 252.2257010 is amended by revising the introductory text to read as follows:



252.2257010 

Duty Free Entry_Additional Provisions.



As prescribed in 225.60570(d), use the following clause: 



* * * * *



17. A new section 252.2257035 is added to read as follows:



252.2257035 

Buy American Act_North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act_Balance of Payments Program Certificate.



As prescribed in 225.408(a)(3), use the following provision:



Buy American Act_North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act_Balance of Payments Program Certificate
(Jan. 1994)



(a) 

Definitions.

Domestic end product, qualifying country end product, 

and

 U.S. made end product

 have the meanings given in the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act or Buy American Act and Balance
of Payments Program clauses of this solicitation.

(b) 

Evaluation.



Offers will be evaluated by giving preference to U.S. made end products, qualifying country end products, or NAFTA
country end products over other end products.

(c) 

Certifications.



(1) The Offeror certifies that_

(i) Each end product, except the end products listed in paragraph (c)(2) of this provision, is a domestic end product
(as defined in the Buy American Act and Balance of Payments Program clause of this solicitation); and 

(ii) Components of unknown origin are considered to have been mined, produced, or manufactured outside the United
States or a qualifying country.

(2) The Offeror must identify and certify all end products that are not domestic end products.

(i) The Offeror certifies that the following supplies qualify as ``U.S. made end products'' but do not meet the definition
of ``domestic end product'': 

(insert line item number).



(ii) The Offeror certifies that the following supplies are qualifying country end products: 

(insert line item number) (insert country of origin).



(iii) The Offeror certifies that the following supplies qualify as NAFTA country end products: 

(insert line item number (insert country of origin).



(iv) The Offeror certifies that the following supplies are other non-NAFTA country end products: 

(insert line item number) (insert country of origin).

 (End of provision)




18. A new section 252.2257036 is added to read as follows:



252.2257036 

North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act.



As prescribed in 225.408(a)(4), use the following clause:



North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (Jan. 1994)



(a) 

Definitions.



(1) 

Components, domestic end product, end product, nonqualifying country, qualifying country, 

and 

qualifying country end product 

have the meanings given in the Buy American Act and Balance of Payments Program clause of this contract.



(2) 

North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) country

 means Canada or Mexico.

(3) 

NAFTA country end product

 means an article that_

(i) Is wholly the growth, product, or manufacture of a NAFTA country; or

(ii) Has, in the case of an article which consists in whole or in part of materials from another country or instrumentality,
been substantially transformed in a NAFTA country into a new and different article of commerce with a name, character,
or use distinct from that of the article or articles from which it was so transformed. The term includes services (except
transportation services) incidental to its supply, provided that the value of those incidental services does not
exceed the value of the product itself. It does not include service contracts as such.

(4) 

Non-NAFTA country end product

 means any end product which is not a U.S. made end product or a NAFTA country end product. 

(5) 

United States

 means the United States, its designated possessions, Puerto Rico, and any other place subject to its jurisdiction,
but does not include leased bases or trust territories.

(6) 

U.S. made end product

 means an article which is_

(i) Wholly the growth, product or manufacture of the United States, or

(ii) In the case of an article which consists in whole or in part of materials from another country or instrumentality,
has been substantially transformed in the United States into a new and distinct article of commerce with a name, character,
or use distinct from that of the article or articles from which it was so transformed.

(b) This clause implements the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act of 1993 by providing a preference
for U.S. made end products and NAFTA country end products over non-NAFTA country end products, except non-NAFTA country
end products which are qualifying country end products.

(c) The Contractor agrees to deliver under this contract only U.S. made end products unless, in its offer, it specified
delivery of qualifying country, NAFTA country, or non-NAFTA country end products in the Buy American Act_North American
Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act_Balance of Payments Program Certificate provision. An offer certifying
that a qualifying country end product or a NAFTA country end product will be supplied requires the Contractor to supply
a qualifying country end product or a NAFTA country end product, whichever is certified, or, at the Contractor's option,
a U.S. made end produce.

(d) The offered price of end products listed and certified under paragraphs (c)(2)(i) and (iv) of the Buy American
Act_North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act-Balance of Payments Program Certificate provision
of the solicitation must include all applicable duty. The offered price of qualifying country end products or NAFTA
country end products for line items subject to the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act, should
not include custom fees or duty. (End of clause)




19. A new section 252.2257037 is added to read as follows:



252.2257037 

Duty-Free Entry_NAFTA Country End Products and Supplies.



As prescribed in 225.60570(c), use the following clause:



Duty-Free Entry_NAFTA Country End Products and Supplies (Jan. 1994)



(a) 

Definitions.





