 

(iv) The TRICARE Enrollment Program under section 199.17, except for TRICARE Extra program under that section; and

(v) The special programs for civilian sector services in lieu of military hospital services under section 199.19.

(3) Exemptions to the restriction. In addition to the provision to make TRICARE Extra available to CHCBP beneficiaries,
the following two demonstration projects are also available to CHCBP enrollees:

(i) Home Health Care Demonstration; and

(ii) Home Health Care-Case Management Demonstration.

(q) 

Premiums.



(1) 

Rates.

 Premium rates will be established by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs) for two rate groups_individual
and family. Eligible beneficiaries will select the level of coverage they require and pay the appropriate premium
payment. The rates shall be based on Federal Employee Health Benefit Program employee and agency contributions which
would be required for a comparable health benefits plan, plus an administrative fee. The administrative fee, not
to exceed ten percent of the basic premium amount, shall be determined based on actual expected administrative costs
for administration of the program. Premiums may be revised annually and shall be published annually for each fiscal
year. Premiums will be paid by enrollees quarterly.
(2) 

Effects of failure to make premium payments.

 Failure by enrollees to submit timely and proper premium payments will result in denial of continued enrollment and
denial of payment of medical claims. Premium payments which are late 30 days or more past the start of the quarter for
which payment is due will result in the ending of beneficiary enrollment. Beneficiaries denied continued enrollment
due to lack of premium payments will not be allowed to reenroll. In such a case, benefit coverage will cease at the end
of the ninety day (90) period for which a premium payment was received. Enrollees will be held liable for medical claims
costs in this instance.

(r) 

Transitional provisions.

 The Department of Defense shall provide for a period of enrollment for members and former member of the uniformed services
for whom the availability of transitional health care under 10 U.S.C. 1145(a) expires before the October 1, 1994,
implementation of the Continued Health Care Benefit Program.

(1) Enrollment in the U.S. VIP program will continue up to October 1, 1994. Policies written prior to October 1, 1994,
will remain in effect until the end of the policy life.

(2) After the October 1, 1994, implementation of the Continued Health Care Benefit Program, beneficiaries who enrolled
in the U.S. VIP program prior to October 1, 1994, may elect to cancel their U.S. VIP policy and enroll in the CHCBP.

(s) 

Procedures

. The Director, OCHAMPUS, may establish other rules and procedures for the administration of the Continued Health
Care Benefits Program.




Dated: March 31, 1994.



<SIGNER>
L.M. Bynum,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Alternative OSD Federal Register Liaison Officer, Department of Defense.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948113 Filed 4594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 500004M
</BILLING>

