 

A. Clarification and Update to Preamble Explanation of Copper MCLG 


The preamble to the final lead/copper NPDWR in the 

Federal Register

 contained EPA's rationale for setting the Maximum Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG) for copper at 1.3 milligrams per
liter (mg/L). In referencing the medical and epidemiological literature regarding health risks posed by copper,
EPA provided an incomplete discussion that is corrected. 



On 56 FR 26471, it is stated that: 
``This MCLG of 1.3 mg/L is based on a Lowest Observed Adverse Health Effect Level (LOAEL) of 5.3 mg/day from human clinical
case studies in which 5.3 mg was the lowest acute oral dose at which gastrointestinal effects were seen (Chuttani et
al., 1965).'' 



Chuttani et al. described the clinical course and treatment of patients who were hospitalized after suicidal ingestion
of large quantities of copper sulfate (>250 mg). In fact, the 5.3 mg/day LOAEL was derived in EPA's Drinking Water Criteria
Document for copper (EPA, 1987; p.VIII10) from analysis of a number of studies, briefly summarized here, in
which individuals developed gastrointestinal illnesses after ingesting much lower levels of copper than in the
Chuttani et al. study. 
Wyllie (1957) treated nurses for acute effects of copper poisoning (nausea, diarrhea, vomiting) caused by the dissolution
of copper contained in a cocktail shaker. Analysis of cocktail fluid prepared in the shaker allowed an estimate of
the amounts of copper ingested (5.332 mg copper; EPA, 1987, p. VI6). The following day, 10 of the 15 nurses
were still too ill to resume their duties and suffered from weakness, abdominal cramps, dizziness, and headaches.

Similar findings cited in the Criteria Document were reported among British workers who experienced nausea, diarrhea,
and vomiting after ingesting single dosages of approximately 710 mg copper in their tea (EPA, 1987, p. VIII9;
Semple et al., 1960; Nicholas and Brist, 1968). 
Spitalny et al. (1984) reported that one adult and two children, ages 5 and 7, of a Vermont family had recurrent episodes
of vomiting and gastrointestinal pain after drinking water in a newly built home which contained 2.8 to 8 mg/L copper.
In addition, the Centers for Disease Control reported 112 cases of copper intoxication between 1977 and 1982. The
majority of cases involved leaching of copper into drinking water from plumbing with reported copper levels ranging
from 4.070 mg/L (CDC, 19771982; EPA, 1987, p. VIII8). 
Several other epidemiological and controlled exposure studies, cited in the 1987 Criteria Document, have found
acute copper intoxication associated with higher exposure levels among a wide variety of populations. Based on a
review of human and animal toxicity, including the studies summarized above, the Criteria Document concluded (p.
VIII15): 



``A level of 1.3 mg/L is recommended to be the basis for the drinking water standard for the following reasons: 1) this
level would satisfy the nutritional requirements for copper: the National Academy of Sciences (NAS, 1980) estimated
that ``an adequate and safe'' intake of 23 mg copper in a 70 kg adult and 1.52.5 mg/day for children will
satisfy nutritional requirements and be protective of human health; and 2) assuming consumption of 2 L of water per
day, 1.3 mg/L copper in the drinking water would result in a daily intake of less than the lowest levels that were seen
to result in gastrointestinal effects in humans (5.3 mg/day, 38 mg/L). This value would thus be protective
against acute toxic effects in humans. This value is not protective against copper toxicity in sensitive members
of the population, such as those rare individuals with Wilson's disease. These individuals would have to further
limit their intake of copper from all sources.'' 



B. Amendments to Regulatory Language 


The amendments to regulatory language included in this action are described below. 




