 







<USDEPT>FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>AJJ Bancorp, Inc., et al.; Formations of; Acquisitions by; and Mergers of Bank Holding Companies</DOCTITLE>


The companies listed in this notice have applied for the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company
Act (12 U.S.C. 1842) and  225.14 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.14) to become a bank holding company or to acquire
a bank or bank holding company. The factors that are considered in acting on the applications are set forth in section
3(c) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 1842(c)).
Each application is available for immediate inspection at the Federal Reserve Bank indicated. Once the application
has been accepted for processing, it will also be available for inspection at the offices of the Board of Governors.
Interested persons may express their views in writing to the Reserve Bank or to the offices of the Board of Governors.
Any comment on an application that requests a hearing must include a statement of why a written presentation would
not suffice in lieu of a hearing, identifying specifically any questions of fact that are in dispute and summarizing
the evidence that would be presented at a hearing.
Unless otherwise noted, comments regarding each of these applications must be received not later than June 17, 1994.


A. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago

 (James A. Bluemle, Vice President) 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60690:


1. AJJ Bancorp, Inc.

, Elkader, Iowa; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 92.5 percent of the voting shares of Central State Bank,
Elkader, Iowa.


2. Bank of Montreal

, Toronto, Ontario; Bankmont Financial Corp., Wilmington, Delaware; and Harris Bankmont, Inc., Chicago, Illinois;
to acquire 100 percent of the voting shares of Suburban Bancorp, Inc., Palatine, Illinois, and thereby indirectly
acquire Suburban National Bank, Aurora, Illinois; Suburban Bank of Barrington, Barrington, Illinois; Suburban
Bank of Bartlet, Bartlet, Illinois; Suburban Bank of Cary-Grove, Cary, Illinois; Suburban National Bank of Elk Grove
Village, Elk Grove, Illinois; Marengo State Bank, Marengo, Illinois; Suburban Bank of Oakbrook Terrace, Oakbrook
Terrace, Illinois; Suburban National Bank of Palatine, Palatine, Illinois; Suburban Bank of Rolling Meadows, Rolling
Meadows, Illinois; Suburban Bank of Hoffman-Schaumburg, Schaumburg, Illinois; Suburban Bank of Westbrook, Westchester,
Illinois; Woodstock Acquisition Corp., Chicago, Illinois; The State Bank of Woodstock, Woodstock, Illinois; Huntley
Acquisition Corp., Huntley, Illinois; and State Bank of Huntley, Aurora, Illinois.
In connection with this application, Harris Bankmont, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, has also applied to become a bank
holding company by acquiring Suburban Bancorp, Inc., Palatine, Illinois, and its subsidiaries.


B. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

 (James M. Lyon, Vice President) 250 Marquette Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480:


1. Citizens State Bancshares, Inc.

, Lankin, North Dakota; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 82.08 percent of the voting shares of Citizens
State Bank of Lankin, Lankin, North Dakota. 


C. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas

 (Genie D. Short, Vice President) 2200 North Pearl Street, Dallas, Texas 75201-2272:


1. Central Bancshares, Inc.

, Houston, Texas; to acquire 100 percent of the voting shares of Lee County National Bank, Giddings, Texas.


D. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

 (Kenneth R. Binning, Director, Bank Holding Company) 101 Market Street, San Francisco, California 94105:


1. Charter Bancorporation

, Newport, Minnesota; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of First Buffalo
Holding Company, Scottsdale, Arizona, and thereby indirectly acquire Bank of Arizona, Scottsdale, Arizona.



Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 19, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Jennifer J. Johnson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Secretary of the Board.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94-12719 Filed 5-24-94; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 6210-01-F
</BILLING>



