 

The Service, and Federal, State, or tribal agencies, after they have been authorized by the Service, could promptly
remove any wolf from the experimental population once the Service, or its authorized agencies, has determined it
was presenting a threat to human life or safety. Although not a management option 

per se, 

it is noted that a person can legally kill or injure wolves in response to an immediate threat to human life. The incidental,
unavoidable, unintentional, accidental take in the course of otherwise lawful activity, or in defense of human life,
would be permitted by the Service and its authorized agencies, provided that such taking was not resulting from negligent
conduct lacking reasonable due care, due care was exercised to avoid taking a wolf, and the taking was immediately
(within 24 hours) reported to the appropriate authorities. Shooters have the responsibility to identify their target
before shooting. The act of taking a wolf that is wrongly identified as another species, for purposes of this rule,
will be considered as intentional, negligent, and not accidental. Such take may be referred to the appropriate authorities
for prosecution.
The Service, and other Federal, State, or tribal agencies, after they have been designated by the Service, may control
wolves that attack livestock (cattle, sheep, horses, and mules) by aversive conditioning, nonlethal control, and/or
moving wolves when five or fewer breeding pairs are established, or by other previously described measures. Killing
wolves or placing them in captivity may only be considered when there are six or more breeding pairs established in
the experimental population area. When depredation occurs on public land and prior to the establishment of six breeding
pairs, depredating females and their pups would be captured and released, at or near the site of capture, one time prior
to October 1. If depredations continue, or if six packs are present, females and their pups would be removed. Wolves
on private land under these same circumstances would be moved. Wolves that attack other domestic animals or pets on
private land twice in a calendar year would be moved, and chronic problem wolves would be removed from the wild.
The Service, other Federal agencies, and State or tribal wildlife personnel would be authorized and trained to take
wolves under special circumstances. Wolves could be live-captured and translocated to resolve conflicts with State
or tribal big-game management objectives, when they are located outside of the experimental areas, or to enhance
wolf recovery. If the captured animal is clearly unfit to remain in the wild, it could be placed in a captive facility.
Killing of any wolves would be a last resort and only authorized when live capture attempts fail or there is some clear
danger to human life.
The Service and authorized agencies of the Service would use the following conditions and criteria to determine the
status of problem wolves within the nonessential experimental population area:
(1) Wounded livestock or the partial remains of a livestock carcass must be presented with clear evidence (Roy and
Dorrance 1976; Fritts 1982) that the livestock injury or death was directly caused by a wolf or wolves. Such evidence
is essential for justifying any control action because wolves may feed on carrion they did not kill. Additionally,
there must be an indication that additional livestock losses may occur if the problem wolf or wolves are not controlled.
(2) No evidence of artificial or intentional feeding of wolves can be present. Improperly disposed livestock carcasses
located in the area of depredation will be considered attractants. On Federal lands, removal or a decision on the use
of such attractants must accompany any control action. If livestock carrion or carcasses are not being used as bait
for an authorized control action on Federal lands, it must be removed or otherwise disposed of so that they will not
attract wolves.
(3) On Federal lands, animal husbandry practices previously identified in existing approved allotment plans and
annual operating plans for allotments must have been followed.
Federal responsibility for protecting gray wolves under the experimental population provisions of the Act would
continue until formal delisting rulemaking procedures are completed. In accordance with the Act, delisting may
occur when analysis of the best available scientific and commercial information shows that gray wolves are no longer
threatened with extinction due to: (1) Loss of habitat, (2) overutilization, (3) disease or predation, (4) inadequacy
of existing regulatory mechanisms, and (5) other natural or manmade factors. In addition to the above, the following
criteria must be met: (1) For 3 consecutive years, a minimum of 10 breeding pairs are documented in each of the 3 recovery
areas described in the revised wolf recovery plan (Service 1987); (2) protective legal mechanisms are in place; and
(3) the EIS evaluation has been completed (Service 1994). After delisting, the Act specifies a species population
must be monitored for a 5-year period. After delisting, if in any 1 of the 3 recovery areas the wolf population fell below
the minimum of 10 breeding pairs for 2 consecutive years, then wolves in that recovery area would be considered for
protective status under the Act.
All reintroduced wolves designated as nonessential experimental will be removed from the wild and the experimental
status and regulations revoked when (1) legal actions or lawsuits change the wolves status to endangered under the
Act or (2) within 90 days of the initial release date, naturally occurring wolves, consisting of two breeding pairs
that for 2 consecutive years have each successfully raised two offspring, are discovered in the experimental population
area. The naturally occurring wolves would be managed and protected as endangered species under the Act.


Summary of Comments and Recommendations


Two proposed nonessential experimental population rules for the areas of Yellowstone National Park and central
Idaho were published in the 

Federal Register

 on August 16, 1994 (59 FR 42108 and 59 FR 42118, respectively) (Service 1994a). The Record of Decision, notification
of the proposed rules, and tentative schedule for public hearings were mailed to nearly 50,000 people on September
6, 1994. All interested parties were requested to submit factual reports or information that might contribute to
the development of the final rule. Appropriate Federal and State agencies, county governments, scientific organizations,
and other interested parties were contacted and requested to comment. A legal notice announcing the proposed rules,
hearings, and inviting public comment were published in the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Olympia Olympian, New
Paper Agency (Salt Lake City Papers), Washington Times, Lewiston Morning Tribune, The Idaho Statesman, Wyoming
Tribune, Casper Star Tribune, Bozeman Daily Chronicle, and Billings Gazette beginning on September 14, 1994.


