 

16. Substantial barriers to entry and expansion exist in the relevant market. One barrier to entry and expansion is
the considerable time and expense required to develop, test, and market a new PC operating system. Other interrelated
barriers to entry and expansion include:

a. the absence of a variety of high quality applications that run on a new operating system, and the difficulty of convincing
independent software vendors (``ISVs'') to develop such applications;

b. the lack of a sizable installed base of users; and

c. the difficulty in convincing OEMs to offer and promote a non-Microsoft PC operating system, particularly one with
a small installed base and relatively few applications designed to run on it.

17. These barriers magnify and reinforce each other because the value of an operating system to a consumer is directly
related to two factors: the availability of a variety of high quality applications that run on that system, and the
number of users who use that operating system and thus are able to share information and work with the system without
additional training. ISVs, in turn, tend to develop applications for operating systems with a large installed base
of users, and consumers gravitate towards operating systems with a large base of applications.

18. Microsoft's anticompetitive contracting practices described below significantly increase the already high
barriers to entry and expansion facing competitors in the PC operating system market. These practices reduce the
likelihood that OEMs will license and promote non-Microsoft PC operating systems, make it more difficult for Microsoft's
competitors to persuade ISVs to develop applications for their operating systems, and impede the ability of a non-Microsoft
PC operating system to expand its installed base of users.




Microsoft's Exclusionary and Anticompetitive OEM Licenses Foreclose Access to the OEM Channel by Microsoft's PC
Operating System Competitors 



19. In 1980, IBM agreed to license the original version of MSDOS from Microsoft for IBM's PC, which experienced
considerable success. Other OEMs also used MSDOS in order better to emulate the IBM PC. Microsoft quickly dominated
and gained a monopoly in the market for PC operating systems. It then entered into a series of exclusionary and anticompetitive
contract terms to maintain its monopoly.

20. Because of Microsoft's monopoly position in the marketplace, OEMs believe that they must offer MSDOS and
Windows to their customers. Profit margins in the computer hardware industry are very thin and OEMs want to obtain
MSDOS and Windows at the lowest possible cost. Microsoft has induced many OEMs to execute anticompetitive
``per processor'' contracts for MSDOS and Windows, even though many would prefer to preserve their freedom
to offer PCs with non-Microsoft operating systems.




