 

(4) 

Tentative position: Limitations on product ``for processing.'' 

FSIS is considering that, in addition to complying with any applicable limitations discussed with regard to the requirements
of the definitions and standards of identity or composition for particular poultry products and meat food products
(9 CFR parts 319 and 381, subpart P thereto), use of MDP ``for processing,'' i.e., MDP that has a protein content of less
than 14 percent and/or a fat content of more than 25 percent, not be permitted in the formulation of a poultry product
or meat food product at levels above 2 or 3 percent because of the effect on finished product quality. FSIS is requesting
comments regarding this approach and possible conditions for exceptions, e.g., when poultry and meat food products
are subject to a regulatory definition and standard which establishes a minimum requirement for protein content
and a maximum limit on fat content which ensure finished product quality.

FSIS also recognizes that MDP ``for processing'' may be used at very low levels (2 or 3 percent) as a binder_i.e., for
a technological or functional purpose. FSIS is particularly interested in receiving comments on whether such product
should be permitted for this purpose and, if so, in what products and under what conditions. For example, would it be
adequate and appropriate to permit this type of use so long as it is limited to the 3 percent level in formulating processed
product?

D. 

Tentative position: Labeling.

 FSIS expects to include special provisions for the labels of MDP and products in which it is used as an ingredient. If
adopted, these provisions would supplement other, more general requirements for such labels (see 9 CFR parts 317
and 381, subpart N).

(1) 

Tentative position: The product. 

FSIS is considering the following possible labeling provisions for MDP: (a) The name of the product (e.g., ``Mechanically
Separated (Kind),'' must be followed immediately by the phrase(s) ``for processing'' unless it has a protein content
of not less than 14 percent and a fat content of not more than 25 percent, ``made from fowl'' unless it is not made, in whole
or part, from mature female chickens (see 9 CFR 381.170(a)(1)(vi)), and ``with excess skin'' unless it is made from
poultry product that does not include skin in excess of the natural proportion present on the whole carcass (see 9 CFR
381.117(d)); (b) after any such required information, the name of the product may be followed by ``without skin''
and/or ``without kidneys and sex glands'' if it is made from poultry product that does not include skin and/or that
does not include kidneys or sex glands; and (c) there must be appropriate descriptive terminology if heat treatment
has been used in the preparation of such product. Because the characteristics specified are ones which would affect
use of MDP, FSIS is considering that, in order to assure compliance with regulatory requirements and thereby prevent
the adulteration and misbranding of finished poultry products and meat food products, it is necessary to provide
for their clear identification on the label when MDP leaves the establishment at which it is manufactured (see 9 CFR
381.115).

As indicated previously, the regulations already require that information bearing on use_including deviations
from the natural whole carcass proportion of skin as well as the fact of cooking_appear on the label of mechanically
separated poultry product (9 CFR 381.117(d)). The presence of skin or its presence in excess of the natural whole carcass
proportion would, as discussed previously, continue to affect product use if the regulations are amended. The use
of heat treatment in the preparation of the product also would be of continuing relevance (9 CFR 381.157(a)). In addition,
since the presence of poultry kidneys or sex glands can affect use (9 CFR 319.180(b)), a number of manufacturers of
MDP not containing these parts currently choose to note this fact on the label. The other information that would be
required is identification of product made from fowl and product for processing.



