 

By order dated June 25, 1993 (HCAR No. 25836) (``June 1993 Order''), the Applicants were authorized to: (1) add HEC
as a participant in the Money Pool for borrowings up to $11 million pursuant to the same terms and conditions as authorized
by the December 1992 Order, but only insofar as funds borrowed by HEC were contributed to the Money Pool by Northeast;
and (2) to increase Rocky River's short-term borrowing authorization from $15 million (which was granted pursuant
to the December 1992 Order) to $25 million. In addition, the June 1993 Order reserved jurisdiction over PSNH, North
Atlantic and HEC borrowings of Money Pool funds attributable to contributions from WMECO. 

The Applicants now propose that the aggregate amount of short-term debt that CLP may have outstanding at any
one time through December 31, 1994 be increased from its presently authorized level of $375 million to $500 million.
It is stated that CLP requests such authorization in order to use short-term debt to repay its Series WW First
Mortgage Bonds, which will mature on October 1, 1994. 



Central and South West Corporation, et al. 708423 



Central and South West Corporation (``CSW''), a registered holding company, and CSW Energy, Inc. (``Energy'') (collectively,
``Applicants''), a wholly owned nonutility subsidiary company of CSW, both located 1616 Woodall Rodgers Freeway,
P.O. Box 660164, Dallas, Texas 75202, have filed an application-declaration under Sections 6(a), 7, 9(a), 10, 12(b),
13(b), 32 and 33 of the Act and Rules 43, 45, 51, 53, 83, 86, 87, 90 and 91 thereunder. 

Applicants propose to organize and to invest in certain entities for the purpose of engaging in international business
activities that may arise from time to time (``Business Activities''). The Business Activities will include forming,
acquiring, financing and owning the securities or interests in the business of exempt wholesale generators, as defined
in Section 32(e) of the Act (``EWG'') and foreign utility companies, as defined in Section 33(a) of the Act (``FUCO'')
(collectively with EWGs and FUCOs, ``Facilities''). The EWGs will develop, construct, own and operate electric
generating assets and the FUCOs will develop, construct, own and operate electric generation, transmission and
distribution assets (``E/F Activities''). CSW proposes to organize, form, acquire and fund subsidiary companies
(``Project Parents'') that would engage in E/F Activities, and for Project Parents to issue equity and debt securities
to third parties. 

The Business Activities will also consist of providing consulting services, including, but not limited to, designing,
constructing and engineering services, to foreign electric utility enterprises and Facilities in which CSW has
no ownership interest (collectively, with E/F Activities, ``Permitted Activities''). 

CSW proposes to organize and to invest in a direct, wholly owned subsidiary company, which is anticipated to be named
CSW International, Inc. (``CSWI''). In addition, Applicants propose for CSWI and Energy to organize and to invest
in a subsidiary company, which will be organized and to invest in a subsidiary company, which will be organized under
the laws of the United Mexican States and is anticipated to be named CSW de Mexico, S.A. de C.V. (``CSWdM''). Upon formation,
CSWI and CSWdM propose to organize and to invest in a subsidiary company, which will be organized under the laws of the
United Mexican States and is anticipated to be named CSW de Mexico Servicios, S.A. de C.V. (``CSWdM Servicios'').


Applicants propose to organize CSWI, CSWdM and CSWdM Servicios in the following manner: (1) CSWI will be organized
under the laws of the State of Delaware with an authorized share capital of 1,000 shares of common stock, par value $.01
per share; (2) CSWdM will be organized under the laws of the United Mexican States with an authorized share capital
of up to 10,000 shares of common stock, par value NP$5.00 per share; and (3) CSWdM Servicios will be organized under
the laws of the United Mexican States with an authorized share capital of up to 10,000 shares of common stock, par value
NP$5.00 per share. 

CSW will initially subscribe to 1,000 shares of CSWI's authorized and issued common stock, at a subscription price
of $1.00 per share. CSWI will initially subscribe to 9,999 shares of CSWdM common stock at a subscription price of NP$5.00
per share, and Energy will initially subscribe to one share of CSWdM common stock at a subscription price of NP$5.00
per share. CSWI and Energy will thus own all authorized and issued shares of CSWdM. CSWdM will initially subscribe
to 9,999 shares of CSWdM Servicios common stock at a subscription price of NP$5.00 per share, and CSWI will initially
subscribe to one share of CSWdM Servicios common stock at a subscription price of NP$5.00 per share. CSWI and CSWdM
will thus own all authorized and issued shares of CSWdM Servicios. Energy will hold directly one share in CSWdM, and
CSWI will hold directly one share in CSWdM Servicios, to comply with the requirement under Mexican law that each of
CSWdM and CSWdM Servicios has a minimum of two shareholders. In the event any company in the CSW System is to acquire
an interest in CSWI, CSWdM or CSWdM Servicios (other than as set forth above), appropriate Commission approval will
be requested. 



