 



Comment:

 A few commenters recommended amending the proposed text to provide that a facility that is certified meets all Federal
requirements, except that a facility may be considered to meet the requirements if it has requested and been granted
a waiver by either HCFA or the State survey agency. Commenters further requested that we clarify in the regulation
that once a waiver is granted, the existing situation which required the waiver is not considered a deficiency for
the purpose of remedies or repeat deficiencies. 


Response:

 We do not believe the regulation needs to be changed. Waiving requirements renders those requirements not applicable
to a particular facility for the duration of the waiver. If requirements are not applicable to a particular facility,
that facility cannot be out of compliance with those requirements. Therefore, when a facility has been granted a waiver
of certain requirements, there would be no remedies imposed nor would those waived requirements be considered when
looking at a pattern of repeated noncompliance. 


Comment:

 Some State commenters believed that the proposed rule was unclear about when the certification of compliance or noncompliance
would be issued. For example, in the case of a plan of correction, would HCFA or the State certify compliance after an
acceptable plan of correction was received or would noncompliance be certified, and after successful completion
of the plan of correction, a subsequent certification of compliance be issued. 


Response:

 The certification of compliance or noncompliance is issued by the State survey agency approximately 20 to 25 days
after the last day of the survey. A finding of substantial compliance is considered within the range of compliance
and would receive a certification of compliance. A certification of compliance would be issued after a certification
of noncompliance if, as in the example the commenter offers, a facility submits a plan of correction and achieves substantial
compliance. The exact mechanism by which the facility will be notified of the subsequent certification of compliance
will be specified in manual instructions. 


Comment:

 One commenter suggested that HCFA not terminate a Medicaid provider agreement based on a validation survey unless
there is immediate jeopardy to resident health and safety. 


Response:

 We continue to believe that there is ample authority in the Act for the Secretary to terminate Medicaid provider agreements
in situations that do not pose immediate jeopardy. First, section 1919(h)(3)(B) of the Act provides that ``[n]othing
in this subparagraph shall be construed as restricting the remedies available to the Secretary to remedy a facility's
deficiencies.'' Second, section 1919(h)(3)(C) of the Act provides that the Secretary may provide for other specified
remedies. We view these provisions as statutory authority and Congressional intent that the Secretary design enforcement
remedies that will assist in effectively assuring prompt and lasting compliance by nursing facilities that serve
the Medicaid population. Third, the Act already expressly provides for terminations by the Secretary in non-immediate
jeopardy cases. Specifically, sections 1919(h)(6) and 1919(h)(7) of the Act, by their own terms, apply to findings
of noncompliance by the Secretary when there is no immediate jeopardy to resident health and safety. Each of these
provisions speaks to actions of the Secretary to terminate the provider agreement of such facilities. Accordingly,
we are not accepting the commenter's suggestion. 


Comment:

 A few commenters recommended that we revise 488.330(d)(1) to remove ``nature of noncompliance'' and replace
it with ``basis for the determination.'' The commenters suggested that the word ``nature'' was not specific enough
and does not furnish the provider with the necessary information to formulate an appropriate plan of correction or
response to deny the allegation. Some commenters further suggested that the facility should be provided with full
information that supports each citation and the survey agency's decisions including the underlying reason, basis
or rationale for the findings of noncompliance with a regulatory requirement. 





