 

Virginia Electric and Power Company, Docket Nos. 50338 and 50339, North 
Anna Power Station, Units No. 1 and No. 2, Louisa County, Virginia 





Date of Amendment Request:

 March 30, 1994.



Description of Amendment Request:

 The proposed changes would revise the North Anna Power Station, Units No. 1 and No. 2 (NA12) Technical

Specifications (TS). Specifically, the proposed changes would revise the High Head Safety Injection (HHSI) flow
balance surveillance requirements by removing specific numerical values. The numerical values would be replaced
with broader requirements to ensure that the HHSI flow rates meet the loss 
of coolant accident (LOCA) analysis acceptance criteria and pump runout limits. The NA12 TS 4.5.2.h
requires a surveillance test of the HHSI 
system following the completion of any modification to the Emergency Core 
Cooling System (ECCS) subsystems that could alter the subsystem flow 
characteristics. The current surveillance criteria specify values for the 
sum of the injection line flow rates, excluding the highest flow rate, and 
the total pump flow rate. These correspond to requirements for the safety 
analysis flow input and the HHSI pump runout limit, respectively. 

The HHSI test acceptance criteria in the current TS are very narrow 
because of the various system physical and technical constraints that need 
to be considered in the flow balance testing. These acceptance criteria 
may also be more restrictive than required by either the LOCA analysis or 
the actual pump runout requirements. For example, the LOCA analysis 
contains input conservatisms that could be used to offset a reduction in 
the required HHSI flow while still meeting the 10 CFR 50.46 LOCA acceptance 
criteria. The proposed TS changes would permit the use of additional 
available margin, while maintaining a strong technical linkage between the 
measured system performance and the safety analysis. Although these 
proposed TS changes remove the numerical values from TS 4.5.2.h, neither 
the methodology nor the acceptance criteria for LOCA analysis are affected. 



Basis for Proposed No Significant Hazards Consideration Determination:

 As required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee has provided its analysis of the issue of no significant hazards consideration,
which is presented below: 




Specifically, operation of North Anna Power Station in accordance with 
the proposed Technical Specification changes will not: 

1. Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences 
of an accident previously evaluated. The proposed Technical Specification changes continue to require that with
one HHSI pump running, the sum of the flows through the two lowest branch lines shall be [greater than or equal to] the
minimum HHSI flow required by the safety analysis and that the total HHSI pump flow rate shall be [less than or equal
to] the evaluated HHSI pump 
runout limit. 

Likewise, the consequences of the accidents previously evaluated will not increase as a result of the proposed Technical
Specification changes. The system performance will remain bounded by the safety analysis for all postulated conditions.
The safety analysis will continue to be performed and evaluated in accordance with the requirements of 10 CFR 50.59
and 10 CFR 50.46. 

2. Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident or 
malfunction from any previously evaluated. The proposed Technical Specification changes will not affect the capability
of the HHSI System to perform its intended function. The proposed Technical Specification changes are bounded by
the existing safety analysis and do not involve operation of plant equipment in a different manner from which it was
designed to operate. 

Since a new failure mode is not created, a new or different type of accident or malfunction is not created. 

3. Involve a reduction in a margin of safety. The system performance will continue to bound the flow rates specified
in the safety analysis, therefore safety margins are not reduced.




The NRC staff has reviewed the licensee's analysis and, based on this 
review, it appears that the three standards of 50.92(c) are satisfied. 
Therefore, the NRC staff proposes to determine that the amendment request 
involves no significant hazards consideration. 



Local Public Document Room Location:

 The Alderman Library, Special 
Collections Department, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
229032498. 



Attorney for Licensee:

 Michael W. Maupin, Esq., Hunton and Williams, 
Riverfront Plaza, East Tower, 951 E. Byrd Street, Richmond, Virginia 23219.



NRC Project Director:

 Herbert N. Berkow.


