 



Par. 9. 

Section 1.13941 is added under the heading ``Definitions; special rule'' to read as follows:


1.13941 

Enterprise zone facility bonds.


(a) 

Scope. 

This section contains rules relating to section 1394, relating to tax-exempt bonds for enterprise zone facilities
(

enterprise zone facility bonds

). See sections 1394, 1397B, and 1397C for other rules and definitions.
(b) 

Continuing compliance_

(1) 

In general. 

Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, compliance with the requirements applicable to enterprise
zone facility bonds apply throughout the term of the bonds.
(2) 

Start-up period. 

For a qualified business that is first established in connection with the issuance of enterprise zone facility bonds
(as opposed to a continuing qualified business to which financing is provided), the requirements relating to qualification
as an enterprise zone business and satisfaction of the rules for qualified zone property do not apply prior to the date
that is one year after the later of the issue date of the bonds and the date the financed facility is placed in service
(the 

testing date

).
(3) 

Manner of continuing compliance. 

An issue is treated as continuing to comply with the requirements of section 1394 (a) and (b) if_
(i) The issuer and each principal user in good faith attempts to meet these requirements throughout the term of the
bonds; and
(ii) Any failure to meet these requirements is corrected within a reasonable period after the failure is first discovered.
(4) 

Good faith. 

In order to satisfy the good faith requirement of paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section, the issuer and each principal
user must satisfy the requirements of 1.14113(a) (relating to conditions to taking remedial actions).
For this purpose, reasonable procedures to ensure compliance with the requirements of section 1394 (a) and (b) include
a requirement that, at least annually, each principal user submit to the issuer information demonstrating its monitoring
of compliance with these requirements.
(5) 

Reasonable period to correct noncompliance. 

Noncompliance that is corrected within one year of discovery satisfies the requirement of paragraph (b)(3)(ii)
of this section if, during the period in which the noncompliance exists, the issuer and the principal user use their
best efforts to correct the noncompliance.
(6) 

Application to employee requirements.

 For purposes of the requirement of section 1397 (b)(6) and (c)(5) that at least 35 percent of the employees are residents
of the empowerment zone or enterprise community, the issuer and each principal user may rely on an employee certification,
signed under penalty of perjury in connection with the hiring of that employee, regarding the residence of the employee
provided_
(i) The employee is made aware of the geographic boundaries of that zone or community;
(ii) The employee is required to notify the employer of a change of residence; and
(iii) Neither the issuer nor the relevant principal user has actual knowledge to the contrary.
(7) 

Application to gross income requirements. 

For purposes of paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section, the requirement of section 1397B (b)(2) or (c)(1) continues
to be treated as satisfied for each 5-year period during which, on the average, at least 85 percent of the total gross
income of the enterprise zone business is derived from the active conduct of that business if_
(i) The requirements of paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section are satisfied; and
(ii) The requirement of section 1397B (b)(2) or (c)(1) is satisfied during each of the first 3 years after the testing
date.
(c) 

Limitation on amount of bonds_

(1) 

Determination of outstanding amount. 

Whether an issue satisfies the requirements of section 1394(c) (relating to the $3 million and $20 million aggregate
limitations on the amount of outstanding enterprise zone facility bonds) is determined as of the issue date of that
issue based on the issue price of that issue and the adjusted issue price of outstanding bonds.


