 

A number of provisions in subpart 2 and elsewhere in the Act 
are particularly important to emphasize here. Part D establishes 
a scheme for more polluted areas to have more time to attain the 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), and subjects 
those more polluted areas to a graduated program of additional 
and more stringent specific control requirements to be 
accomplished over the longer time-frame. 
Section 181(a) provides for classification of ozone 
nonattainment areas based on the degree of the nonattainment 
problem in the area (as measured by the area's ozone design 
value), and provides that attainment ``shall be as expeditiously 
as practicable but not later than'' specified deadlines expressed 
as years after enactment. The areas, and the corresponding 
attainment deadlines are: Marginal (1993); Moderate (1996); 
Serious (1999); Severe (2005 or 2007, depending on the design 
value); and Extreme (2010). The Act also provides for additional 
``unclassifiable/no data'' nonattainment areas. All 
classifications other than Extreme are represented in the OTR. 
Section 184(b) also specifies additional requirements applicable 
for attainment areas in ozone transport regions, including: (1) 
Enhanced vehicle inspection and maintenance programs in cities 
meeting specified size thresholds; (2) state-wide implementation 
of reasonably available control measures (RACT); (3) ``Stage II'' 
vehicle refueling vapor controls or ``comparable measures''; and 
(4) treatment of major stationary sources of ozone precursors as 
if they were in moderate nonattainment areas. 
Section 182 establishes the graduated control measures 
applicable for each nonattainment classification. These measures 
are additive in that the higher classifications must generally 
adopt, in addition to measures specifically applicable to that 
higher classification, all measures identified for lower 
classifications as well. A basic requirement applicable to 
Marginal and above classifications is that States are to submit 
inventories of actual emissions from all sources in each 
nonattainment area. See sections 182(a)(1) and 172(c)(3). 
These emissions inventories may be important in determining 
whether the LEV program is necessary in the OTR. For example, 
the inventories may be important to determining the magnitude of 
emissions reductions that may be needed for attainment, and the 
effectiveness of various measures to obtain such reductions. 
Another potentially key requirement is that Moderate and 
above areas must submit attainment demonstrations. Under section 
182(b)(1)(A), for Moderate and above areas States are to specify 
in their plans specific annual reductions in emissions ``as 
necessary to attain the [NAAQS] for ozone by the attainment date 
applicable under this Act.'' Under section 182(c)(2)(A), for 
Serious and above areas States are to submit a demonstration that 
the State Implementation Plan (SIP), ``as revised, will provide 
for attainment of the ozone [NAAQS] by the applicable attainment 
date.'' Further, this provision continues, ``[t]his attainment 
demonstration must be based on photochemical grid modeling or any 
other analytical method determined by the Administrator, in the 
Administrator's discretion, to be at least as effective.'' These 
requirements provide the motivation for the OTC's recommendation; 
as additional measures may be necessary for the States to 
demonstrate that their SIPs will achieve timely attainment. The 
modeling information is, of course, important to determining what 
reductions are necessary in what areas for attainment in the OTR. 
It is also relevant that States are obligated to adopt 
various measures specified for progress toward attainment, and to 
achieve certain percentage reductions in emissions by interim 
dates. In general, section 172(c)(2) requires that SIPs ``require 
reasonable further progress'' (RFP), defined in section 171(1) to 
mean ``such annual incremental reductions in emissions of the 
relevant air pollutant as are required by this part or may 
reasonably be required by the Administrator for the purpose of 
ensuring attainment of the [NAAQS] by the applicable date.'' More 
specifically, section 182(b) provides that for Moderate and above 
areas States were to submit, by November 15, 1993, SIP revisions 
providing for a 15% reduction in emissions of volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs) from a 1990 baseline to be achieved by 1996. 
Further, section 182(c)(2)(B) provides that for Serious and above 
areas States are to submit, by November 15, 1994, SIP revisions 
that will result, subject to a limited feasibility exception, in 
additional reductions in VOC emissions from the 1990 baseline of 
3% each year averaged over consecutive 3-year periods beginning 
in 1996 and until the attainment date. Section 182(c)(2)(C) 
provides for substitution of reductions in emissions of nitrogen 
oxides (NO

X

) for VOC, in accordance with EPA guidance. These RFP 
requirements establish minimum reductions that certain 
nonattainment areas in the OTR will be required to achieve apart 
from whether EPA approves or disapproves the recommendation. 
Finally, section 110 of the Act establishes general 
requirements for SIPs. Section 110(a)(2) specifies minimum 
elements of a State's SIP, and subparagraph (D) specifies that a 
State's SIP shall contain adequate provisions prohibiting, consistent with the provisions of this 
title, any source or other type of emissions activity 
within the State from emitting any air pollutant in 
amounts which will contribute significantly to nonattainment in, or 
interfere with maintenance by, any other State 
with respect to any such national primary or 
secondary ambient air quality standard. 
This provision, as discussed in detail below, is the key 
mechanism under the transport provisions of sections 176A and 
184, and is central to the OTC recommendation and to EPA's action 
on it. 


B. Ozone Transport Region Provisions 


The OTR was established by operation of law under section 
184 of the Act and is comprised of the States of Connecticut, 
Delaware, Maine, Massachusetts, Maryland, New Hampshire, New 
Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, the 
District of Columbia, and the portion of Virginia that is within 
the Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area that includes the 
District of Columbia. Congress established the OTR in the 1990 
Amendments to the Act based on the recognition that the transport 
of ozone and ozone precursors throughout the region may render 
the Northeast States' attainment strategies interdependent. 
Under section 184, the Administrator established a Northeast 
Ozone Transport Commission for the OTR consisting of the Governor 
of each State or their designees, the Administrator or her 
designee, the Regional Administrators for the EPA regional 
offices affected (or the Administrator's designees), and an air 
pollution control official representing each State in the region, 
appointed by the Governor. 




