 

<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: 

Additional information on matters related to this 

Federal Register

 notice can be obtained at the address and telephone number set forth below: Mr. Ronald Johnston, Program Director,
CUP Completion Act Office, Department of the Interior, 302 East 1860 South, Provo, UT 846066154, Telephone:
(801) 3791103.


Information related to Western's purchasing and/or marketing the power may be obtained at the address and telephone
number set forth below: Mr. Kenneth G. Maxey, Area Manager, Western Area Power Administration, P.O. Box 11606, Salt
Lake City, UT 841470606, Telephone: (801) 5246372.
Technical data may be obtained at the address and telephone number set forth below: Mr. Reed Murray, Program Coordinator,
CUP Completion Act Office, Department of the Interior, 302 East 1860 South, Provo, UT 846066154, Telephone:
(801) 3791237.


Background Information


The CUP, Bonneville Unit, located in northern Utah, was authorized for construction, including hydroelectric power,
by the Colorado River Storage Project (CRSP) Act of April 11, 1956, (70 Stat. 105) (CRSP Act) as a participating project,
and the Central Utah Project Completion Act (Titles II through VI of Public Law 102575, 106 Stat. 4605) (CUPCA).
The United States has constructed a portion of the Bonneville Unit of the CUP (initial phase), including, among other
features, Upper Stillwater Dam, Bottle Hollow Dam, Starvation Dam, Currant Creek Dam, Jordanelle Dam, Soldier Creek
Dam for the enlarged Strawberry Reservoir, the Syar Tunnel, and the Sixth Water Aqueduct and Tunnel. The Central Utah
Water Conservancy District (District) is constructing other features of the Bonneville Unit pursuant to CUPCA.
Section 208 of the CUPCA provides that power generation facilities associated with the CUP be developed and operated
in accordance with the CRSP Act, which explicitly embodies all Reclamation law except as otherwise provided in the
CRSP Act. The District, under its contracts with the United States, has certain operation, maintenance, replacement,
and repayment responsibilities and obligations concerning the Bonneville Unit.
The United States constructed the SVP, comprising the Strawberry Dam and Reservoir, the Strawberry Tunnel, the Upper
Spanish Fork Powerplant and transmission lines, the High Line Canal, the Mapleton and Springville Lateral and related
collection, diversion, conveyance, and distribution works, all of which were substantially completed in approximately
the year 1915. The Strawberry Water Users Association (Association), under its contracts with the United States,
has the right to lease power privileges (subject to approval by Interior) and has operation, maintenance, replacement,
and repayment responsibilities and obligations concerning the SVP.
Interior, in consultation with Western, is considering only a consolidated system for hydroelectric power development
in the Diamond Fork area (Project), involving both the CUP and the SVP, through a lease of power privilege. The general
authority for lease of power privilege under Reclamation law includes the Town Sites and Power Development Act of
1906 (43 U.S.C. 522) and the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 (43 U.S.C. 485h(c)) (1939 Act).
A lease of power privilege is an alternative to Federal hydroelectric power development. The lease of power privilege
would grant to a non-Federal entity(s) the right to utilize, consistent with CUP and SVP purposes, water power head
or storage at and/or operationally in conjunction with the CUP and the SVP, for non-Federal electric power generation
and sale by the lessee(s). Any lease of power privilege in the Diamond Fork area of the CUP and SVP must accommodate pre-existing
legal rights of the District and the Association.
Interior would be the lead Federal agency for compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for any
lease of power privilege to develop the Project. Issuance of a lease(s) of power privilege for hydroelectric power
development in the Diamond Fork area will require compliance with Federal fish, wildlife, recreation, and environmental
laws, as determined by Interior.
Western would have the first opportunity to purchase and/or market the power that would be generated by the Project
under a lease(s) of power privilege. Under this process, Western would either purchase and market the power as Salt
Lake City Area_Integrated Projects (SLCAIP) power or market the power independently by first offering it
to preference entities and secondly to non-preference entities.

</FURTHER>
