 



(b) R403B.

_

R403B, which consists of HCFC22, R218, and propane, is acceptable as a substitute for CFC13,
R13B1, and R503 in retrofitted and new very low temperature refrigeration.

 Because HCFC22 contributes to ozone depletion, this blend is considered a transitional alternative. Regulations
regarding recycling and reclamation issued under section 608 of the Clean Air Act apply to this blend. R218,
or perfluoropropane, is an extremely long-lived substance with an extremely high GWP. EPA believes this blend could
significantly contribute to global warming. In addition, the long lifetimes of R218 means global warming
and other effects would be essentially irreversible. R403B is only acceptable as a substitute for the refrigerants
listed above. The GWP of HCFC22 and HCFC142b are also somewhat high. Although propane is flammable,
the blend is not. Leak testing has demonstrated that the blend's composition never becomes flammable. In a proposed
rulemaking soon to be issued, EPA intends to propose R403B unacceptable as a substitute for R502 in all
end-uses because other substitutes have been identified which do not exhibit such extreme GEPs or lifetimes.



(c) PFC Blend Alpha.

_

PFC Blend Alpha, which contains HFC23 and R116, is acceptable as a substitute for CFC13, R13B1,
and R503 in retrofitted and new very low temperature refrigeration.

 Both components of this blend exhibit extremely high GWPs and long lifetimes. HFC23 has a GWP of 9,000 and a lifetime
of 280 years, and R116, perfluoroethane, has a GWP of 9,000 and a lifetime of 10,000 years. EPA believes this
blend could significantly contribute to global warming if allowed to escape refrigeration systems. In addition,
the long lifetimes of R116 and HFC23 mean any global warming or other effects would be essentially irreversible.
While the current rule issued under section 608 of the CAA does not require recycling and recovery of this blend, or
leak repair for systems using it, EPA strongly encourages users to anticipate future rulemakings with voluntary
compliance. In particular, EPA urges users to reduce leakage and recover and recycle HFC23 during equipment
servicing and upon the retirement of equipment. This blend is nonflammable and does not deplete ozone.



B. Foams



1. Clarification from March 18, 1994 Final Rulemaking



In Section IX.E. Foams, under the listing decisions for rigid polyurethane and polyisocyanurate laminate boardstock
(59 FR 13085), the narrative under substitute (e) HCFC22/HCFC141b incorrectly reads as follows: ``The


HCFC22/HCFC142b 

blend is acceptable as a substitute for CFC11 in rigid polyurethane and polyisocyanurate laminate boardstock
foams.'' This sentence should read 

HCFC22/HCFC141b. 

The Agency regrets any confusion this error may have caused.

Further, the end-use titled ``Phenolic Insulation Board'' requires clarification. In this end-use the Agency includes
foam products manufactured from both the discontinuous block (or bun) process and the continuous lamination process.
Henceforth, this end-use will be referred to as ``Phenolic Insulation Boardstock and Bunstock Foam.''



2. New Listing Decisions

a. Acceptable Substitutes

(1) Rigid Polyurethane and Polyisocyanurate Laminated Boardstock





(a) Electroset Technology.

_

The Electroset Manufacturing Technology is an acceptable substitute for CFC11 blown rigid polyurethane
and polyisocyanurate laminated boardstock foams.

 This proprietary manufacturing process, developed by the U.S. Navy, transforms organic casting resins into electrosettable
foaming compounds. These compounds are made electrically semiconductive with the addition of electrically polarizable
particles, and if necessary, an electrically conductive fluid. This process enables foam manufacturers to electrically
accelerate the speed at which they set (i.e., harden) and cure (i.e. solidify). Other characteristics such as density,
compressibility, adhesion, and shear strength can also be electrically controlled.

Potential health and environmental risks for this technology are considered similar to or less than those of other
acceptable substitutes for this end-use. Risk is expected to vary based on the quantity of electrically polarizable
particles added in the polymer and whether other electrically conductive fluids are added to the formulation. Of
the six potential electrically foaming agents reviewed by the Agency, none represented a significant risk under
the SNAP criteria for evaluation. Adequate workplace precautions such as workplace ventilation were presumed.
For additional detail see, ``SNAP Evaluation for Electroset Technology.''



(2) Rigid Polyurethane Appliance





(a) Electroset Technology.

_

The Electroset Manufacturing Technology is an acceptable substitute for CFC11 blown rigid polyurethane
and polyisocyanurate laminated boardstock foams.

 See discussion above. 



(3) Rigid Polyurethane Spray and Commercial Refrigeration, and Sandwich Panels





(a) Electroset Technology.

_


