 

Executive Order 12612, Federalism



The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under section 6(a) of Executive order 12612, Federalism, has determined
that the policies contained in this rule do not have Federalism implications and, thus, are not subject to review under
the Order. No programmatic or policy changes result from this rule's promulgation which would affect existing relationships
between the Federal Government and State and local governments.



Executive Order 12606, The Family



The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under Executive order 12606, The Family, has determined that this
rule does not have potential for significant impact on family formation, maintenance, and general well-being, and,
thus, is not subject to review under the Order. The rule is procedural in nature and no significant change in existing
HUD policies or programs impacting on the family result from promulgation of this rule.



Environment



An environmental assessment is unnecessary, since internal administrative procedures whose content does not constitute
a development decision affecting the physical condition of specific project areas or building sites are categorically
excluded from the Department's National Environmental Policy Act procedures under 24 CFR 50.20(k).



List of Subjects



24 CFR Part 251



Low and moderate income housing, Mortgage insurance, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



24 CFR Part 252



Health facilities, Loan programs_housing and community development, Loan programs_health, Mortgage insurance,
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Nursing homes.



24 CFR Part 255



Low and moderate income housing, Mortgage insurance, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




Accordingly, 24 CFR parts 251, 252 and 255 are amended to read as follows:



PART 251_COINSURANCE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OR SUBSTANTIAL REHABILITATION OF MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROJECTS



1. The authority citation for 24 CFR part 251 is revised to read as follows:






Authority: 

12 U.S.C. 1715b, 1715z9; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).




2. Section 251.2 is added to read as follows:



251.2 

GNMA right to assignment.



If the lender-issuer defaults on its obligations under the GNMA Mortgage-Backed Securities Program, GNMA will have
the right to cause all Coinsured Mortgages held in GNMA pools by the defaulting coinsuring lender-issuer to be assigned
to another GNMA-approved coinsuring lender-issuer, or to GNMA itself.

(a) For any Coinsured Mortgage that is not in default and is held by a defaulting lender-issuer, GNMA will have the right
to perfect an assignment of the mortgage to itself. However, before exercising this right, GNMA will attempt to have
the Mortgage assigned to another eligible coinsuring lender (unless GNMA determines, with the agreement of the Commissioner,
that the attempt would prove ineffectual because of market conditions or other factors). This attempt will be undertaken
by soliciting offers to assume the defaulting lender-issuer's rights and obligations under the Mortgage from those
eligible coinsuring lenders that are also GNMA issuers and that are indicated on a periodically updated listing furnished
to GNMA by the Commissioner.

(b) For any Coinsured Mortgage that is in default and held by a defaulting lender-issuer, GNMA will have the right to
perfect an assignment of the Coinsured Mortgage directly to itself before extinguishing the Mortgage by completion
of foreclosure action or acquisition of title by deed-in-lieu of foreclosure.

(c) GNMA, as assignee, will give the Commissioner written notice, within 30 days after taking a Mortgage by assignment
in accordance with this section, in order to allow an appropriate endorsement and necessary changes in the Commissioner's
records.

(d) The Commissioner will endorse any Mortgage assigned to GNMA as provided by this section for full insurance, effective
as of the date of assignment in accordance with the appropriate provisions of 24 CFR part 221. Any future claim by GNMA,
or any assignment of the fully insured Mortgage, will be governed by the appropriate provisions of 24 CFR part 221,
except that any payment will be made in cash instead of debentures.



PART 252_COINSURANCE OF MORTGAGES COVERING NURSING HOMES, INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITIES AND BOARD AND CARE HOMES



3. The authority citation for 24 CFR part 252 is revised to read as follows:






Authority: 

12 U.S.C. 1715b, 1715z9; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).



4. Section 252.2 is added to read as follows:


