 

In addition, these solvents are all listed as hazardous wastes under RCRA (F001, U080, U210, U228) and thus must comply
with applicable RCRA waste disposal requirements. The SNAP risk screen did note the potential for adverse effects
without additional controls. However, the Agency is in the process of addressing residual risks to the general population
through releases to air under section 112 of the Clean Air Act. Section 112 requires EPA to establish Maximum Achievable
Control Technology (MACT) standards for use of Hazardous Air Pollutants (HAPs). All three non-OD chlorinated solvents
are listed as HAPs, and the Agency issued a proposal describing MACT rules governing their use in industrial cleaning
in November 1993. The final regulation is expected to be issued by the end of 1994. 

Finally, through the voluntary ``33/50'' pollution prevention program, the EPA is encouraging companies to decrease
emissions of TCE, perc, and meth, in addition to 14 other specific chemicals. Companies participating in this program
voluntarily commit to decreasing emissions 33 percent by the end of 1992 and 50 percent by the end of 1995, using pollution
prevention strategies. The Agency is committed in the long term to urge companies to participate in pollution prevention
programs such as 33/50, and to continue to find new ways to use and emit less polluting and lower toxicity compounds.
EPA urges even companies not participating in the 33/50 program to explore and adopt housekeeping practices, chemical
handling procedures, and equipment configurations that lead to lower chemical consumption. 

(d) Supercritical carbon dioxide. Supercritical carbon dioxide is acceptable as a substitute for CFC113
and MCF in the metals cleaning sector. The Agency's risk screen did not identify any environmental effects with significant
concerns for this substitute. 

(e) Vanishing oils. Vanishing oils are acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in the metals cleaning sector.
Although these materials are VOCs, extensive regulations exist at the Federal, state, and local level to control
any new VOC uses. In addition, newer vanishing oils often have higher flashpoints, enabling them to be flashed and
captured in ovens. 

(f) Volatile methyl siloxanes (dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane, hexamethyldisiloxane, octamethyltrisiloxane,
decamethyltetrasiloxane). The volatile methyl siloxanes dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane, hexamethyldisiloxane,

octamethyltrisiloxane, and decamethyltetrasiloxane are acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in the
metals cleaning sector. The Agency's risk screen for these chemicals indicated that exposure to these substitutes
are generally below levels that would raise concern for health risks. Two of the volatile methyl siloxanes, octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane
and decamethylcyclopentasiloxane, have low company-set exposure limits, and these chemicals will be handled under
a separate rulemaking. 

(2) Electronics cleaning. a. (Semi-aqueous/aqueous cleaners).
Semi-aqueous and aqueous cleaners are acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in electronics cleaning.
The justification for this determination is described in the section on metals cleaning. In this case, the Agency
estimated that up to 80 percent of the cleaning market could be captured by semi-aqueous cleaners and that up to 60 percent
of the market could be served by aqueous cleaners. As in metals cleaning, the Agency urges companies to adopt pollution
prevention practices and to select formulations with low overall toxicity. 

Effluent limitations and standards that affect use of water-based formulations in the electronics cleaning sector
will be proposed under the Clean Water Act for the Phase I Metal Products and Machinery sector by November 1994. Phase
I includes electronic equipment along with other manufacturing areas such as aerospace, hardware and mobile industrial
equipment. Phase II, to be issued later, covers household and office equipment in addition to sectors such as motor
vehicles and shipbuilding. 

(b) No-clean substitutes. No-clean processes are acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in electronics
cleaning. The Agency's analysis estimates that, over time, as much as seventy percent of the electronics cleaning
market could switch to no-clean processes_a projection that is borne out by the high degree of interest shown by electronics
companies in these substitutes. 

Concerns for risks deriving from use of no-clean processes focus primarily on worker safety. To examine these risks,
the Agency looked at critical factors that distinguish no-clean processes from conventional electronics assembly.
These differences center on changes in the proportions of chemicals used in formulations, rather than on differences
in the identity of chemicals selected. The analysis determined that occupational risks deriving from these differences
are already well-documented and controlled, for example, through requirements specified on key Materials Safety
Data Sheets and existing workplace regulations implemented by OSHA. 




