 

Hereafter, until the Department of Housing and Urban Development has adopted regulations specifying the nature
and quality of insurance covering the potential personal injury liability exposure of public housing authorities
and Indian housing authorities (and their contractors, including architectural and engineering services) as a
result of testing and abatement of lead-based paint in federally subsidized public and Indian housing units, said
authorities shall be permitted to purchase insurance for such risk, as an allowable expense against amounts available
for capital improvements (modernization): Provided, That such insurance is competitively selected and that coverage
provided under such policies, as certified by the authority, provides reasonable coverage for the risk of liability
exposure, taking into consideration the potential liability concerns inherent in the testing and abatement of lead-based
paint, and the managerial and quality assurance responsibilities associated with the conduct of such activities.

 

In other words, until a final rule is effective, HAs may proceed with lead-based paint abatement activities, selecting
their own lead-based paint liability coverage so long as they determine it is appropriate for their needs. 
A proposed rule was published on November 2, 1993 (FR 58513) which covered this subject. This final rule responds to
comments received on that proposed rule. 


III. Public Comments 


The Department received comments from nine public sources. Three were from housing authorities. Two were from testing/abatement
contractors or consultants. Three were from PHA-owned insurance entities or their administrators, and one was from
a trade association. 


Comment.

 Three sources questioned HUD's reasoning in not attempting to secure another master insurance policy that would
provide liability coverage for both the contractor performing testing and abatement work, as well as the HA, and requested
reconsideration of this decision. Two of the sources also recommended that such master policy also cover any type
of contractor (plumbing, heating, mechanical, electrical, painting and decorating) who might come in contact with
lead-based paint while performing their work. 


Response.

 The Department rejects this recommendation for a number of reasons. In its report to Congress dated September 24,
1991, concerning the previous master policy which expired on October 1, 1993, the HUD Inspector General questioned
the involvement of HUD staff in the procurement of that policy. The IG felt that since this was not a Federal procurement,
but an HA procurement subject to State procurement statutes and regulations, HUD's involvement should have been
only in an advisory capacity. In addition, it is extremely doubtful that any insurance company would consider issuing
a liability insurance policy to a HA that would cover as insured parties, contractors engaged in performing various
types of skilled work only while working on HA premises. Should the housing authorities or any contractor trade associations
desire to secure a master policy that meets the requirements of this rule and provides adequate protection for the
exposure, they are free to do so. Also, since the passage of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act
of 1992, which is Title X of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 48514856), other public
and private housing owners are required to engage in lead-based paint testing and abatement. Since contractors performing
these operations need insurance when working for other housing owners, a master policy obtained by HUD insuring them
only while performing work for HAs would not fill all of their needs. In addition, there appears to be a more available
market for this type of insurance than prevailed in 1990 when the previous master policy was obtained. 


Comment

. The rule should have a ``grandfather clause'' allowing HAs and contractors to continue coverage that was obtained
prior to the effective date of the rule even though the policy does not meet the rule requirements. 


Response

. The Department agrees that it should not require midterm cancellation of any policy that would result in a short rate
penalty in order to comply with the rule and has modified the rule accordingly. It will be necessary, however, to comply
with the requirements of the rule when the policy in force on the effective date of the rule expires. 


Comment

. In order to expand the availability of insurance policies that would qualify under the rule, allow a ``claims made''
form as long as it has a discovery period. 


Response

. The Department is willing to allow a ``claims made'' form, as long as it has a discovery period of at least five years,
and the rule has been changed to that effect. 


Comment

. Professional Liability insurance for architects and engineers cannot be obtained on an ``occurrence'' form and
insurance companies insuring the contractors and HAs for liability do not want to add this coverage to their policies.



Response

. It was not the intent that this rule was to apply to Professional Liability policies obtained by architectural and
engineering firms, and the rule has been clarified accordingly. The HA, however, should have these firms provide
evidence that they do have some type of Professional Liability insurance in effect. 





