 

The OPA proposed rule specifies that an injury resulting from the incident is demonstrated in the case of direct exposure,
if: (a) the natural resource was exposed, (b) there is a pathway between the discharge and exposed natural resource,
and (c) the exposure of oil, its components, or by-products have been shown by rigorous and appropriate scientific
methodology to have an adverse effect on the natural resource in laboratory experiments or the field. In the absence
of direct exposure, an injury resulting from the incident is demonstrated if: (a) the adverse effect on or impaired/diminished
use of a natural resource has been shown by rigorous and appropriate scientific methodology; and (b) the adverse effect
on or impaired/diminished use of the natural resource would not have occurred but for the discharge or threat of a discharge.
This definition differs from the corresponding definition under the CERCLA rule (43 CFR 11.62(b)-(f)), but this
difference should not produce inconsistencies. 

NOAA is developing guidance on the types of adverse effects that are associated with discharges of oil in a technical
support document for Injury Determination and Quantification. Generally, when attempting to determine whether
there is an injury, quantify that injury, and evaluate whether the injury is a type of injury associated with the discharge
of oil, the trustee should identify those adverse effects that meet certain ``acceptance criteria.'' Factors that
are relevant in choosing a methodology to use to demonstrate adverse effect include the extent to which that methodology
has been able to demonstrate adverse effect in the laboratory or field, and the scientific appropriateness of that
methodology. 



Summary of Comments 



The discussions at the regional workshops and the Washington, D.C. meeting focused on whether trustees should be
required to ``measure'' an adverse change in order to show injury under OPA. NOAA presenters discussed the distinction
between establishing ``liability'' under OPA and proving ``damages.'' Participants indicated that the proposed
rule should explain the distinction better than it does now. 

Another issue of concern to many participants was the perception that some biological effects or responses to exposure
to oil are produced in the laboratory but are not reflected in field studies. There was some criticism that the proposed
rule allowed unobserved biological responses to be characterized as ``injury'' to natural resources and that this
amounted to assessing damages for a ``risk of injury'' rather than actual injury. 

One commenter stated that OPA required the injury to be of the type that required restoration or be relevant to restoration
before damages would be owed a trustee. This commenter suggested that adverse effects on natural resources were not
enough by themselves, that the adverse effects had to require restoration in order to constitute injury under OPA.


One participant argued that OPA is a civil damages statute imposing tort liability and therefore requires a demonstration
of injury-in-fact on-site to result in damages. It was also suggested that the proposed rule presumed injury if a discharge
of oil occurs and that NOAA has no statutory authority for such a presumption. 



Specific questions on which NOAA is seeking comment: 



1. Does NOAA's proposed definition of ``injury'' reflect the general understanding of the term in the scientific
and legal community? Should NOAA define ``adverse change?'' If yes, how? 
2. Does NOAA's proposed definition of ``injury'' presume injury or must the trustee present evidence of ``injury''
for purposes of establishing damages under OPA? 
3. NOAA's proposed rule includes a definition of the phrase ``injury resulting from a discharge of oil'' (see 59 Fed.
Reg. 1169). OPA section 1002 provides that liability is for removal costs and damages ``that result from such incident.''

a. Does NOAA's proposed definition of ``injury resulting from a discharge'' mingle the concepts of ``injury'' with
``causation?''
b. Does the proposed definition mingle concepts of legal causation with scientific premises for establishing cause-in-fact?

c. Should NOAA provide a regulatory definition of ``injury resulting from...such incident...''? 
d. Should NOAA limit its regulatory approach to describing acceptable ways trustee and responsible parties may develop
evidence of injury ``resulting from'' an incident; i.e.''acceptance criteria?'' 


