

Figure H2. Guide for Preparing Remedies Plan 



Guide for Preparing a Remedies Plan 

(Date of Plan) 

Section I (Administrative Data)



A. Subject of Allegation.

B. Principal Investigative Agency.

C. Investigative Agency File Number.

D. Subject's Location.

E. Location Where Offense Took Place.

F. Responsible Action Commander.

G. Responsible MACOM.

H. Contract Administrative Data (If Applicable):



1. Contract Number.

2. Type of Contract.

3. Dollar Amount of Contract.

4. Period of Contract.



I. Principal Case Agent (Name and Telephone Number).

J. Civilian Prosecutor (If Applicable) (Name, Address, and Telephone Number).

K. Is Grand Jury Investigating This Matter? If So, Where is Grand Jury Located?

L. Audit Agency Involved (If Applicable). Name and Telephone Number of Principal Auditor.

M. Suspense Date for Update of This Plan.



Section II (Summary of Allegations and Investigative Results to Date)



(Provide sufficient detail for reviewers of the plan to evaluate the appropriateness of the planned remedies. If
information is ``close-hold'' or if grand jury secrecy applies, so state.)



Section III (Adverse Impact Statement)



(Describe any adverse impact on the DA/DOD mission. Adverse impact is described in DOD Directive 7050.5, paragraph
E.1.g. Identify impact as actual or potential. Describe the impact in terms of monetary loss, endangerment to personnel
or property, mission readiness, etc. This information should be considered in formulating your remedies as described
below and provided to prosecutors for their use in prosecution of the offenses.)



Section IV (Remedies Taken and/or Being Pursued)



A. Criminal Sanctions. (As a minimum, address the following: Are criminal sanctions appropriate? If so, which ones?
If not, why not? Has the local U.S. Attorney or other civilian prosecutor been notified and briefed? What actions have
been taken or are intended? If and when action is complete, describe action and final results of the action. Other pertinent
comments should be included.)

B. Civil Remedies. (As a minimum address the following: Which civil remedies are appropriate? Has the local U.S. Attorney
or other civilian prosecutor been notified and briefed? How, when, where and by whom are the appropriate civil remedies
implemented? If and when action is completed, describe action and final results. Other pertinent comments should
be included.)

C. Contractual/Administrative Remedies. (As a minimum, address the following: Are contractual and administrative
remedies appropriate: If so, which ones? If not, Why? If contractual or administrative remedies are considered appropriate,
describe how, when, and by whom the remedies are implemented. If and when action is completed, describe action and
results of the action. Other pertinent comments should be included.)

D. Restrictions on Remedies Action. (Comment as to why obvious remedies are not being pursued. For example, the U.S.
Attorney requests suspension action held in abeyance pending criminal action.)



Section V (Miscellaneous Comments/Information)

Section VI (Remedies Plan Participants)



(Record the name, grade, organization, and telephone number of all Remedies Plan participants.)



Section VII (MACOM Coordination Comments)



(Record the name, grade, office symbol, and telephone number of all MACOM officials providing coordination comments;
record the date when comments are submitted and append to the Remedies Plan the signed comments provided.)



MACOM Focal Point



(Record the name, grade, office symbol, and telephone number of the MACOM focal point.)



Section VIII (Coordination/Comments)



(Record the name, grade, organization, office symbol, and telephone number of all officials with whom you have coordinated
the Remedies Plan or who have provided comments on your plan; append any comments provided to the Remedies Plan.)


