 

Paperwork Reduction Act 



No new data collection or recordkeeping requiring Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approval under the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 through 3502) are included in this rule. 

The Administrator of FNS has determined pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(3)(B) that prior notice and comment on this rule
prior to implementation is unnecessary and contrary to public interest, and therefore good cause exists for making
this rule effective without prior public comment. This document makes technical changes and imposes no new requirements.
This rule updates 7 CFR parts 210 and 220 to incorporate a change made in the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) nutrition
labeling regulations. There is no need for public comment because the change from the U.S.RDA reference to the RDI
reference does not effect the basis of the regulation. In addition, FDA has already made this change in the nutrition
labeling regulations the competitive foods rule must make the change in order to refer to an accepted reference. 



Background 



The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires that certain food products be labeled with information sufficient
to apprise consumers of the nutritional content and value of the products. Food product labels are required to indicate
on a per serving basis the percentage contribution of the product to the recommended daily consumption of certain
vitamins and minerals considered essential for human nutrition. The amounts of these vitamins and minerals recommended
for daily consumption are known as the U.S. Recommended Daily Allowances or U.S.RDAs. The U.S.RDAs are derived by
FDA from the ``Recommended Daily Allowances,'' published by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy
of Sciences-National Research Council (NASNRC). The Department employs the U.S.RDAs in the National School
Lunch, 7 CFR 210.11(b); Appendix B, and School Breakfast, 7 CFR 220.12(b)(1); appendix B, program regulations in
describing foods of minimal nutritional value which are prohibited from being sold in school food service areas during
regular meal service. The NASNRC Recommended Daily Allowances are referenced by the Department in the National
School Lunch and Food Stamp Program regulations to describe nutritional goals of the programs. 

In part to eliminate the public's confusion from the widespread use of both the U.S.RDAs and the NASNRC Recommended
Daily Allowances, and in part to reflect recent increases in the scientific knowledge concerning human nutrition
requirements, FDA is discontinuing use of the U.S.RDAs as of May 8, 1994. On that date, the U.S.RDAs will be replaced
by the Reference Daily Intakes, or RDIs, and the Daily Reference Values or DRVs. RDIs will be used to describe recommended
vitamin, mineral and protein consumption and DRVs in discussing fats and carbohydrates. RDI and DRV information
will not be used on food product labels. Rather, FDA is adopting a new nutrition labeling reference, known as the Daily
Value, which will combine RDI and DRV information and will be required on most packaged food products. 

To coincide with FDA's replacement of the U.S.RDAs with RDIs and DRVs, the Department is updating its references to
the U.S.RDAs in the regulations it administers. Effective May 8, 1994, the National School Lunch and School Breakfast
Program regulations will be amended by substituting the term RDI in place of U.S.RDA. The Department's current references
to the U.S.RDAs involve only vitamin and mineral content of food products. Therefore, no reference need be made by
the Department to the DRVs as that term will refer only to the fats and carbohydrates. References to the NASNRC
Recommended Daily Allowances in 7 CFR 210.10(b) and 272.5(b) will be unaffected by this regulatory change. 



List of Subjects



7 CFR Part 210 



Food Assistance Programs, National School Lunch Program, Commodity School Program, Grant programs-social programs,
Nutrition, Children, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Surplus agricultural commodities.



7 CFR Part 220 



Food Assistance Programs, School Breakfast Programs, Grant programs-social programs, Nutrition, Children, Reporting
and recordkeeping requirements, Surplus agricultural commodities. 

Accordingly, 7 CFR parts 210 and 220 are amended as follows: 



PART 210_NATIONAL SCHOOL LUNCH PROGRAM 



1. The authority citation for part 210 continues to read as follows: 






Authority:

 The provisions of part 210 issued under sec. 212, 60 Stat. 230, as amended; sec. 10, 80 Stat. 889, as amended;
84 Stat. 270; 42 U.S.C. 17511760, 1779. 







