 

The proposed rule would: Require the submission of a full appraisal report, including a complete and detailed description
of the elements that make up an appraisal report, justification for the methodology employed and sufficient support
for the conclusions reached therein; require a depositor vote on all mutual-to-stock conversions of State Savings
Banks and prohibit management's use of previously executed (or ``running'') proxies to satisfy depositor voting
requirements; for one year following the date of the conversion, among other things, require that any management
recognition plans or stock option plans be implemented only after shareholder approval is received, require that
stock options (if any) be granted at no lower than the market price at which the stock is trading at the time of grant and
prohibit MRPs funded by conversion proceeds; require that the record date for determining depositors eligible to
receive rights to participate in the subscription offering of the conversion stock not be less than one year prior
to the date of adoption of the plan of conversions by the converting bank's board of trustees; require that the subscription
offering provide a preference to eligible depositors and others in the bank's ``local community'' (as defined in
the proposed rule) or within 100 miles of the bank's home office or branch(es); require that employee stock ownership
plans (ESOPs) not have a priority over subscription rights of ``eligible depositors'' (as defined in the proposed
rule); require the submission of a business plan, including, among other things, a detailed discussion of how management
intends to deploy the capital raised through the sale of stock in the conversion; and prohibit stock repurchases within
one year following the conversion. 



2. Discussion of Each Proposed Requirement 


The following is a discussion of each of the requirements in the proposed rule. Many of the requirements are engendered
by the Board's concerns about bank management's proper exercise of its fiduciary duties. As discussed in the preamble
to the Interim Rule, the duties and obligations of trustees and officers of mutual savings banks are identical to the
responsibilities the FDIC has historically enunciated and enforced concerning directors and officers of commercial
banks.

2

 The two principal duties of care and loyalty that directors and officers of commercial banks must exercise on behalf
of the institution and its constituencies (

i.e.

, depositors, creditors and shareholders) also obligate trustees of mutual savings banks. Both duties have long
antecedents in the common law of corporations and financial institutions.

3

 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>


See e.g.

, 

Statement Concerning the Responsibilities of Bank Directors and Officers

 (FDIC Legal Division, December 3, 1992); Pocket Guide for Directors (FDIC 1988). 


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


3

</FOOTNAME>


Greenfield Savings Bank 

v. 

Abercrombie

, 211 Mass. 252, 97 N.E. 897, 39 L.R.A.n.s. 173 (1912) provides a detailed discussion of liability of trustees of a savings
bank. 

</FOOTNOTE>


Trustees (as well as officers) of mutual savings institutions are held to the same standard of care and loyalty as directors
and officers of stock banks. Thus, the trustees must fulfill their duty of loyalty to the institution by administering
its affairs with the utmost candor, personal honesty and integrity. They are prohibited from advancing their own
personal or business interests or those of others at the expense of the bank. This general fiduciary duty has been frequently
interpreted to include an element of fairness and good faith which, in the context of mutual-to-stock conversions,
affords protection to the various stakeholders (particularly depositors) of mutual savings banks. 

The FDIC, through the Interim Rule, also requires the trustees of mutual savings banks to adhere to the same standards
of loyalty and care that are required of directors and officers of stock institutions in order to prevent insider abuse.

Publicized insider abuse (and the lawsuits that such abuses may engender) may have a sufficiently significant impact
upon the reputation of a bank to affect its continued viability and, thus, its safety and soundness, resulting in a
regulatory violation. 
As indicated above, the requirements in the proposed rule are rooted in concerns about safety and soundness, breaches
of fiduciary duty and/or other violations of law. 




