 

(A) If interim sacrifices are planned, the number of animals shall be increased by the number of animals scheduled
to be sacrificed during the course of the study. 

(B) For a chronic study, the number of animals at the termination of the study must be adequate for a meaningful and valid
statistical evaluation of chronic effects. 

(v) A concurrent control group is required. This group shall be exposed to clean, filtered air under conditions identical
to those used for the group exposed to the test atmosphere. 

(vi) The same species/strain shall be used to make comparisons between fuel-only and fuel/additive mixture studies.
If another species/strain is used, the tester shall provide justification for its selection. 

(2) 

Animal handling and care.

 (i) A key element in the conduct of inhalation exposure studies is the proper handling and care of the test animal population.
Therefore, the exposure conditions must conform strictly with the conditions for housing and animal care and use
set forth in the 

Guide

. 

(ii) In whole-body exposure chambers, animals shall be housed in individual caging. The minimum cage size per animal
will be in accordance with instructions set forth in the 

Guide. 

(iii) Chambers shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with recommendations and schedules set forth in the
Guide

. 

(A) Observations shall be made daily with appropriate actions taken to minimize loss of animals to the study (e.g.,
necropsy or refrigeration of animals found dead and isolation or sacrifice of weak or moribund animals). Exposure
systems using head/nose-only exposure chambers require no special daily chamber maintenance. Chambers shall be
inspected to ensure that they are clean, and that there are no obstructions in the chamber which would restrict air
flow to the animals. Whole-body exposure chambers will be inspected on a minimum of twice daily, once before exposures
and once after exposures. 

(B) Signs of toxicity shall be recorded as they are observed, including the time of onset, degree, and duration. 

(C) Cage-side observations shall include, but are not limited to: changes in skin, fur, eye and mucous membranes,
respiratory, autonomic, and central nervous systems, somatomotor activity, and behavioral patterns. Particular
attention shall be directed to observation of tremors, convulsions, salivation, diarrhea, lethargy, sleep, and
coma. 



