 

Background


The Air Tour Industry


Since 1980, the air tour industry in the State of Hawaii has grown rapidly, particularly on the islands of Oahu, Kauai,
Maui, and Hawaii. The growth of the tourist industry, the beauty of the islands, and the inaccessibility of some areas
on the islands has generated tremendous growth in the number of air tour flights. In 1982, there were approximately
63,000 helicopter and 11,000 airplane air tour flights. By 1991, these numbers had increased to approximately 101,000
for helicopters and 18,000 for airplanes. After a slight decline due to Hurricane Iniki in 1992, air tour flights in
1994 are projected to reach the 1991 levels. In Hawaii, the air tour industry carries about 400,000 passengers annually.
Thirty-eight operators are conducting air tours within the State of Hawaii, using approximately 97 helicopters
and 16 fixed-wing aircraft. During the 9-year period between 1982 and 1991, there were eight fatal accidents with
24 fatalities. The accident data shows an escalation of fatal accidents during the 3-year period between 1991 and
1994. During this time, there were five fatal accidents with 24 fatalities. (See table and figure)


Use of Helicopters in Air Tours


Helicopters are uniquely suited for air tours in Hawaii because they can operate at slow speeds and hover over scenic
areas. Helicopter air tours are often conducted close to the ground, near scenic attractions so passengers can see
and experience the thrill of being close to geological and terrain features, such as lava flows and waterfalls.
Some air tour operators advertise dramatic overwater flights to view whales, shorelines, cliffs, and waterfalls;
entry into one-way canyons; flying close to hot molten lava; and hovering over the shoreline where molten lava flows
into the ocean. Some advertising brochures, for example, describe air tours as ``excitement to the boiling point,''
and invite tourists to ``fly into the heart and heat of an active volcano'' and ``close enough to waterfalls to feel
the cooling mist.'' One fixed-wing air tour operator formerly advertised that ``[w]e fly you lower and slower than
any twin engine plane can ... lower and slower than many helicopters do ...''
While passengers are often attracted to the thrill associated with low-flying air tours, they are generally not aware
of the risks involved. Risks associated with low flying air tour operations include: unpredictable winds that create
less stable flying conditions; fewer options to escape unforeseen weather; unmarked or unknown obstructions; less
time to select suitable emergency landing areas; increases in pilot workload because of quick stops, rapid turns,
and watching for obstructions; inability to be detected by air traffic control radar; inability to conduct two-way
radio communication; increased likelihood of ingesting foreign debris, including salt water spray, into the engine;
less overall reaction time; and congestion of low flying traffic at scenic locations. Further, many air tours are
conducted over scenic areas along rugged coasts, where, in the event of an engine failure, the pilot must ditch in the
ocean. A helicopter without flotation devices, unlike most light airplanes, may sink within moments.


History and Escalation of Accidents


The growth of the air tour sightseeing industry in Hawaii has been associated with an escalation of accidents. The
proximate causes of the accidents range from engine power loss to encounters with adverse weather. Contributing
factors to the causes and seriousness of accidents are: operation beyond the demonstrated performance envelope
of the aircraft, inadequate preflight planning for weather and routes, lack of survival equipment, and flying at
low altitudes (which does not allow time for recovery or forced landing preparation in the event of a power failure).
The following table is a synopsis of selected air tour accidents involving aircraft damage, minor or serious injuries,
or fatalities that occurred between September 1982 and September 1994.


