 

The source of this information is the Department's Office of the Inspector General (OIG) study, ``Draft Report_Review
of Epogen Reimbursement'' (Audit No. A019200506). The OIG reviewed invoices paid by dialysis
facilities and financial reports filed by the manufacturer and found that facilities generally pay nine to ten percent
less for EPO than the Medicare payment rate. In addition, the manufacturer gave surveyed facilities end-of-year
rebates ranging from two percent to eight percent depending upon the volume of EPO used. 



Comment: 

Two commenters expressed the hope that local physicians will be able to continue to administer EPO incident to a physician's
service. 



Response: 

This regulation is in no way intended to preclude provision of EPO furnished incident to a physician's service. 



Comment: 

One commenter was of the opinion that there is no statutory authority for the provision in 413.170(c)(6)) requiring
suppliers to accept assignment of benefits for EPO. 



Response: 

The statutory provisions for payment of benefits for EPO are in section 1881(b)(1). Section 1881(b)(1)(B) of the
Act provides for payments ``to or in behalf of'' beneficiaries for home dialysis supplies and equipment. However,
with respect to payment for self-administered EPO, section 1881(b)(1)(C) permits payment only to a supplier of home
dialysis supplies and equipment that is not a provider of services, a renal dialysis facility, or a physician. There
is no authority in the law to pay this benefit to a beneficiary. Therefore, the law implicitly requires payment to a
supplier under assignment. 

Furthermore, any other reading of the statute would have anomalous results. For example, if the statute did not require
suppliers to accept assignment, the beneficiary would be protected for charges for home dialysis supplies and equipment,
but not for EPO furnished directly by the supplier. Nothing in the legislative history suggests the Congress intended
such a result. 



V. Specific Changes to the Interim Final Rule. 



In response to the comments discussed above, we have made the following changes in the text of the interim final rule
published on September 4, 1991. 

1. Patient care plan. 

We have revised 405.2137(b)(7) to establish separate requirements for review of medication and evaluation
of hematocrit for iron stores and to suggest use of a patient log for keeping the physician informed of the results of
blood tests. 

2. Patient selection. 

We have revised 405.2163 to_ 


 


&bull;Require that the physician follow the drug labeling when he or she establishes the protocol and monitors home
use of EPO;

&bull;Include as an assessment requirement obtaining assurance that EPO can be stored under refrigeration, secure
from tampering and out of reach of children in the patient's residence. 

&bull;Add a paragraph (h) to highlight the responsibilities of the physician and the dialysis facility and to make
clear that the ``two-month'' supply of EPO is a maximum and that control of the amount ``on hand'' is maintained through
the physician's prescriptions. 




B. Technical amendments. 

1. Throughout the text ``Erythropoietin'' is changed to ``Epoetin'', which is the generic name of the drug. 

2. In 413.170(c)(6), the cross-reference is corrected. 




