 

Table of Contents 



I. Supplementary Information


A. Events Leading to This Action 


II. Health Effects 


A. Sick Building Syndrome 
B. Building-Related Illness 
1. Indoor Air Contaminants 
2. Microbial Contaminants 
C. Environmental Tobacco Smoke
1. Pharmacokinetics 
(a) Absorption and Distribution 
(b) Metabolism 
2. Irritation 
3. Pulmonary Effects 
4. Cardiovascular Effects 
(a) Thrombus Formation 
(b) Vascular Wall Injury 
(c) Possible Mechanisms of Effect 
(d) Acute Heart Effects 
(e) Chronic Heart Effects 
5. Reproductive Effects 
6. Cancer 
(a) Evidence of Association 
(b) Epidemiological and Experimental Studies 
7. Genotoxicity 
8. Conclusions 
D. Case Reports 
1. Sick Building Syndrome and Building-Related Illness 
2. Environmental Tobacco Smoke 


III. Exposure 


A. Sources of Indoor Air Contaminants 
B. Microbial Contamination
C. Exposure Studies
1. Low-level Contaminants 
2. Bioaerosols 
3. Environmental Tobacco Smoke 
(a) Chemistry 
(b) Human Activity Pattern Studies Used to Assess Workplace Exposure 
(c) Indoor Levels of Environmental Tobacco Smoke Constituents 
(d) Levels of Respirable Suspended Particulates and Nicotine Found in Field Studies 
(e) Biomarkers of Environmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure 
(f) Inadequacy of General Dilution Ventilation to Address Environmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure Control 


IV. Preliminary Quantitative Risk Assessment 


A. Introduction 
B. Review of Epidemiologic Studies and Published Risk Estimates 
C. Data Sources 
D. OSHA's Estimates of Risk-Environmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure 
E. OSHA's Risk Estimates_Indoor Air Quality 
F. Pharmacokinetic Modeling of Environmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure 
1. Considerations for Selection of a Biomarker for Environmental Tobacco Smoke 
2. Cardiovascular Effects 
3. Carcinogenicity 
4. Evaluation of Cotinine as a Biomarker for Environmental Tobacco Smoke 
5. Description of Pharmacokinetic Models for Nicotine and Cotinine 
6. Application of Pharmacokinetic Modeling for Environmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure Estimation 
7. Analysis of Uncertainty 
(a) Physiological Parameters 
(b) Distribution Parameters 
(c) Kinetic Parameters 


