 

In the final rule of November 16, 1993, the Service interpreted that Appendix III species are considered CITES-listed
species for the purposes of these regulations only if they originate in the country that listed them in Appendix III.
The Service noted that the listing of a species in Appendix III is a unilateral action by a particular CITES Party, thereby
requiring CITES permits and implementation of CITES permit issuance requirements for that country only; when the
species is found in countries that did not list it in Appendix III, only a certificate of origin is required, stating
that it did not originate in the country that listed the species in Appendix III. Therefore, when the species is found
in countries other than where listed in Appendix III, it is not subject to the same level of CITES controls, and indeed
is only listed in the Appendices to assist the listing state in implementing its domestic legislation. Based on its
understanding of the intent of Congress, the Service implemented a final rule whereby Appendix III species were subject
to the 

automatic

 import prohibitions of the law, if they originated in the listing country. Otherwise, they would be subject to the


discretionary

 prohibitions of the law. 
The Humane Society of the United States and Defenders of Wildlife brought a civil action against the Secretary of the
Interior in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia challenging that part of 50 CFR 15.11 which
restricts the importation of certain Appendix III exotic birds. 

Humane Society of the United States 

v. 

Babbitt, 

Civ. No. 940296 (D.D.C., March 29, 1994). A hearing in the District Court took place on March 7, 1994. Plaintiffs
argued that this provision, which was adopted through notice and comment procedures, violates the language of the
Wild Bird Conservation Act of 1992. They sought relief to suspend or invalidate the following exception, contained
in the final rule, to the prohibition on importation of birds listed in the Convention's appendices: ``This paragraph
(b) does not apply to an exotic bird species listed in Appendix III to the Convention that originated in a country that
has not listed the species in Appendix III'' (50 CFR 15.11(b)(2)). Plaintiffs argued that this provision violates
the plain language of the Act, which bars the importation of ``any'' species listed in ``any'' appendix to the Convention.

On March 29, 1994 U. S. District Judge Louis F. Oberdorfer found the contested regulation to be invalid. (This Court
Order was discussed in a Notice in the 

Federal Register

 published on May 24, 1994.) Therefore, the Service hereby proposes to amend 50 CFR 15.11 (b) and (c) to comply with the
Court Order. The Service proposes that all bird species listed in CITES Appendix III, (in addition to those in Appendices
I or II) wherever found, cannot be imported into the U.S. unless they are either accompanied by an import permit issued
pursuant to subpart C of 50 CFR part 15, or they are included in an approved list. On March 17, 1994 the Service published
in the 

Federal Register

 (59 FR 12784) a proposed rule that would establish those approved lists. 


Effects of the Rule 


The Service has determined that this proposed rule is categorically excluded under Departmental procedures in complying
with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). See DOI Departmental Manual, 516 DM 2, Appendix 1,  1.10.
The regulations are procedural in nature, and the environmental effects are judged to be minimal, speculative, and
do not lend themselves to meaningful analysis. The permits and other administrative actions authorized under the
WBCA and regulations will be subject to future NEPA documentation requirements, on a case-by-case basis. 


Executive Orders 12866, 12612, and 12630 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act 


This proposed rule has been determined not to be significant for purposes of Executive Order 12866. This action would
not be expected to have significant taking implications for U.S. citizens, as per Executive Order 12630. Any effects
on small entities (importers, shippers, etc.) would likely be minor, and would in any event, be the mandatory result
of the district court ruling. Future proposed rule making will establish procedures for listing of species approved
for import, which may reduce any effects on small entities. No reporting requirements would be added to existing regulations.
Therefore, this revision would not have a significant economic effect on a substantial number of small entities as
described by the Regulatory Flexibility Act. Since the proposed rule applies to importation of live exotic birds
into the United States, it does not contain any Federalism impacts as described in Executive Order 12612. The Department
has certified that this proposed rule meets the applicable standards provided in sections 2(a) and 2(b)(2) of Executive
Order 12778. 


Paperwork Reduction Act 


No new information collection requirement(s) are contained in this proposed rule for which OMB approval under 44
U.S.C. 3501 is necessary. 


