 

Executive Order 12778 



This interim rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. This rule is intended to have
preemptive effect with respect to any state or local laws, regulations, or policies which conflict with its provisions
or which would otherwise impede its full implementation. This rule is not intended to have retroactive effect unless
so specified in the 

Effective Date 

section of the preamble. Prior to any judicial challenge to the provisions of this rule or the application of the provisions,
all applicable administrative procedures must be exhausted. This includes any administrative procedures provided
by state or local governments. For disputes involving procurements by State agencies or Indian Tribal Organizations,
this includes any administrative appeal procedures to the extent required by 7 CFR 253.5(l), 7 CFR 254.3(a), and 7
CFR part 3016. 

The rule published on October 20, 1987 (52 FR 39158), proposed to authorize ITOs and State agencies to serve income-eligible
households residing in near areas which contain an Indian tribal member, regardless of that person's tribal affiliation.
This interim rule will mandate that all such households be provided program benefits upon application. Because the
Department believes that permitting ITOs and State agencies to exclude these Native Americans from program participation
simply because they do not live on a reservation or near their tribe's reservation is inequitable and counter to the
intent of FDPIR, the Administrator of FNS has determined that prior notice and comment on this provision of this rule
would be unnecessary and contrary to public interest. For this reason, the Administrator has determined, in accordance
with 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(3)(B), that good cause exists to waive the solicitation of public comments prior to implementation.
However, the Department believes this rule may be improved by public comment based on actual operating experience.
Therefore, comments solicited on this rule must be postmarked or submitted on or before March 14, 1994. All comments
will be analyzed, and any appropriate changes to the rule will be incorporated in the subsequent publication of a final
rule. 



Background 




The Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations (FDPIR) was established by section 4(b) of the Food Stamp Act
of 1977, as amended (7 U.S.C. 2013(b)), as an alternative to food stamps for low-income Native Americans who, because
they live on or near Indian reservations in sparsely populated areas, may not have convenient access to food stamp
certification offices or authorized food stamp retailers. However, the current regulatory definition of ``Indian
tribal household'' at 7 CFR 253.2(c) and 254.2(d) renders ineligible certain categories of such Native Americans.



The first category is comprised of households which lack a Native American adult, but which include Native American
children. Although such households do not exist in large numbers, they reside in many of the areas adjacent to reservations
(i.e., ``near areas'') which Indian Tribal Organizations or State agencies have chosen to serve. Native American
children may be part of a household that lacks a Native American adult due, for example, to death of a parent or divorce.
Also, Native American children may be living with non-Native American foster or adoptive parents. These children
are not necessarily in any less need of the program than children living with Native American adults in near areas,
who may participate. The definition of ``Indian tribal household'' in the FDPIR at 7 CFR 253.2(c) requires that all
households residing in a near area have an adult Indian tribal member in order to participate. The definition in the
FDPIHO at 7 CFR 254.2(d) also requires that all households have an adult Indian member in order to participate. Thus,
Native American children in otherwise eligible households are denied access to both of these programs. 


The second category excluded from participating applies only to FDPIR: Native American households, residing in
near areas, which lack a member of a tribe that is represented by the ITO or State agency administering the program on
the adjacent reservation. The definition of ``Indian tribal household'' at 7 CFR 253.2(c) excludes such households,
in effect, due to the combination of their tribal affiliation and where they reside. They could be eligible if they
lived on the reservation in question, or on or near the reservation of the tribe of which they are a member. The Department
believes that exclusion of these Native Americans from program participation simply because they do not live on a
reservation or near their tribe's reservation, is inequitable and counter to the intent of FDPIR. Their Native American
identity and potential need for the program are in no way diminished by their current residence. In contrast, Native
American tribal households residing in any program service area in Oklahoma may participate in FDPIHO regardless
of their tribal affiliation. 



