 

1. The Licensee's organization, and assigned responsibilities and authorities within that organization;

2. The Licensee's program for training and retraining individuals working with NRC-licensed materials, in NRC regulations,
in the conditions of the Licenses, and in radiologically safe practices for using licensed material;

3. The Licensee's methods of approving individuals for the use of licensed materials and developing procedures for
the safe use of licensed materials;

4. The Licensee's program for training and qualifying all individuals involved in managing, supervising, inspecting
and auditing licensed activities;

5. The Licensee's program of surveillance and audits to determine compliance by individual users of licensed materials
with NRC regulations, the conditions of the NRC Licenses, and the Licensee's own procedures for the safe use of radioactive
materials;

6. The adequacy of the existing staffing within the Radiation Safety Department, to ensure that the items set forth
in Sections IV.B.2 through V.B.5 of this Order are adequately performed; and,

7. The Licensee's management of the radiation safety program, including the function of the Radiation Safety Committee
and its methods of monitoring the program to ensure that problems, when they exist, are promptly identified and effectively
corrected.

C. Within 120 days of NRC approval of the consultant selection described under Section IV.A of this Order, the Licensee
shall submit a performance improvement plan to the Regional Administrator, NRC Region I, describing its methods
of implementing the recommendations of the assessment report, or providing justification for alternate or no corrective
action, if any specific recommendations are not adopted. This plan shall include:

1. Action items completed or to be performed;

2. Schedules for, or dates of, completion of each specific action item; and

3. A system for monitoring and tracking the status and completion of the action items.

D. Upon completion of all action items, a final report shall be submitted by the Licensee to the Regional Administrator,
NRC Region I. During implementation of the performance improvement plan, the Licensee shall provide written quarterly
status reports to the Regional Administrator, NRC Region I, concerning the implementation of the plan, until such
time as all items in the performance improvement plan have been implemented and the final report issued.

The Regional Administrator, NRC Region I, may relax or rescind, in writing, any of the above conditions upon demonstration
by the Licensee of good cause.



V



Any person adversely affected by this Confirmatory Order, other than the Licensee, may request a hearing within 20
days of its issuance. Any request for a hearing shall be submitted to the Secretary, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
ATTN: Chief, Docketing and Service Section, Washington, D.C. 20555. Copies also shall be sent to the Director, Office
of Enforcement, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, D.C. 20555, to the Assistant General Counsel for
Hearings and Enforcement at the same address, to the Regional Administrator, NRC Region I, 475 Allendale Road, King
of Prussia, Pennsylvania 19406, and to the Licensee. If such a person requests a hearing, that person shall set forth
with particularity the manner in which his interest is adversely affected by this Order and shall address the criteria
set forth in 10 CFR 2.714(d).

If a hearing is requested by a person whose interest is adversely affected, the Commission will issue an Order designating
the time and place of any hearing. If a hearing is held, the issue to be considered at such hearing shall be whether this
Confirmatory Order should be sustained.

Pursuant to 10 CFR 2.202(c)(2)(i), (57 FR 20194) May 12, 1992, any person adversely affected by this Order, other than
the Licensee may, in addition to demanding a hearing, move the presiding officer to set aside the immediate effectiveness
of the Order on the ground that the Order, including the need for immediate effectiveness, is not based on adequate
evidence but on mere suspicion, unfounded allegations, or error.

In the absence of any request for hearing, the provisions specified in Section IV above shall be final 20 days from the
date of this Order without further order or proceedings. An answer or a request for hearing shall not stay the immediate
effectiveness of this Order.




Dated at Rockville, Maryland this 17th day of March 1994.




For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.



<SIGNER>
James Lieberman,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Office of Enforcement.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 947062 Filed 32494; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M
</BILLING>



