 

Dissenting Statement of Commissioner Deborah K. Owen on Proposed Consent Agreement With Martin Marietta Corp. File
No. 9410038



Respondent Martin Marietta Corporation manufactures satellites, which are launched into orbit by expendable launch
vehicles, some of which it also manufactures. It proposes to acquire the Space Systems Division of General Dynamics
Corporation, which manufactures Atlas-class expendable launch vehicles. The theory of the complaint is that if
this acquisition is consummated, Martin Marietta's launch vehicle division will gain access to trade secrets concerning
the products of other satellite manufacturers, and will transfer such information to Martin Marietta's satellite
division, which will use it to injure its competitors. The Commission's order would enjoin Martin Marietta from misusing
its rivals' confidential information in this manner.

Vertical integration, and combinations designed to achieve the efficiencies of such integration, are common phenomena,
particularly in the aerospace industry. Accordingly, it would seem that there are already ample opportunities for
the sort of abusive information-sharing which concerns the Commission. However, equally common are contractual
obligations between vertically integrated companies, and firms that do business with one of their divisions, to
prevent the sharing of those firms' confidential business information with other parts of the conglomerate with
which they compete. The question then is whether such contracts are sufficient to avoid any competitive problem,
or whether government-imposed requirements are necessary; if there exists a significant number of substantiated
incidents of such activity, then private agreements would not seem adequate. However, the opposite appears to be
the case.

While various Commission personnel have, in recent years, exhorted the business community to be sensitive to antitrust
concerns stemming from the sharing of business information, Commission enforcement actions in this area have been
rare, and no case has involved the strategic misuse of proprietary information so as to injure a competitor. Furthermore,
Martin Marietta currently manufactures both satellites and launch vehicles, and is already privy to competitively
significant information from other satellite manufacturers, yet I am unaware of any instance where it has been alleged
that proprietary information has been used for exclusionary purposes by Martin Marietta, or indeed by any other aerospace
manufacturer. As a result, it seems fair to conclude that contractual obligations prohibiting such behavior, coupled
with the threat of business tort and treble-damage antitrust suits, are sufficient deterrents. Moreover, as the
amount of available business in the aerospace industry continues to dwindle, it is hard to imagine that developing
a reputation for abusing confidential information would enhance any company's competitiveness.

The Commission's proposed consent is somewhat puzzling in its coverage. If the theory of the complaint is correct_that
Martin Marietta's dominant power in the launch vehicle market would facilitate anticompetitive information-sharing
in the satellite market_why would the company stop there? The theory would seem to support as well allegations of other
exclusionary and tying practices, yet these are not included. The Commission, correctly I believe, concluded that
there was no evidence to support such charges; I therefore find it strange that it chose to go forward on the equally
speculative information-sharing allegations.

In short, I do not believe that the evidence supports the theory behind the Commission's complaint, nor that a Commission
order would be superior to privately negotiated confidentiality agreements for protecting the trade secrets of
satellite manufacturers. I dissent.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948743 Filed 41194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 675001M
</BILLING>


