 

(2) Hispanic. A person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American or other Spanish culture or origin,
regardless of race.

(3) Asian or Pacific Islander. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia,
the Indian Subcontinent, or the Pacific Islands. This area includes, for example, China, Japan, Korea, the Philippine
Islands, and Samoa.

(4) American Indian or Alaskan Native. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of North America, and
who maintain cultural identification through tribal affiliation or community recognition.



* * * * *





Periodic,

 as used in sections 306(a)(6) and 307(a)(8) of the Act with respect to evaluations of, reports on, and public hearings
on, activities carried out under State and area plans, means, at a minimum, once each fiscal year (annually). 




Rural area,

 as used in this part, means any area that is not defined as urban. Urban areas comprise: 

(1) Urbanized areas (incorporated places and adjacent densely settled territory with a combined minimum population
of 50,000) and 

(2) All other places with 2,500 or more inhabitants.



Subpart B_State Agency Responsibilities



3. Section 1321.17 is revised to read as follows:



1321.17 

Content of State plan.



To receive a grant under this part, a State shall have an approved State plan as prescribed in section 307 of the Act.
In addition to meeting the requirements of section 307, a State plan shall include:

(a) Identification by the State of the sole State agency that has been designated to develop and administer the plan.

(b) Statewide program objectives to implement the requirements under Title III of the Act and any objectives established
by the Commissioner through the rulemaking process.

(c) A resource allocation plan which indicates the proposed use of all Title III funds administered by a State agency,
and the distribution of Title III funds to each planning and service area using the intrastate funding formula developed
under section 305(a)(2)(C), and published in accordance with the requirements of section 305(d); contains a descriptive
narrative explaining how the State will meet the requirements of section 307(a)(3)(B); and contains an exhibit that
details how the State will meet the requirements of section 307(a)(37) of the Act, including:

(1) A descriptive statement and comparison of the current intrastate funding formula's assumptions and goals and
those of the proposed formula developed as required under section 305(a)(2)(C) for the Commissioner's approval;

(2) A numerical statement of the current intrastate funding formula compared to the formula developed as required
under section 305(a)(2)(C) for the Commissioner's approval;

(3) A listing of the population, economic, and social data to be used for each planning and service area in the State;

(4) A comparison and demonstration (i.e., statement) of the allocation of funds, pursuant to the current intrastate
funding formula, applied to the best available data, for each planning and service area in the State compared to the
allocation of funds for each planning and service area using the formula developed as required under section 305(a)(2)(C)
for the Commissioner's approval; and

(5) In accordance with the definition of rural areas in 1321.3, the State must submit the following supporting
information displayed in one table:

(i) The Planning and Service Areas (PSA's) ranked from high to low based on the proportion of rural individuals age
60 years and over to the total population age 60 years and over in each PSA;

(ii) The distribution of funds to rural areas in each of the PSA's based on the current formula; and

(iii) The distribution of funds to rural areas in each of the PSA's using the formula developed under section 305(a)(2)(C)
for the Commissioner's approval.


