 

Two respondents commented on the splicing of strength members as specified in paragraph (e)(4) of the specification.
The first respondent recommended that the 1 kilometer splicing limitation for strength members be changed to 500
meters. The second respondent questioned the rationale for limiting the number of strength member splices. 



Response: 

REA limits the number of strength member splices to 1 per kilometer in the completed cable to avoid strength member
splices being in close proximity to one another which in the opinion of REA could lead to failure of the cable during
installation as a result of splice breakage. Since REA borrowers have been installing fiber optic cables with the
above strength member splice requirement for the past seven years without any reported installation failures, REA
will not change the requirement specified in paragraph (e)(4) of 7 CFR 1755.900. 

Two respondents commented that the language of paragraph (f)(3) should be modified to allow the cable manufacturer
the option of using natural colored threads and tapes as core binders. 



Response: 

REA has reviewed the suggested change in language and the reasons for the change in language presented by the commentators.
Because REA agrees with the reasons for their suggested change in language, REA will modify the language in paragraph
(f)(3) of the specification to allow manufacturers the option of providing natural colored threads and tapes as core
binders. 

One respondent commented that the language in paragraph (f)(4) of 7 CFR 1755.900 should be changed to better reflect
the functional needs of fiber optic cables currently being used by REA borrowers. 



Response: 

REA reviewed the reason for the proposed change in language submitted by the commenter and as a result of our review
will change the present language in paragraph (f)(4) of 7 CFR 1755.900 to the language proposed by the commenter. 

Two respondents commented on the core wrap section of 7 CFR 1755.900. The first commenter recommended that the core
wrap section (paragraph (h) of the specification) be revised to more clearly indicate that the use of core wraps in
the manufacture of fiber optic cable is an option. The second commenter recommended that the core wrap section be further
modified to allow one or more core wraps in the manufacture of fiber optic cable. 



Response: 

In regards to the first respondent's comment, REA has reviewed the present language of paragraph (h) and agrees with
the respondent's comment that the core wrap section does not clearly indicate that the use of a core wrap in the manufacture
of the cable is at the option of the manufacturer. Since REA agrees with the commenter's comment, REA will revise paragraph
(h) of 7 CFR 1755.900 to clearly indicate that the use of a core wrap is at the option of the manufacturer. 

Regarding the second respondent's comment, the latest issues of REA's copper cable specifications covered under
7 CFR 1755.390 and 7 CFR 1755.890 allow the use of multiple core wraps in manufacture of these type cables provided at
the filling compound is applied between each core wrap layer. Since REA allows the use of multiple core wraps in the
manufacture of copper cables, REA will also allow the use of multiple core wraps in the manufacture of fiber optic cables.
Therefore paragraph (h) of 7 CFR 1755.900 will be modified to allow the use of multiple core wraps by fiber optic cable
manufacturers. REA will also modify paragraph (h) to indicate that when multiple core wraps are used that the filling
compound must be applied between each core wrap layer to prevent the ingress of water between each core wrap layer.


Two respondents commented that the testing of the inner jacket for fungus resistance as specified in paragraph (i)(3)
of the specification should be eliminated because the polyethylene compounds used for the inner jackets are inherently
resistant to fungus attack. 



Response: 

The current REA Bulletin 34590 allows fiber optic cable manufacturers the option of using any available material
for producing inner jackets. To assure that these inner jacket materials would provide satisfactory field service,
the bulletin required that they pass a fungus resistance test. Since 7 CFR 1755.900 now specifies that only polyethylene
compounds can be used to produce inner jackets and REA knows that these compounds are inherently resistant to fungus
attack, REA will eliminate the fungus resistance test, paragraph (i)(3), for inner jacket materials from 7 CFR 1755.900.


One respondent commented that paragraph (j)(2) of 7 CFR 1755.900 should be modified to indicate that a flooding compound
is only required for armored cable and that jacket slip test reference in the paragraph be clarified to indicate that
it only applies to flooded cable designs. 



Response: 

In reviewing the present language of the flooding compound section, paragraphs (j)(1) through (j)(4), of 7 CFR 1755.900,
paragraph (j)(1) clearly indicates that flooding compound applies only to armored fiber optic cable designs. Also
the present language of the jacket slip test, paragraph (III)(3), Appendix A, clearly indicates that this test is
only performed on flooded cable designs. Because the present language in both paragraphs clearly indicate the intent
of the commenter's recommendation, REA will not revise paragraph (j)(2) of 7 CFR 1755.900 as recommended by the commenter.


One respondent commented that ``water blocking tape'' language of paragraph (j)(4) be changed to ``water blocking
material'' to allow for the use of water blocking tapes or powders in lieu of a flooding compound. 



Response: 

REA has allowed the use of water blocking tapes in place of flooding compounds in filled fiber optic cables for several
years with satisfactory field performance, but the use of water blocking powders in place of the flooding compound
is a new application for fiber optic cables with limited field experience. Until fiber optic cables using water blocking
powders as replacements for flooding compounds gain more field experience to assure reliable service, REA will not
change the language in paragraph (j)(4) of 7 CFR 1755.900 to the language recommended by the commenter. 




