 

If a species is bred in captivity in large numbers, but individual birds of that species are frequently, sometimes,
or even rarely taken from the wild, or if there are enforcement concerns that illegal trade occurs in the species, the
statute does not allow that species to be included as a captive-bred species. However, individual captive-bred birds
may still be imported into the United States under one of the following conditions: (1) the foreign breeding facility
could be approved pursuant to Subpart E of this Part 15; or (2) a permit for an individual import could be obtained pursuant
to Subpart C, if the requirements of that Subpart are met. 

As established in the WBCA, the Service will periodically review the list of species that meet the approval criteria
for the importation of captive-bred species. Any changes [additions and/or deletions] to this approved list will
be proposed in the 

Federal Register

 for public comment, followed by a final rule in which the proposed changes will be made or an explanation provided for
not making them. 

Numerous commenters, including 762 form letters from aviculturists, requested that all captive-bred birds be exempted
from the WBCA and its implementing regulations. The Service disagrees, since that is not allowed by the statute. One
of the purposes of the WBCA is to assist wild bird conservation and management in the countries of origin. However,
except for the 10 bird families specifically exempted from the WBCA, the WBCA applies to all species of exotic birds
being exported from any country, whether individual birds are of captive or wild origin. In passing the WBCA, Congress
recognized that there are serious concerns that wild-caught birds are often intentionally misrepresented as captive-bred.
For this reason, the law specifies criteria for the import of captive-bred species; it does not simply exempt them.
Furthermore, the Service is aware of illegal trade whereby wild-caught birds are misrepresented as captive-bred
and laundered as captive-bred birds. Therefore, it would be inconsistent with both the plain language and intent
of the statute to exempt entirely all birds that are claimed to be bred in captivity from the provisions of the law. However,
the Service notes that, in addition to the list of approved captive-bred species, several other ways exist to import
captive-bred birds into the United States under the WBCA. 

Numerous commenters objected to the Service's use of the standards adopted by the State of New York with respect to
establishing the criteria for including species in the approved list for captive-bred species, and commented that
such standards were too restrictive. The Service disagrees. The Service was advised to adopt such standards by the
House of Representatives Committee Report for the WBCA. The House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee advised
the Service ``to use the standards adopted by the State of New York with respect to importation of captive-bred species,
and include such species on the approved list under this section, as long as the Secretary believes that trade based
on these standards will not result in harm to species in the wild'' [House Report No. 102749 (I) pages 16021603].
These standards would include species of exotic birds in the approved list if the species is regularly bred in captivity
and none are taken from the wild for trade. Many commenters stated that many more species are bred in captivity than
occur on the New York State Approved List of Captive-bred Species and that this list was adopted years ago when avicultural
techniques were not as developed as they are today. The Service agrees that many more species are bred in captivity
now than when New York State developed its regulations and approved list. The Service has adopted the standards used
by New York State in developing its criteria for the approval of captive-bred species, and has included many species
that are not found on the New York State approved list of captive-bred species. 

Animal welfare organizations and one conservation organization supported the criteria for including species on
the approved list of captive-bred species, but requested that additional criteria be added to conform to CITES requirements
for the humane transport of live animals. They requested that species experiencing 10% or higher mortality in transit
or 15% or higher mortality in quarantine not be included on the approved list of captive-bred species. Although the
Service is concerned about the humane treatment and transport of all birds, it disagrees that such criteria are required
for including species on the approved list of captive-bred species. The Service implements requirements for the
humane and healthful transport of live birds imported into the United States through its implementation of the Lacey
Act humane and healthful transport requirements, found in 50 CFR Part 14. In including species on the approved list
of captive-bred species, the Service is required to determine that the species is regularly bred in captivity and
no wild-caught birds of the species are in trade, legally or illegally. The Service notes as well that mortalities
in shipments of birds that are bred in captivity tend to be lower than those of wild-caught birds. 


