 

The Service is required to use existing, readily recognizable boundaries in the development of legal descriptions
for critical habitat. The Service cannot use ephemeral features such as vegetation for boundaries. In cases where
areas designated as critical habitat do not contain the primary constituent elements, impacts occurring within
this area will not result in a finding of adverse modification by the Service. Thus, designation of critical habitat
will not effect those areas within the legal critical habitat boundaries that do not contain vireo nesting or foraging
habitat. 


Issue 3: 

The Service has not clarified the potential effects of critical habitat designation on private landowners. For example,
Service responses to Issues 7 and 18 in the revised proposed rule (50 FR 34892) appear contradictory. The response
to Issue 7 states that most activities potentially taking place within critical habitat will require Federal approval,
and therefore be subject to the requirements of section 7 consultation. The discussion of Issue 18, however, implies
that Federal involvement in projects on private land would be unusual. 
Federal case law indicates that designation of critical habitat will, contrary to the Service's representations,
affect activities on State and private property even if there is no Federal involvement. For example, in 

Palila 

v. 

Hawaii, 

639 F. 2d 495 (9th Cir. 1981), the court held that the state of Hawaii's maintenance of sheep and goats within Palila
(

Loxioides bailleui

) critical habitat constituted a take, even though there was no Federal involvement. 


Service Response: 

Section 7 of the Act applies only to Federal agencies, directing them to ensure that their actions do not jeopardize
the continued existence of listed species or adversely modify critical habitat. The Service maintains that a project
potentially affecting a federally listed species will only require section 7 consultation when Federal funding,
approval, permitting, licensing, or other discretionary authority is involved. Because the least Bell's vireo
critical habitat is primarily wetland, it is anticipated that the Army Corps of Engineers will be involved in projects
affecting this habitat, through the section 404 permitting process of the Clean Water Act. A section 404 permit is
required for projects involving dredge or fill of jurisdictional wetlands or waters of the United States. For projects
on private property, where wetland within critical habitat is neither dredged nor filled, Federal involvement under
section 7 is not anticipated. 
By contrast, section 9, which prohibits the unpermitted ``take'' of endangered species, applies to all ``persons''
(as defined in the Act) within the jurisdiction of the United States. Pursuant to section 9 of the Act and the regulations
and statutes pertaining thereto, ``take'' means to ``harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture
or collect, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct'' [16 U.S.C. 1532(19)]. In the case of 

Palila 

v. 

Hawaii, 

the Court rendered an opinion on the legal definition of ``take.'' The Court ruled in 

Palila 

v. 

Hawaii 

that habitat destruction harms a species by indirectly causing a decline in the population, and precluding recovery
of the species. Therefore, the court's ruling in this case pertained to the legal definition of ``take'' and not the
designation or function of critical habitat. A landowner destroying vireo habitat might be involved in a section
9 taking, but would have no incremental legal exposure as a result of critical habitat designation. 





