 

The central nervous system effects reported by many do not lend themselves to ready diagnosis [Ex. 4282]. Some
of the lesser affected individuals either saw no physician at all or saw a family doctor or allergist who was not familiar
with occupational or environmental health [Ex. 4282]. 
The Air Force Procedural Guide [Ex. 4199] on dealing with SBS takes a practical view: ``***in
most cases the sick building syndrome does not have a clearly understood etiology and many of the SBS studies and investigations
were inconclusive. The significance of exposure that [what chemical or physical agent concentrations cause symptoms]
can be pathogenic remains unanswered, but the realities of worker complaints and discomfort are valid reasons to
seriously address this problem.'' 
In summary, SBS is not a well-defined disease with well-defined causes. It appears to be a reaction, at least in part
due to stimulation of the common chemical sense, to a variety of chemical, physical or biological stimuli. Its victims
display all or some of a pattern of irritation of the mucous membranes, and the worst affected individuals have neurological
symptoms as well. 


B. Building-Related Illness 


Building-related illness (BRI) describes specific medical conditions of known etiology which can often be documented
by physical signs and laboratory findings. Such illnesses include sensory irritation when caused by known agents,
respiratory allergies, nosocomial infections, humidifier fever, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, Legionnaires'
disease, and the symptoms and signs characteristic of exposure to chemical or biologic substances such as carbon
monoxide, formaldehyde, pesticides, endotoxins, or mycotoxins [Exs. 361, 4144]. Some of these conditions
are caused by exposure to bioaerosols containing whole or parts of viruses, fungi, bacteria, or protozoans. These
illnesses are often potentially severe and, in contrast to SBS complaints, are often traceable to a specific contaminant
source, such as mold infestation and/or microbial growth in cooling towers, air handling systems, and water-damaged
furnishings. Symptoms may or may not disappear when the employee leaves the building. Susceptibility is influenced
by host factors, such as age and immune system status. Mitigation of building-related illnesses requires identification
and removal of the source, especially in cases involving hypersensitivity responses. 


1. Indoor Air Contaminants 


Comments submitted to the docket in response to the RFI and contained in the literature indicate that specific substances
or classes of substances have been implicated as contributing to poor indoor air quality problems. These substances,
either alone or in synergy, have produced health effects that OSHA believes can be considered material impairment
[Ex. 4124]. In most cases, people likely to be at risk have specific susceptibility. 




