 



Control channel. 

In the Cellular Radiotelephone Service and the Air-ground Radiotelephone Service, a channel used to transmit information
necessary to establish or maintain communications. In the other Public Mobile Services, a channel that may be assigned
to a control transmitter.



Control point. 

A location where the operation of a public mobile station is supervised and controlled by the licensee of that station.


Control transmitter. 

A fixed transmitter in the Public Mobile Services that transmits control signals to one or more base or fixed stations
for the purpose of controlling the operation of the base or fixed stations, and/or transmits subscriber communications
to one or more base or fixed stations that retransmit them to subscribers.



Dead spots. 

Small areas within a service area where the field strength is lower than the minimum level for reliable service. Service
within dead spots is presumed.



Dispatch service. 

A radiotelephone service comprising communications between a dispatcher and one or more mobile units. These communications
normally do not exceed one minute in duration and are transmitted directly through a base station, without passing
through mobile telephone switching facilities.




Effective radiated power (ERP). 

The effective radiated power of a transmitter (with antenna, transmission line, duplexers etc.) is the power that
would be necessary at the input terminals of a reference half-wave dipole antenna in order to produce the same maximum
field intensity. ERP is usually calculated by multiplying the measured transmitter output power by the specified
antenna system gain, relative to a half-wave dipole, in the direction of interest.



Emission. 

The electromagnetic energy radiated from an antenna.


Emission designator. 

An internationally accepted symbol for describing an emission in terms of its bandwidth and the characteristics
of its modulation, if any. See 2.201 of this chapter for details.



Emission mask. 

The design limits imposed, as a condition or type acceptance, on the mean power of emissions as a function of frequency
both within the authorized bandwidth and in the adjacent spectrum.


Equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP). 

The equivalent isotropically radiated power of a transmitter (with antenna, transmission line, duplexers etc.)
is the power that would be necessary at the input terminals of a reference isotropic radiator in order to produce the
same maximum field intensity. An isotropic radiator is a theoretical lossless point source of radiation with unity
gain in all directions. EIRP is usually calculated by multiplying the measured transmitter output power by the specified
antenna system gain, relative to an isotropic radiator, in the direction of interest.


Extension. 

In the Cellular Radiotelephone Service, an area within the service area boundary of a cellular system, but outside
of the market boundary. See 22.911(c) and 22.912.




Facsimile service. 

Transmission of still images from one place to another by means of radio.


Fill-in transmitters. 

Transmitters added to a station, in the same area and transmitting on the same channel or channel block as previously
authorized transmitters, that do not expand the existing service area, but are established for the purpose of improving
reception in dead spots.



Five year build-out period. 

A five year period during which the licensee of the first cellular system authorized on each channel block in each cellular
market may expand the system within that market. See 22.947.


Fixed transmitter. 

A stationary transmitter that communicates with other stationary transmitters.


Frequency. 

The number of cycles occurring per second of an electrical or electromagnetic wave; a number of representing a specific
point in the electromagnetic spectrum.




Ground station. 

In the Air-ground Radiotelephone Service, a stationary transmitter that provides service to airborne mobile stations.


Height above average terrain (HAAT). 

The height of an antenna above the average elevation of the surrounding area.


In-building radiation systems. 

Supplementary systems comprising low power transmitters, receivers, indoor antennas and/or leaky coaxial cable
radiators, designed to improve service reliability inside buildings or structures located within the service areas
of stations in the Public Mobile Services.


Initial cellular applications. 

Applications for authority to construct and operate a new cellular system, excluding applications for interim operating
authority.


Interfering contour. 

The locus of points surrounding a transmitter where the predicted median field strength of the signal from that transmitter
is the maximum field strength that is not considered to cause interference at the service contour of another transmitter.


Interoffice transmitter. 

A fixed transmitter in the Rural Radiotelephone Service that communicates with other interoffice transmitters
for the purpose of interconnecting rural central offices.



Meteor burst propagation mode. 

A long distance VHF radio communication path occurring as a result of the refraction of electromagnetic waves by ionized
meteor trails.


Mobile station. 

One or more transmitters that are capable of operation while in motion.


Necessary bandwidth. 

The calculated spectral width of an emission. Calculations are made using procedures set forth in part 2 of this chapter.
The bandwidth so calculated is considered to be the minimum necessary to convey information at the desired rate with
the desired accuracy.


