 

1. OSHA has characterized these scaffolds as a type of interior hung scaffold. To what extent is the above-described
characterization correct? If this characterization is correct, to what extent do the proposed requirements for
interior hung scaffolds (1915.253(p)) and the general scaffold requirements (1915.252) adequately
address the above-described scaffolds? To what extent does proposed Appendix A adequately address the above-described
scaffolds? What changes, if any, should be made in proposed subpart N to improve the coverage of the above described
scaffolds? 

2. The Agency is concerned about the possibility that a suspension rope could be inadvertently disconnected from
an ``S'' hook, thereby allowing an interior hung scaffold to fall. Accordingly, OSHA is considering requiring that
the end of the ``S'' hook which supports the suspension rope be effectively closed. If so, what methods can be used to
close the hook? OSHA is considering if mousing (wrapping rope around the hook opening when the suspension rope is connected)
would adequately assure that the suspension rope did not disconnect from the ``S'' hook. What experience have employers
had with the use of mousing to close the hook opening? OSHA is also considering if locking hooks, such as required in
1910.66, Powered platforms, should be required. To what extent would the use of locking hooks be appropriate
with these scaffolds? 

3. Proposed paragraph 1926.253(p)(3) requires that suspension ropes and cables on interior hung scaffolds
be connected to overhead supporting members by shackles, clips, thimbles, or equivalent means. To what extent do
the ``S'' hooks used on the above-described scaffolds constitute equivalent means of connection? Should OSHA prohibit
the use of ``S'' hooks for suspending these scaffolds? 

4. OSHA is also concerned about the possibility that an ``S'' hook could be inadvertently disconnected from its support,
thereby allowing an interior hung scaffold to fall. Accordingly, OSHA is considering requiring that the ``S'' hooks
be secured to the overhead longitudinal structural members in tanks. If so, what methods can be used to secure them?


5. In its rulemaking for scaffolds used in construction, OSHA reopened the rulemaking record (58 FR 16509, March 29,
1993) to solicit comments and information regarding the feasibility of providing fall protection and safe access
for employees erecting and dismantling scaffolds, including interior hung scaffolds (proposed 1926.452(t)).
The materials submitted in response to that notice (Ex. 34, with attachments) will be considered when OSHA drafts
the final rule for part 1915, subpart N. 

In addition, the Agency is considering requiring the provision and use of fall protection and safe access for employees
erecting and dismantling scaffolds used in shipyard employment. To what extent is it feasible for shipyard employers
to provide fall protection and safe access for employees erecting or dismantling scaffolds, such as the above-described
scaffolds, used in shipyard employment? 

6. How would a fall protection requirement affect the erection and dismantling of scaffolds? 

7. OSHA is considering requiring that measures be taken to prevent the swaying of vertical lines suspending employees
erecting or dismantling the above-described scaffolds. What measures have been taken to prevent such swaying? What
other methods would be appropriate? 

8. OSHA is considering specifying a minimum diameter for wire ropes used to suspend these scaffolds. Proposed 1915.252(a)(4)(ii)
requires that ropes suspending catenary scaffolds be equivalent to at least one-half inch diameter wire rope. Would
that minimum diameter be appropriate for the above described scaffolds? If not, how should OSHA address the minimum
diameter for ropes used to suspend such scaffolds? 

9. OSHA is considering requiring that only improved plow steel wire rope be used as suspension ropes on scaffolds.
To what extent would such a requirement be appropriate? 

10. OSHA is concerned that incorrect size wire rope clips might be used on the wire ropes used to suspend scaffolds.
Accordingly, OSHA is considering specifying that when clips are used they must be the right size for the rope. To what
extent would such a requirement be appropriate? 

11. When a U-bolt wire rope clip is installed backwards on a wire rope (i.e., the saddle is placed on the dead end and the
U-bolt is placed on the live end of a rope), the live end may be damaged through contact with the U-bolt. OSHA is concerned
that the use of U-bolt wire rope clips could damage wire rope so that a rope is not capable of supporting a scaffold. Accordingly,
OSHA is considering prohibiting the use of U-bolt wire rope clips on suspension scaffolds. To what extent would such
a requirement be appropriate? 

12. The struts that support the platforms on the above described scaffolds usually rest on wire rope clips attached
to the suspension ropes. The clips usually are attached to only one section of the rope, instead of two sections as is
the case when an eye is formed in a rope. OSHA is concerned that wire rope clips, especially U-bolt clips, used in this
manner might not provide adequate support for a scaffold. OSHA is also concerned that wire rope clips, especially
U-bolt clips, used in this manner might damage a rope, reducing its load carrying ability (see question 11 above).
Accordingly, OSHA is considering prohibiting the use of wire rope clips in this manner, and seeks comment on the extent
to which wire rope clips adequately support the struts when used in this manner. Would it be appropriate for OSHA to
prohibit the use of U-bolt clips for this purpose, but to allow such a use of double-saddle clips? If the use of clips
is allowed for this purpose, (1) are clips necessary on the top of each strut as well as at the bottom in order to adequately
secure each strut to its wire rope, and (2) how many clips should OSHA require, as a minimum, for rigging these scaffolds?





