 

Other commenters suggested that EPA should rely on EPA-conducted inspections at refineries and at downstream locations,
as in the gasoline volatility program. EPA intends to conduct inspections like these under the reformulated gasoline
program, but does not consider them to be replacements for independent sampling and testing. EPA inspections at refineries
and import facilities will be able to monitor the refiner- or importer-claimed properties for reformulated gasoline
only if product is present at the time of the EPA inspection that has not been fungibly mixed. EPA believes this will
often not be the case. Moreover, the refiner or importer is required to submit reports to EPA stating the claimed properties
of a batch of gasoline only at the conclusion of each quarter, and would know which gasoline EPA sampled during an inspection.
It would be expected that prior to filing its report to EPA, a refiner or importer would verify, and re-verify, its analysis
results for gasoline that had been sampled by EPA. A willful cheater could simply record the correct properties for
gasoline that had been sampled by EPA, while continuing to report bogus properties for the remainder of the gasoline.

Inspections conducted by EPA downstream would almost always be of fungibly mixed gasolines, and as a result would
be valid only for checking compliance with the maximum and minimum requirements; downstream inspections would not
serve as a check on the per-gallon or average properties claimed by refiners and importers. 
It is relevant to note the difference in enforcement that was used under the lead phasedown program, as contrasted
with the enforcement possible under reformulated gasoline. Lead phasedown was similar to reformulated gasoline
in that refiners and importers were required to meet an average standard that applied to gasoline produced or imported.
Unlike reformulated gasoline, however, lead phasedown compliance was based only on the volume of gasoline produced
and the amount of lead used in that production_two categories of information that were easily verified after-the-fact.
Lead usage was verifiable because EPA required all lead manufacturers to report to EPA the amount of lead shipped to
each refinery. EPA could verify the volume of gasoline produced through audits of refinery production documents,
cross checked with refinery sales documents and records from transferees of refinery gasoline. 
Under reformulated gasoline, however, this type of after-the-fact verification of refinery or importer reports
is not possible. In contrast with volume information, routinely determined and kept by all parties to gasoline transactions,
the properties relevant to reformulated gasoline include many that are routinely determined only a single time_by
the refiner laboratory_and are therefore not susceptible to verification and cross checks. 
One commenter stated that EPA should require independent sampling and testing only for identified violators. EPA
has rejected this option, however, because of difficulties in implementing such an approach. The limitations in
determining refiner or importer cheating in its reports to EPA, discussed above, would make it difficult for EPA to
know or prove any party is a violator in this way. Such refiner-specific imposition of independent sampling and testing
would most properly be based on proof of refiner violations involving improper product testing, but if such violations
could be documented easily, or even with difficulty but reliably, there would be little need for independent sampling
and testing to begin with. It is precisely this difficulty in detecting and documenting testing violations that creates
the need for independent sampling and testing. Violations that are susceptible to reliable documentation, such
as of the minimum and maximum requirements or of the time and place of use restrictions, would not appear appropriate
predicates for imposing independent sampling and testing. Requirements of this type are not the primary focus of
independent sampling and testing. Moreover, if non-testing violations resulted in the imposition of independent
sampling and testing, alleged violators would likely use protracted litigation to avoid the consequence. 
Commenters made a number of suggestions as to changes that should be made in the independent sampling and testing program
as proposed. One commenter proposed that EPA should require independent sampling and testing only for reformulated
gasoline that meets standards on average, and not for reformulated gasoline that meets standards per-gallon. EPA
rejected this option, however, for the reasons provided below. 
EPA could inspect reformulated gasoline produced to meet the per-gallon standard, or fungible mixtures of per-gallon
gasolines, and gain reasonable certainty that the gasolines were produced in compliance with the per-gallon standard.
This is the type of enforcement program used for other gasoline rules with per-gallon standards, such as volatility.
See 40 CFR part 80. In the absence of averaging, this is the type of enforcement program EPA might expect to use for reformulated
gasoline. 
EPA believes that most reformulated gasoline found downstream will not be per-gallon gasoline only, however, but
rather is likely to be either averaged gasoline or a mixture of per-gallon and averaged gasoline, and therefore not
susceptible to downstream verification of refiner and importer reports. As a result, the ultimate consequence of
removing the independent sampling and testing requirement from per-gallon gasoline would be the loss of verification
over most refiner and importer reports for per-gallon reformulated gasoline. 






