 





In their certification application for the 1999 model year, manufacturers will also have to identify which engine
families are only meeting the somewhat less stringent transitional enhanced in-use standards. Manufacturers will
also have to monitor the sales of these models to ensure they represent no more than 25 percent of total sales. As mentioned
earlier, manufacturers would also have to certify that their vehicles would meet the enhanced in-use I/M standards
proposed in Section A.(4) below. However, as that standard is 0.20 g/mi exhaust HC over a test which excludes cold start
emissions, EPA expects this to be very easy to do relative to the certification and recall FTP standards. Natural gas
fueled vehicles will have the greatest difficulty meeting this I/M 240 standard relative to compliance with the enhanced
in-use FTP standards, because of these vehicles' relatively high emissions of methane relative to NMHC. The enhanced
in-use standards over the full FTP exclude methane, (i.e., are in terms of NMHC) and CARB's NMOG standards greatly
diminish methane's importance. However, the I/M 240 test includes methane (i.e., measures total HC). Overall, though,
natural gas vehicles have very low levels of NMHC emissions and, given the warmed up nature of the I/M 240 test, are still
expected to be able to meet this standard with little difficulty. EPA requests comments on how these vehicles should
be addressed in conventional and enhanced in-use compliance I/M.

EPA also proposes that all enhanced in-use compliance vehicles provide easy access for I/M pressure and purge testing.
Otherwise, the types of tests performed, the fuels used and other certification application details can continue
to be performed in accordance with CARB rules.



b. New medium-duty vehicles.

 CARB's MDV standards for 1995 and later model years apply to vehicles between 6,000 and 14,000 pounds GVWR, not otherwise
qualifying as LDTs. However, CARB allows, at the manufacturer's discretion, MDVs over 8500 pounds GVWR to be certified
as engines according to their requirements for heavy-duty engines. EPA proposes that all 1999 and later model vehicles
certified under CARB's LEV program as MDVs be subject to the enhanced in-use standards for MDVs. Engines certified
under CARB's requirements as heavy-duty engines would be subject to EPA's enhanced in-use compliance program for
heavy-duty engines described in Section B. below.

The table below (``Proposed Certification and In-Use Standards for MDVs under the Enhanced In-Use Compliance Program'')
contains the composite NMHC and NO

X

 emission standards being proposed for MDVs under the enhanced in-use compliance program. EPA is proposing a single
composite hydrocarbon recall standard (for each subclass of MDVs) that will apply throughout the useful life of a
MDV. Compliance with the composite NMHC standard would be performed in the same manner as that for LDVs and LDTs, using
the equation presented above in Appendix I.A.2.a. These standards are designed to provide generally the same stringency
of control as the enhanced in-use standards for the heavier LDTs presented in the previous section.

EPA believes that the technology being applied to heavier LDTs to meet the enhanced in-use standards can be applied
to MDVs as well. EPA requests comments on the applicability of standards equivalent to the enhanced in-use standards
for LDTs to MDVs.






