 

410.10 


Medical and other health services: Included services. 


Subject to the conditions and limitations specified in this subpart, ``medical and other health services'' includes
the following services: 


* * * * * 


(e) Diagnostic laboratory and X-ray tests (including diagnostic mammography that meets the conditions for coverage
specified in 410.34(b) of this subpart) and other diagnostic tests. 


* * * * * 


3. Section 410.34 is amended by revising the heading, removing the introductory text, revising paragraph (a), redesignating
paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(6) as paragraphs (d)(1) through (d)(6), adding a heading to newly redesignated paragraph
(d), revising newly redesignated paragraph (d)(1), and adding new paragraphs (b) and (c) to read as follows: 


410.34 


Mammography services: Conditions for and limitations on coverage. 


(a) 

Definitions. 

As used in this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1) 

Diagnostic mammography 

means a radiologic procedure furnished to a symptomatic woman for the purpose of detecting breast disease and includes
a physician's interpretation of the results of the procedure. 
(2) 

Screening mammography 

means a radiologic procedure furnished to an asymptomatic woman for the purpose of early detection of breast cancer
and includes a physician's interpretation of the results of the procedure. 
(3) 

Supplier of diagnostic mammography 

means a facility that is certified and responsible for ensuring that all diagnostic mammography services furnished
to Medicare beneficiaries meet the conditions for coverage of diagnostic mammography services as specified in paragraph
(b) of this section. 
(4) 

Supplier of screening mammography 

means a facility that is certified and responsible for ensuring that all screening mammography services furnished
to Medicare beneficiaries meet the conditions and limitations for coverage of screening mammography services as
specified in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(5) 

Certificate 

means the certificate described in 21 CFR 900.2(b) that may be issued to, or renewed for, a facility that meets the requirements
for conducting an examination or procedure involving mammography. 
(6) 

Provisional certificate 

means the provisional certificate described in 21 CFR 900.2(m) that may be issued to a facility to enable the facility
to qualify to meet the requirements for conducting an examination or procedure involving mammography. 
(7) The term 

meets the certification requirements of section 354 of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act 

means that in order to qualify for coverage of its services under the Medicare program, a supplier of diagnostic or
screening mammography services must meet the following requirements: 
(i) Must have a valid provisional certificate, or a valid certificate, that has been issued by FDA indicating that
the supplier meets the certification requirements of section 354 of the PHS Act, as implemented by 21 CFR part 900,
subpart B. 
(ii) Has not been issued a written notification by FDA that states that the supplier must cease conducting mammography
examinations because the supplier is not in compliance with certain critical certification requirements of section
354 of the PHS Act, implemented by 21 CFR part 900, subpart B.
(iii) Must not employ for provision of the professional component of mammography services a physician or physicians
for whom the facility has received written notification by FDA that the physician (or physicians) is (or are) in violation
of the certification requirements set forth in section 354 of the PHS Act, as implemented by 21 CFR 900.12(a)(1)(i).



