 




<USBUREAU>Public Health Service</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Agency Forms Submitted to the Office of Management and Budget for Clearance</DOCTITLE>



Each Friday the Public Health Service (PHS) publishes a list of information collection requests it has submitted
to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for clearance in compliance with the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C.
Chapter 35). The following requests have been submitted to OMB since the list was last published on Friday, January
14, 1994.




(Call PHS Reports Clearance Officer on 2026907100 for copies of request).




1. Behavorial, Biochemical, Endocrine and Genetic Study of Alcohol Abusing Violent Offenders_09250390
(Reinstatement)_NIAAA requires information on genetic and biochemical determinants of alcohol abuse and alcoholism.
This information will be collected by psychiatric interview data, behavioral observation and laboratory testing
of specimens obtained from violent offenders, their blood relatives and matched controls. The data collected will
be used to further our understanding of the transmission and results of alcohol abuse. Respondents: Individuals
or households; Number of Respondents: 200; Number of Responses per Respondent: 1; Average Burden per Response: 8
hours; Estimated Annual Burden: 1600 hours.

2. Survey of Kidney Transplant Centers Regarding Living-Related Donations_New_Transplant centers vary in their
use of kidneys donated by potential recipients' living relatives. This survey of all kidney transplant centers will
identify institutional factors influencing living-related donation rates. It will enable the Health Resources
and Services Administration to describe team and center characteristics that support appropriate use of this cost-effective
alternative to long-term dialysis. Respondents: Businesses or other for-profit; Non-profit institutions, Small
businesses or organizations; Number of Respondents: 900; Number of Responses per Respondent: 1; Average Burden
per Response: .29 hour; Estimated Annual Burden: 260 hours.

3. Grants for Hospital Construction and Modernization_Federal Right of Recovery and Waiver of Recovery (42 CFR 124,
Subpart H)_09150099 (Extension)_``Federal Right of Recovery and Waiver of Recovery'' provides a means for
the Federal Government to recover grant funds and a method of calculating interest when a grant-assisted facility
is sold or leased, or there is a change in use of the facility. It also allows for a waiver of the right of recovery under
certain circumstances. Respondents: State or local governments, Businesses or other-for-profit; non-profit
institutions; Number of Respondents: 20; Number of Responses per Respondent: 1; Average Burden per Response: 3 hours;
Estimated Annual Burden: 60 hours.

4. NIH Intramural Research Training Award (Program Application)_09250299 (Extension, no charge)_The information
collection will be used to make fellowship awards to qualified applicant individuals. Awardees will receive training
in biomedical research at the National Institutes of Health. Respondents: Individuals or households; Number of
Respondents: 10,600; Number of Responses per Respondent: 1; Average Burden per Response: .55 hour; Estimated Annual
Burden: 5,800 hours.

