 

A small institution that met each of the standards for a 
``satisfactory'' rating and exceeded some or all of those standards could have 
received an overall rating of ``outstanding'' depending on the degree to which it 
exceeded the criteria for a ``satisfactory'' rating and, at its option, its record of 
making qualified investments and its record of providing services. If a small 
institution failed to meet or exceed all of the standards for a ``satisfactory'' 
rating, the relevant agency would have conducted a more extensive examination 
of the institution, including, at the option of the institution, an examination of 
its investment and service performance. Also, if a small institution operated in 
more than one service area, the relevant agency would have evaluated the 
institution's performance in all of those service areas. 
Many community and consumer group commenters asked the 
agencies to eliminate the small institution assessment method because they 
believed that it would operate as an exemption for qualifying institutions. 
However, many banks and thrifts, as well as the weight of Congressional 
comments, supported the streamlined approach. The agencies have retained the 
streamlined assessment method as modified in the revised proposal. The 
agencies also have retained the December proposal's exemption of small 
institutions from the new data collection and reporting requirements for small 
business, small farm and community development loans, although the agencies 
have clarified that small institutions would not be subjected to those 
requirements because they request to be evaluated under the strategic plan 
assessment option. 
The agencies reiterate, however, that they do not intend by the 
proposal to exempt small institutions from the CRA or subject them to a less 
demanding standard of performance. The revised proposal has been redrafted 
so that the format of the small institution approach is more straightforward. 
The revised proposal first states the criteria that the agencies would use to 
assess the performance of a small institution, and then describes the 
performance levels that correspond to satisfactory performance. As under the 
tests for large retail institutions, the agencies have eliminated the structure of 
rebuttable presumptions and have proposed a rating profile. A small 
institution's performance need not fit every aspect of the rating profile 
describing ``satisfactory'' performance for it to receive that rating. 
Exceptionally strong performance on some aspects can compensate for weak 
performance on others provided the institution's overall performance is 
consistent with the rating profile. Small institutions that do not meet the 
standards for a ``satisfactory'' record would be given the appropriate rating 
without the necessity of a ``closer review.'' 
Some commenters expressed concern that under the December 
proposal an institution would be required to affirmatively elect to be examined 
under the streamlined assessment method and suggested that the streamlined 
method be the default examination procedure unless a qualifying institution 
elects another assessment method. The agencies agree and have drafted the 
revised proposal accordingly. 
Commenters representing holding companies and small institutions 
that are affiliates of holding companies with total banking and thrift assets over 
$250 million urged that the $250 million asset limit take into consideration only 
the assets of the subject bank or thrift and not the aggregate amount of bank 
and thrift assets held by the holding company or, alternatively, that the asset 
limit be raised. Many community and governmental groups, on the other hand, 
believed that the asset limit should be lowered. After considering all of the 
comments, the agencies have decided to retain the definition of small institution 
set forth in the December proposal. No compelling evidence was presented to 
support a change of the asset limit. Further, the revised proposal reflects the 
notion that the CRA performance of a small independent institution or small 
affiliate institution of a small holding company should be measured against 
different standards than a small institution affiliate of a larger holding company. 
The consideration of assessment context added in the revised proposal will 
permit the agencies to make this differentiation. The larger holding company 
could be expected to provide support and assistance to a degree not available to 
a small independent institution or to an affiliate institution of a small holding 
company. 





