 



Workload Projections:

 Determination of workloads varies by 
fee. Principal workload projection techniques are as 
follows: 

Patent application workloads are projected from statistical 
regression models using recent application filing trends. 
Patent issues are projected from an in-house patent 
production model and reflect examiner production 
achievements and goals. Patent maintenance fee workloads 
utilize patents issued 3.5, 7.5 and 11.5 years prior to 
payment and assume payment rates of 80 percent, 57 percent 
and 25 percent, respectively. Service fee workloads follow 
linear trends from prior years' activities. 



General Procedures:

 Any fee amount that is paid on or after 
the effective date of the fee increase, would be subject to 
the new fees then in effect. For purposes of determining 
the amount of the fee to be paid, the date of mailing 
indicated on a proper Certificate of Mailing or 
Transmission, where authorized under 37 CFR 1.8, will be 
considered to be the date of receipt in the PTO. A 
Certificate of Mailing or Transmission under Section 1.8 is 
not ``proper'' for items which are specifically excluded from 
the provisions of Section 1.8. Section 1.8 should be 
consulted for those items for which a Certificate of Mailing 
or Transmission is not proper.'' Such items include, inter 
alia, the filing of national and international applications 
for patents. However, the provisions of 37 CFR 1.10 
relating to filing papers and fees with an ``Express Mail'' 
certificate do apply to any paper or fee (including patent 
applications) to be filed in the PTO. If an application or 
fee is filed by ``Express Mail'' with a proper certificate 
dated on or after the effective date of the rules, as 
amended, the amount of the fee to be paid would be the fee 
established by the amended rules. 

A comparison of existing and proposed fee amounts is 
included as an Appendix to this notice of proposed 
rulemaking. 

In order to ensure clarity in the implementation of the 
proposed fees, a discussion of specific sections is set 
forth below. 



DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC RULES 



37 CFR 1.16National application filing fees. 



Section 1.16, paragraphs (a), (b), (d), and (f)-(i), if 
revised as proposed, would adjust fees established therein to reflect 
fluctuations in the CPI. 



37 CFR 1.17Patent application processing fees. 



Section 1.17, paragraphs (b)-(g) and (m), if revised as 
proposed, would adjust fees established therein to reflect 
fluctuations in the CPI. 

Section 1.17, paragraphs (j), and (n)-(p), if revised as 
proposed, would adjust fees established therein to recover 
costs. 



37 CFR 1.18Patent issue fees. 



Section 1.18, paragraphs (a)-(c), if revised as proposed, 
would adjust fees established therein to reflect 
fluctuations in the CPI. 



37 CFR 1.20Post-issuance fees. 



Section 1.20, paragraphs (c), (i)(1), and (j), if revised as 
proposed, would adjust fees established therein to recover 
costs. 

Section 1.20, paragraphs (e)-(g), if revised as proposed, 
would adjust fees established therein to reflect 
fluctuations in the CPI. 



37 CFR 1.445International application filing, processing, 
and search fees. 



Section 1.445, paragraph (a), if revised as proposed, would 
adjust the fees authorized by 35 U.S.C. 376 to recover 
costs. 



37 CFR 1.482International preliminary examination fees. 



Section 1.482, paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2)(ii), if revised 
as proposed, would adjust the fees authorized by 35 U.S.C. 
376 to recover costs. 



37 CFR 1.492National stage fees. 



Section 1.492, paragraphs (a), (b) and (d), if revised as 
proposed, would adjust fees established therein to reflect 
fluctuations in the CPI. 



Other Considerations 



This proposed rule change is in 
conformity with the requirements of Executive Order 12612, 
and the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. 3501, et 
seq. There are no information collection requirements 
relating to patent fee rules. This proposed rule has been 
determined not to be significant for purposes of Executive 
Order 12866. 

The PTO has determined that this proposed rule change has no 
Federalism implications affecting the relationship between 
the National Government and the States as outlined in 
Executive Order 12612. 

The General Counsel of the Department of Commerce has 
certified to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy, Small Business 
Administration, that the rule change would not have a 
significant impact on a substantial number of small entities 
(Regulatory Flexibility Act,


Pub. L. 96354). The proposed 
rule change increases fees by changes in the CPI as 
authorized by 35 U.S.C. 41(f). Further, the principal 
impact of the major patent fees has already been taken into 
account in 35 U.S.C. 41(h), which provides small entities 
with a 50-percent reduction in the major patent fees. 





