 

Third, a new paragraph, 58.77(d), is added to part 58, which adds the new statutory provisions for monitoring,
training, and termination or suspension of assumption of review responsibilities. 
The amendments to 24 CFR part 58 in this interim rule contain changes consistent with the above changes in part 92. 
In addition, Section 305 of MHPDRA amends Section 1011 of the HCDA 1992 to provide that for purposes of environmental
review, decisionmaking and action, certain grants for lead-based paint hazard reduction and abatement shall be
treated as assistance under the HOME Investment Partnership Act and shall be subject to HUD's regulations implementing
section 288 of that Act. In other words, recipients of these lead-based paint grants will assume environmental responsibilities
to the same extent as recipients under the HOME program and will be subject to 24 CFR part 58. The grants covered by this
provision are lead-based paint hazard reduction grants under section 1011, as well as grants to States and units of
general local government for abatement of lead-based paint and lead dust hazards pursuant to title II of the Departments
of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 1992 (approved
October 28, 1991, Pub. L. 102139), (92 App. Act). Accordingly, 58.1(c) is amended to reflect the applicability
of part 58 to these lead-based paint grants. 
Section 208 of MHPDRA creates a new section 290 of NAHA which permits the Secretary to waive certain statutory provisions
for PJs that are in federally-declared disaster areas under title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act and that will be using HOME funds to address damage. However, the Secretary may not waive
requirements related to public notice of funding availability, nondiscrimination, fair housing, labor standards,
environmental standards and low-income housing affordability. With regard to low-income housing affordability,
projects must meet the occupancy rent and periods of affordability provisions outlined in 92.252 and
92.254. It is the Department's intent to provide waivers on other HOME requirements based on the circumstances of
a particular disaster, tailoring the waivers to the needs of the participating jurisdiction. 
The Department is making a technical correction to 92.211(a)(2) to reflect the 1992 amendments to the Section
6(c)(4)(A) of the Housing Act of 1937. Selection policies and criteria for a tenant-based rental assistance program
funded by HOME are considered reasonably related to the Federal preference rules if, at least, 50% of the families
would meet the Federal preferences. The change reduces the proportion of families required to meet the Federal preferences
from 70% to 50%. 
The Department is amending 92.254(a) to include the requirement that homeownership under a lease-purchase
agreement, in conjunction with a homebuyer program, must occur within 36 months. This addition serves to integrate
policy guidance enunciated previously to the field into the rule. The Department believes that 36 months should be
ample time for a homebuyer to resolve any outstanding credit problems, to complete homeowner education courses,
or build up sufficient equity for homeownership (especially since HOME funds can be used for down-payment assistance).
Lease-purchase arrangements in connection with homebuyer programs are not subject to the same occupancy and rental
restrictions as are HOME rental projects and, therefore, the Department is concerned that any longer lease period
would be contrary to the statutory requirements governing HOME rental projects. The Department would appreciate
any comment regarding this regulatory amendment, whether the 36 month period is too long or not long enough or whether
the time period should be determined by the PJ. 
The HOME Program regulations published April 19, 1994 made a change to 92.252(a)(2) designed to prevent ``Low
HOME Rents,'' as calculated, to be higher than ``High HOME Rents'' as a result of fair market rents in some regions.
The change was made to correct this problem by indicating that if the low HOME rents were higher than the high HOME rents
that the figure for the lower rent would be used for all HOME units. That change, however, has been interpreted as limiting
the method for calculation of low HOME rents, which was not intended. Revisions have been made to 92.252(a)(2)(iii)
to clarify this point. 




