 

Upon termination, the said trustees shall (1) continue in such capacity until discharged by the Secretary; (2) from
time to time account for all receipts and disbursements and deliver all property on hand, together with all books and
records of the committee and of the trustees, to such persons as the Secretary may direct; and (3) upon the request of
the Secretary, execute such assignments or other instruments necessary or appropriate to vest in such person, full
title and right to all of the funds, property, and claims vested in the committee or the trustees pursuant hereto. 
Any person to whom funds, property, or claims have been transferred or delivered, shall be subject to the same obligation
imposed upon the committee and upon the trustees. 
After a statement of total claims and debts, any remaining funds held in the reserve account will be returned, on a pro
rata basis, to those pear handlers who paid assessments under the order during the 199192 fiscal period. 
It is hereby directed that a referendum be conducted in accordance with the procedure for the conduct of referenda
(7 CFR 900.400 et seq.) to determine whether continuance of the order's pear provisions regulating the handling of
pears is approved or favored by producers who during the representative period were engaged in the production of such
pears grown in California. 
The referendum agents of the Secretary to conduct the referendum are hereby designated as Kurt J. Kimmel and Terry
Vawter, California Marketing Field Office, USDA/AMS, 2202 Monterey St., suite 102B, Fresno, California
93721; telephone: 2094875901. 

Ballots will be mailed to all pear producers of record. Ballots may also be obtained at County Extension Service Offices,
or by contacting the California Marketing Field Office. Copies of the order may also be obtained by contacting the
California Marketing Field Office. 

In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. chapter 35), information and collection requirements
for pears under the order have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and assigned OMB Control No.
05810080). The ballot material to be used in the referendum herein ordered has been submitted to and approved
by OMB, and it has been estimated that it will take an average of 30 minutes to read and complete the ballot for each of
the approximately 300 producers who elect to participate in the voluntary referendum balloting. 

Based on the above, the Administrator of the AMS has determined that this rule will not have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities. 

After consideration of all relevant material presented, including the committee's recommendations, and other
available information, it is found and determined that the pear provisions in the order and the rules and regulations
issued thereunder, along with certain provisions in 917.18 pertaining to the nomination of members to the
Control Committee, do not tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act at this time, and that such provisions should
be suspended. It is further found that suspending all the rules and regulations pertaining to pears issued under the
order will tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act. 



List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 917 



Marketing agreements, Peaches, Pears, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

 

For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 7 CFR part 917 is amended as follows: 
1. The authority citation for 7 CFR part 917 is revised to read as follows:


 




Authority:

 7 U.S.C. 601674. 



PART 917_FRESH PEARS AND PEACHES GROWN IN CALIFORNIA 



917.4 

[Suspended in part] 



2. In 917.4 the words ``, and (b) all varieties of pears except Beurre Hardy, Beurre D'Anjou, Bosc, Winter Nelis,
Doyenne du Comice, Beurre Easter, and Beurre Clairgeau'' are suspended. 



917.15 

[Suspended in part] 



3. In 917.15 the words ``917.21 through'' are suspended. 



917.18 

[Suspended in part] 



4. In 917.18, paragraph (a) the words ``The number of remaining members which each respective commodity committee
shall be entitled to nominate shall be based upon the proportion that the previous three fiscal period's shipments
of the respective fruit is of the total shipments of all fruit to which this part is applicable during such periods.
In the event provisions of this part are terminated as to any one fruit, nominations of members to the Control Committee
shall be composed of representatives of the remaining two fruits. The apportionment shall be determined as aforesaid.
In the event provisions of this part are terminated as to any two fruits, the members of the commodity committee of the
remaining fruit shall have all the powers, duties, and functions given to the Control Committee under this part and
sections of this part pertaining to the designation of the Control Committee shall be terminated.'' are suspended.




917.20 

[Suspended in part] 



5. In 917.20 the words ``a Pear Commodity Committee and'' are suspended. 



917.21 

[Suspended] 



6. Section 917.21 is suspended in its entirety. 



917.24 

[Suspended in part] 



7. In 917.24, paragraph (a) the words ``917.21 and'' are suspended, and in paragraph (c) the words ``A
grower nominated for membership on the Pear Commodity Committee must have produced at least 51 percent of the pears
shipped by him during the previous fiscal period, or he must represent an organization which produced at least 51 percent
of the pears shipped by it during such period.'' are suspended. 





