 

(1) Through bill of lading; or
(2) Contract directly with suppliers of services, and submit a billing, with supporting documentation, to CCC indicating
actual costs incurred. All supporting documentation must be sent to the Director, Public Law 480OD. Payment
will be made, at the option of CCC, in dollars at the exchange rate as of the date of payment by CCC, or in foreign currency.


1499.16


Disposition of commodities unfit for authorized use.


(a) 

Prior to delivery to Cooperating Sponsor at discharge port or point of entry. 

If the commodity is damaged prior to delivery to a governmental Cooperating Sponsor at discharge port or point of entry
overseas, the Agricultural Counselor or Attache, or CCC designated representative, shall immediately arrange
for inspection by a public health official or other competent authority. A nongovernmental Cooperating Sponsor
shall arrange for such inspection of commodities damaged prior to delivery. If the commodity is determined to be unfit
for the use authorized in the Program Agreement, the commodities shall be disposed of in accordance with the priority
set forth in paragraph (b) of this section. Expenses incidental to the handling and disposition of the damaged commodity
shall be paid by CCC from the sales proceeds or from an appropriate CCC account as determined by CCC. The net proceeds
of sales shall be deposited with the U.S. Disbursing Officer American Embassy, for the credit of CCC in an appropriate
CCC account as determined by CCC. However, if the commodities were donated for monetization programs, the net sales
proceeds, after deducting expenses incidental to handling and disposition of the damaged commodity, shall be deposited
to the special account established for monetized proceeds, and the Cooperating Sponsor is responsible for documenting
the amount of the sales proceeds from the sale of damaged commodities deposited to the special account. The Cooperating
Sponsor shall seek guidance from CCC regarding sales proceeds in the event the Cooperating Sponsor executed a sales
agreement under which title passed to the purchaser prior to delivery.
(b) 

After delivery to Cooperating Sponsor. 

If after arrival in a foreign country it appears that the commodity, or any part thereof, may be unfit for the use authorized
in the Program Agreement, the Cooperating Sponsor shall immediately arrange for inspection of the commodity by a
public health official or other competent authority approved by the Agricultural Counselor or Attache. If no competent
local authority is available, the Agricultural Counselor or Attache may determine whether the commodities are unfit
for the use authorized in the Program Agreement, and, if so, may direct disposal in accordance with paragraphs (b)
(1) through (4) of this section. The Cooperating Sponsor shall arrange for the recovery for authorized use of that
part designated during the inspection as suitable for authorized use. If, after inspection, the commodity (or any
part thereof) is determined to be unfit for authorized use, the Cooperating Sponsor shall notify the Agricultural
Counselor or Attache of the circumstances pertaining to the loss or damage. With the concurrence of the Agricultural
Counselor or Attache, the commodity determined to be unfit for authorized use shall be disposed of in the following
order of priority:
(1) By transfer to an approved section 416(b) program for use as livestock feeding feed. CCC shall be advised promptly
of any such transfer so that shipments from the United States to the livestock feeding program can be reduced by an equivalent
amount;
(2) Sale for the most appropriate use, i.e., animal feed, fertilizer, or industrial use, at the highest obtainable
price. When the commodity is sold, all U.S. Government markings shall be obliterated or removed; 
(3) By donation to a governmental or charitable organization for use as animal feed or for other non-food use; or
(4) If the commodity is unfit for any use or if disposal in accordance with paragraph (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section
is not possible, the commodity shall be destroyed under the observation of a representative of the Agricultural Counselor
or Attache, if practicable, in such manner as to prevent its use for any purpose.


