 

<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Send comments on the proposal in triplicate to: Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the Chief Counsel, Attention:
Rules Docket (AGC200), Airspace Docket No. 92AWA6, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington,
DC 20591.




The official docket may be examined in the Rules Docket, Office of the Chief Counsel, room 916, 800 Independence Avenue,
SW., Washington, DC, weekdays, except Federal holidays, between 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. An informal docket may also be
examined during normal business hours at the office of the Regional Air Traffic Division.




</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Mr. Lewis W. Still, Airspace and Obstruction Evaluation Branch (ATP240), Airspace-Rules and Aeronautical
Information Division, Air Traffic Rules and Procedures Service, Federal Aviation Administration 800 Independence
Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591; telephone: (202) 2679250.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:


Comments Invited




Interested parties are invited to participate in this proposed rulemaking by submitting such written data, views,
or arguments as they may desire. Comments that provide the factual basis supporting the views and suggestions presented
are particularly helpful in developing reasoned regulatory decisions on the proposal. Comments are specifically
invited on the overall regulatory, aeronautical, economic, environmental, and energy-related aspects of the proposal.
Communications should identify the airspace docket number and be submitted in triplicate to the address listed above.
Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments on this notice must submit with those comments
a self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: ``Comments to Airspace Docket No. 92AWA6.''
The postcard will be date/time stamped and returned to the commenter. All communications received on or before the
specified closing date for comments will be considered before taking action on the proposed rule. The proposal contained
in this notice may be changed in light of comments received. All comments submitted will be available for examination
in the Rules Docket both before and after the closing date for comments. A report summarizing each substantive public
contact with FAA personnel concerned with this rulemaking will also be filed in the docket.




Availability of NPRM's




Any person may obtain a copy of this Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation
Administration, Office of Public Affairs, Attention: Public Inquiry Center, APA220, 800 Independence Avenue,
SW., Washington, DC 20591, or by calling (202) 2673485. Communications must identify the notice number of
this NPRM. Persons interested in being placed on a mailing list for future NPRM's should also request a copy of Advisory
Circular No. 112A, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Distribution System, which describes the application procedure.





Related Rulemaking Actions




On May 21, 1970, the FAA published Amendment 9178 to part 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (35 FR 7782),
which provided for the establishment of Terminal Control Areas (TCA's).


On February 3, 1987, the FAA published a final rule that established requirements pertaining to the use, installation,
inspection, and testing of Air Traffic Control Radar Beacon System (ATCRBS) and Mode S transponders in U.S.-registered
civil aircraft (53 FR 3380). The rule did not affect the requirement to have an operable transponder in a TCA.

On June 21, 1988, the FAA published a final rule that requires aircraft to have Mode C equipment when operating below
10,000 feet MSL within 30 nautical miles of any designated TCA primary airport, except for those aircraft not originally
certified with an engine driven electrical system or which have not subsequently been certified with such a system
installed (53 FR 23356).


On October 14, 1988, the FAA published a final rule that revised the classification and pilot/equipment requirements
for conducting operations in a TCA (53 FR 40318). Specifically, the rule: (a) Established a single-class TCA; (b)
requires the pilot-in-command of a civil aircraft operating within a TCA to hold at least a private pilot certificate,
except for a student pilot who has received certain documented training; and (c) eliminated the helicopter exception
from the minimum navigational equipment requirement.



On December 17, 1991, the FAA published a final rule on airspace reclassification (56 FR 65655). As a result of this
reclassification, that airspace formerly referred to as the Charlotte, NC, Terminal Control Area was reclassified
to Charlotte, NC, Class B airspace area, effective September 16, 1993.







</SUPPLEM>
