 

B. Requirements for Participation for Facilities 



We propose to establish standards in subpart F of part 483 for all facilities and units that wish to participate in Medicaid
as providers of the psychiatric

L

21 benefit. 

The proposed requirements relating to active treatment and the inpatient plan of treatment would apply to psychiatric
hospitals and psychiatric units in general hospitals that provide the psychiatric

L

21 benefit, as well as to PRTFs. In 483.202, Active treatment program, we propose to require that the facility
provide treatment designed to enable the individual to achieve sufficient stability to progress to outpatient care,
and to attain the objectives specified in the inpatient plan of treatment that would be required in 483.202(b).


Section 483.202(b), Inpatient plan of treatment, would require that an interdisciplinary team, which includes
a facility staff physician and at least one other professional staff person, develop the inpatient plan of treatment
which specifies the interventions to be provided for the individual. We would require that the inpatient treatment
plan include specific measurable treatment objectives and timeframes for meeting these objectives. In addition,
we would require that inpatient mental health services be coordinated with any other services being provided under
the individual's comprehensive services plan. 

The interval for review of inpatient care by the review team in acute care psychiatric

L

21 providers would be set at 7 days after admission and every 7 days thereafter. In a PRTF, reviews would be required
every 7 days in the initial month of stay; after the first month, reviews would be required at monthly intervals. We
do not believe that longer periods should elapse before the treatment modalities being used are assessed for their
effectiveness. Any necessary changes should be made as soon as possible in order to make certain that discharge occurs
at the earliest possible time. 



C. PRTF Conditions of Participation 



In developing the proposed requirements for PRTFs, we have tried to allow flexibility for providers whenever possible,
and to avoid requiring specific documentation of administrative procedures. We recognize that policies and procedures
relating to such matters as personnel and admissions are generally necessary but we believe that facilities that
can meet the requirements specified in this proposed rule can develop these administrative procedures without additional
Federal requirements. We have made an effort to minimize the imposition of any paperwork burdens. 




