 

One effect of cross-referencing in a Federal program is that if a permanent program rule is revised, the corresponding
Federal program rule would be similarly revised. However, the notice of proposed rulemaking would invite comments
not only on the proposed rule generally, but also on how it might affect a particular Federal program. If certain changes
were needed for a Federal program, then a separate provision would be added to the Federal program regulation that
is the counterpart to the permanent program rule.
Several provisions of the permanent program rules are already applicable to all Federal programs because they were
promulgated for application to all regulatory programs and therefore need not be cross-referenced here. These provisions
are 30 CFR Chapter VII, Subchapter P_Protection of Employees; Part 706Restrictions on Financial Interests
of Federal Employees; Part 769_Petition Process for Designation of Federal Lands Unsuitable for Surface Coal Mining;
Subchapter D_Federal Lands Program; Part 955_Certification of Blasters in Federal Program States and on Indian
lands.
On October 6, 1982, OSM published in the 

Federal Register

 a proposed Federal program to regulate coal exploration and surface coal mining and reclamation operations on non-
Federal and non-Indian lands in Arizona (47 FR 44194). During the public comment period, OSM was informed by Arizona
officials that all known coal reserves in Arizona are located on Indian lands. Based on this information, OSM determined
at that time that a Federal program for Arizona for non-Federal and non-Indian lands was not necessary. Therefore,
by notice published in the 

Federal Register

 on January 4, 1983, OSM withdrew its proposal for a Federal program (48 FR 273).
Subsequently, OSM has determined that a regulatory program in Arizona is needed in the event that coal exploration
and surface coal mining and reclamation operations should occur on non-Federal and non-Indian lands in Arizona in
the future. The State of Arizona has elected not to pursue primacy under a State program at this time. Consequently,
pursuant to 504(a) of 
SMCRA, OSM is once again proposing a Federal program in Arizona to regulate coal exploration and surface coal mining
and reclamation operations on non-Federal and non-Indian lands.


III. Discussion of Proposed Rule


As mentioned above, when promulgating a Federal program for a State, the Secretary is required by Section 504(a) of
SMCRA to take into consideration the nature of the terrain, climate, biological, chemical, and other relevant physical
conditions of that State. OSM has reviewed the Arizona laws and regulations to determine whether they suggest that
special provisions may be necessary or appropriate based on special terrain or other physical conditions in the State.


Review of State Law


In connection with its 1982 proposal, OSM reviewed Arizona State statutes to determine which ones provide regulatory
requirements for coal exploration and surface coal mining and reclamation operations as defined by SMCRA, and to
identify provisions that might be either more stringent than or inconsistent with the requirements of SMCRA. The
more stringent requirements, whether State or Federal, would be adopted for this program by listing in the proposed
rules the Arizona State statutes that set different controls and for which compliance is required in the surface coal
mining and reclamation operation. Determining whether the State statutes are more stringent than the Federal regulations
was done on a case-by-case basis. Citation in the proposed Federal program of State statutes with which compliance
is required is not meant as an adoption of those State statutes and regulations for purposes of enforcement by OSM.
Citation of such statutes is intended as an aid to persons who must comply with both the Federal program requirements
and State statutes. However, if a State law is cited below as interfering with the achievement of the purposes of SMCRA,
it would be superseded to the extent that it is less stringent than the Federal program.
In accordance with 30 CFR Part 736, OSM has tentatively identified the following statutes and regulations which,
in certain circumstances, impose stricter environmental controls than are provided for under SMCRA or the Federal
regulations. Section 903.700(e) of the proposed Federal program for Arizona lists the Arizona laws which OSM has
tentatively identified as setting more stringent land use and environmental controls for surface mining. The list
set forth below is based in part on the list published on October 6, 1982 (47 FR 44194), and may need to be updated in a final
rule adopting an Arizona Federal program. Those more stringent Arizona statutes are described and summarized as
follows:
(1) The Arizona Commission of Agriculture and Horticulture has authority to abate public nuisances including noxious
weed seeds. Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) Section 3231 to Section 3242. Violation of this statute
is a misdemeanor.
(2) It is unlawful to injure any bird or harass any bird upon its nest to remove the nests or eggs of any bird without prior
authorization of the Arizona Game and Fish Commission. A.R.S. Section 17236.
(3) A bridge, dam, dike, or causeway may not be constructed over or in a navigable river or other navigable water without
the authorization of the Governor. A.R.S. Section 18301.


