 




<USBUREAU>Fish and Wildlife Service</USBUREAU>



<DOCTITLE>Notice of Receipt of Applications for Permit</DOCTITLE>



The following applicants have applied for a permit to conduct certain activities with endangered species. This notice
is provided pursuant to Section 10(c) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 

as amended

 (16 U.S.C. 1531, 

et seq.

): 

Applicant: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Regional Director, Region 5, PRT697823. 
 

The applicant requests an amendment to their current permit to include take activities for small whorled pogonia
(

Isotria medeoloides

) for the purpose of scientific research and enhancement of propagation or survival of the species as prescribed by
Service recovery documents. 

Applicant: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Regional Director, Region 2, PRT676811. 
 
The applicant requests an amendment to their current permit to include take activities for Louisiana black bear (

Ursus americanus luteolus

) and Harperella (

Ptilimnium nodosum

) for the purpose of scientific research and enhancement of propagation or survival of the species as prescribed by
Service recovery documents. 

Applicant: John Beers, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, PRT788447. 
 

The applicant requests a permit to purchase in interstate commerce three Indian monitors (

Varanus bengalensis

) from Danny Gorman, Levittown, NY, for the purpose of enhancement of propagation and survival of the species through
breeding. 

Applicant: University of Florida, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, PRT789854. 

The applicant requests a permit to reexport a Galapagos tortoise (

Geochelone elephantopus

) to the Galapagos Islands, Ecuador, for the purpose of enhancement of propagation or survival of the species. This
animal had been imported for emergency medical treatment and is being returned to the wild following treatment and
rehabilitation. 

Applicant: George B. Hubbard, Jr., Columbus, GA, PRT789661. 

The applicant requests a permit to import the sport-hunted trophy of one male bontebok (Damaliscus dorcas dorcas)
culled from the captive herd maintained by the Ciskei Government, the Tsolwana Game Reserve, Tarkastad, Republic
of South Africa, for the purpose of enhancement of survival of the species. 

Applicant: Oakhill Center for Rare and Endangered, Species, 
Oklahoma City, OK, PRT789591. 

The applicant requests a permit to import one captive-bred female Amur leopard (

Panthera pardus orientalis

) from the Moskovskii Zoologicheskii Park, Moscow, Russia, for the purpose of enhancement of propagation and survival
of the species through breeding. 

Applicant: Levi Britton, Emigrant, MT, PRT786031. 

The applicant requests a permit to import one surplus captive-bred male woods bison (

Bison bison athabascae

) from the Willow Hollow Game Ranch, Turtleford, Saskatuawan, Canada, to be culled during a sport-hunt and to then
sell the hide and horns in interstate commerce, for the purpose of enhancement of survival of the species. 

Written data or comments should be submitted to the Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of Management
Authority, 4401 North Fairfax Drive, room 432, Arlington, Virginia 22203 and must be received by the Director within
30 days of the date of this publication. 

Documents and other information submitted with these applications are available for review, 

subject to the requirements of the Privacy Act and Freedom of Information Act,

 by any party who submits a written request for a copy of such documents to the following office within 30 days of the date
of publication of this notice: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of Management Authority, 4401 North Fairfax
Drive, room 420(c), Arlington, Virginia 22203. Phone: (703/3582104); FAX: (703/3582281). 



Emergency Exemption; Issuance 



On May 2, 1994, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) issued a permit (PRT789799) to the University of
Florida, College of Veterinary Medicine to import one Galapagos tortoise (

Geochelone elephantopus

) from the Galapagos Islands, Ecuador. The 30-day public comment period required by section 10(c) of the Endangered
Species Act was waived. The Service 
determined that an emergency affecting the health and life of this tortoise existed and that no reasonable alternative
was available to the applicant. The tortoise required life-saving emergency surgery which could not be performed
on the Galapagos Islands nor in Ecuador


. 



Dated: May 5, 1994.





<SIGNER>
Margaret Tieger, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Chief, Branch of Permits, Office of Management Authority. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9411315 Filed 51094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055P
</BILLING>




