 


Section 182(d)(1)(B) of the CAA requires State or nonattainment areas with ozone pollution levels defined as ``Severe''
or ``Extreme'' under the CAA to develop and implement an ECO program designed to reduce work-related vehicle trips
and vehicle miles travelled during peak commuting periods. Specifically, section 182(d)(1)(B) requires employers
with 100 or more employees to participate in a trip reduction program. These employers must submit compliance plans
to the state or governing agency two years after an ECO regulation is submitted to EPA for inclusion in the SIP. These
employer compliance plans must convincingly demonstrate an increase in the average passenger occupancy (APO) of
their employees who commute to work during the peak travel period by no less than 25 percent above the average vehicle
occupancy (AVO) of the nonattainment area during the peak travel period. These compliance plans must also convincingly
demonstrate that employers will meet the 25 percent increase APO target no later than four years after the ECO regulation
is submitted to EPA.


b. ECO program requirements and Sacramento ECO regulation implementation approach. 

The proposed ECO regulation meets the basic ECO program requirements:



(1) calculate an AVO for the nonattainment area or for each zone if the area is divided into zones;
(2) specify target APO(s) which are no less than 25 percent above the AVO(s);
(3) include enforcement procedures to ensure that employers develop and implement compliance plans; and
(4) provide an ECO program that has a process for ensuring that compliance plans are a ``convincing'' compliance demonstration.



The proposed ECO regulation uses data collected from the 1991 Caltrans (California Department of Transportation)
State Travel Survey to produce the baseline AVO for the nonattainment area and the target APO for the regulation. This
survey estimated Sacramento regional AVO to be 1.11 in 1991. It is EPA's opinion that no substantial changes in travel
patterns have taken place since that time such that there is reason to believe this number has changed since 1991. Consequently,
a 25 percent increase in AVO produces a regional APO target of 1.38; the performance target included within the ECO
regulation.
The Caltrans Statewide Travel Study attempted to estimate the number of persons telecommuting by asking the question,
``do you work at home?''. This survey question does not distinguish between those who work at home because they are
self-employed and their business is located in their home and those who work away from home but participate in an employer-sponsored
telecommuting program. EPA believes that a large percentage of those who work at home would be self-employed. Consequently,
any APO target based on the Caltrans study and including all of these home workers as telecommuters would be inflated
by some degree and result in a regional target APO of 1.46. EPA has chosen the 1.38 APO target because it is comparatively
a more reliable baseline AVO estimate.
The third ECO program requirement concerns sufficient enforcement procedures. Through the provisions of the ECO
regulation, EPA must be able to invoke penalties that are severe enough to provide an adequate incentive for employers
to comply and no less than the expected cost of compliance. Section 113 of the Act provides the statutory authority
for federal enforcement and the ability to assess penalties for violations under this ECO regulation. EPA may assess
civil or criminal penalties up to $25,000 per day per violation; however, Section 113 requires EPA to consider the
size of the business, the economic impact of the penalty on the business, the violator's compliance history and good
faith efforts to comply, the duration of the violation, payment of penalties for previous similar violations, the
economic benefit of noncompliance, and the seriousness of the violation in assessing a penalty fee.
Finally, Section 182(d)(1)(B) requires that employer compliance plans ``convincingly demonstrate'' prospective
compliance with the target APO. EPA's 

ECO Guidance 

defines four ECO regulation design options for eliciting compliance plans that make this convincing demonstration.
An ECO regulation may:



(1) provide for effective plan-by-plan review of employer-selected measures to ensure the high quality of compliance
plans and that unconvincing compliance plans will be rejected;


