 

(f) An agency may make an exception to this section and appoint an individual not on the RPL as authorized by 330.207(d).

(g) When submitting a request for referral of eligibles, an agency is required to indicate that no qualified RPL registrant
is available for the vacancy and therefore the agency may make a new appointment. Similarly, an agency must clear its
RPL before making appointments under a direct-hire authority, which includes the Outstanding Scholar provision,
or delegated examining authority.

26. In 330.206, paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2), and (b) are revised to read as follows:



330.206 

Job consideration.



(a) (1) An eligible employee under 330.203 is entitled to consideration for positions in the commuting area
for which qualified and available that are at no higher grade (or equivalent), have no greater promotion potential
than the position from which the employee was or will be separated, and have the same type of work schedule. In addition,
an employee is entitled to consideration for any higher grade previously held on a nontemporary basis in the competitive
service from which the employee was demoted under part 351 of this chapter.

(2) An employee is considered for positions having the same type of work schedule as the position from which separated
except that the agency, at its discretion, may adopt provisions permitting empoyees to request consideration for
other work schedules in addition to that formerly held.



* * * * *



(b) (1) An eligible employee under 330.204 is placed on the RPL for reemployment consideration for his or her
former position or an equivalent one. If the individual cannot be placed in such a position in the former commuting
area, he or she is entitled to priority consideration for an equivalent position elsewhere in the agency at the time
and in a manner as the agency determines will provide the individual with maximum opportunities for consideration.

(2) In lieu of expanded consideration in other locations, an individual who cannot be placed in his or her former or
equivalent position in the former commuting area may elect to be considered for the next best available position in
the former commuting area.

27. In 330.207, paragraphs (a), (b), (c)(1), and (d) are revised to read as follows:



330.207 

Selection from RPL.



(a) 

Options. 

An agency must adopt one of the selection methods in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section for use in operating a single
RPL. The agency may adopt the same method for each RPL it establishes or may vary the method by location, but it must adopt
a written policy for each RPL it establishes and maintains. After a method is adopted, the agency uses that method in
filling all positions. While an agency may not vary the method used by individual vacancy, it may at any time switch
selection methods for employees enrolled on the RPL.

(b) 

Retention standing order. 

For each vacancy to be filled, the agency shall place qualified individuals in group and subgroup order in accordance
with part 351 of this chapter. In making a selection, an agency may not pass over an individual in group I to select from
group II and, within a group, may not pass over an individual in a higher subgroup to select from a lower subgroup. Within
a subgroup, an agency may select an individual without regard to order of retention standing. A person has no greater
priority for the grade or position from which separated than any other person on the list who is qualified for the vacancy.
An agency may make an exception to this selection order only in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section.

(c) 

Rating and ranking. 

(1) For each vacancy to be filled, the agency rates qualified individuals according to their job experience and education.
To do this, an agency shall develop job-related evaluation procedures capable of distinguishing differences in
qualifications measured, which shall be applied in a fair and consistent manner. Based on these procedures, the agency
shall assign qualified individuals a numerical score of at least 70 on a scale of 100. The agency shall grant 5 additional
points to preference eligibles under section 2108(3) (A) and (B) of title 5, United States Code, and 10 additional
points to preference eligibles under section 2108(3) (C) through (G) of that title.



* * * * *




