 

As amended, the criteria provide that the ``Star of Life'' 
may be used on emergency care vehicles that either meet 
Federal specifications or are authorized to be used for 
emergency responses by a State or Federal agency. They 
continue to provide that the symbol may be used to indicate 
the location of and access to qualified emergency medical 
care. 

The criteria clarify that the ``Star of Life'' may be worn 
or used on patches, badges, lapel pins and other similar items 
by persons who have completed training and are authorized by a 
State or Federal agency to provide EMS care and by persons who 
by title and function are involved in the administration or 
supervision of or otherwise participate in an EMS system. 

As explained above, the criteria have been amended to 
provide that the ``Star of Life'' may be used to inform 
providers of medical conditions (such as diabetes) or to 
identify appropriate treatment (such as DNR), in accordance 
with programs established by the State or Federal agency. 

The criteria continue to provide that the symbol may be 
used on EMS training materials, other materials (such as 
letterheads and publications) having direct EMS application, 
medical equipment and supplies intended for use by EMS 
providers and by entrepreneurs engaged in the production or 
publication of these items. 

With regard to the appearance of the ``Star of Life,'' the 
specifications continue to include a sample of the registered 
blue ``Star of Life'' symbol and to identify the color of the 
symbol and its dimensions. The criteria, as amended, indicate 
that deviations in size may be made, provided they are 
proportionate, and that other deviations may be made, provided 
they create the same commercial impression created by the 
registered mark. Deviations which change the basic, overall 
commercial impression created on the public are not permitted. 

The criteria continue to provide instructions for 
including the symbol to show that the ``Star of Life'' is a 
registered certification mark. They have been amended to 
provide that some manner of demarcation should be used on 
patches, lapel pins and other similar items to distinguish 
whether the person wearing such item is an EMS provider or an 
individual involved in the administration or supervision of an 
EMS system. Provisions that attempted to detail the 
appearance of the ``Star of Life'' for these and other uses have 
been deleted.

Appendix A to this notice contains the revised criteria 
and specifications for the Use of the ``Star of Life'' Symbol. 




Issued on: August 5, 1994.

 


<SIGNER>
Michael Brownlee, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Administrator for Traffic Safety Programs. 

</SIGNJOB>
