 

There are obvious overlaps between agency regulations, such as differing labeling and packaging requirements of
RSPA and the CDC for cultures and stocks of infectious substances. CDC has expressed a willingness to work with RSPA
in resolving these differences through changes to one or both agencies' regulations. There also are differing labeling
and packaging requirements of RSPA and OSHA for medical waste as discussed in the proposed rule change elsewhere in
this notice. Although compliance with two or more differing agencies' regulations may be burdensome, RSPA has not
identified any situation where compliance with one agency's regulations is a barrier to compliance with another
agency's regulations. However, RSPA agrees with commenters' contentions that differing requirements cause confusion
and increase compliance costs and the likelihood of non-compliance based on misunderstanding. RSPA intends to work
with other Federal agencies to eliminate overlaps, where feasible. 

Of more concern to RSPA than overlapping requirements are gaps or inadequacies of regulation which may impact transportation
safety. RSPA is particularly concerned that diagnostic specimens and biological products known or suspected to
contain infectious substances may be transported with inadequate or no hazard communication (e.g., shipping paper
descriptions identifying them as hazardous, package markings and labels to identify the hazard class and name of
the hazardous material, emergency response information specifying steps to be taken in the event of an incident in
transportation) and may be transported in packagings which are inadequate for the conditions of transport and the
risks posed by the materials contained therein. 

RSPA recognizes that the regulations under the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Department of Health and
Human Services (21 CFR parts 312 and 600680) and APHIS of the United States Department of Agriculture (9 CFR
parts 102104) are designed to protect the safety, potency, and purity of the biological product and are not
specifically intended to protect transport workers or the public against exposure to biological products. RSPA
also understands that CDC regulations in 42 CFR 72.3 govern packaging and labeling for diagnostic specimens that
are equivalent to the HMR for infectious substances. However, regulatory gaps may exist in CDC's regulations because
the list of agents is outdated. For example, the list does not include HIV or Lyme disease. 

Because of the need for expeditious delivery, many biological products and diagnostic specimens are transported
by aircraft. Although not subject to incident reporting requirements of the HMR, RSPA understands that packages
of these materials often are damaged in transit aboard aircraft, causing costly delays and posing risks to cargo handlers,
emergency responders, others who may be exposed to the materials and property. Although many commenters to the ANPRM
on this issue supported regulation of these materials under the HMR, RSPA is not proposing to impose requirements
on biological products and diagnostic specimens at this time. RSPA would continue to except biological products
and diagnostic specimens from the HMR. RSPA anticipates proposing deletion of exceptions for these materials, if
justified in terms of benefits versus costs, in future rulemaking action. Other exceptions, such as those for hazardous
wastes, may be reconsidered at a future date if safety concerns warrant. 

RSPA would authorize, by today's proposed rule, non-bulk, non-specification packagings for RMW under specified
conditions. RSPA intends to monitor closely incident reports for these shipments to ensure that the packaging and
handling requirements achieve an acceptable level of safety and, if not, will propose adjustments in future rulemaking
action. 

Several other issues may be considered in future rulemaking action. Although no bulk packagings for RMW are specified
in the HMR, their use is authorized under the provisions of a number of exemptions. RSPA anticipates proposing to convert
the provisions of some or all of these exemptions into regulations of general applicability. RSPA currently requires
the segregation of poisons from foodstuffs. There may be sufficient justification, in terms of safety, to impose
similar restrictions on all infectious substances or RMW only. RSPA is aware that a number of States have differing
vehicle marking requirements for vehicles containing RMW. Although RSPA has not required a vehicle marking to date,
there may be a need to propose one. Finally, in the interest of minimizing cost impacts on the regulated industry, RSPA
did not adopt vehicle placarding requirements for Division 6.2 materials. For purposes of emergency response and
international harmonization, it may be beneficial to adopt an ``INFECTIOUS SUBSTANCE'' placard in future rulemaking
action. 



VII. Regulatory Analyses and Notices 



A. Executive Order 12866 and DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures



This proposed rule is considered a significant regulatory action under section 3(f) of Executive Order 12866 and,
therefore, was reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget. This rule is significant under the Regulatory Policies
and Procedures of the Department of Transportation (44 FR 11034), because of substantial public interest. A regulatory
evaluation is available for review in the docket. 



B. Executive Order 12612



This proposed rule has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteria contained in Executive Order
12612 (``Federalism''). Federal law expressly preempts State, local, and Indian tribe requirements applicable
to the transportation of hazardous material that cover certain subjects and are not substantively the same as the
Federal requirements. 49 U.S.C. 5125(b)(1). These subjects are: 

(A) The designation, description, and classification of hazardous material; 

(B) The packing, repacking, handling, labeling, marking, and placarding of hazardous material; 

(C) The preparation, execution, and use of shipping documents pertaining to hazardous material and requirements
respecting the number, content, and placement of those documents; 

