 

7. Electronic Payments



56. We have decided to proceed cautiously with our implementation of electronic fee payments. We require that regulatees
intending to make fee payments electronically submit a written request to the Managing Director and obtain his written
authorization or that of his designee prior to making their initial electronic payment.
<FOOTCITE>22</FOOTCITE>
 Following authorization by the Office of the Managing Director, a payor may either instruct its bank to make payment
of a regulatory fee directly to our lockbox bank or authorize us to direct our lockbox bank to withdraw funds directly
from the payor's bank account. It is the responsibility of the entity subject to the regulatory fee payment to assure
compliance with our electronic payment procedures. We will announce specific procedures for electronic payment
by public notice. Failure to comply with these procedures will result in the return of the fee payment and a penalty
of 25 percent if the subsequent refiling of the payment is late. Any late payment resulting from a failure to comply
with our electronic fee payment procedures will also subject the payor to the penalties set forth in 1.1163
of the rules.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
22

</FOOTNAME>
NYNEX has suggested that responsibility for recommending rules and procedures relating to the electronic payment
of regulatory fees by common carriers be given to the proposed advisory committee that would be established to assist
the Common Carrier Bureau in the development and implementation of an electronic filing system. See Public Notice,
9 FCC Rcd 1293 (1994). Since our system for the electronic payment of fees will soon be operational, we decline to combine
these tasks into a single project. However, the Commission staff involved in these undertakings will closely coordinate
their activities.

</FOOTNOTE>


57. Credit card payments may be made only with Mastercard and Visa since at this time these are the only credit cards
authorized for payments to the United States Treasury. Credit card payments must be accompanied by a Form 159. Failure
to accurately enter an authorized signature and the credit card name, number and date of expiration in blocks 22 and
23 of Form 159 will result in the return of the credit card payment and any associated filing.



E. Enforcement



58. As provided in section 9(c) of the Act, we proposed to enforce payment of regulatory fees by: (1) Assessing monetary
penalties for late payment, (2) dismissal of applications and, (3) in egregious cases, revocation of existing licenses
and authorizations. 47 U.S.C. 159(c). In addition, we proposed to pursue delinquent regulatees under the Debt Collection
Act, 31 U.S.C. 3711 

et seq., 

and related statutory provisions.



1. Penalties for Late Payment



59. Any regulatee that fails timely to pay its regulatory fee or make an installment payment shall be assessed a 25 percent
penalty. See 47 U.S.C. 159(c)(1). A regulatory fee is untimely paid when it is not received at the lockbox bank by the
date we establish for payment.
<FOOTCITE>23</FOOTCITE>
 A fee payment is also considered late filed if an instrument of payment is not collectible. A 25 percent penalty will
be assessed against any outstanding amount due on a fee, including any amount past due on an installment payment.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
23

</FOOTNAME>
The NAB and the Society of Broadcast Engineers have proposed that we consider a regulatory fee payment to be timely
submitted if the payment is postmarked by the date it is due. At least for FY 1994, we have decided to continue our practice
of requiring fee submissions to be received by the date due. We believe retention of this practice for regulatory fee
payments for FY 1994 is necessary to enable us to process these payments efficiently.

</FOOTNOTE>


2. Dismissal of Application


