 

It is anticipated that an amount up to $135,000 will be allocated to fund one or more projects for up to 17 months under
this priority area. 







Note

: To foster the sharing of research, principal investigators for each grant awarded will be required to (1) include
in the final report an executive summary which SSA could publish in the quarterly Social Security Bulletin and (2)
discuss the results of their research with SSA staff. Funds should be included in the grant budget for a meeting at the
SSA Office of Research and Statistics, Washington, DC. 



Part III. Application Process 



A. Eligible Applicants 



Any State or local government, public or private organization, nonprofit or for-profit organization, or agency,
hospital, or educational institution may apply for a grant under this announcement. Applications will not be accepted
from applicants which do not meet the above eligibility criteria at the time of submission of applications. 


Individuals are not eligible to apply. For-profit organizations may apply with the understanding that no grant funds
may be paid as profit to any grant recipient. Profit is considered as any amount in excess of the allowable costs of the
grant recipient. A for-profit organization is a corporation or other legal entity which is organized or operated
for the profit or benefit of its shareholders or other owners and must be distinguishable or legally separable from
that of an individual acting on his/her own behalf. 



B. Availability and Duration of Funding 



SSA anticipates allocating up to $100,000 to fund the initial 12-month budget period of a 24-month grant for one project
in priority area ORS94001, ``Economic Circumstances of Aged Widows.'' SSA anticipates allocating
up to $240,000 to fund the initial 12-month budget period for one or more projects in priority area ORS94002,
``Selected Economic and Demographic Assumptions Used to Project the Financial Status of the OASDI Trust Funds.''
SSA anticipates allocating up to $190,000 to fund one or more projects not to exceed 17 months in duration in priority
area ORS94003, ``Issues Related to the Scheduled Increase in the Retirement Age.'' SSA anticipates
allocating up to $190,000 to fund the initial 12-month budget period of 24-month grants for one or more projects in
priority area ORS94004, ``Analysis of the New Beneficiary Data System.'' Also, SSA anticipates allocating
up to $135,000 to fund one (1) or more projects not to exceed 17 months in duration in priority area ORS94005,
``Documenting and Explaining SIPPCPS Differences in Aged Poverty Rates.'' 



C. Grantee Share of the Project Costs 



Grant recipients receiving assistance to conduct these research projects are expected to contribute towards the
project costs. Generally, 5 percent of the total costs is considered acceptable. No grant will be awarded that covers
100 percent of the project's costs. 


D. The Application Process for Proposals Requesting 
Grant Funds 



Organizations wishing to compete for grants under this announcement must submit an application by September 6, 1994.
Applications received in response to this announcement will be reviewed by Federal and non-Federal personnel. 

Successful applicants may expect funding during the fourth quarter of FY 1994 (prior to September 30, 1994). 




