 

Complaint Register 



The Complaint Register for section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (Section 3 Compliant Form) is
necessary for the collection of information relative to the investigation of allegations of noncompliance pursuant
to Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended (Section 3). Section 3 requires that the Department,
to the greatest extent feasible, provide: (1) job and training opportunities for lower income persons within that
unit of local government or the metropolitan area (or nonmetropolitan county) where the project is located; and (2)
business opportunities for firms located or owned in substantial part by persons in the same metropolitan area (or
nonmetropolitan county) as the project. The regulation at 24 CFR part 135 provides that Section 3 residents and business
concerns may file a complaint alleging noncompliance with Section 3 by a recipient, contractor or subcontractor.
The complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged violation. 

It is anticipated that the Section 3 Complaint Form will help to expedite the acceptance of complaints because the
form guides the complainants to include all necessary components of the complaint, thereby saving costs associated
with staff time that would otherwise be spent securing additional information that would be necessary to complete
a complaint. 



Statutory Authority 



The authorization for the information collection on the Section 3 Reporting Form is Section 3 of the Housing and Urban
Development Act of 1968, as amended, 12 U.S.C. 1701u. The implementing regulations are found at 24 CFR Part 135 Subpart
F_Recordkeeping and Reporting. 

The authorization for Section 3 Complaint Form is Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended,
12 U.S.C. 1701u. The implementing regulations are found at 24 CFR Part 135 Subpart D_Complaint and Compliance Review.
The Section 3 Complaint Form was developed to provide for uniformity in the information that, by regulation, must
be included in a complaint and for the convenience of the public. The Section 3 regulation (24 CFR Part 135) states what
each complaint should contain. For purposes of meeting the time requirement for filing complaints (180 days), initially
these complaints do not have to be submitted on the form that HUD provides.




2. Use of Information 



The Section 3 Reporting Form will be used by the Department to monitor program recipients' compliance with Section
3. HUD Headquarters will use the information to assess the results of the Department's efforts to meet the statutory
objectives of Section 3. Also, the data collected will be used by recipients as a self-monitoring tool. If the information
is not collected, HUD will be unable to prepare the mandatory reports to Congress or to assess the effectiveness of
Section 3. 

The Section 3 Complaint Form will be used by a complainant to provide the necessary information to file a complaint.
A complaint may be filed by mail, in person or by telephone with the Office of Fair Housing And Equal Opportunity (FHEO),
Department of Housing and Urban Development. FHEO staff will use the information provided by this form as the basis
for the Department's determination of jurisdiction over a complainants' allegations. 



3. Improved Technology To Reduce Burden



This issue is not applicable to the Section 3 Reporting Form. 

The collection of data on the Section 3 Complaint Form is consistent with the use of improved technology as the Department
prepares to convert their form to a direct electronic input source. This electronic input source will reduce the burden
of completing the form manually before the information is stored on to an electronic media for use in the Department's
automated tracking system. 



4. Duplication 



The Section 3 Reporting Form does not duplicate any other reporting requirement in the Department. 

The Section 3 Complaint Form does not duplicate any other information collection process. HUD is the only Federal
agency with responsibility for administration of Section 3. This form is unique to the processing of a allegation
of noncompliance with the Section 3 statute or implementing regulations. 



5. No Similar Information 



No similar information is available to HUD with respect to the Section 3 Reporting Form.

