 

Part by Part Explanation 


Part I 


Part I requires the filing party to state the full name of the 
agreement, and the assigned FMC number. 


Part II 


Part II requires the filing party to indicate any change 
occurring during the calendar quarter to the list of other 
agreements set forth in Part II of the Information Form. 


Part III 


Part III requires the filing party to identify any change in 
the nature or type of service at any of the ports within the entire 
geographic scope of the agreement. 


Part IV(A) 


Part IV(A) requires the filing party to provide the name, 
title, address, telephone number and cable address of a person the 
Commission may contact regarding the Monitoring Report and any 
information provided therein. 


Part IV(B) 


Part IV(B) requires generally that the filing party sign the 
Monitoring Report and certify that the information in the Report 
and all attachments and appendices are, to the best of the filing 
party's knowledge, true, correct and complete. The filing party is 
also required to indicate his or her relationship with the parties 
to the agreement. 



Federal Maritime Commission 


Monitoring Report For Class C Agreements 
Between or Among Ocean Common Carriers 


Agreement Number 


(Assigned by FMC) 


Part I Agreement Name: 


Part II Other Agreements 


Indicate any change occurring during the calendar quarter to 
the list of other agreements set forth in Part II of the 
Information Form. 


Part III Port Service 


For each port within the entire geographic scope of the 
agreement, indicate any change in the nature or type of service 
effected during the calendar quarter, including base port 
designation and frequency of vessel calls. 


Part IV 
(A) Identification of Person(s) to Contact Regarding the 
Monitoring Report 


(1) Name 
(2) Title 
(3) Firm Name and Business 
(4) Business Telephone Number 
(5) Cable Address 


(B) Certification 


This Monitoring Report, together with any and all appendices 
and attachments thereto, was prepared and assembled in accordance 
with instructions issued by the Federal Maritime Commission. The 
information is, to the best of my knowledge, true, correct, and 
complete. 


Name (please print or type) 
Title 
Relationship with parties to agreement 

Signature 
Date






