 

A more detailed discussion of the individual source contributions, their associated control measures (including
available control technology) and an explanation of why certain available control measures were not implemented,
can be found in the TSD accompanying EPA's proposed approval of the Pagosa Springs moderate PM10 nonattainment
area SIP (59 FR 1101311015). EPA has reviewed the State's documentation and concluded that it adequately justifies
the control measures to be implemented. The implementation of Colorado's PM10 nonattainment plan for Pagosa
Springs will result in the attainment of the PM10 NAAQS by December 31, 1994 and maintenance through December
31, 1997. By this action, EPA is approving the Pagosa Springs PM10 moderate nonattainment area plan's control
measures as satisfying the RACM, including RACT, requirement. 

EPA also finds that the State of Colorado's December 9, 1993 submittal of PM10 contingency measures for the
Pagosa Springs moderate PM10 nonattainment area meets the requirements of section 172(c)(9) of the Act. Specifically,
Section I.E. of the State regulation entitled ``Nonattainment Areas'' provides that, within two months following
EPA's determination that the Pagosa Springs area failed to attain the PM10 NAAQS or make RFP, the Town of Pagosa
Springs must sweep all traffic lanes of the major State highway through town as soon as practical following each sanding
event using vacuum sweepers that are at least 34 percent effective. EPA has reviewed the State's documentation and
regulation and concluded that it adequately meets the requirements of section 172(c)(9) of the Act. By this action,
EPA is approving the PM10 contingency measures for the Pagosa Springs PM10 moderate nonattainment
area. 

In this document, EPA is also announcing its determination that major stationary sources of precursors of PM10
do not contribute significantly to PM10 levels in excess of the NAAQS in Pagosa Springs.

2

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
The consequences of this finding are to exclude these sources from the applicability of PM10 nonattainment
area control requirements. Note that EPA's finding is based on the current character of the area including, for example,
the existing mix of sources in the area. It is possible, therefore, that future growth could change the significance
of precursors in the area. 

</FOOTNOTE>


Lastly, EPA announces that the Pagosa Springs moderate PM10 nonattainment area description specified in
40 CFR 81.306 is replaced with following boundary description:




Township 35N  Range 2W: 

Sections 13, 14, 15; section 23 NE, N 1/2 SE; section 24 all except SWSW; section 25 N 1/2 NE, NENW. 



Township 35N  Range 1W: 

Section 18 W 1/2.

 


Nothing in this action should be construed as permitting or allowing or establishing a precedent for any future request
for a revision to any SIP. Each request for a revision to the SIP shall be considered separately in light of specific
technical, economic, and environmental factors, and in relation to relevant statutory and regulatory requirements.




Final Action



This document makes final the action proposed on March 9, 1993 (59 FR 11012). As noted elsewhere in this final action,
EPA received no public comments on the proposed action. As a direct result, the Regional Administrator has reclassified
this action from Table 2 to Table 3 under the processing procedures established at 54 FR 2214, January 19, 1989. 

Under Executive Order 12866 (58 FR 51735 (October 4, 1993), the Agency must determine whether the regulatory action
is ``significant'' and therefore subject to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) review and the requirements
of the Executive Order. The Order defines ``significant regulatory action'' as one that is likely to result in a rule
that may: 

(1) Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector
of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local, or tribal
governments or communities; 

(2) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; 

(3) Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations
of recipients thereof; or 

(4) Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles
set forth in the Executive Order. 
It has been determined that this rule is not a ``significant regulatory action'' under the terms of Executive Order
12866 and is therefore not subject to OMB review. 

Under section 307(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act, petitions for judicial review of this action must be filed in the United
States Court of Appeals for the appropriate circuit by July 19, 1994. Filing a petition for reconsideration by the
Administrator of this final rule does not affect the finality of this rule for the purposes of judicial review nor does
it extend the time within which a petition for judicial review may be filed, and shall not postpone the effectiveness
of such rule or action. This action may not be challenged later in proceedings to enforce its requirements. (See section
307(b)(2).) 






