 

EPA's experience has been that the great majority of its 
administrative penalty actions conclude by a settlement. Part 28 
explicitly provides settlement procedures and, unlike part 22, 
would allow field citation cases to settle by the simple 
agreement of the parties in a consent order or, if the Respondent 
chooses, by the Respondent's payment of the amount requested by 
the Agency in the field citation itself (or in any superseding 
pleading). Under part 28, a settlement may be reached at any 
time, even before the deadline for a response has passed. In 
cases of settlement, there is no further administrative review, 
and the Respondent waives its rights to appeal the administrative 
penalty to the appropriate federal court. Pursuant to the 
language of the CAA, consent orders under the Part 28 field 
citation program would allow for the compromise, modification, or 
remission by the Agency, with or without conditions, of any 
penalty requested in the administrative complaint. 


Part 28 would be revised such that failure of the Respondent 
to affirmatively request a hearing in the response would lead to 
assessment of the penalty proposed in the field citation. Under 
section 113(d)(3) of the Act, the penalty assessed by the field 
citation becomes final if the Respondent fails to request a 
hearing within the time required by the implementing regulation. 
Part 28 would also be revised to require Agency counsel to file a 
written explanation for the penalty imposed by the field citation 
no later than five days following a Respondent's default by 
failure to request a hearing. This would ensure an adequate 
administrative record for the penalty imposed. 

Upon the request of a party, or on his own initiative, the 
Presiding Officer may make a summary adjudication of the 
allegations, without further proceedings, whenever he finds that 
there are no material facts in dispute and that a party is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. In the same manner, the 
Presiding Officer may accelerate the transmittal of his 
recommended decision to the Regional Administrator if there is no 
compelling need for additional fact-finding on remedy issues. 

Either party may request a summary determination or an 
accelerated recommended decision at any time after service of the 
response, up until thirty days before the time set for a hearing. 
Alternatively, the Presiding Officer may summarily determine any 
of the allegations after the time for the exchange of information 
has run, and after he has examined the entire administrative 
record. The Presiding Officer may accelerate the transmittal of 
the recommended decision, upon finding liability in a summary 
determination or upon stipulation as to liability by the parties, 
if there is no need for further fact-finding as to remedy. 

In reaching a recommended decision, the Presiding Officer is 
required to consider the statutory penalty assessment criteria 
listed in section 113(e) of the Act. These criteria include the 
size of the business; the economic impact of the penalty on the 
business; the Respondent's full compliance history; the 
Respondent's good faith efforts to comply; the duration of the 
violation as established by any credible evidence; payment by the 
Respondent of penalties previously assessed for the same 
violation; the economic benefit of noncompliance; the seriousness 
of the violation; and such other factors as justice may require. 
The Respondent is afforded the opportunity to provide evidence of 
the relevant statutory criteria, including evidence concerning 
the duration of the violation. Part 28 would be revised to 
incorporate these statutory penalty assessment criteria. 

Other than by a motion for summary determination or by a 
motion for an accelerated recommended decision, a field citation 
may be settled preliminarily by a consent order. The consent 
order includes a penalty settlement which has the force and 
effect of a final order issued by the Regional Administrator, 
except that the consent order is not appealable. Part 28 would 
be revised to provide that, consistent with the authority under 
section 113(d)(2)(B), the consent order may be issued with or 
without conditions. 

Part 28 establishes deadlines to ensure that administrative 
cases do not languish. 

Not later than thirty days following the Respondent's 
response, the Presiding Officer is required to hold a prehearing 
conference at which the parties meet to consider matters which 
may expedite the disposition of the proceedings. The Presiding 
Officer also sets the time and place for further proceedings and 
schedules an information exchange during the prehearing 
conference, if one is requested. 

The authority to require discovery is limited to exchange of 
certain information. The required information that may be 
exchanged is limited to: (1) Documents intended to be introduced 
at the proceedings under Part 28 that have not already been filed 
with the Hearing Clerk; (2) witness lists, qualifications of 
expert witnesses and the subject matter of intended witness 
testimony; and (3) information known to the Respondent relating 
to the Respondent's inability to pay a civil penalty or relating 
to any economic advantage accruing to the Respondent as a result 
of his alleged violations of law. Part 28 would be revised to 
expand this last category, by allowing the Agency to include the 
Respondent's good faith efforts to comply with the applicable 
Clean Air Act requirements. Other forms of discovery, including 
interrogatories and the taking of depositions, are not permitted 
unless stipulated to by the parties. 

Except for supplemental materials, the information exchange 
must conclude no later than sixty days following the prehearing 
conference. Since new information concerning witnesses or 
documents may develop after an information response deadline 
passes, the parties may supplement the original information, but 
not later than seven days prior to the hearing. 





