 

A few commenters suggested that for a school-wide project, an entire school district should be allowed to qualify
and not just an individual school. The Department believes that the provisions of the Act clearly apply to an individual
school. No change is made to the final rule. 
Several commenters sought clarification of when SDAs would be required to have complied with the requirement to serve
50-percent youth who are out-of-school. Section 628.803(h)(1) is amended to state that the Governor has the responsibility
to determine the period for which the 50 percent out-of-school requirement will be calculated based either on the
period covered by the job training plan or on a program year. 
A few commenters maintained that the term ``dropout'' needed clarification. ``School dropout'' is defined at section
4(38) of the Act as an individual who is no longer attending any school and who has not received a secondary school diploma
or a certificate from a program of equivalency for such a diploma. That definition is now referenced at 628.804(c).

There were many comments on title IIC authorized services including limited internships, entry employment
experiences, cooperative education, tryout employment, youth work experience, youth OJT, and others. Most of these
comments indicated confusion and asked for clarification in a variety of ways. 
A few commenters wanted limited internships clarified. A few commenters expressed surprise at how open limited internships
were compared to OJT with 100-percent wage reimbursement at a private-for-profit employer and no classroom training
component. A few commenters thought the provision on entry employment experience was poorly written and confusing.
Some wanted clarification on cooperative education. Entry employment experience, cooperative education, and
limited internship offer work-based training experiences in a work setting. The Department believes that the particulars
of how they are designed and carried out should be a matter of State and local policy, so long as they are consistent with
general provisions of the regulations. The Department encourages the development of such work-based training programs
in conjunction with education components that reinforce the experience. The 500-hour limitation on entry employment
experience and limited internship is removed and 628.804(h)(2) of the final rule is amended accordingly.
With regard to cooperative education programs, the Department wishes to emphasize that, as has been the practice,
no subsidized wages may be paid to participants in this activity. 
In response to commenters who sought clarification of what constituted an alternative course of study, the 628.803(h)(2)
includes examples of an alternative school program including an alternative course of study in connection with the
in-school, out-of-school ratio. Section 628.804(b) indicates that the alternative course of study shall be approved
by the local educational authority and may be delivered by a CBO. The Department believes that the JTPA rules should
not specify the characteristics of an alternative course of study when, in almost all instances, this falls within
the responsibility of the local educational authorities. 
A commenter asked whether tryout employment is allowable under title IIC. Tryout employment previously was
described in section 205 of the Act. If conducted under the provisions of title IIC, it would be a kind of entry
employment experience. The design of such an activity and the decision to use it is made at the local level. 
A few commenters stressed that youth work experience should not be limited to 500 hours. As previously discussed,
the final rule is revised to clarify that work experience has no duration limitation. 
Several commenters expressed alarm over the title IIC OJT requirement that the youth OJT wage equal or exceed
the average wage at placement of title IIA wage. Commenters stated, in various ways, that the new provisions
on OJT for youth will eliminate youth OJT as a program option and that JTPA will lose its ability to serve this special
needs population. There were several recommendations on how to compute wage. Several wanted the wage to be computed
based totally on youth wages. It is clear that the language at section 264(d)(3)(C)(i)(I) of the Act intends the youth
OJT wage to be based on the adult wage in title IIA. Section 628.804(j)(1)(i) is amended to clarify that wages
for OJT positions meet or exceed the average wage at placement in the SDA for participants under title IIA ``based
on the most recent available data.'' This replaces the language in the interim final rule of ``in the preceding program
year.'' Some may still view these provisions as eliminating private sector work for youth. The Act, however, provides
other opportunities for youth in the private sector, such as entry employment experience, limited internships,
and cooperative education. A few commenters expressed concern that disabled youth will be hurt by the new wage restrictions
for youth OJT. These new training options may be developed with the disabled in mind. These options can be used to provide
sheltered or supported work experiences for disabled youth similar to those available under OJT. 
Section 628.804(k) is amended to clarify that supportive services may be provided after termination. They include
the full range of supportive services defined at section 4(24) of the Act, except for financial assistance, for up
to a year after termination. In the title IIB section of this Preamble, ``follow-up services'' that would help
bring JTPA closer to the goal of a year round program for youth are discussed. 


Part 631_Programs Under Title III of the Job Training Partnership Act
 


A number of comments received by the Department in response to the December 29, 1992, interim final rule specifically
addressed title III issues and concerns. The revisions to the regulations for part 631, Programs under Title III of
the Job Training Partnership Act, were driven by changes to the legislative provisions contained in the Job Training
Amendments of 1992 and the Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1993. Only those comments pertaining to the proposed
regulatory revisions stemming from the legislative changes were considered. After the issuance of the interim final
rule, the enactment of the NAFTA Worker Security Act required additional revisions to the regulations. 
Several commenters recommended editorial changes to the proposed regulatory language. These suggestions were
incorporated depending on their accuracy and usefulness. Major comments on the proposed revisions to Part 631, the
Department's analysis of and reaction to those comments, and major changes to the final rule are discussed below.



Definitions 




