 




<RINDOCK>[Docket Nos. 50327 and 50328]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Sequoyah Nuclear Plant Units 1 and 2; Consideration of Issuance of Amendment to Facility Operating License, Proposed
no Significant Hazards Consideration Determination, and Opportunity for a Hearing</DOCTITLE>


The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is considering issuance of amendments to Facility Operating
License Nos. DPR77 and DPR79 issued to the Tennessee Valley Authority (the licensee) for operation
of the Sequoyah Nuclear Plant, Units 1 and 2, located in Soddy Daisy, Tennessee.
The proposed amendments, submitted by the licensee's letter dated September 8, 1994, would incorporate a clarification
to separate the portion of the steam generator tubing from the end of the tube up to the start of the tube-to-tubesheet
weld from the remainder of the tube for the purposes of sample selection and repair when defects are found in this section
of a steam generator tube.
Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission will have made findings required by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (the Act) and the Commission's regulations.
The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration.
Under the Commission's regulations in 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordance with the
proposed amendments would not (1) involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences of an accident
previously evaluated; or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident from any accident previously
evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety. As required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee
has provided its analysis of the issue of no significant hazards consideration, which is presented below:



TVA has evaluated the proposed technical specification (TS) change and has determined that it does not represent
a significant hazards consideration based on criteria established in 10 CFR 50.92(c). Operation of Sequoyah Nuclear
Plant (SQN) in accordance with the proposed amendment will not:
1. Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated.
This change will clarify the requirements for indications found in the region of the steam generator (S/G) tube, which
protrudes below the tubesheet. This region of the tube does not affect the structural integrity of the reactor coolant
system (RCS) pressure boundary, since it is not part of the pressure boundary. This revision will exempt this portion
of the tube from being considered under the result and action required sections of Table 4.42 in SQN's TS. Therefore,
indications in this region will not require repairs and will not be used for the purpose of expanding the sample of tubes
to be inspected under the requirements of the TS.
The condition described in this evaluation results in tube integrity considerations commensurate with Regulatory
Guide 1.121 criteria both analytically and empirically. If the indications are hypothetically considered as cracks,
the Row 1 tube end indications neither adversely affect S/G tube integrity or any other component, nor does the presence
of the indications alter the function of the S/G or any other component. Continuing the hypothetical scenario, even
if the crack propagated beyond the weld, the only consequence of an accident that could be caused by plant operation
or by the occurrence of a faulted condition event with the tube end indications, would be negligible leakage from the
primary to secondary system. Such leakage is expected to be insignificant at both normal and faulted conditions.
Therefore, plant operation with the tube end indications present in the Row 1 tubes does not increase the probability
of an analyzed accident such as a S/G tube rupture event, 


