 

&bull;Coordinate prevention and intervention programs with the implementation of community-oriented policing.
&bull;Commit to citywide reengineering and quality public service.


Support Families and Protect Children


&bull;Provide teen pregnancy prevention and prenatal services to high-risk mothers and fathers.
&bull;Strengthen families through parent training, family support, and family preservation services.
&bull;Prevent child abuse.
&bull;Develop health services for high-risk youth and their families, including drug and alcohol counseling and
treatment and mental health screening and treatment where necessary.
&bull;Provide services to juvenile victims of and witnesses to violence.


Ensure Education


&bull;Expand readiness-to-learn strategies for children, including Head Start and other programs.
&bull;Create safe havens.
&bull;Assist youth with learning problems by providing specialized educational services and tutoring.
&bull;Address truancy and school dropouts through prevention, intervention, and alternative education.
&bull;Encourage the development of positive values and teach critical social skills including conflict resolution
and peer mediation.


Expand Opportunities 


&bull;Give children and young people guidance and consistent discipline and rewards through the use of mentors.
&bull;Offer opportunities for healthy recreation and cultural awareness.
&bull;Promote leadership qualities by involving young people in planning and decision-making activities, particularly
concerning quality of life and public safety problems. 
&bull;Provide youth vocational training and meaningful job opportunities.


Effective Juvenile Justice


&bull;Respond appropriately to abuse and neglect reports made to child protective services and juvenile and family
courts. 
&bull;Intervene with youth when delinquent behavior first occurs. 
&bull;Establish a broad spectrum of graduated sanctions that provides for accountability to the victim and community,
enhances community safety, and provides a continuum of services to respond appropriately to the needs of each juvenile
offender. 
&bull;Offer intensive, carefully monitored aftercare services.
&bull;Control the small segment of serious, violent, and chronic juvenile offenders. 


