 

(iii) The number and amount of loans in low-, moderate-, middle-, and 
upper-income geographies in the bank's service area(s); 
(2) 

Borrower characteristics. 

The distribution, particularly in the bank's 
service area, of the bank's lending (based on borrower characteristics), 
including: 
(i) The number and amount of home mortgage loans to low-, moderate-, 
middle-, and upper-income individuals; 
(ii) The number and amount of small business and small farm loans to 
businesses and farms with gross annual revenues less than or equal to 
$1 million; 
(iii) The number and amount of small business and small farm loans by size 
of loan; and 
(iv) At the bank's option, the number and amount of consumer loans to 


low-, moderate-, middle-, and upper-income individuals; 


(3) 

Community development lending. 

The bank's community development 
lending, including the number and amount of community development loans 
outstanding, their complexity and innovativeness, and the number and amount 
of lines of credit, commitments, and letters of credit for community 
development purposes; and 
(4) 

Innovative or flexible lending practices. 

The bank's use of innovative or 
flexible lending practices to address the credit needs of low- or moderate- 
income individuals or geographies. 
(c) 

Affiliate lending. 

(1) The OCC shall, if the bank elects, consider in its 
assessment of a bank's lending performance under this section lending by an 
affiliate of the bank, if the bank, or its affiliate, reports or collects the lending 
data pursuant to 25.42 of this part. 
(2) The OCC may consider in its assessment lending by a bank's affiliate 
even if the bank has chosen not to have the affiliate's lending considered if the 
OCC determines that this lending is integral to the business of the bank. 
(3) Consideration of affiliate lending shall be subject to the following 
constraints: 
(i) No affiliate may claim the same loan as another institution; and 
(ii) If the OCC considers loans within a particular lending category (

e.g.

, 
home mortgage, small business, small farm, consumer or community 
development lending) made by one or more of the bank's affiliates in a 
particular service area, the OCC shall consider all the loans within that lending 
category made by all of the bank's affiliates in that particular service area. 
(d) 

Consortia and third-party lending. 

Community development loans made 
through consortia in which the bank participates or through third parties in 
which the bank has invested: 
(1) Shall be considered under the lending test, if the bank elects, provided 
the data pertaining to these loans are reported by the bank under the applicable 
provisions of 25.42 of this part; and 
(2) May be allocated among participants or investors as they choose for 
purposes of the lending test, provided that no participant or investor claims the 
same loan or part of a loan as another participant or investor, or claims in the 
aggregate greater than its percentage share (based on the level of its 
participation or investment) of the total loans made by the consortium or third 
party. 
(e) 

Lending performance rating. 

The OCC shall rate a bank's lending 
performance as provided in Appendix A of this part. 

 




