 

B. Authority for Awarding a Grantback 


Section 456(a) of GEPA, 20 U.S.C. 1234e(a), the authority applicable to this grantback request, provides that whenever
the Secretary has recovered funds following a final audit determination with respect to any applicable program,
the Secretary may consider those funds to be additional funds available for the program and may arrange to repay to
the State or local education agency affected by that determination an amount not to exceed 75 percent of the recovered
funds. The Secretary may enter into this grantback arrangement if the Secretary determines that_
(1) The practices and procedures of the State or local education agency that resulted in the audit determination have
been corrected, and the State or local agency is, in all other respects, in compliance with the requirements of the
applicable program; 
(2) The State or local agency has submitted to the Secretary a plan for the use of the funds to be awarded under the grantback
arrangement, which meets the requirements of the program, and, to the extent possible, benefits the population that
was affected by the failure to comply or by the misexpenditures that resulted in the audit exception; and 
(3) The use of the funds to be awarded under the grantback arrangement in accordance with the State or local agency's
plan would serve to achieve the purposes of the program under which funds were originally granted. 


C. Plan for Use of Funds Awarded Under a Grantback Arrangement 


Pursuant to section 456(a)(2) of GEPA, Idaho has applied for a grantback of $86,250, or 75 percent of the $115,000 repaid
to the Department under the settlement agreement, and has submitted a plan for use of the proposed grantback funds,
consistent with Perkins II, currently in effect. Generally, Idaho plans to purchase vocational-technical training
equipment to improve vocational-technical programs in Idaho's State system of vocational and applied technology
institutions. 
Specifically, Idaho plans to utilize the requested grantback funds totaling $86,250 to_

(1) Replace outdated equipment in the electronics program at North Idaho College, School of Vocational-Technical
Education by purchasing two Oscilloscopes ($7,000); 
(2) Purchase two Pentium Work Stations necessary for establishing an interdivisional CD ROM Instructional Lab at
Lewis-Clark State College, School of Technology ($5,625); 
(3) Purchase equipment needed by Boise State University, College of Technology, to implement an Academic Skills
Development unit at the Canyon County Center ($23,445); 
(4) Purchase updated equipment for the Licensed Practical Nurse and Welding programs at the College of Southern Idaho
School of Vocational-Technical Education ($12,500); 
(5) Purchase equipment for establishing an integrated learning experience laboratory at Idaho State University,
School of Applied Technology ($22,680); and 
(6) Purchase an Eberline HBM1 Hand/Foot counter to be used in the Radiation Safety program at Eastern Idaho
Technical College ($15,000). 
The postsecondary institutions for which Idaho plans to purchase equipment with the grantback funds will participate
with comprehensive high schools in the various regions in which the institutions are located throughout the State
to deliver Tech-Prep programs and coordinate initiatives for future delivery of youth apprenticeship training.
As is indicated in Idaho's grantback plan, the additional equipment Idaho plans to purchase will serve to advance
the quality of programs delivered by, and coordinated through, the postsecondary State system, resulting in Statewide
benefit to vocational education, and maximizing the impact of the grantback funds. 
Idaho's plan further indicates that these equipment purchases are intended to improve vocational-technical programs
by maintaining high-quality State programs with state-of-the-art training stations. These training stations
will be of critical importance in advancing the development of Idaho's workforce. Laboratories in the postsecondary
vocational-technical education system will provide preparatory training essential for new entrants into highly
skilled occupations. In addition, industry upgrade and retraining of employees will be provided on the campuses
of Idaho's postsecondary system of technical institutions. 










