 

(b) If a course or courses required toward a Fellow's master's degree are coincidentally credited toward a Fellow's
future doctoral degree or teaching certificate, the Foundation will provide reimbursement toward that course or
those courses. Such reimbursement will be governed by all other rules, requirements, and obligations set forth here.



2400.65 

Alteration of plans of study.



Although Junior Fellows are expected to pursue full-time study and Senior Fellows to pursue part-time study, the
Foundation may permit Junior Fellows with an established need (such as the need to accept a teaching position) to study
part time and Senior Fellows with established need (such as great distance between the Fellow's residence and the
nearest university, thus necessitating a full-time leave of absence from employment in order to study) to study full
time.



2400.66 

Completion of fellowships.



A Fellow will be deemed to have satisfied all terms of a fellowship and all obligations under it when the Fellow has completed
no fewer than 12 credits of study of the Constitution, formally secured the masters degree, attended the Foundation's
Summer Institute on the Constitution, completed teaching for the number of years and fractions thereof required
as a condition of accepting Foundation support for study, and submitted all required reports.



Subpart H_Summer Institute on the Constitution



2400.70 

Institute's relationship to fellowship.



Each year, the Foundation offers, normally during July a four-week graduate-level Institute on the principles,
framing, ratification, and implementation of the United States Constitution at an accredited university in the
Washington, DC area. The Institute is an integral part of each fellowship.



2400.71 

Fellows' participation in institute.



Each Fellow is required as part of his or her fellowship to attend the Institute, normally during the summer following
the Fellow's commencement of graduate study under a fellowship.



2400.72 

Contents of institute.



The principal element of the Institute is a graduate history course, ``The Origins of Constitutional Government
in the United States, 17631803.'' Other components of the Institute include study visits to sites associated
with the lives and careers of members of the founding generation and exposure to advanced teaching methods.

