 



Comment: 

One commenter asked what type of medical documentation will be required to support payment for occasional use of EPO
prior to dialysis, required because of temporary patient weakness or a low hematocrit reading. 


Response: 

Medicare eligibility based on ESRD is not established until the patient has been undergoing routine dialysis for
three months or has a kidney transplant. Thus it is unlikely that a patient undergoing EPO therapy before dialysis
would be a Medicare beneficiary. However, if a beneficiary whose Medicare eligibility is based on age or disability
receives EPO for either of the types of anemia listed on the drug labeling, the drug may be covered if furnished ``incident
to a physician's service''. Routine documentation requirements for this treatment include appropriate diagnostic
coding on the HCFA1500 claim form filed by the physician. 


Comment: 

One commenter stated that the rule implies that home dialysis patients have not been receiving EPO and that the need
for EPO must be evaluated for each patient. The commenter points out that many patients have met the criteria for EPO,
have been monitored monthly by appropriate laboratory tests and frequent blood pressure checks, and may already
have been determined to have hematocrits within the target range. The commenter recommended that we not require full
evaluation of patients who are already on EPO. 


Response: 

We realize that a patient who is receiving EPO may have a hematocrit within the target range of 3033 percent.
We also realize that any patient considered for home use of EPO would be under the care of a physician who furnishes all
dialysis-related services. We assume that, in determining whether the patient is an appropriate candidate for home
use, the physician would take into account any previous evaluations and whether the patient is currently receiving
EPO. Nevertheless, we continue to believe that every patient must be evaluated before being approved for home use
of EPO. The physician may base the evaluation in part on information previously obtained in the course of monitoring
dialysis, but must also evaluate other factors, such as competence to inject the drug and capacity for proper storage
of the drug, that are not pertinent to receiving EPO in a facility or a physician's office. 


Comment: 

One commenter believes that home health agencies (HHAs) should not have to adhere to the standard of ensuring that
the two-month supply limitation is met, especially in a patient's own household. The commenter believes that such
a standard could impose on the HHA inappropriate and unwarranted liability, especially since EPO is a drug that allegedly
``may be abused.'' The same commenter also requested that the phrase, ``in the judgment of the home health agency,''
be inserted after the word ``patient'' in 405.2163(g)(2) to prevent reviewing agencies from alleging that
the patient did not have the abilities necessary to self-administer EPO. 


Response: 

Under 405.2163 (g)(2) and (h)(3), the patient's physician or dialysis facility (and not the supplier) is responsible
for ensuring that the patient is capable of self-administering the drug and, through the drug prescriptions, that
the amount ``on hand'' does not exceed a 2-month supply. Accordingly, if an HHA qualifies to be a supplier of home dialysis
equipment and supplies, that HHA would not be subject to the responsibilities that aroused the commenter's concern.
Ordinarily, HHAs would not be involved in monitoring self-administration of EPO. 


Comment: 

One professional association commented that the wording in 405.2163(g)(2)(iii), that is, ``being able to
adhere to a disciplined medical regimen'', is a broad subjective statement that lacks meaning without some measurement
of nonadherence. It recommended replacing the language with the words ``be able to meet the requirements of an established
home dialysis training program and periodic reassessment by qualified training staff.'' 


Response: 

We agree that the cited current language lacks specificity and have removed it. However, we did not add the suggested
language because, in this context, it is training in the self-administration of EPO (rather than in self-dialysis
as such) that is pertinent, and that is already dealt with in paragraph (g)(3). 


B. Patient Care Plan 




Comment: 

Three commenters, all renal dietitians, questioned the wording of the requirement to review a patient's diet and
fluid modifications to monitor adequate iron stores and hyperkalemia. All commented that the amount of iron required
during EPO therapy can rarely be met with dietary iron, since such diets are typically iron deficient. They noted that
oral or even intravenous supplemental iron is required and recommended that we revise the language to include the
following: 



