 

(iv) Notice may be delayed if it is determined that such action is likely to endanger the safety of a law enforcement
official or compromise another ongoing criminal investigation conducted by OIG, the United States Secret Service,
the United States Postal Inspection Service, or other authorized Federal law enforcement agency.

(v) Notice need not be given to the general public.

(4) Administrative review.

(i) The actual or apparent owner(s) of or person(s) with possessory interests in the property shall have 30 days from
the date of the delivery of the notice of forfeiture to make a request for an administrative review of the forfeiture.

(ii) The request shall be made in writing to the Assistant Inspector General for Investigations, Office of Inspector
General, USDA, or to his/her designee, hereinafter referred to as the reviewing official.

(iii) A request for an administrative review of the forfeiture of property shall include the following:

(A) A complete description of the property, including serial numbers, if any;

(B) Proof of the person's property interest in the property; and, 

(C) The reason(s) the property should not be forfeited.

(iv) The requestor may, at the time of his/her written request for administrative review, also request an oral hearing
of the reasons the property should not be forfeited.

(v) The burden of proof will rest upon the requestor, who shall be required to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the property should not be forfeited.

(vi) Should the administrative determination be in their favor, the actual or apparent owner(s) of or person(s) with
possessory interests in the property subject to forfeiture may request that forfeited items be returned or that compensation
be made if the custodian has already disposed of the property.

(vii) The reviewing official shall not remit or mitigate a forfeiture unless the requestor:

(A) Establishes a valid, good faith property interest in the property as owner or otherwise; and

(B) Establishes that the requestor at no time had any knowledge or reason to believe that the property was being or would
be used in violation of the law; and

(C) Establishes that the requestor at no time had any knowledge or reason to believe that the owner had any record or
reputation for violating laws of the United States or of any State for related crimes.

(viii) The reviewing official may postpone any decision until the conclusion of any related administrative, civil,
or criminal proceeding. 

(ix) The decision of the reviewing official as to the disposition of the property shall be the final agency determination
for purposes of judicial review.




Done at Washington, D.C. this 28th day of September 1994.



<SIGNER>
Mike Espy,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of Agriculture.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9425008 Filed 10794; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341023M
</BILLING>



