 

Fedwire on-line funds transfer operating hours will be expanded to open at 12:30 a.m. e.t. (5:30 a.m. G.m.t. and 2:30
p.m. Tokyo time) to support strengthened, interbank settlement for domestic and cross-border markets. This precedes
the opening of the current European banking day by about three hours and overlaps with current payment system and money
market hours in Tokyo by about two and one-half hours. This overlap of payment system hours could increase further
if, in the future, the operating hours of other national payment systems were expanded. 

The closing time for the Fedwire funds transfer service will remain at 6:30 p.m. e.t. (11:30 p.m. G.m.t. and 8:30 a.m.
Tokyo time), in order not to delay inordinately the calculation of U.S. dollar positions by U.S. banks providing dollar
clearing services to clients operating in the Asian markets, or to disrupt domestic money management. Further, keeping
the closing time at 6:30 p.m. e.t. will not disturb the reserve management operations of the large number of smaller
U.S. banks that are not active internationally and that are unlikely to participate in an expanded Fedwire operating
day. 

The Federal Reserve's estimated incremental costs to operate the funds transfer service from 12:30 a.m. e.t. to 6:30
p.m. e.t. will be roughly $2.5 to $4.0 million per year, or about 3 to 5 percent of the total cost of providing the service
in 1993. While the operational costs incurred by banks using Fedwire during the expanded operating period are difficult
to estimate, such costs would be incurred entirely voluntarily. Banks could choose to remain closed during the expanded
operating period and thus forego any additional operating costs. 

Further, an 18-hour day (beginning at 12:30 a.m. e.t. and closing at 6:30 p.m. e.t.) provides an adequate six-hour
quiet period within which banks can perform end-of-day processing and provides for contingency situations. It also
provides for a definite period for measuring reserve positions, a requirement for the conduct of monetary policy.
There are some other minor issues posed by an 18-hour Fedwire funds transfer day that are discussed in appendix C of
this notice. 

With respect to Fedwire securities transfer operating hours, under current DVP arrangements, banks do not have the
capability to control the timing of deliveries of securities and associated debits to their funds accounts. Accordingly,
banks have limited control over the effect of securities-related debits on their funds positions and their use of
Federal Reserve securities-related intraday credit. These control limitations could lead to either increased
operating costs or increased use of intraday credit, with accompanying charges, during periods of expanded hours.
(See appendix C of this notice for further discussion.) In contrast to the Fedwire funds transfer service, therefore,
expanding the operating hours of the securities transfer service would likely impose unavoidable costs on a large
number of banks. Thus, the Board believes that it is inadvisable at this time to approve an expansion of the operating
hours for the Fedwire securities transfer service. 



Competitive Impact Analysis



During expanded Fedwire funds transfer operating hours, the Federal Reserve Banks will be providing real-time gross
settlement in central bank money. While this service cannot be duplicated in the private sector, this situation is
no different under expanded operating hours than it is under the existing Fedwire operating hours. Service providers
that provide funds transfer services under a netting arrangement could expand their operating hours to coincide
with Fedwire operating hours; however, only by setting earlier settlement time(s) and settling through Fedwire
could these organizations provide risk-free central bank money earlier in the day to their participants. Service
providers that provide real-time gross settlement funds transfer services across their own books could not solely
backstop these transactions with central bank money and, thus, could be reliant on their own capital and credit standing
to assure participants of final settlement. Again, this situation is no different under expanded operating hours
than it is under normal Fedwire operating hours.




By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 15, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
William W. Wiles, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of the Board. 




</SIGNJOB>
