 

Response to Comments 


NMFS agrees with the World Wildlife Fund that development and implementation of a recovery plan is essential for the
conservation and recovery of winter-run chinook salmon. For this reason, NMFS has appointed a National Sacramento
River winter-run chinook salmon recovery team, comprised of fishery resource mangers, experts on winter-run chinook
salmon biology, and conservation biology specialists, to develop a recovery plan. The recovery team has been meeting
since September 1992 and will submit a draft recovery plan to NMFS in 1994. Interior's technical comments were incorporated
where appropriate. 
NMFS disagrees with the comments of the Westlands Water District, the Family Water Alliance, and the Glenn County
Board of Supervisors that current protective measures should be allowed to be in place for a certain amount of time
and their effectiveness evaluated before NMFS determines whether reclassification is necessary. Although measures
have been implemented to reduce adverse impacts on winter-run chinook salmon, and NMFS believes they are likely to
be effective, their effectiveness is currently unknown and cannot be evaluated until data on future returns are available.

One of the factors to be considered in listing, delisting and reclassifying a species is ``the inadequacy of existing
regulatory mechanisms.'' Judicial interpretation of this language allows NMFS to also consider the ``adequacy''
of regulatory mechanisms in its listing decisions. It is premature to determine the adequacy of these measures for
purposes of this reclassification. Most measures will not demonstrate positive results until the 1996 return of
adult winter-run chinook salmon. NMFS must determine whether reclassification is justified on the basis of the current
status of the population and the factors affecting its continued existence. 


Summary of Factors Affecting the Species 


Section 4(a)(1) of the ESA specifies five criteria to be evaluated in reviewing the status of a species or population
proposed for listing or reclassification. The following discussion is in addition to the evaluation of these factors
in the proposed rulemaking to reclassify winter-run chinook salmon as an endangered species (57 FR 27416, June 19,
1992), the first Notice of Determination (52 FR 6041, February 27, 1987), a subsequent Notice of Determination (53
FR 49722, December 19, 1987), two emergency rules (54 FR 32088, August 4, 1989 and 55 FR 12193, April 2, 1990), the proposed
rule to list winter-run chinook salmon as threatened (55 FR 10260, March 20, 1990), and the final rule listing the species
as threatened (55 FR 46515, November 5, 1990). 



1. The Present or Threatened Destruction, Modification, or Curtailment of its Habitat or Range



Modification and loss of spawning and rearing habitat have been major factors contributing to the decline of the winter-run
chinook salmon. 


Shasta and Keswick Dams


On February 12, 1993, NMFS issued a biological opinion and incidental take statement to the Bureau of Reclamation
which concluded that long-term operations of the Federal Central Valley Project and the State Water Project would
jeopardize the continued existence of winter-run chinook salmon. The opinion identifies a reasonable and prudent
alternative with measures designed to protect winter-run chinook salmon from the long-term operations of Shasta
and Keswick Dams, as well as other facilities of the Central Valley Project. Implementation of these measures is expected
to substantially improve water temperature and flow conditions in the upper Sacramento River for winter-run chinook
salmon spawning, incubation, and rearing. The specific measures contained in the reasonable and prudent alternative
that relate to Shasta and Keswick Dams require the Bureau to (1) use a more conservative forecasting approach to determine
the annual allocation of deliverable water stored in Shasta Reservoir, (2) maintain a minimum end-of-water-year
carryover storage in Shasta Reservoir (1.9 million acre-feet) for most water year types, (3) maintain daily average
water temperatures in the winter-run chinook salmon spawning grounds below Keswick Dam at no more than 56 degrees
Fahrenheit from April 15 through August 31 and at no more than 60 degrees Fahrenheit from October 1 through October
31, (4) maintain a minimum flow of 3,250 cubic feet per second (cfs) from Keswick Dam from October 1 through March 31,
and (5) reduce releases from Keswick Dam according to specific criteria from July 1 through March 31. The reasonable
and prudent alternative identified specific temperature control points in the upper Sacramento River for various
operating scenarios based on the water year type and reservoir storage conditions at the start of the water year. 





