 

Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 214



[proposed]



Announcing the Standard for COBOL



Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS) are issued by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to Section 111(d) of the Federal Property
and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100235.

1. 

Name of Standard

. COBOL (FIPS PUBS 214)

2. 

Category of Standard

. Software Standard, Programming Language.

3. 

Explanation

. This publication announces the adoption of American National Standard COBOL, as specified in ANSI X3.231985,
X3.23a1989 and ANSI X3.23b1993, as a Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) This revision
supersedes FIPS PUB 213 and reflects corrections and clarifications to the COBOL specifications. The American
National Standards define the elements of the COBOL programming language and the rules for their use. The purpose
of the standards is to promote portability of COBOL programs for use on a variety of data processing systems. The standards
are used by implementors as the reference authority in developing processors and by users who need to know the precise
syntactic and semantic rules of the standard language.

4. 

Approving Authority

. Secretary of Commerce.

5. 

Maintenance Agency

. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 

6. 

Cross Index

. 

a. American National Standard for Information Systems_Programming Language_COBOL, ANSI X3.231985, ISO
19891985.

b. American National Standard for Information Systems_Programming Language_Intrinsic Function Module for COBOL,
ANSI X3.23a1989.

c. American National Standard for Information Systems_Programming Language_Correction and Clarification Amendment
for COBOL, ANSI X3.23b1993.

7. 

Related Documents

.*



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
*

</FOOTNAME>
References to most recent revision of FIPS PUBS.

</FOOTNOTE>


a. Federal Information Resources Management Regulation (FIRMR) Subpart 201.20.303, Standards, and Subpart 201.39.1002,
Federal Standards.

b. Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 29, Interpretation Procedures for Federal Information
Processing Standards for Software.

c. NBS Special Publication 500117, Selection and Use of General-Purpose Programming Languages.

8. 

Objectives

. Federal standards for high level programming languages permit Federal departments and agencies to exercise more
effective control over the production, management, and use of the Government's information resources. The primary
objectives of Federal programming language standards are:




_To encourage more effective utilization and management of programmers by insuring that programming skills acquired
on one job are transportable to other jobs, thereby reducing the cost of programmer re-training;

_To reduce the cost of program development by achieving the increased programmer productivity that is inherent in
the use of high level programming languages;

_To reduce the overall software costs by making it easier and less expensive to maintain programs and to transfer programs
among different computer systems, including replacement systems; and

_To protect the existing software assets of the Federal Government by insuring to the maximal feasible extent that
Federal programming language standards are technically sound and that subsequent revisions are compatible with
the installed base.




9. 

Applicability.

a. Federal standards for high level programming languages should be used for computer applications and programs
that are either developed or acquired for government use. FIPS COBOL is one of the high level programming language
standards provided for use by all Federal departments and agencies. FIPS COBOL is especially suited for applications
that emphasize the manipulation of characters, records, files, and input/output (in contrast to those primarily
concerned with scientific and numeric computations).



