 




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 50461]</RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Consideration of Issuance of Amendment to Facility Operating License, Proposed No Significant Hazards Consideration
Determination, and Opportunity for a Hearing; Illinois Power Co.</DOCTITLE>



The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is considering issuance of an amendment to Facility Operating
License No. HPF62, issued to the Illinois Power Company (the licensee), for operation of the Clinton Power
Station, Unit 1, located in Dewitt County, Illinois.

The proposed amendment would modify Technical Specification (TS) Table 4.8.1.1.21, ``Diesel Generator
Test Schedule,'' to exclude three valid failures of the Division 1 emergency diesel generator (EDG) from contributing
towards accelerated diesel generator testing.

The last three valid failures (occurring on August 3, 1993, June 7 and July 12, 1994) were determined not as the result
of an actual surveillance test, but the confirmation of the failure of one of two CV2 relays associated with
the Division 1 EDG output breaker. The relays are checked each shift for visible indication of failure. Failure of
the relay could cause premature closure of the breaker upon receipt of an automatic start signal due to or coincident
with a loss of offsite power. The cause of these failures was subsequently attributed to undersized current-limiting
resistors that were installed in the relays by the vendor. These resistors were replaced with appropriately sized
resistors and testing has been performed to ensure operability. The relay is normally tested only during the 18-month
shutdown test that assures proper functioning of the EDG and associated equipment upon receipt of a loss-of-offsite
power test signal. Weekly testing, as required by TS Table 4.8.1.1.21, allows for manual loading which bypasses
the CV2 relay.

The valid failure of the Division 1 EDG on June 7, 1994, brought the number of failures in the last 100 valid tests up to
seven. In addition, the valid failure of July 12, 1994, was the second failure in the last 20 tests. In accordance with
TS Table 4.8.1.1.21, the frequency of testing increases from monthly to weekly until at least seven consecutive
successful tests are performed and there is a maximum of only one failure in the last 20 tests. Weekly testing, which
began following the failure of June 7, 1994, must now continue until at least the first week of October 1994.

In a letter dated August 5, 1994, the licensee requested an exigent technical specification change to modify TS Table
4.8.1.1.21 to exclude these three valid failures from contributing to accelerated testing of the Division
1 diesel generator. The licensee's basis for this request included the following:

&bull;Additional weekly testing is inappropriate because the increased surveillance testing does not test the
relay that failed;

&bull;The undersized current-limiting resistors found in the CV2 relays have been replaced which should
eliminate similar failures in the future;

&bull;Plant operators, who identified the previous three failures, will continue to tour the equipment once per
shift and check for targets that may have dropped;

&bull;Testing of the EDG at the Clinton power Station involve paralleling the diesel generators to the grid. NRC Information
Notice 8469 warns against operating diesel generators connected to offsite power unnecessarily as disturbances
in the offsite power system can adversely affect availability of the EDG; and

&bull;Excessive or unnecessary testing of diesel generators can cause unnecessary wear or degradation and thus
contribute to their reduced reliability.

Approval of the proposed TS change will eliminate unnecessary testing of the diesel generator and will permit the
licensee to resume a monthly test frequency. Prompt action by the staff is necessary to eliminate unnecessary testing
and precludes the time available to permit the customary public notices in advance of this action.

Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission will have made findings required by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (the Act) and the Commission's regulations.

Pursuant to 10 CFR 50.91(a)(6) for amendments to be granted under exigent circumstances, the NRC staff must determine
that the amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulations
in 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordance with the proposed amendment would not (1) involve
a significant increase in the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated; or (2) create the
possibility of a new or different kind of accident from any accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant
reduction in a margin of safety. As required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee has provided its analysis of the issue
of no significant hazards consideration, which is presented below:



