 

The past performance disclosure requirements have also been comprehensively reviewed and revised with a view towards
eliminating or reducing past performance disclosures of secondary importance. As a result, the primary focus of
past performance disclosure would be the performance of the pool offered and for most pools with less than a three year
operating history, upon pools of a similar nature. Only the past performance records of CTAs with responsibility
for managing substantial amounts of a pool's futures or commodity option trading would be required. The performance
of CTAs managing lesser amounts of the pool's futures trading and other performance data of secondary relevance to
the offering would generally not be required except to the extent that such performance was below a specified benchmark
rate of return or resulted in significant losses. The performance of pools dissimilar to the pool offered would be
permitted to be shown in composites, subject to limitations on the types of pools that may be included in a composite.


The proposed rules also take into account structures in which a trading manager, rather than the pool's CPO, allocates
pool assets, and fund-of-funds structures. In addition, because, under the proposal, the volume of required performance
disclosures would be considerably reduced, the time period for these disclosures would be increased from three to
five years to provide pool participants with a better chronological perspective of the track records presented in
the disclosure document.
<FOOTCITE>26</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
26

</FOOTNAME>
This recommendation is consistent with a similar recommendation by the NFA Special Committee. 

</FOOTNOTE>


Thus, the proposed past performance requirements require presentation of the past performance of the pool itself.
For most pools with at least a three-year track record this would be the only past performance required to be disclosed.
Proposed Rule 4.25(c) would require the following additional disclosures with respect to pools with less than a three-year
history. If the pool has not commenced trading, a short statement to that effect would be required to be prominently
disclosed. The performance of the CPO (or of the pool's trading manager, if applicable) would be required to be disclosed
and if the CPO (trading manager) had less than a three-year trading history, the performance of its trading principals
also would be required.
<FOOTCITE>27</FOOTCITE>
 If applicable, a legend would be required to disclose the fact that neither the CPO (or trading manager), nor its principals
has any commodity interest trading experience. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
27

</FOOTNAME>
This performance would be presented in a capsule format and the performance of pools of a different class than the pool
offered could be presented in a composite format. See discussion of proposed Rule 4.25(a)(3)(ii) relating to composites,


infra

. 

</FOOTNOTE>


With respect to CTAs and investee pools, proposed Rule 4.25(c)(3) would provide for disclosure of the performance
of ``major'' CTAs and investee pools, 

i.e.

, CTAs allocated at least twenty-five percent of the pool's aggregate initial futures margins and commodity option
premiums and investee pools allocated at least twenty-five percent of the pool's assets, to be set forth in the specified
capsule format. The CPO would only be required to indicate any ``adverse performance'' as defined in proposed Rule
4.25(a)(8) on the part of CTAs allocated less than twenty-five but at least ten percent of the pool's futures margins
and commodity option premiums and investee pools allocated less than twenty-five percent but at least ten percent
of the assets of the pool offered. No performance disclosure would be required for CTAs allocated less than ten percent
of the pool's futures margins and commodity option premiums or investee pools allocated less than ten percent of the
pool's assets. If a major CTA or investee pool had no experience in trading commodity interests, a prominent legend
would be required to so indicate. The legend would also indicate the percentage of futures margins and option premiums
allocated to the particular CTA or pool assets allocated to the investee pool. 

Past performance disclosure requirements would be codified in Rule 4.25, which would contain three sections. Paragraph
(a) would set forth general principles applicable to pool performance disclosure; paragraph (b) would set forth
the requirements applicable to pools with three or more years history; and paragraph (c) would address other pools.
<FOOTCITE>28</FOOTCITE>
 The proposed changes are more fully described below. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
28

</FOOTNAME>
Rule 4.34, which sets forth performance disclosure requirements for CTA disclosure documents, would include paragraph
(a), setting forth general principles applicable to CTA performance disclosures, and paragraph (b) setting forth
specific requirements. 


 
</FOOTNOTE>

