 

Current OSHA policy is that written, detailed plans of abatement shall be submitted to the Area Director when citations
are issued alleging (i.e. noise or air contaminant) violations and OSHA orders that engineering or administrative
controls be implemented. In these cases, employers are also asked to submit progress reports, generally every ninety
days, detailing steps taken to achieve complete abatement (e.g., procurement of engineering controls). Field Operations
Manual, chapter V (appendix), E.4.a. and c., E.5.a. and c. (Ex. 2) OSHA's policy, therefore is to have employers verify
that the violation cited has been corrected. Despite this policy, there is no existing regulation, enforceable by
citations and civil penalties, which mandates employers to submit abatement plans, progress reports, or abatement
verification letters. Thus, OSHA proposes that employers should be required by regulation to submit such documents.

Currently, 29 CFR 1903.16 requires the posting of a citation at or near the place of the alleged violation. This regulation
is inadequate in many instances to notify employees that OSHA has required the abatement of hazardous conditions
because citations are often posted on company bulletin boards that employees may not see or read. Employees are more
likely, therefore, to be informed about hazardous equipment they are operating via a required tag affixed to that
equipment than by a posted citation. OSHA already requires that employers in general industry and construction affix
accident-prevention tags informing employees about hazardous conditions. 29 CFR 1910.145(f) and 1926.200(h).
However, these standards do not require employers to state that a condition has been cited. Further, the General Industry
standard does not apply to construction, maritime, or agricultural employers. 29 CFR 1910.145 (f)(1)(ii). Therefore,
OSHA also proposes that all employers covered by the OSH Act be required to affix tags to cited equipment informing
employees about an OSHA citation regarding that equipment.



Legal Considerations



Introduction



For purposes of the proposed rule, there are two key terms, i.e., ``abatement date'' and ``final order.'' The following
discussion is provided in order to relate these terms to the statutory framework created by the OSH Act. The discussion,
however, is general in nature and is not intended to address every situation that may arise in the course of litigation.



Contesting a Citation



As noted above, an employer has the right, under the OSH Act, to contest a citation or a prescribed abatement date. (employers
may also contest only the amount of the penalty proposed for a violation, but this action does not delay the abatement
period prescribed for that violation). An abatement date can also be contested by an affected employee or a representative
of affected employees. If neither the employer nor employees contest the citation, the date set forth in the citation
for the correction of the violation is the abatement date.
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
The Act provides that an employer may file a notice of contest within fifteen working days of receiving the notification
of proposed penalty. Section 10, 29 U.S.C. 659. (Under current OSHA practice, the notification of proposed penalty
is attached to the citation.) Appellate courts have held that OSHA may set an abatement date which falls within the
fifteen-day period, in which case the period allowed for contest is shortened accordingly. See 

Dunlop 

v. 

Haybuster Mfg. Co.,

 524 F.2d 222 (8th Cir. 1975); 

Brennan 

v. 

OSHRC and Kesler  Sons Construction Company,

 513 F.2d 553, 55758 (10th Cir. 1975).

</FOOTNOTE>


The Act also provides that, in the event of a contest, the employer's obligation to abate a cited violation is suspended,
provided that the employer's contest has been made ``*** in good faith and not solely for purposes
of delay or avoidance of penalties.'' Section 10(b), 29 U.S.C. 659(b). Once a citation is contested, an employer's
abatement obligation generally does not start to run until a ``final order'' has been issued ending the administrative
phase of the litigation.

When a citation or a prescribed abatement period has been contested, the matter is adjudicated by the Occupational
Safety and Health Review Commission (i.e., ``the Commission''), an independent agency headed by three Presidential
appointees (i.e., ``Members''). Initially, a contested case is usually heard by an administrative law judge (ALJ)
of the Commission. The ALJ issues a decision and order, which are then docketed with the Commission. This decision
and order may subsequently be reviewed by the full Commission. Section 12(j), 29 U.S.C. 659(j). Under this review
procedure, any Member of the Commission may direct review of the ALJ's decision and order within thirty days of the
docketing date. If there is no direction for review, the ALJ's decision and order becomes the final order of the Commission.


Id.

 Any abatement requirement affirmed or modified by an ALJ's decision and order will start to run on the date that the
ALJ's decision and order become a final order. The new abatement date is determined by adding to the final order date
either: (1) The number of days allowed originally for abatement in the citation (in cases where the ALJ affirms the
abatement requirement) or (2) the newly specified period for abatement (in cases where the ALJ modifies the abatement
requirement). If, However, the Commission reviews an ALJ's decision and order, the employer's abatement obligation
remains suspended during the review process. Following its review, the Commission will generally issue its own decision,
which becomes a final order thirty days after its decision is issued. Section 10(c), 29 U.S.C. 659(c).
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 Again, any abatement period affirmed or modified as a result of the Commission's decision will start to run from the
date its decision becomes a final order.
<FOOTCITE>4</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
Prior to issuing its decision, the Commission may sever one or more citation items from the case if it determines that
it will not review the ALJ's affirmance of those items. See Hamilton Die Cast Inc., 12 BNA OSRC 1797 (No. 83308,
1986). The order severing citation items will become a final order as to those items.


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
4

</FOOTNAME>
It is possible that the Commission (or an ALJ) could, in modifying an abatement requirement, state an actual date by
which abatement must be accomplished. In that situation, the abatement date would be the date as specified.
</FOOTNOTE>

