 

Issued on September 21, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Barry Felrice,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Administrator for Rulemaking.



Agenda



I. Introduction



A NHTSA representative will introduce the meeting and discuss its purpose. This will include a review of the Federal
Register notice on January 3, 1994, and a brief summary of the comments received. The format of the meeting will be outlined.
Proposed panel discussions and presentations involving both NHTSA and public participants will be announced.



II. Background of NCAP



An agency speaker will briefly discuss the background of NCAP including the statutory mandate, early efforts, a brief
history of NCAP, the current program criteria, procedures and protocol and Congressional interest.



III. Relevance of NCAP Data



The agency will make presentations and discuss its recent report showing the correlation between real-world crashes
and NCAP results. The agency will also discuss comments on that report.



IV. Reactions to NCAP Information



This subject will be addressed by a panel of representatives of manufacturers, media, insurers and automobile safety
and consumer groups. The discussion of this and all other participant panels will be moderated by an agency representative.



V. Methods of presenting and format of NCAP Information



An agency speaker will present an historical overview of the methods used to present previous NCAP data and discuss
the current star rating system. In addition, the agency will discuss the possibility of combining data from various
crash modes into a single injury indicator. Outside speakers are invited to present their views, reactions and suggested
revisions to the present format.



VI. Current Test Procedure Issues



This subject will be addressed by a panel of representatives of manufacturers, media, insurers and automobile safety
and consumer groups. Topics will include issues such as repeatability, international harmonization and aggressivity.



VII. Future of Consumer Safety Information Initiatives 



The agency will moderate a discussion of possible future changes in NCAP and its other consumer safety information
initiatives. Proposed topics include; evaluating the need to change NCAP, consideration of higher test speeds,
side impacts, offset crashes, different size dummies and/or developing new injury criteria. The agency will also
entertain discussion of the feasibility of mandating the provision, by manufacturers, of comprehensive safety
information on new models. The objective of providing such information would be to inform consumers (via one label
or through other means) of important vehicle safety attributes such as protection in frontal impacts, side impacts
and rollovers. It should also be noted that in 1981 the agency proposed establishment of an NCAP performance rating
program to be developed by manufacturers via a window sticker.



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423722 Filed 92394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491059M
</BILLING>


