 

(a) A certification that the units for which funding is requested in this application will be readily marketable when
they are made ready for occupancy; 

(b) Certification of eligibility of the PHA and the proposed activities under sections I.F(1) and (2) of this NOFA;


(c) A certification that the PHA has insufficient funds (as defined in Section I.F(3) of this NOFA) in its operating
budget or pursuant to its formula grant under the Comprehensive Grant Program to fund the activities for which funding
is sought under this NOFA, and that the activities have not been selected for funding from other sources, such as Urban
Revitalization Demonstration (URD) grants, CIAP, or State or local funding. 
(3) Form HUD50070, Certification for Drug-Free Workplace. 
(4) Form HUD50071, Certification for Contracts, Grants, Loans and Cooperative Agreements, required of PHAs
established under State law that are applying for grants exceeding $100,000. 
(5) SFLLL, Disclosure of Lobbying Activities, required of HAs established under State law only when any funds,
other than federally appropriated funds, will be or have been used to influence Federal workers or Members of Congress
or their staffs regarding specific grants or contracts. 
(6) Form HUD2880, Applicant/Recipient Disclosure/Update Report. 
(7) For any unit reconfiguration for which funds are requested under Section I.F(1)(e) of this NOFA, data supporting
the eligibility of the conversions. 
(8) Certification of the PHA's intent to comply with the Fair Housing Act, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Executive
Order 11063, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, and any implementing regulations. 
(9) Certification that the PHA will make best efforts to give low- and very low-income persons training and employment
opportunities generated by assistance awarded under this NOFA, and to award contracts for work to be performed in
connection with assistance provided under this NOFA to business concerns that provide economic opportunities for
low- and very low-income persons, as required by section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C.
1701u). 



IV. Corrections to Deficient Applications



Immediately after the submission of an application, HUD will screen the application to determine whether all items
were submitted. If the PHA fails to submit any of the items listed in Section III.C of this NOFA, or the application contains
a technical mistake such as an incorrect signatory, HUD will immediately notify the PHA that it has 14 calendar days
from the date of HUD's written notification to submit or correct the specified items. If any items are missing and the
PHA does not submit them within the 14-day cure period, the application will be ineligible for further processing.




V. Subsequent Revisions of Vacancy Reduction Plan 



The intent of the Department is to assist each high vacancy PHA to develop a plan that will assure success in reducing
the PHA's vacancy rate and improving management capacity to assure continued progress in reaching high occupancy
levels. If a plan submitted in response to this NOFA is approved under the NOFA, but needs improvement or supplementation,
HUD will so advise the PHA. The Department will specify areas in which improvement or supplementation is needed and
require that revisions be made prior to execution of the amendment of the ACC. HUD staff will be available to assist
the PHA in revising its plan. 


