 

Although ultimate safety determinations must await the certification process, EPA wishes to repeat that it knows
of nothing that would preclude the certification of properly designed ORVR canister systems on LDVs and LDTs. EPA
stresses that it has never determined for purposes of certification under section 206 that any specific ORVR system
(including ORVR canisters) would present an unreasonable risk to public safety within the meaning of section 202(a)(4),
58 FR 3074030741. Consequently, the potential existence of means other than canisters to control refueling
emissions should not preclude certification of properly-designed canister-based control systems. 


6. Alternative Control Technologies 



As part of the technical analysis supporting the NPRM, EPA indicated that control technologies such as collapsible
fuel bladders and cloth impregnated with activated carbon absorbers were potential alternatives to carbon canisters.
As part of the technology assessment for this final rule, EPA reviewed the record of the rule to see what options had
been put forth and to assess what progress had been made in applying these technologies to vehicle fuel systems. The
collective determination from the review was that, in some cases, parties have pursued development of these technologies
for other applications, such as aircraft fuel systems and chemical protection suits, but that less overall progress
has been made in applying these technologies to automotive applications. In some cases no progress was made, and the
technical feasibility of these designs therefore remains problematic. In one case commercial development was dependent
on industry or government support. While EPA cannot arbitrarily preclude the use of any control system design approach,
EPA concludes that such alternatives are not generally likely to be available for production application in the time
frame when manufacturers must begin to install ORVR systems on their vehicles. The potential existence of these alternative
control approaches does not preclude certification of properly designed canister-based ORVR controls. 



E. Certification Provisions 



1. General 



Today's action modifies the certification process by adding the requirement for demonstrating compliance with
refueling emission standards according to the prescribed phase-in schedule. This action is expected to have no direct
impact on manufacturers' fuel economy programs. The following paragraphs summarize EPA's certification and fuel
economy requirements with regard to ORVR controls. 

The regulations promulgated in this action provide new definitions for refueling families and refueling emission
control systems. For LDVs and LDTs, manufacturers will normally perform a refueling test on one emission-data vehicle
per refueling emission control system and submit this test data (low altitude data) to EPA for possible confirmatory
testing. Data submitted to EPA should include the exhaust emissions data from the exhaust emissions test which is
contained in the refueling test sequence. The data should demonstrate compliance with all applicable emission standards.
Manufacturers may submit high altitude test data to EPA for possible confirmatory testing, or provide a statement
in the application for certification that vehicles will comply with applicable emission standards at high altitude.
Note that this action requires manufacturers to perform exhaust and evaporative emission tests using pre-loaded
canisters. Also note that vehicles inherently low in refueling emissions can be certified using an engineering evaluation
approved by the Administrator in lieu of testing. 

After the testing has been completed, manufacturers typically submit to EPA an application for certification, containing
information about the vehicles intended for production, emission test data used to support certification, statements
of compliance with emission standards and device safety, and other information required by EPA. This action will
require manufacturers to provide refueling information in their application for certification. To determine compliance
with applicable emission standards, this action requires the refueling emission test data to be adjusted by an additive
deterioration factor, developed by the manufacturer using good engineering judgement to assure that vehicles will
comply in actual use for the useful life of the vehicle/engine. Should EPA have any concerns about the safety of the
ORVR refueling system used by the manufacturer, certification may be delayed or denied, under section 202(a)(4)
and 206(a)(3) of the CAA. This should not happen, however, with properly designed systems. 


