 

In support of its petition, BSC submitted: (1) Detailed descriptions of its manufacturing, waste treatment, and
stabilization processes, including schematic diagrams; (2) Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) for all trade name
products used in the manufacturing and waste treatment processes; (3) results from total constituent analyses for
the eight Toxicity Characteristic (TC) metals listed in 261.24, nickel, cyanide, zinc, and sulfide from representative
samples of the dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake and the stabilized filter cake; (4) results from the EP Toxicity
Test and the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP, SW846 Method 1311) for the eight TC metals
(except for barium and selenium) and nickel from representative samples of the dewatered (unstabilized) filter
cake, uncured stabilized filter cake, and the cured stabilized filter cake; (5) results from total oil and grease
analyses from representative samples of the dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake and stabilized filter cake; (6)
results from the Multiple Extraction Procedure (MEP, SW846 Method 1320) for the eight TC metals (except for
barium and selenium) and nickel from representative samples of the stabilized filter cake; (7) test results and information
regarding the hazardous characteristics of ignitability, corrosivity, and reactivity; (8) results from the TCLP
analyses for the TC volatile and semivolatile organic compounds from representative samples of the dewatered (unstabilized)
filter cake; and (9) results from total constituent analyses for hexavalent chromium from representative samples
of dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake.

Similar to other facilities seeking upfront exclusions, once BSC's proposed stabilization system is on-line at
its Sparrows Point, Maryland facility, BSC would be required to submit additional analytical data for the petitioned
waste to verify that the on-line stabilization system meets the treatment capability of the stabilization process
as described in the petition and the verification testing conditions specified in the exclusion (see Section F_

Verification Testing Conditions

).

BSC's Sparrows Point, Maryland facility is involved in electroplating operations producing tin and chromium plated
parts and steel strip. Three plating lines contribute wastes to the wastewater treatment plant generating BSC's
chromium high density filter cake, namely, a tin free steel-chromium type (TFSCT) plating line and two halogen tinning
lines.

The TFSCT plating line is designed to deposit a layer of chromium on the steel strip with an additional outer protective
covering of chromium oxides. The TFSCT plating line consists of five major sections: The Entry Section, the Pre-Treatment
Section, the Plating Section, the Post-Treatment Section, and the Delivery Section. The purpose of the entry section
is to join the ends of the steel coils in preparation for subsequent continuous processing in the following sections.
The pre-treatment section cleans and prepares the steel to be plated. The strip passes through an electrolytic cleaning
system, brush scrubber, and pickle and pickle rinse cells to remove oil, dirt, rust, and other foreign substances.
In the plating section, the steel strip passes through the plater conditioner cell prior to entering the plating cell.
The chromium and chromium oxide layers are electrolytically plated onto the steel strip. The steel strip is rinsed,
after it leaves the plater, in the dragout and rinse cells. In the post-treatment section, the coated steel strip is
washed, dried, and oiled prior to being coiled for shipping or storage. The oil film helps to prevent scratching of
the coated strip during handling, serves as a lubricant for punching and forming operations, and retards oxidation
and corrosion. The delivery section consists of the equipment required for strip tension control, storage, measurement
and inspection, and shearing and winding into coils.

During the TFSCT plating process overflow chromic acid solution from the plater conditioner, overflow rinse waters
from the dragout and rinse cells of the plater section, and overflow rinse waters from the final washer cell are sent
to a sump (the chromium sump) which collects only chromium-bearing wastewaters. The collected wastewater is then
pumped from the chromium sump to the chromium High Density Sludge (HDS) Wastewater Treatment Plant. In addition,
if it is necessary to shut down the TFSCT plating line for repairs or in the event of a strip break, chromium-bearing
wastewaters from the plater conditioner and plater section are sent to a storage tank for subsequent treatment via
the chromium HDS wastewater treatment plant.

The two halogen tinning lines are designed to deposit a thin layer of tin on metal strip with an outer protective covering
of a very thin film of chromium and chromium oxides. The two halogen lines also consist of five major sections: the Entry
Section, the Pre-treatment Section, the Tin Plating Section, the Post-Treatment Section, and the Delivery Section.
The purpose of the entry section is to join the ends of the coils in preparation for subsequent continuous processing
in the following sections. The pre-treatment section cleans and prepares the metal strip to be plated. The metal strip
is cleaned in a hot, alkaline solution. A brush scrubber removes loosened dirt and any remaining caustic film, then
a sulfuric acid solution is used to remove metal oxides. A second brush scrubber removes the remaining acid film. In
the plating section, the cleaned, prepared metal strip is electroplated with tin. In the tin plating unit, the strip
rides on top of the halogen plating solution, while a series of soluble anodes below the surface provide the tin for
plating. The metal strip is sprayed and rinsed, after it leaves the plater, to remove any residual plating solution.
After being dried, the metal strip passes through the electrical induction reflow (melting) process where the plated
tin is converted from a matte (as plated) finish to a bright finish. The post-treatment section consists of a chemical
treatment tank and a washer. In the chemical treatment tanks sodium dichromate is used to produce a thin uniform chromium
and chromium oxide layer on the tinned surface via cathodic electrolysis. The film serves to stabilize or ``passivate''
the tinned surface preventing the undesirable tin oxides from forming. This section is completed with a dryer, Trion
oiler, and a bridle roll. The delivery section consists of the delivery looping tower, a bridle roll, inspection and
a recoil area where the metal strip is cut and transferred to empty reels.






