 

5. 

Reintroduction Protocol: 

The wolf reintroduction project is undertaken by the Service in cooperation with the National Park Service, Forest
Service, other Federal agencies, potentially affected tribes, the States of Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho, and entities
of the Canadian government. To obtain wolves, the Service will enter into formal agreements with the Canadian and
Provincial governments and/or resource management agencies. 
The Park's wolf reintroduction plan requires transferring 45 to 75 wolves from southwestern Canada, representing
various sex and age classes, over a 3- to 5-year period. The capture of about 15 wild wolves from several different packs
using standard capture techniques will be done annually over 3 to 5 years. Captured wolves will be transported to the
Park. Wolves from the same pack will be placed in individual holding pens of about 0.4 hectare (1 acre) for up to 2 months
for acclimation to the new environment. The acclimation pens will be isolated to protect the wolves from other animals
and to prevent habituation to humans. During the acclimation period but after release, each wolf will be monitored
by radiotelemetry to ensure quick retrieval, if necessary. Carcasses of natural prey taken in the Park will be provided
to the wolves. Veterinary care, including examinations and vaccinations, will be provided as needed. 
Once acclimated, the wolves will be released into the Park. Food (ungulate carcasses) will be provided until the wolves
no longer use it. Initially, all wolves will be closely monitored with a gradual reduction over time. Previous experiences
with reintroduced wolves have shown that they may not remain together. In general, attempts to locate and/or move
lone wolves dispersing throughout the Park will not be done. However, wolves may be moved on a case-by-case basis,
if necessary, to enhance wolf recovery in the experimental area. Reintroduced wolves will remain in the wild, as long
as they are capable of sustaining themselves on carrion or wild prey. Conflicts between wolves and humans may result
in the recapture and/or removal of a wolf in accordance with procedures successfully used with other problem wolves.

An overall assessment of the success of the reintroduction will be made after the first year and for every year thereafter.
Procedures for subsequent releases could be modified, if information from the previous reintroduction warrants
such changes. The physical reintroduction phase should be completed within 35 years. Once the reintroduced
wolves form two packs with each pack raising two pups, for 2 consecutive years, management practices would allow the
wolves to grow naturally toward recovery levels. Wolves would only be monitored, and no further reintroduction would
take place unless fewer than two litters were produced in a single year. This reintroduction effort is consistent
with the recovery goals identified in the 1987 recovery plan for the northern Rocky Mountain Gray Wolf. 
It is estimated that the Park's reintroduction effort with a similar effort in central Idaho, plus the natural recovery
occurring in northwestern Montana, could result in a viable recovered wolf population (10 breeding pairs in each
of 3 recovery areas for 3 consecutive years) by the year 2002. 
The Service will continue to ask private landowners and agency personnel adjacent to the Park to immediately report
any wolf observations to the Service or other authorized agencies. An extensive information and education program
will discourage the taking of gray wolves by the public. Initially, all wolves will be monitored by radio telemetry
and, therefore, easy to locate if necessary. Public cooperation with the Service will be encouraged to ensure close
monitoring of the wolves and quick resolution of any conflicts that might arise. 

Specific information on wolf reintroduction procedures can be found in Appendix 4 ``Scientific techniques for the
reintroduction of wild wolves'' in the environmental impact statement: ``The Reintroduction of Gray Wolves to Yellowstone
National Park and Central Idaho'' (Service 1994). 



Status of Reintroduced Populations 



In accordance with section 10(j) of the Act, wolves reintroduced into the Park are designated as nonessential experimental.
Such designation allows the wolves to be treated as a threatened species or species proposed for listing for the purposes
of sections 4(d), 7, and 9 of the Act. This allows the Service to establish a less restrictive special rule rather than
using the mandatory prohibitions covering endangered species. The biological status of the wolf and the need for
management flexibility resulted in the Service designating gray wolves reintroduced into the Park as ``nonessential.''
The Service determined that the ``nonessential'' designation, with other protective measures, will conserve and
recover the gray wolf in the Yellowstone ecosystem. 
It is anticipated that released wolves will come into contact with humans and domestic animals inside and outside
of the Park. Public opinion surveys, public comments on wolf management planning, and the positions taken by elected
local, State, and Federal government officials indicate that wolves should not be reintroduced without assurances
that current uses of public and private lands will not be disrupted by wolf recovery activities. The following provisions
respond to these concerns. There would be no violation of the Act for unintentional, nonnegligent, and accidental
taking of wolves by the public, provided the take was incidental to otherwise lawful activities, it did not result
from negligent conduct lacking reasonable due care or was in defense of human life. Such wolf takings would need to
be reported to the Service or other authorized agency within 24 hours. The Service may designate certain Federal,
State, and/or tribal employees to take wolves that required special care or pose a threat to livestock or property.
Private land owners or their designates would be permitted to harass wolves in an opportunistic noninjurious manner
on their leases or private property, provided such harassment was reported within 7 days to the Service or other authorized
agency. 
Under the ``nonessential'' status, private landowners or their designates would be permitted to take (injure or
kill) a wolf in the act of wounding or killing livestock on private land. However, physical evidence (wounded or dead
livestock) of such an attack would be required to document that the attack occurred simultaneously with the taking.
A report of such a take would need to be immediately (within 24 hours) reported to the Service or other authorized agency
personnel for investigation. Once six or more breeding pairs are established in the Park or experimental area, livestock
owners or their designates could receive a permit from a Service-designated agency to take (injure or kill) gray wolves
that are attacking livestock on permitted public livestock grazing allotments. Such a take would be only permitted
after due notification to Service-designated agencies and unsuccessful capture efforts. 

Wolves that repeatedly (two times in a calendar year) attack domestic animals other than livestock (fowl, swine,
goats, etc.) or pets (dogs or cats) on private land would be designated as problem wolves and relocated from the area
by the Service or a designated agency. After one relocation, wolves that continued to depredate on domestic animals
would be considered chronic problem wolves and would be removed from the wild. 

It is unlikely that wolf predation on big game populations would be primary cause for failure of the States or tribes
to meet their specific big game management objectives outside of the national parks and national wildlife refuges.
The Service could, however, determine that wolves responsible for excessive depredation should be translocated
to other sites in the experimental area. Such actions are expected to be rare and unlikely to impact the overall recovery
rate. States and tribes would need to define such situations in their Service-approved wolf management plans before
such actions could be taken. Under the nonessential designation, wolves could not be deliberately killed solely
to resolve predation conflicts with big game. 

The States of Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho and potentially affected tribes will be encouraged to enter into cooperative
agreements for management of the gray wolf outside of national parks and national wildlife refuges. These cooperative
agreements would be reviewed annually by the Service to ensure that the States and tribes have adequate regulatory
authority to conserve listed species, including the gray wolf. The National Park Service will be the primary agency
implementing the experimental population rule inside the boundaries of national parks. States and tribes are anticipated
to be the primary agencies implementing this experimental population rule outside of national parks and national
wildlife refuges after their wolf management plans are approved by the Service. The Service will provide oversight,
coordinate wolf recovery activities, and provide technical assistance. If the States and tribes do not assume wolf
management responsibilities or adhere to provisions of their wolf management plans, the Service would assume management
authority. If for unforeseen reasons the wolf population failed to sustain positive growth toward recovery levels
for 2 consecutive years, the influencing factors would be identified. The Service, and affected States or tribes
would be responsible for determining if any management strategies needed modification. The Service in coordination
with the States and tribes would implement those strategies to ensure wolf population recovery. 

The Service finds that protective measures and management practices are necessary and advisable for the conservation
and recovery of the gray wolf and that no additional Federal regulations are required. The Service also finds that
the nonessential experimental status is appropriate for gray wolves taken from wild populations and released in
the Park. The nonessential status for such wolves allows for additional management flexibility. Nonessential experimental
populations located outside of a national park or national wildlife refuge are treated under the Act as if they were
only proposed for listing, and not listed. Only section 7(a)(1) and section 7(a)(4) apply to Federal actions outside
national parks and wildlife refuges. Presently, there are no conflicts envisioned with any current or anticipated
management actions of the Forest Service or other Federal agencies in the areas. The national forests are beneficial
to the reintroduction effort in that they form a natural buffer to private properties and are typically managed to
produce wild animals that wolves could prey upon. The Service finds the less restrictive section 7 requirements associated
with the nonessential designation do not pose a threat to the recovery effort and continued existence of the gray wolf.







