 

EPA Evaluation and Proposed Action



In determining the approvability of a NO

X

 rule, EPA must evaluate the rule for consistency with the requirements of the CAA and EPA regulations, as found in section
110, and part D of the CAA and 40 CFR part 51 (Requirements for Preparation, Adoption and Submittal of Implementation
Plans). The EPA interpretation of these requirements, which forms the basis for this action, appears in various EPA
policy guidance documents.

3

 Among these provisions is the requirement that a NO

X

 rule must, at a minimum, provide for the implementation of RACT for stationary sources of NO

X

 emissions.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


3

</FOOTNAME>
Among other things, the pre-amendment guidance consists of those portions of the proposed Post-1987 ozone and carbon
monoxide policy that concern RACT, 52 FR 45044 (November 24, 1987); ``Issues Relating to VOC Regulation Cutpoints,
Deficiencies, and Deviations, Clarification to Appendix D of November 24, 1987 

Federal Register

 Notice'' (Blue Book) (notice of availability was published in the 

Federal Register

 on May 25, 1988).

</FOOTNOTE>


For the purposes of assisting state and local agencies in developing NO

X

 RACT rules, EPA prepared the NO

X

 supplement to the General Preamble, cited above (57 FR 55620). In the NO

X

 supplement, EPA provides guidance on how RACT will be determined for stationary sources of NO

X

 emissions. While most of the guidance issued by EPA on what constitutes RACT for stationary sources has been directed
towards application for VOC sources, much of the guidance is also applicable to RACT for stationary sources of NO

X

 (see section 4.5 of the NO

X

 Supplement). In addition, pursuant to section 183(c), EPA is issuing alternative control technique documents (ACTs),
that identify alternative controls for all categories of stationary sources of NO

X

. The ACT documents will provide information on control technology for stationary sources that emit or have the potential
to emit 25 tons per year or more of NO

X

. However, the ACTs will not establish a presumptive norm for what is considered RACT for stationary sources of NO

X

. In general, the guidance documents cited above, as well as other relevant and applicable guidance documents, have
been set forth to ensure that submitted NO

X

 RACT rules meet federal RACT requirements and are fully enforceable and strengthen or maintain the SIP.

Rule 74.15.1 limits the discharge of NO

X

 from boilers, steam generators, and process heaters (ICIs) to 30 parts per million volume (ppmv) or 0.036 pounds per
million Btu (lb/MMBtu). Rule 74.15.1 effectively increases the stringency of California RACT for ICIs by lowering
the 

de minimis

 from 5 MMBtu/hr to 1 MMBtu/hr and decreasing the emission standard from 70 ppmv to 30 ppmv. The rule's compliance date
of May 31, 1995, satisfies the CAA's NO

X

 RACT implementation date requirement of May 31, 1995 (section 182(b)(2)). The District expects this rule to provide
a 71% reduction in NO

X

 emissions from the units subject to this rule. This reduction corresponds to 0.189 tons per day based on the District's
inventory. A more detailed discussion of the sources controlled, the controls required, and the justification for
why these controls represent RACT can be found in the Technical Support Document (TSD), dated March 3, 1994.

EPA has evaluated the submitted rule and has determined that it is consistent with the CAA, EPA regulations and EPA
policy. Therefore, VCAPCD's Rule 74.15.1, ``Boilers, Steam Generators, and Process Heaters,'' is being proposed
for approval under section 110(k)(3) of the CAA as meeting the requirements of section 110(a), section 182(b)(2),
section 182(f) and the NO

X

 Supplement to the General Preamble.

Nothing in this action should be construed as permitting or allowing or establishing a precedent for any future request
for revision to any state implementation plan. Each request for revision to the state implementation plan shall be
considered separately in light of specific technical, economic and environmental factors and in relation to relevant
statutory and regulatory requirements.



Regulatory Flexibility



Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 600 

et seq.,

 EPA must prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis assessing the impact of any proposed or final rule on small entities.
5 U.S.C. 603 and 604. Alternatively, EPA may certify that the rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities. Small entities include small businesses, small not-for-profit enterprises, and government
entities with jurisdiction over populations of less than 50,000.

SIP approvals under section 110 and subchapter I, part D of the CAA do not create any new requirements, but simply approve
requirements that the State is already imposing. Therefore, because the Federal SIP-approval does not impose any
new requirements, I certify that it does not have a significant impact on affected small entities. Moreover, due to
the nature of the federal-state relationship under the CAA, preparation of a regulatory flexibility analysis would
constitute federal inquiry into the economic reasonableness of state action. The CAA forbids EPA to base its actions
concerning SIPs on such grounds. 

Union Electric Co. v. U.S. E.P.A.,

 427 U.S. 246, 25666 (S.Ct. 1976); 42 U.S.C. 7410 (a)(2).




