 

C. Disease or Predation 



The Service is unaware of any known 
diseases or predators that threaten the jaguar at this time. 



D. The Inadequacy of Existing Regulatory Mechanisms



State Regulations 



Jaguars are listed as endangered by the State of Arizona. In 
general, violations of Arizona Game and Fish Laws (AGFD 1991) are 
class 2 misdemeanors. The Arizona Game and Fish Commission may, 
through civil action, seek to recover a minimum of $750 for each 
endangered species unlawfully taken, wounded or killed. Special 
permits may be issued for taking depredating wildlife. The AGFD 
offered a reward of $4,000 for information leading to a conviction 
for the reported killing of a jaguar in 1986. However, a conviction 
has yet to be obtained for that incident. 

Under the California Code of Regulations, it is prohibited to 
import, transport, or possess jaguars. In Louisiana the jaguar 
receives no official protection from the State (Fred Kimmel, 
Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, pers. comm., 1993). 
The jaguar is not listed as an endangered species, a game animal, or 
a fur-bearing animal by the State of New Mexico; it receives no 
official protection from New Mexico (Sartor O. Williams III, New 
Mexico Department of Game and Fish, 

in litt., 

1992). 

The jaguar is listed as endangered by the State of Texas (Texas 
Parks and Wildlife Department 1987). It is unlawful to take, 
possess, transport, export, process, sell or offer for sale, or ship 
jaguars in Texas. However, some of the above actions may be allowed 
for zoological gardens, and scientific, commercial, and propagation 
purposes with the proper permits. A first violation of the 
regulations or a permit is a Texas Parks and Wildlife Code C 
misdemeanor, which carries a fine of $25 to $500 (Capt. Harold Oates, 
Texas Parks and Wildlife, pers. comm., 1994). 

In summary, although some States provide limited protection to 
the jaguar, illegal taking continues to occur. Listing the species 
under the Act would result in protective measures beyond those 
provided by the States. 



Federal Protection 



The jaguar is currently listed under the Act as an endangered 
species only in Mexico and southward to include Central and South 
America. Jaguars that may occur in, or immigrate into, the United 
States are not currently protected by the Act. The jaguar is on 
Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). However, that listing does 
not prohibit the act of taking, possessing or transporting a jaguar 
within the United States and its territories. 

The subspecies 

Panthera onca veraecrucis, 

with historical range 
in Texas and eastern Mexico, is designated by the United States 
government as a peripheral animal of concern in a provisional list 
for the Annex of the Convention on Nature Protection and Wildlife 
Preservation in the Western Hemisphere (Nowak, pers. comm., 1992). 


Panthera onca arizonensis 

is not so designated. This Convention, as 
implemented by sections 2 and 8(A) of the Act, does not require the 
protection of species listed only on a provisional basis. Therefore, 
neither 

P. o. veraecrucis 

nor 

P. o. arizonensis 

are currently 
protected. 



E. Other Natural or Manmade Factors Affecting Its Continued 
Existence 



M44 ejector devices with cyanide capsules used in Animal 
and Plant Health Inspection Service animal damage control programs to 
accommodate concerns of livestock owners over predator losses may be 
a threat to the jaguar (Terry B. Johnson, 

in litt

., 1993). Jaguars 
may also be victims of traps targeted for other predators such as 
bears and cougars. 

The Service has carefully assessed the best scientific and 
commercial information available regarding the past, present, and 
future threats faced by this species in determining to propose this 
rule. Based on this evaluation, the preferred action is to propose 
the jaguar (

Panthera onca

) as endangered throughout its range. The 
lack of protection under the Act for jaguars in the United States is 
due to an uncorrected technicality, rather than to any scientific 
information that jaguars do not require protection in the U.S. A 
decision to take no action would exclude the jaguar in the U.S. from 
needed protection pursuant to the Act. A decision to propose only 
threatened status would not adequately express the drastic 
distributional decline of the species and the continued jeopardy of 
any individuals in the U.S. Therefore, no action or listing as 
threatened would be contrary to the intent of the Act. Critical 
habitat is not being proposed at this time for the jaguar for reasons 
discussed in the ``Critical Habitat'' section of this proposal. 




