 



Section 148.8. 

The appendices B, D.1, D.4 and D.5 of the 1991 Edition of the BC Code would be incorporated by reference. Several provisions
of the proposed rules require the performance of tests specified in the BC Code appendices. Shippers and carriers
in international commerce will be able to comply with the BC Code where such compliance is required by the administration
of the country of origin or destination. 



Section 148.10. 

The format for table 148.10 would be modified. The table would include the UN number and hazard class of the materials
and references to sections of special requirements to be followed whenever that material is carried. These revisions
would make it easier to determine the exact requirements for the carriage of each approved cargo. 



Sections 148.15 through 148.30. 

These sections would clarify when a Special Permit is required, who would have to apply for a Special Permit, what information
would be required to be submitted to obtain a Special Permit, and who would be covered by the Special Permit once it is
issued. These proposed sections are more detailed than the current regulations in order to more clearly state each
person's responsibility and to clear up recurring misunderstandings concerning the applicability of the Special
Permit. The submittal of detailed information about the material carried would also greatly decrease the amount
of time currently spent by the Coast Guard in doing the necessary research to process each petition for a Special Permit.




Section 148.15. 

This proposed section places the responsibility on the shipper to determine if the material to be shipped fits into
any of the hazard classes defined in the HMR or whether it meets the definition of a PDM. 



Section 148.20. 

This section would list the information that must be included in a petition for a Special Permit. Submission of a Material
Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) would, in part, fulfill this requirement. When applying for renewal or extension of an existing
Special Permit, a shipper would be permitted to submit less detailed information because the Coast Guard would already
be in possession of much of the information. 



Section 148.30. 

This section would instruct the shipper on how to obtain a listing of materials for which a Special Permit currently
exists. 



Section 148.55. 

This proposed section states that the regulations apply to all transportation of solid bulk cargoes within the United
States including shipments which originate in foreign countries. This section provides that it would be the responsibility
of the person importing a bulk solid cargo to ensure that the foreign shipper is aware of U.S. regulatory requirements.




Section 148.120. 

This section would contain two tables presenting the requirements for segregation between incompatible bulk solid
cargoes and segregation between bulk solid cargoes and incompatible packaged cargoes. These tables are identical
to those which appear in the BC Code. 



Section 148.155. 

The properties of potentially dangerous materials vary greatly. This section would present the special stowage
and segregation requirements for these materials in tabular form for clarity. 



Section 148.260. 

This proposed section specifies that a vessel may not leave port unless the Captain of the Port is satisfied that the
temperature of the metal turnings is in accordance with the limits set by the applicable provisions of this section.
The current provision merely specifies that the Captain of the Port must be notified if the temperature limits are
exceeded. 



Section 148.270. 

This section would establish a new category of materials in part 148. Hazardous substances have previously been carried
only under Special Permits issued on a case by case basis. Hazardous substances are classified by the EPA based on the
potential of an accidental release of the material to endanger public health or welfare or the environment. The EPA
assigns to each hazardous substance a ``Reportable Quantity'' (RQ), which is that quantity, the release of which,
requires notification pursuant to 40 CFR part 302. 

The HMR, in 49 CFR 171.8, defines hazardous materials as including hazardous substances. Hazardous substances are
defined as materials, including mixtures and solutions, that are listed in the appendix to 172.101 and that
are present in a quantity, in one package, that exceeds the RQ of that substance. The definition further sets out the
concentration of a hazardous substance, for mixtures and solutions, that must be present before the mixture or solution
is considered a hazardous substance. For bulk shipments, the entire shipment would be taken into consideration since
there is no package. RQs assigned by EPA do not exceed 5,000 pounds, so any bulk shipment of hazardous substance would
be a shipment of a hazardous material. This section would not relieve the shipper or the master from any of the reporting
requirements set forth in 40 CFR part 302, but would set out minimum requirements for the safe carriage of solid hazardous
substances in bulk. 




