 

1. Do not contribute to the formation of tropospheric ozone, and in some situations inhibit the formation of tropospheric
ozone; 

2. Do not deplete stratospheric ozone; 

3. Are generally nontoxic to humans and the environment; 

4. Are used in personal care products and other consumer products; 

5. Have potential uses as substitutes for chlorofluorocarbons in a number of specified applications; and, 

6. Have a wide variety of applications and potential applications as substitutes for other VOC. 

The petition included a number of reports on smog chamber reactivity studies on VMS and other supporting information.
A copy of this material is included in the docket for this rulemaking. 

Several toxicity studies for multiple routes of exposure exist for parachlorobenzotrifluoride. In laboratory
animals, kidney and liver effects have been documented. More importantly, eye and nasal irritation were observed
during inhalation exposures. However, it is not expected to have ecological effects. There is a lack of data concerning
carcinogenicity in humans and animals. Of the volatile methyl siloxanes, only the D4 has been studied extensively.
Mild liver effects (inhalation exposure) and testicular effects (dietary exposure) were observed in laboratory
animals. The D4 compound is known to produce adverse immunological effects when injected, but it is not known if the
same effect can be elicited by inhalation exposure. These compounds are not included on the 112(b)(1) list of hazardous
air pollutants and are not regulated by any program. Our best judgment at this time is that the known toxic effects of
the pollutants do not warrant alteration of a decision to remove them from the VOC list nor warrant addition to the 112(b)(1)
list. If additional data were to alter this judgment, or if petitioned, the Agency would further consider the need
to add either or both compounds to 112(b)(1). 

If VMS and PCBTF are accepted as having negligible photochemical reactivity, exempting them from regulation as ozone
precursors could contribute to the achievement of several important environmental goals. For example, they might
be used as a substitute for several compounds (e.g., methyl chloroform) that are listed as hazardous air pollutants
(HAP) under section 112 of the Act. 

Another area of concern is finding substitutes for ozone depleting substances (ODS) which are active in depleting
the stratospheric ozone layer. Under the London Amendments to the Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the
ozone layer (``Montreal Protocol''), the United States agree to phase out production and consumption of certain
chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) by the year 2000 and methyl chloroform by 2005 (see 58 FR 15016 (March 18, 1993)). In 1990,
Congress added title VI to the Act in part to provide for the implementation of this phaseout (see 42 U.S.C. 7671


et seq.

). The 1990 Amendments specified an initial list of Class I and Class II ODS, authorizing EPA to add compounds to both
lists depending on a given compound's potential to contribute to stratospheric ozone depletion, (

Id. 

7671a.) The 1990 Amendments further required phaseout of the production and consumption of Class I ODS by 2000, methyl
chloroform by 2002, and Class II ODS by 2030 (see 42 U.S.C. 7671c, 7671d). At the fourth meeting, in 1992, of the parties
to the Montreal Protocol in Copenhagen, Denmark, the parties adjusted the phaseout schedules of Class I substances
under the Montreal Protocol to phase out Class I CFC and methyl chloroform by 1996. In 1993, EPA proposed to accelerate
the phaseout of Class I CFC and methyl chloroform in order to discontinue use of these compounds after January 1, 1996
(see 58 FR 15022). 

As a result of these phaseout deadlines, there is a need to develop substitutes for ODS. The EPA has listed several VMS
compounds as ozone-depleting substance substitutes under the program known as the ``Significant New Alternatives
Policy'' (SNAP) program, (59 FR 13044, March 18, 1994). Within the context of the SNAP rule, substitutes are ``acceptable''
if they are technically feasible to be used as an alternative to an ODS for particular uses and give reduced overall
risk to human health and the environment compared to the ODS they replace. In the SNAP rule, EPA listed several volatile
siloxanes as acceptable substitutes for metal cleaning, electronics cleaning, and precision cleaning (59 FR 13134).
The SNAP program lists benzotrifluorides as ``pending decisions'' for use in aerosols and adhesives, coatings,
and inks (59 FR 13145). The Agency has not yet completed reviews of data for these benzotrifluoride compounds, but
plans to issue a SNAP determination for these substitutes in the next set of listing decisions (59 FR 13118). 

In these areas of concern, toxic air emissions and depletion of stratospheric ozone, adding these compounds to the
list of negligibly-reactive VOC may provide support for the EPA's pollution prevention efforts. By enacting the
Pollution Prevention Act of 1990, Congress established as a national policy that ``pollution should be prevented
or reduced at the source whenever feasible'' (42 U.S.C. 13). An important part of EPA's pollution prevention strategy
is encouraging companies to use substitutes in their production processes that are more environmentally benign
than the substances they currently use. For example, in its blueprint for a comprehensive national pollution prevention
strategy, (56 FR 7849 (February 26, 1991)), the EPA recognized that the definition of pollution prevention 
includes a ``switch to non-toxic or less toxic substitutes'' (

Id. 

at 7854). 





