 


The next meeting of the Parties is scheduled for October 
1994. At that session the Parties will review the 
recommendations by the Technology and Economic Assessment Panel 
and make final decisions on this round of essential use 
nominations. 



In 1993, the Parties to the Protocol modified the timetable 
for submission of essential use nominations to combine both 
halons and all the other class I controlled substances (except 
methyl bromide) and to reduce the overall length of time between 
nomination and decision. According to Decision V/18, essential 
use nominations for halon consumption and production for 1995 and 
beyond, and essential use nominations for all the other class I 
controlled substances (except methyl bromide) for 1997 and 
beyond, must be submitted to the Secretariat prior to January 1st 
of the year prior to the year for which production and 
consumption is being sought.
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>
 Parties must submit essential use 
nominations for CFCs for 1997 (nominations for 1996 have already 
been considered) to the Montreal Protocol Secretariat by January 
1, 1996. EPA will revise its domestic schedule to require that 
nominations be submitted at least three months prior to the 
Protocol Secretariat deadline for submission, and will issue a 


Federal Register

 notice in August 1994, calling for essential use 
nominations for halons for 1996 and beyond. The next call by EPA 
for other class I controlled substances will be in August of 1995 
for 1997 essential-use exemption nominations. 




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>
Decision V/18 also directed the Technology and Economic Assessment Panel to develop a ``Handbook of Essential Use
Nominations.'' The Handbook is being prepared and will contain forms and instructions for how to apply for an essential-use
exemption. When available, the Handbook may be obtained from the Stratospheric Protection Division, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or the Ozone Secretariat of the Montreal Protocol in Nairobi.



</FOOTNOTE>



b. 

Domestic Implementation of Essential-Use Program. 

Any essential use exemptions would also have to comply with 
the provisions of the CAA. Section 604 of the CAA authorizes the 
granting of specific exemptions from the phaseout schedules 
contained in the Clean Air Act for essential uses for methyl 
chloroform for which no safe and effective substitute is 
available (section 604(d)(1)), for limited quantities of class I 
substances solely for use in medical devices if such 
authorization is determined to be necessary (section 604(d)(2)) 
and for limited quantities of halon1211, halon1301 and halon2402 solely for use in aviation
safety if no safe and effective 
substitute is available and if such authorization is necessary. 
The CAA also authorizes specific exemptions from the phaseout 
schedule of CFC114, halon1211, halon1301 and halon2402 for 
national security (section 604(f)). 



In today's action, EPA does not propose essential uses 
under the provisions of the CAA. However, EPA does propose to 
permit continued production for the essential uses authorized 
under the Protocol, so long as these essential use exemptions do 
not exceed amounts allowed in the schedule contained in section 
604(a) of the CAA. 



As indicated on the table below, EPA is proposing essential 
uses for specified controlled substances for the years 1996 and 
1997. As discussed in section A.1.c., ``The Post-Phaseout 
Procedures for Granting Destruction and Transformation Credits,'' 
EPA proposes to authorize continued production for essential uses 
permitted under the Montreal Protocol, but not to exceed the 
maximum allowable limits set forth in section 604(a) of the CAA. 
As used in a previous example in section A.1.c., the CAA requires 
that in 1996, the maximum allowable production of CFC12 may be 
no more than 40 percent of the quantity produced in the baseline 
year. Thus, in 1996, if total production of CFC12 were to be 
used for essential uses, the amount produced for those essential 
uses may not exceed 40 percent of the quantity produced in the 
baseline year. Although production may be used for some 
combination of essential uses, destruction credits, or 
transformation credits, the total amount produced could not 
exceed the maximum allowable limits set forth in the CAA as 
reproduced in Table I below. 



To incorporate the essential-use provisions under the 
Montreal Protocol into our domestic allowance program, EPA is 
proposing the creation of a new class of allowances to be 
referred to as ``essential-use allowances.'' 



The essential-use allowances will be allocated to United 
States entities based on the nominations made to the Protocol 
which will be decided upon by the Parties at the October 1994 
meeting and at meetings thereafter. In the nominations to the 
Protocol, U.S. entities apply for an essential-use exemption from 
the production and consumption phaseout for a specific quantity 
of controlled substance for a specific use. EPA proposes using 
the applications that are agreed to by the Parties to the 
Protocol to make specific allocations of essential-use 
allowances. Although the TEAP has received applications for 
essential-use exemptions beyond 1997, today's proposal only 
includes those recommendations by the Panel for 1996 and 1997. 
In today's rulemaking, EPA proposes an allocation of essential-use allowances up to the amount being recommended
by the 
Technology and Economic Assessment Panel to the Parties for their 
meeting in October 1994. It should be noted that the final 
essential-use allowances promulgated by EPA may not exceed the 
exemptions adopted by the Parties.


