 

FSIS expects to require that MDP be produced under an approved plant quality control program. Also, FSIS is considering
a requirement that the plant quality control program provide the controls and information necessary to assure that
MDP manufactured under such a program meets any requirements established and that it will enable establishment personnel
and FSIS to monitor it for effectiveness. FSIS is focusing on methods that will minimize inter-lot variation by maintaining
the uniformity of starting materials and controlling the handling and processing of starting materials and resulting
product.

Because it appears that this goal can be achieved effectively and efficiently where a program for quality control
incorporates appropriate methods and monitoring techniques and adheres to good manufacturing practice, FSIS contemplates
requiring that an establishment conduct only limited analyses for protein quality and fat, and for MDP represented
as containing not less than 14 percent protein and not more than 25 percent fat, to confirm that production is, in fact,
under control. After it has been demonstrated that the quality control program is able to yield complying product,
confirmatory analyses would be required only periodically, as long as the product is in compliance.

FSIS anticipates establishing basic parameters for the chemical analyses that must be performed to verify compliance
with the requirements, e.g., defining production lots and sampling schedules, and the accepted methodology for
performing analyses. FSIS wishes to receive comments on the parameters necessary for an adequate quality control
program.

B. 

Tentative position: Handling requirements.

 Current regulatory requirements, including provisions for sanitation, operating procedures, and heat processing
(9 CFR part 381, subpart H and I, and 381.150), already provide the basic controls necessary to prevent spoilage
and assure poultry product wholesomeness. However, because the mechanical deboning process presents greater opportunities
for bacterial growth than traditional poultry product processing, FSIS is considering amending the poultry products
inspection regulations to more specifically address the requirements for the various starting materials used for
MDP and the resulting product.

Although the data reviewed in the 1979 health and safety report indicate that MDP products generally are acceptable
from a microbiological standpoint, the data also show that where bacterial loads tend to be higher, it can be attributed
to the starting material used. This is not surprising as common starting materials for mechanical deboning are products
that remain after the removal of a substantial portion of skeletal muscle or other tissue (e.g., skin) from poultry
carcasses or parts of carcasses. As a result, the resistance of the exposed surface area to microbial penetration
has been reduced and the ratio of the surface area to the volume of total product which is exposed to contaminating influences
has been increased. Higher microbial counts in MDP have been associated with the time and conditions of holding such
starting materials.

Mechanically deboned poultry itself also presents opportunities for excessive microbiological growth because
it consists of small particles which have a greater surface area than most poultry products and because during its
preparation any microorganisms that are present are distributed throughout the product.

FSIS believes that potential bacterial hazards are diminished as long as handling accords with good manufacturing
practices. FSIS is, therefore, considering that processing and storage requirements are warranted for the raw materials
used to make the product and for the product itself.



