 


This section would be amended to make it clear that any party whose interest is adversely affected may appeal the final
decision of the authorized officer. The amendment would also provide instructions regarding the filing of appeals
and petitions to stay decisions. When a final decision is issued, all parties whose interests have been adversely
affected may file an appeal and a petition for stay of the decision within 30 days from the date of receipt of a final decision,
or 30 days from the date a proposed decision becomes final in the absence of a protest. Under the process of 4.21
of this title, the Office of Hearings and Appeals would be allowed 45 days from the end of the appeal period to review
the petition and issue a determination. A decision would not be in effect during the consideration of a petition for
stay unless it was made effective for reasons under 4110.33(b) or 4150.2(d) of this subpart. The determination
of who qualifies as an affected party is made by OHA. 

This section includes changes made in addition to those presented in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking, including
a requirement for prompt transmittal by the authorized officer of appeals and petitions for stay to the Office of Hearings
and Appeals. 



Subpart 4170_Penalties 



Section 4170.11Penalty for Violations 



This section would be amended to provide for a penalty for unauthorized leasing and subleasing in the amount of two
times the private grazing land lease rate for the 17 western States as supplied annually by the National Agricultural
Statistics Service, and all reasonable expenses incurred by the United States in detecting, investigating, and
resolving the violation. This penalty would be more consistent with the penalties provided for unauthorized use
and would be simpler to administer than the penalty provided in the existing regulations. This provision was not included
in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking. 



Section 4170.12Failure to Use 



This section would be amended to clarify the consultation requirements when considering taking action to cancel,
in whole or in part, a permit or lease in response to failure to use, and to clarify that the failure to make substantial
grazing use as authorized means the failure to make active grazing use as approved on a grazing use authorization.
Permittees and lessees would be required to apply and receive approval for nonuse or conservation use. This section
also would include failure to maintain or use water base property in the grazing operation. The failure to make authorized
use may result in monitoring studies providing false information which could cause decisions to overobligate the
forage resource of the rangeland. The failure to apply for conservation use or nonuse prevents the BLM from having
an opportunity to determine if conservation use or nonuse is in conformance with applicable plans and if it will aid
in achieving resource condition objectives. Review by the authorized officer of applications for nonuse is also
necessary to determine if forage left unused should be allocated to another party through a temporary permit. Finally,
water property is crucial to the proper use and operation of livestock grazing in water base areas. If base property
waters are not kept in serviceable condition, livestock are forced to overuse the service areas of the remaining waters.




Section 4170.13Bald Eagle Protection Act and Endangered Species Act 




The proposed rule would amend this section to include Federal or State predator animal and pest control and protection
of the natural environment, wild free-roaming horses and burros, natural and cultural resources, or resource conservation
regulations or laws. The heading of this section would be amended to reflect the change in scope. These proposed amendments
are also made in the section on prohibited acts, 4140(b) of this part, and discussed earlier. The proposed amendments
would adopt language of the grazing administration regulations that existed before 1984. 





