 

Because a responsible entity that follows the verification and due process requirements established in the final
rule is statutorily protected from liability, HUD has not revised the requirements in the 1994 proposed rule to include
any additional protections. 


O. Reexamination of Income


Two commenters argued that the requirement for annual verification of the immigration status of any tenant family
containing one or more non-citizen members is an unnecessary burden for project owners, HAs, and tenants. The commenters
that immigration status rarely changes, and that any additional burden encountered because of an applicant's lack
of citizenship might result in discrimination by project owners against all noncitizens. 
HUD agrees that the burden of requiring an annual recertification and verification of immigration status of all noncitizen
members of tenant families outweighs any benefit to be obtained, and the 1994 proposed rule revises the reexamination
provisions to restrict the requirement for submission of a declaration (and documentation and verification of immigration
status, where an alien is involved) to new individuals joining the household_other than by birth to one of the occupants.



P. Miscellaneous 


1. Cost


Several of the commenters on the 1988 proposed rule complained that the requirement that the immigration status of
all applicants be documented and verified under these procedures which include the offer of hearings at several points
would be expensive and time-consuming. One commenter estimated that it would need to hire 56 additional housing assistants,
at a cost of $2 million, as well as conduct training of its employees, at a cost of $250,000, and spend $800,000 on notifying
applicants of the requirements. Several HA commenters suggested that HUD reimburse them for additional staff time.
Another commenter speculated that some landlords would withdraw from participation in HUD programs rather than
put up with the extra burdens and costs of the new requirement. 
HUD is aware that the verification procedure prescribed by IRCA is not without cost. The Federal government will incur
the cost of the computerized verification system (SAVE) operated by the INS. The cost of operating that system will
not be billed to the HA or project owner accessing the system but to HUD, for each inquiry made to the system. For HAs and
project owners in most areas of the country, the cost of the verification system will not be substantial, because most
applicants and tenants will certify that they are citizens. For HAs and project owners located in the parts of the country
where the concentration of noncitizen residents is greatest, there will be greater impact. However, the additional
cost will be only a small, incremental change in the overall cost of processing applications and reexaminations.

One small HA advocated that HUD at least provide grants to small HAs who must computerize to accomplish the required
verification. HUD sees no reason that any HA would need to computerize in order to implement these requirements. All
that is necessary to access the SAVE system is a touch-tone telephone. 


2. Implementation Timing 


HAs indicated that the rule should not be implemented until the INS verification program is fully operational and
readily available for their use. As stated earlier in this preamble, HUD is in full agreement with that desire. The
SAVE system is operational. Funds have been budgeted for billing the cost of SAVE access for HUD programs to HUD. After
the publication of the final rule, arrangements will be made to issue identifying codes to the many administrators
of HUD-assisted housing. 


3. Other Changes 


A number of the sections in the 1994 proposed rule have been revised and restructured for ease of understanding and
clarity of complex provisions. 
In the 1994 proposed rule, HUD has changed the minimum retention period for documents from 3 years to 5 years. This makes
the retention period coincide with the statute of limitations for criminal prosecution and the ongoing needs for
computer matching to verify tenant income. The five-year retention requirement does not impose a burden on HAs and
private project owners, because HAs and project owners currently retain the records concerning the initial certification,
regular recertification and interim recertification for at least five years. 


VIII. Other Matters 


Executive Order 12866 


This proposed rule was reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget under Executive Order 12866 as a significant
regulatory action. Any changes made in this proposed rule as a result of that review are clearly identified in the docket
file for this proposed rule, which is available for public inspection in the Office of HUD's Rules Docket Clerk, Room
10276, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 204100500. 


Environmental Review


A Finding of No Significant Impact with respect to the environment was made in accordance with HUD regulations in 24
CFR part 50 that implement section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332). The
Finding is available for public inspection between 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. weekdays in the Office of the Rules Docket
Clerk at the above address. 


Regulatory Flexibility Act


The Secretary, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 605(b)), has reviewed this proposed rule
before publication, and by approving it, certifies that this rule does not have a significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities. HUD believes that the rule, when implemented, will have only a minimal impact
on small housing project owners, small mortgagees and small housing agencies, since the procedures specified to
implement the restrictions are to require owners and HAs to use an easily accessible (by telephone) automated system
for verifying immigration status. HUD has arranged for the cost of the automated verification system, established
by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, to be billed directly to HUD. The only other significant element of
cost or delay in administration of HUD programs that may be encountered by small entities as a result of this rule is
the requirement for a fair hearing, on request, for any applicant or tenant found to be ineligible. This procedure
is specifically required by 42 U.S.C. 1436a. However, HUD does not believe that the cost or delay will be significant
because HUD anticipates that small housing agencies, project owners and mortgagees will find that the majority of
applicants or tenants are eligible to receive HUD assistance, and therefore fair hearings to determine eligibility
on the basis of immigration status will be minimal. 
Therefore, HUD concludes that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities, and that to the extent possible, HUD has minimized the economic impact on all entities, consistent with
the Secretary's responsibilities under section 1436a. 


Executive Order on Federalism 


The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under section 6(a) of Executive Order 12612, Federalism, has determined
that the policies contained in this proposed rule will not have substantial direct effects on States or their political
subdivisions, or the relationship between the Federal government and the States, or on the distribution of power
and responsibilities among the various levels of government. This proposed rule addresses immigration, a topic
exclusively the province of the Federal government, and the effect is the direct result of the statute that imposes
the restriction against assistance to noncitizens, rather than a result of HUD's exercise of discretion in promulgating
a rule to implement the statute.





