 

Section 213.3152U.S. Government Printing Office 


(a) Not to exceed three positions of Research Associate at grades GS15 and below, involved in the study and analysis
of complex problems relating to the reduction of the Government's printing costs and to provision of more efficient
service to customer agencies and the public. Appointments under this authority may not exceed 1 year, but may be extended
for not to exceed 1 additional year. 
(b) Positions in the printing trades when filled by students majoring in printing technology employed under a cooperative
education agreement with the University of the District of Columbia. 


Section 213.3156Commission on Civil Rights 


(a) Twenty-five positions at grade GS11 and above of employees who collect, study, and appraise civil rights
information to carry out the national clearinghouse responsibilities of the Commission under Public Law 88352,
as amended. No new appointments may be made under this authority after March 31, 1976. 


Section 213.3174Smithsonian Institution 


(a) Not to exceed 25 positions at grades GS11 and below which support planning and production of the Annual American
Folklife Festival. Employment under this authority may not exceed 6 months in connection with any one Festival. 
(b) All positions located in Panama which are part of or which support the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.

(c) Positions at GS15 and below in the National Museum of the American Indian requiring knowledge of, and experience
in, tribal customs and culture. Such positions comprise approximately 10 percent of the Museum's positions and,
generally, do not include secretarial, clerical, administrative, or program support positions. 


Section 213.3175Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars 


(a) One East Asian Studies Program Administrator, one International Security Studies Program Administrator, one
Latin American Program Administrator, one Russian Studies Program Administrator, one West European Program Administrator,
and one Social Science Program Administrator. 


Section 213.3182National Foundation on the Arts and the 
Humanities 


(a) 

National Endowment for the Arts. 

(1) One position of Assistant Director, Artists-in-Education Programs, Office of Partnerships. 
(2) One position of Assistant Director for State Programs. 
(3) One position of Director of Literature Programs. 
(4) One position of Assistant Director of Theater Programs. 
(5) One position of Director of Folk Arts Programs. 
(6) One position of Director, Opera/Musical Theater Programs. 
(7) One position of Assistant Director of Opera/Musical Theater Programs. 
(8) One position of Assistant Director of Literature Programs. 
(9) One position of Director of Locals Test Programs, Office of the Deputy to the Chairman for Public Partnership.

(10) One position of Deputy Chairman for Public Partnership. 
(11) Four Project Evaluators. 
(12) One position of Director of Museum Programs. 
(13) One position of Assistant Director of Folk Arts, Office of the Deputy Chairman for Programs. 
(14) One position of Assistant Director of Music Programs. 
(15) One position of Director of Expansion Arts Programs. 
(16) One position of Director of Media Arts Programs. 
(17) One position of Director, Challenge and Advancement Grant Program. 
(18) One position of Assistant Director, Challenge and Advancement Grant Program. 
(19) One position of Art Specialist, International Programs. 
(20) One position of Director of Inter Arts Program. 
(21) One position of Assistant Director of Expansion of Arts Programs. 
(22) One position of Assistant Director of Media Arts Programs. 
(23) One position of Assistant Director of Design Arts Program. 
(24) One position of Assistant Director of Dance Programs. 
(25) One position of Assistant Director of Visual Arts Programs. 
(26) One position of Assistant Director of Museum Programs. 




