 

In a letter dated April 12, 1994, Dr. Jack Roth of M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, submitted the human
gene transfer protocol entitled: Clinical Protocol for Modification of Tumor Suppressor Gene Expression and Induction
of Apoptosis in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) with an Adenovirus Vector Expressing Wildtype p53 and Cisplatin
to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for formal review and approval.



X. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Dr. Lotze



In a letter dated April 13, 1994, Dr. Michael Lotze of the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania submitted
the human gene transfer protocol entitled: IL12 Gene Therapy Using Direct Injection of Tumor with Genetically
Engineered Autologous Fibroblasts to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for formal review and approval.



XI. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Drs. Liu and Young



In a letter dated October 7, 1993, Drs. Johnson M. Liu and Neal S. Young of the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, submitted the human gene transfer protocol entitled: Retroviral Mediated Gene Transfer of the Fanconi
Anemia Complementation Group C Gene to Hematopoietic Progenitors of Group C Patients to the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee for formal review and approval. At the December 23, 1993, meeting, the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee deferred the protocol until the investigators return to the full Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee with
the following:

(1) Murine data demonstrating 

in vivo

 expression of the FACC gene and safety data accumulated over a period of " 4 months demonstrating that the FACC-transduced
cells do not produce any untoward effects, i.e., malignant transformation:

(2) Data (cited in Dr. Cynthia Dunbar's December 1993 data management report, Protocol 

#

9206025) regarding the possibility that ``stem cell factor could favor the growth of leukemic versus normal
progenitors during 

ex vivo

 culture periods;'' and

(3) Revised eligibility criteria sections for both the protocol and Informed Consent document that describe the
necessity for bone marrow examination following each infusion.

The consensus of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee was that the investigators were not required to submit this
additional data until 4 weeks prior to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee meeting at which the information is
reviewed. Submission of previously reviewed information is not required. The motion to defer the protocol pending
full Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee review of additional information passed by a vote of 14 in favor, 0 opposed,
and 3 abstentions.

On May 2, 1994, Drs. Liu and Young submitted additional materials relating to the human gene transfer protocol to the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for formal review and approval.


XII. Amendment to Part ID of the Points to Consider in the Design and Submission of Protocols for the Transfer
of Recombinant DNA Into the Genome of Human Subjects, NIH Guidelines, Regarding Informed Consent/Dr. Zallen



During the December 23, 1993, Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee meeting, Dr. Gary Ellis, Director of the
Office for Protection from Research Risks (OPRR), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, responded to the written comments submitted
by Dr. Zallen, Chair of the Working Group on Informed Consent Issues. Dr. Ellis noted the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee's concern regarding specific issues that should be addressed in human gene transfer protocol Informed
Consent documents, i.e., request for autopsy, recommendations for male/female contraception, separate Informed
Consent documents when gene therapy is separate from a clinical protocol, commitment to long-term patient follow-up,
and financial responsibility of the institution for all research-related costs. During his presentation, Dr. Ellis
provided the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee with background information regarding the roles of both OPRR and
local Institutional Review Boards (IRB) in the review of research proposals involving human subjects. Dr. Ellis
recommended that the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee draft a letter outlining its specific recommendations
to OPRR for distribution and consideration by the local IRBs.

In a memorandum dated December 23, 1993, Dr. Ellis further clarified the avenues that should be pursued by the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee with regard to the ``quality and content of informed consent documents into constructive
changes in the informed consent process,'' specifically in relation to human gene transfer. Dr. Ellis recommended
that the Points to Consider should be amended to introduce consistency in the Informed Consent document language.

During the March 34, 1994, Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee meeting, Dr. Doris Zallen, Chair of the Working
Group on Informed Consent, provided a summary of the proposed amendments to Part ID, Informed Consent of the
Points to Consider. Two versions of revised Part ID were presented:

(1) The version drafted by the working group, and
(2) A modified version incorporating the modifications suggested by Mr. Alex Capron. The Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee recommended that the working group should develop a consolidated version of part ID which includes
language from both proposed documents. The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee suggested that questions should
be prefaced with an explanation as to the necessity for the requested information.

On April 27, 1994, Dr. Zallen submitted revised amendments to part ID, Informed Consent, of the Points to Consider
in response to the specific comments posed by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee at its March 34, 1994,
meeting. The proposed amendments read:



Part ID Informed Consent



``In accordance with the requirements of DHHS regulations for the protection of human subjects (45 CFR part 46), investigators
shall indicate how subjects will be informed about the proposed study, the manner in which their consent will be solicited,
and that the informed consent form makes clear the special requirements of gene transfer research.



Part 1D1. Communication of the Study to Potential Participants


