 

1608.4 



Prohibitions applicable to the Corporation and to recipients. 



(a) Neither the Corporation nor any recipient shall use any political test or qualification in making any decision,
taking any action, or performing any function under the Act. 

(b) Neither the Corporation nor any recipient shall contribute or make available any Corporation or recipient funds,
personnel or equipment, regardless of source: 

(1) To any political party or association; 

(2) To the campaign of any candidate for public or party office; or 

(3) For use in advocating or opposing any ballot measure, initiative or referendum. 



1608.5 



Prohibitions applicable to all employees. 



No employee of the Corporation or of any recipient shall_

(a) intentionally identify the Corporation or a recipient with any partisan or nonpartisan political activity,
or with the campaign of any candidate for elective public or party office; 

(b) use any Corporation funds for activities prohibited to attorneys under 1608.6 or 1608.7; nor shall
an employee intentionally identify or encourage others to identify the Corporation or a recipient with such activities;


(c) use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election
or nomination for elective public office, whether partisan or nonpartisan; or 

(d) directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, command or advise any employee of the Corporation or of any recipient
to pay, lend, or contribute anything of value to a political party, or committee, organization, agency or person for
political purposes. 



1608.6 



Prohibition applicable to Corporation employees and to staff attorneys. 



No Corporation employee and no staff attorney shall, at any time, be a candidate for partisan elective public office.




1608.7 



Prohibitions applicable to all attorneys. 



(a) No attorney who is engaged in legal assistance activities supported in whole or in part by resources derived from
a grant from or contract with the Corporation shall, during the hours the attorney is working for the recipient or while
actually providing legal assistance to or representing clients of, or referred by, the recipient, engage in: 

(1) any political activity; 

(2) any activity to provide voters with transportation to the polls, or to provide similar assistance in connection
with an election; or 

(3) any voter registration activity. 

(b) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any attorney from engaging in the activities prohibited in 1608.7(a)
on his or her own time or from contributing his or her personal funds or resources to support such activities. 

(c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a recipient from making available general, nonpartisan information on
voter registration procedures or qualifications. 

 


Dated: September 27, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Victor M. Fortuno, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
General Counsel. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9424275 Filed 92994; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 705001P
</BILLING>


