 

The Land and Resource Management Plan for the Flathead National Forest provides the overall guidance for management
activities in the potentially affected area through its goals, objectives, standards and guidelines, and management
area direction. Most of the proposed activities would occur in Management Areas 15 and 7. Forest plan direction states
that Management Area 15 consists of lands where timber management with roads is economical and feasible. The management
goal is to manage those lands suitable for timber production for the long-term growth and production of commercially
valuable wood products, as well as provide for soil and water protection, wildlife habitat, and roaded recreation
opportunities. Management Area 7 is identified as roaded timberlands in visually sensitive areas. The goal in these
areas is to manage timber resources in a manner that complements and protects high scenic values, maintaining a pleasing,
natural-appearing landscape.
In addition, prescribed burning, road re-construction, and some timber harvest and reforestation may occur within
Management Area 12 (riparian areas along perennial streams), Management Area 17 (riparian areas with typically
intermittent streams), Management Area 3 (amenity resource values), or Management Area 1 (nonforested lands).
Proposed Actions would occur in Management Situation 2 grizzly bear habitat. Management Situation 2 includes areas
which do not have distinct bear populations or do not contain year-round high quality bear habitats. The area is a part
of the Northern Continental Divide Recovery Area, but categorized as unnecessary for the survival and recovery of
the bear. Management considerations include minimizing potential bear mortality and human-grizzly conflicts,
and maintaining habitat components. The grizzly bear is an important, but not the primary use in this area.
Public involvement conducted during 1993 has resulted in identification of numerous important issues to be addressed
in the Draft EIS. Five alternatives to the Proposed Action have been developed to address the following issues: Water
quality, fisheries and riparian values, visuals, forest health, grizzly bear, elk, gray wolf, fire risk, and road
and travel management. Many other issues will be addressed as features common to all alternatives, or through effects
analysis included in the Draft EIS.
The analysis will consider a range of alternatives. One of these will be the ``no-action'' alternative, in which none
of the Proposed Actions would be implemented. Other alternatives will examine various levels and locations of proposed
activities to achieve the proposal's purpose, as well as respond to the issues and resource values important to Crane
Mountain.
The analysis will disclose the environmental effects of alternative ways of implementing the Forest Plan. The EIS
will disclose the analysis of the direct, indirect, and cumulative environmental effects of the alternatives. Effects
analysis will address past, present, and projected activities. In addition, the EIS will disclose the analysis of
site specific mitigation measures and their effectiveness.
Public participation is especially important at several points of the analysis. People may visit with Forest Service
officials at any time during the analysis and prior to the decision. However, two periods of time are identified for
the receipt of comments on the analysis. The two public comment periods are during the scoping process (now through
May 31, 1994) and in the review of the Draft EIS (anticipated between June and September 1994). The Forest Service has
not yet determined whether any public meetings will be held.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, will be informally consulted throughout the analysis.
To meet the requirements of the Endangered Species Act, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service will review the EIS and biological
evaluation and, if necessary, render a formal Biological Opinion of the effects on the Threatened and Endangered
Species including grizzly bear, gray wolf, and bald eagle.
The Draft EIS is expected to be filed with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and available for public review
in June or July 1994. At that time the EPA will publish a notice of availability of the Draft EIS in the 

Federal Register

. The public comment period on the Draft EIS will be 45 days from the date when the EPA's notice of availability appears
in the 

Federal Register

.
The Forest Service believes it is important to give reviewers notice at this early stage of several court rulings related
to public participation in the environmental review process. First, reviewers of Draft EISs must structure their
participation in the environmental review of the proposal so that it is meaningful and alerts an agency to the reviewer's
position and contentions. 

Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp.

 v. 

NRDC

, 435 U.S. 519, 553 (1978). Also, environmental objections that could be raised at the Draft EIS stage but that are not
raised until after completion of the final EIS may be waived or dismissed by the courts. 

Wisconsin Heritages, Inc.

 v. 

Harris

, 490 F.Supp. 1334, 1338 (E.D. Wis. 1980). Because of these court rulings, it is very important that those interested
in this Proposed Action participate by the close of the 45-day comment period so that substantive comments and objections
are made available to the Forest Service at a time when it can meaningfully consider them and respond to them in the Final
Environmental Impact Statement.
To assist the Forest Service in identifying and considering issues and concerns on the Proposed Action, comments
on the Draft Environmental Impact Statement should be as specific as possible. It is also helpful if comments refer
to specific pages or chapters of the Draft statement. Comments may also address the adequacy of the Draft Environmental
Impact Statement or the merits of the alternatives formulated and discussed in the statement. (Reviewers may wish
to refer to the Council on Environmental Quality Regulations for implementing the procedural provisions of the National
Environmental Policy Act at 40 CFR 1503.3 in addressing these points.)
Following this comment period, the comments received will be analyzed, considered and responded to by the Forest
Service in the Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS). The FEIS is scheduled to be completed by October 1994.
The Forest Supervisor for the Flathead National Forest is the responsible official for the preparation of this EIS
and will make a decision regarding this proposal considering the comments and responses, environmental consequences
discussed in the FEIS, and applicable laws, regulations, and policies. The decision and rationale for the decision
will be documented in a Record of Decision. That decision will be subject to appeal under applicable Forest Service
regulations.



Dated: April 25, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Joel D. Holtrop,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Forest Supervisor, Flathead National Forest.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9410798 Filed 5494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341011M
</BILLING>





