 

Sections 905.146, 905.147, and 905.148 of the regulations provide terms and conditions under which shippers may
ship organically grown Florida citrus fruit, as Special Purpose Shippers, with a conditional release from certain
grade requirements issued under 905.52 of the order. 
When the provisions concerning special purpose shipments were made effective in 1978, there were no laws governing
organic fruit and vegetable growers in Florida. A ``Special Purpose Shipper'' was defined under the marketing order
as one who had certified that they would handle only citrus fruit which they knew from their own personal knowledge
was produced on trees on which only compost, non-acidulated fertilizer such as rock phosphate, dolomite, or ground
limestone is used, and to which no chemical insecticide or fungicide had been applied. However, the State of Florida
now requires all organically grown fruits and vegetables to be certified. Accordingly, the committee has recommended
redefining the term ``Special Purpose Shipper'' in 905.146 to mean a person who handles Florida citrus fruit
that is certified by a Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services licensed certifying agent as organically
grown under Florida law. This definition reflects that organic fruit has been certified under Florida law, and also
provides additional assurance that shippers claiming organic status and utilizing the grade standards for organic
fruit qualify to do so. 
Under Florida law, the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services licenses independent third parties
to act as certifying agents. Growers who intend to sell organic fruit make an application to a certifying agent. The
certifying agent inspects and certifies a grower's acreage as being in accordance with Florida law and issues the
grower a certificate. The certificate number is transferred to a trip ticket which accompanies any shipments of fruit
grown on the certified acreage. When the handler receives the shipment, a copy of the trip ticket is provided to the
state inspector indicating that the fruit is certified organic and can be packed using the applicable organic grade
standards. 
The committee also recommended that 905.146 be revised to require Special Purpose Shippers to certify that
they will limit their shipments of organically grown citrus fruit to outlets handling organically grown fruits.
This replaces the requirement that only outlets registered and approved by the committee could receive such fruit
and ends the requirement that receivers of special purpose shipments complete the applicable sections of the Report
of Special Purpose Shipments form. 
The language in 905.146, 905.147, 905.148 concerning Certificates of Privilege is being revised for clarity,
and procedural safeguards are being added to 905.147(c) dealing with suspensions or denials of Certificates
of Privilege. 
This rule reflects the committee's and the Department's appraisal of the need to revise the exemption provisions
for special purpose shipments, as specified. The Departmental view is that this rule may have a beneficial impact
on growers and shippers of organic citrus fruit. 
Based on the above, the Administrator of the AMS has determined that this rule will not have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities. 
In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. chapter 35), the information collection requirements
that are contained in this rule have been previously approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and have
been assigned OMB number 05810094. This action will reduce the reporting burden on approximately 95 receivers
of special purpose shipments of Florida citrus completing a section of the Report of Special Purpose Shipments form,
taking about .04 hour to complete each report. 
After consideration of all relevant material presented, including the Committee's recommendation, and other available
information, it is found that this interim final rule, as hereinafter set forth, will tend to effectuate the declared
policy of the Act. 






