 

Vol = the cleaning capacity of the solvent cleaning 
machine (cubic meters). 




(b) Each owner or operator of a batch vapor or in-line 
solvent cleaning machine complying with 63.464(a) shall 
demonstrate compliance with the applicable 3-month rolling 
average monthly emission limit on a monthly basis as 
described in 63.465(b) and (c). 

(c) If the applicable 3-month rolling average emission 
limit is not met, an exceedance has occurred. All 
exceedances shall be reported as required in 63.468(h). 



63.465

Test methods. 



(a) Each owner or operator of a batch vapor or in-line 
solvent cleaning machine complying with an idling emission 
limit standard in 63.463(b)(1)(ii), (b)(2)(ii), 
(c)(1)(ii), or (c)(2)(ii) shall determine the idling 
emission rate of the solvent cleaning machine using 
Reference Method 307 in appendix A to this part. 

(b) Each owner or operator of a batch vapor or in-line 
solvent cleaning machine complying with 63.464 shall on 
the first operating day of every month ensure that the 
solvent cleaning machine system contains only clean liquid 
solvent. This includes, but is not limited to, fresh unused 
solvent, recycled solvent and used solvent that has been 
cleaned of soils. A fill line must be indicated during the 
first month the measurements are made. The solvent level 
within the machine must be returned to the same fill-line 
each month, immediately prior to calculating monthly 
emissions as specified in 63.465(c). The solvent cleaning 
machine does not have to be emptied and filled with fresh 
unused solvent prior to the calculations. 

(c) Each owner or operator of a batch vapor or in-line 
solvent cleaning machine complying with 63.464 shall on 
the first operating day of the month comply with the 
requirements specified in paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(3) 
of this section. 

(1) Using the records of all solvent additions and 
deletions for the previous monthly reporting period required 
under 63.464(a), determine solvent emissions (Ei) using 
equation 2 for cleaning machines with a solvent/air 
interface and equation 3 for cleaning machines without a 
solvent/air interface: 





<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSER02DE94.000




</IMPORT>



<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSER02DE94.001


</IMPORT>



where: 



E

i

=the total halogenated HAP solvent emissions 
from the solvent cleaning machine during the 
most recent monthly reporting period i, 
(kilograms of solvent per square meter of 
solvent/air interface area per month). 

E

n

=the total halogenated HAP solvent emissions 
from the solvent cleaning machine during the 
most recent monthly reporting period i, 
(kilograms of solvent per month). 

SA

i

=the total amount of halogenated HAP liquid 
solvent added to the solvent cleaning machine 
during the most recent monthly reporting 
period i, (kilograms of solvent per month). 

LSR

i

=the total amount of halogenated HAP liquid 
solvent removed from the solvent cleaning 
machine during the most recent monthly 
reporting period i, (kilograms of solvent per 
month). 

SSR

i

=the total amount of halogenated HAP solvent 
removed from the solvent cleaning machine in 
solid waste, obtained as described in paragraph (c)(2) 
of this section, during the most recent 
monthly reporting period i, (kilograms of 
solvent per month). 


AREA

i

=the solvent/air interface area of the solvent 
cleaning machine (square meters). 




(2) Determine SSR

i

 using the method specified in 
paragraph (c)(2)(i) or (c)(2)(ii) of this section. 

(i) From tests conducted using EPA reference method 
25d. 






