 

Additional Guidance 



Financial Aid at Historically Black Colleges and Universities 



Historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), as defined in Title III of the Higher Education Act (Title
III), 
20 U.S.C. 1061, are unique among institutions of higher education in America because of their role in serving students
who were denied access to postsecondary education based on their race.

2

 Congress has made numerous findings reflecting the special role and needs of these institutions in light of the history
of discrimination by States and the Federal Government against both the institutions and their students and has required
enhancement of these institutions as a remedy for this history of discrimination. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
Title III states a number of requirements that an institution must meet in order to be considered an historically black
college or university, including the requirement that the college or university was established prior to 1964. 20
U.S.C. 1061. In regulations implementing Title III, the Secretary has identified the institutions that meet these
requirements. 34 CFR 608.2(b). 

</FOOTNOTE>


Based upon the extensive congressional findings concerning HBCUs, and consistent with congressional and Executive
Branch efforts to enhance and strengthen HBCUs, the Department interprets Title VI to permit these institutions
to participate in student aid programs established by third parties that target financial aid to black students,
if those programs are not limited to students at the HBCUs. These would include programs to which HBCUs contribute
their own institutional funds if necessary for participation in the programs. Precluding HBCUs from these programs
would have an unintended negative effect on their ability to recruit talented student bodies and would undermine
congressional actions aimed at enhancing these institutions. HBCUs may not create their own race-targeted programs
using institutional funds, nor may they accept privately donated race-targeted aid limited to students at the HBCUs,
unless they satisfy the requirements of any of the other principles in this guidance.

3

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


3

</FOOTNAME>
For example, an HBCU might award race-targeted aid to Mexican American students or to white students to promote diversity
under Principle 4. 

</FOOTNOTE>


Transition Period 



Although the Department anticipates that most financial aid programs that consider race or national origin in awarding
assistance will be found to be consistent with one or more of the principles in this final policy guidance, there will
be some programs that require adjustment to comply with Title VI. In order to permit colleges time to assess their programs
and to make any necessary adjustments in an orderly manner_and to ensure that students who already have either applied
for or received financial aid do not lose their student aid as a result of the issuance of this policy guidance_there
will be a transition period during which the Department will work with colleges that require assistance to bring them
into compliance.

4

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
This transition period also applies to recipients of Federal financial assistance that are not colleges, e.g., a
nonprofit organization that operates a scholarship program. 

</FOOTNOTE>


The Department will afford colleges up to two academic years to adjust their programs for new students. However, to
the extent that a college does not need the full two years to make adjustments to its financial aid programs, the Department
expects that the adjustments will be made as soon as practicable. 

No student who is currently receiving financial aid, or who has applied for aid prior to the effective date of this policy
guidance, should lose aid as a result of this guidance. Thus, if a college determines that a financial aid program is
not permissible under this policy guidance, the college may continue to provide assistance awarded on the basis of
race or national origin to students during the entire course of their academic program at the college, even if that
period extends beyond the two-year transition period, if the students had either applied for or received that assistance
prior to the effective date of this policy. 



Legal Analysis 



Introduction 



The Department of Education is responsible for enforcing Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d 

et seq.

, at institutions receiving Federal education funds. Section 601 of Title VI provides that no person in the United
States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits
of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance. 42 U.S.C.
2000d. 






