 

(2) 

Design and fabrication requirements. 

(i) All individual 
terminals or terminal fields must be enclosed and the terminal 
enclosures must be totally filled with an encapsulating grease or 
gel which prevents connection degradation caused by moisture and 
corrosion. The encapsulant must provide complete encapsulation 
of terminal metallic connections and surfaces and totally fill 
all voids and cavities within individual terminal enclosures or 
terminal field enclosures to prevent ingress of moisture. The 
encapsulant must not restrict access to the terminal or restrict 
craft personnel from making connections. The encapsulant must be 
compatible with the standard materials used in cross-connect 
hardware and wiring. 

(ii) The cross-connect module manufacturer shall make 
available any nonstandard tools and test apparatus which are 
required for splicing, placing of jumpers, and the performance of 
maintenance operations. 

(iii) The module shall be designed so that a typical outside 
plant technician using tools shall be able to terminate cross-
connect wire on terminals, or to remove them without causing 
electrical shorts between any other terminals. 

(iv) The pair count sequence terminated on a module shall be 
easily visible and shall have numerals of at least 0.25 cm (0.10 
in.) in height. 

(v) Feeder terminations shall be easily distinguished from 
distribution terminations. 

(vi) Tip and ring terminations shall be easily visible and 
shall be identifiable as described in paragraph (f)(2)(vi) of 
this section. 

(vii) The preferred locations for cross-connect modules to be 
mounted inside a housing is the same as those for terminals and 
are described in paragraphs (f)(2)(vii) and (f)(2)(viii) of this 
section. 

(3) 

Auxiliary features. 

(i) Housings equipped with cross-
connect modules shall be equipped with auxiliary test contacts as 
described in paragraphs (f)(3)(i) and (f)(3)(ii) of this section. 

(ii) Special service markers shall be available for cross-
connect modules as described in paragraph (f)(3)(iii) of this 
section. 

(iii) Housings equipped with, or designed for, cross-connect 
modules shall contain a supply of cross-connect wire as described 
in paragraph (f)(3)(iv) of this section. 

(i) 

Performance criteria and test procedures for insulation 
displacement type cross-connect modules

_(1) 

General. 

Many of 
the tests described in this section require that the 
cross-connect module be installed in an appropriate housing in 
its typical field configuration for testing. Resistance 
measurements should be made with an electrical device which 
measures changes in resistance for each test parameter measured. 
The tests specified provide an indication of the stability of 
the electrical connections under the test conditions encountered. 

(2) 

Environmental requirements. 

(i) A fully equipped 
arrangement of cross-connect modules having approximately 25 
special service markers shall successfully complete environmental 
testing in accordance with paragraphs (e)(3) introductory text 
through (e)(3)(xiii)(B) of this section. 

(ii) 

Insulation resistance/high humidity and salt fog 
exposure. 

Insulation resistance measurements shall not be less 
than 1 x 106 ohms when cross-connect modules are tested by a 
procedure similar to that described in paragraphs (g)(2)(i) 
introductory text through (g)(2)(i)(B) of this section. 

(iii) 

Insulation resistance/simulated rain exposure. 


Insulation resistance measurements shall not be less than 1 x 106 
ohms when cross-connect modules are tested by a procedure similar 
to that described in and paragraphs (g)(2)(ii) introductory text 
through (g)(2)(ii)(B) of this section. 

(iv) 

Contact resistance. 

The change in contact resistance 
should not exceed 2 milliohms when cross-connect modules are 
tested by a procedure similar to that described in paragraphs 
(g)(2)(iii) introductory text through (g)(2)(iii)(B) of this 
section. 

(v) 

Fire resistance. 

A housing fully equipped with cross-
connect modules and jumper wiring shall be tested for fire 
resistance by a procedure similar to that described in paragraph 
(g)(2)(iv) of this section. 

(vi) 

Encapsulant material compatibility. 

Cross-connect wire 
insulation and cross-connect hardware shall exhibit no visible 
material degradation when tested by the procedure described in 
paragraph (g)(2)(v) of this section. 



