 

27. The agency acknowledges that deodorancy is considered a cosmetic claim. However, some deodorant soap products
also bear antimicrobial claims. The agency stated in comment 10 of the tentative final monograph for OTC first aid
antiseptic drug products (56 FR 33644 at 33648) that deodorant soap products making antimicrobial claims are considered
to be drugs and that the testing guidelines for antimicrobial claims would be addressed in this rulemaking. Any deodorant
soap product containing a monograph ingredient may be labeled with antimicrobial claims provided the product meets
the testing requirements for health-care antiseptic drug products or surgical hand scrubs as described under proposed
333.470. 
The agency stated in the previous tentative final monograph for topical antimicrobial drug products (43 FR 1210 at
1244) that actual claims of deodorancy should correlate the microbial reduction achieved in a modified Cade handwashing
test to an ``adequately designed and executed deodorancy test, such as controlled sniff test.'' Several comments
to that proposal objected to such a correlation of deodorancy and microbial reduction. However, none of the comments
provided satisfactory data to enable the agency to include any test in a monograph as a standard for deodorancy due
to antimicrobial activity. Specific testing for antimicrobial claims for deodorancy has not yet been developed.
The agency intends to review any comments or methods submitted for such a purpose in response to this publication and
invites comments and data on this topic. 
28. The Panel's evaluation of OTC topical antimicrobial drug products did not include an evaluation of the use of these
products by the food industry as hand sanitizers or dips. Historically, hand sanitizers and dips have been marketed
as hand cleansers for use by food handlers in federally inspected meat and poultry processing plants and in food handling
establishments. Regulation of these products has been under the jurisdiction of the U. S. Department of Agriculture.
However, it has come to the agency's attention that many of these products include label claims that the agency considers
drug claims, 

i.e.

, ``antibacterial handwash,'' ``kills germs and bacteria on contact,'' or ``effectively reduces bacterial flora
of the skin''. (See comment 10 of the tentative final monograph for OTC first aid antiseptic drug products (56 FR 33644
at 33648).) Examination of the labeling of these products (Ref. 1) has led the agency to conclude that the intended
use of these products, 

i.e.

, the reduction of micro-organisms on human skin for the purpose of the prevention of disease caused by contaminated
food, makes them drugs under the provisions of the act. Section 201(g)(1) of the act (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) defines
a ``drug'' as an article ``intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease
in man ***.'' 
The safety and effectiveness of active ingredients in these products for drug use needs to be demonstrated. Therefore,
the agency is including evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of topical antimicrobial active ingredients
indicated for use as hand sanitizers or dips in the rulemaking for OTC topical antimicrobial drug products. Accordingly,
the agency invites the submission of data, published or unpublished, and any other information pertinent to the use
of topical antimicrobial ingredients in hand sanitizers or dips. The agency also invites comment on applicable effectiveness
standards for these products. These data and information will facilitate the agency's review and aid in its determination
as to whether these OTC drug products for human use are safe, effective, and not misbranded under their recommended
conditions of use. This evaluation will provide all interested parties an opportunity to present for consideration
the best data and information available to support the stated claims for these products. The agency suggests that
all submissions be in the format described in 21 CFR 330.10(a)(2). 
In order to be eligible for review under the OTC drug review procedures, the ingredient must have been marketed in a
hand sanitizer or dip to a material extent and for a material time (21 U.S.C. 321(p)(2)). The submission of data should
include information that demonstrates that the ingredient(s) has been marketed as a hand sanitizer or dip to a material
extent and for a material time. Products with ingredients under consideration in the OTC drug review may be marketed
(at the same dosage strength and in the same dosage form) under the manufacturer's good faith belief that the product
is generally recognized as safe and effective and not misbranded and in accord with FDA's enforcement policies related
to the OTC drug review. (See FDA's Compliance Policy Guides 7132b.15 and 7132b.16.) Such products are marketed at
the risk that the agency may adopt a position requiring relabeling, recall, or other regulatory action. 
The agency notes that antimicrobial hand sanitizers/dips marketed for use in food handling/processing are typically
labeled for a variety of other antimicrobial uses that may include various animal ``drug'' uses and the disinfection
of inanimate objects. These other uses of hand sanitizer or dips will not be included in the agency's evaluation as
part of this rulemaking. 


Reference 


(1) Labeling for hand sanitizer products, in OTC Vol. 230001, Docket No. 75N183H, Dockets Management Branch.





29. The agency is proposing to remove a portion of 369.21 applicable to OTC health-care antiseptic drug products
when the final monograph eventually becomes effective because a portion of the regulations will be superseded by
the final monograph. The item proposed for removal is the entry for ``ALCOHOL RUBBING COMPOUND'' in 369.21.



