 

Narrative comments were attached to 704 questionnaires. In addition, 1,529 letters containing comments on specific
provisions of the proposed policy were received. The total of 2,233 narrative responses, several of which provided
very detailed analysis and recommendations on policy provisions, provided the most useful information in preparing
the final revised policy and form the basis for the following comment analysis.

In addition to providing the questionnaire response forms to their members, the permittee associations provided
narrative responses to the proposed policy. These were generally detailed analysis of the policy with the associations'
recommendations for revision and improvement.

A summary of the general comments received and the agency's response to them is presented first, followed by a summary
of the specific comments received and the agency's response. Specific comments are organized in the same format as
found in the supplementary information to the proposed policy notice, that is, the same 7 topic headings representing
the major issues addressed in the proposed policy are used. The comment analysis concludes with a discussion of the
matters of concern in the Assistant Secretary's decision and the agency's response.



General Comments



Over half of the 2,233 respondents provided general comments on recreation residence use which were not directed
at specific provisions of the policy. Many respondents affirmed their desire to keep their cabins, at the same location,
at reasonable cost, and without continuous fear of nonrenewal of their permits. These respondents felt the agency,
through the proposed policy, was abandoning support for the recreation residence program, was biased against permit
holders, and was seeking to remove this use from National Forest System lands. Some respondents, however, felt the
agency was biased in favor of permit holders.

Many respondents offered eloquent testimony to the significance of the cabin to their family, citing emotional ties
to the site that span several generations. Others emphasized the importance of the recreation residence use to the
National Forest, describing how the cabins are used by a large segment of the public for recreation, generate income
to the Treasury, and contribute to the stewardship of the National Forests.

One permittee association advocated expansion of existing recreation residence tracts and establishment of new
tracts. This view was based on the belief that the agency was in violation of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 by failing to
make recreation residence lots available to persons of minority races, or of diverse religious, political, and sexual
beliefs. On the other hand, several respondents, favored no expansion to phasing out of all recreation residence
tracts.

Many respondents objected to the appeal of the August 10, 1988, policy and 270 suggested that the policy be restored
in its entirety. Often, these respondents stated that the proposed policy was biased and discriminatory against
cabin owners and was overly responsive to the views of those who opposed recreation residence use. A smaller number
felt the proposed policy was an improvement over the 1988 policy, but that there were several flaws in the 1988 policy
not addressed in the proposal, particularly that the bias in favor of permit holders, as identified in the appeal decision,
had not been corrected. Eleven respondents offering general comments generally agreed with the proposed policy,
that it responded to the appeal decision, was constructive and a step in the right direction.

The Forest Service recognizes that there is a divergency of opinion on recreation residence use on the National Forests.
It is sympathetic to those who have enjoyed the privilege of the use for many years and who want to continue the privilege.
Further, the contributions these holders make to the management and protection of the National Forests is acknowledged.

The agency also recognizes that increasing demands are being placed on the National Forests to meet a wider array of
public uses. Significant new public laws have been enacted since the act authorizing privately owned recreation
residences on the National Forests was enacted in 1915. These laws, particularly the National Environmental Policy
Act and the National Forest Management Act of 1976, directly impact the way the agency manages public and private uses
of the National Forests. Equally significant, public perceptions of how the National Forests should be managed have
changed in the 75 years the recreation residence program has been in existence.

The agency, by policy adopted over 25 years ago, stopped the establishment of new recreation residence tracts. Subsequently,
it stopped issuing new permits for vacant lots in already established tracts. This has fixed the number of recreation
residences in existence to a current 15,600. This action was taken in response to an increasing public demand for recreation
use on the National Forests in the 1960's. The rationale supporting that policy decision still applies. The agency,
while recognizing the views of those respondents who seek to create new recreation residence opportunities, believes
that such action would not be in the public interest. It does not propose to create tracts nor offer new permits for recreation
residence use. Recreation residences are bought and sold in the private real estate market, and, as such, are available
to all individuals under the laws of the States and local governments in which they are located.

