 

Many commenters, including State historic preservation organizations, supported this exception for certain historic
properties and its inclusion in ADAAG. Some commenters expressed concern that the exception in proposed ADAAG 4.1.7(a)
did not accurately reflect the distinction between ``program access'' requirements for ``historic programs''
in the Department of Justice title II regulations (see 28 CFR 35.150(b)(2)) and the alterations provisions for historic
buildings and facilities in ADAAG. In these commenters' view, the ``program access'' requirements for ``historic
programs'' in the Department of Justice title II regulations is more stringent than the alteration provisions for
historic properties in ADAAG.



Response. 

The exception incorporated in ADAAG 4.1.7(1)(a) retains the reference to the Department of Justice regulations
but has been clarified as applying to entities covered by title II and title III of the ADA. The Department of Justice
title II regulations also contain requirements for ``program access'' to ``historic programs'' which are in addition
to ADAAG. No other change has been made to this provision.




7. Business, Mercantile and Civic 



The word ``civic'' has been added to the title of this section to clarify that this section applies to buildings and
facilities or portions thereof that are civic administration facilities such as departments of motor vehicles,
licensing bureaus, or social service agencies. The Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS), as well as certain
model building codes, include this term under business occupancy classifications. 



7.2Sales and Service Counters, Teller Windows, Information Counters



ADAAG 7.2(3) provides for access at sales and service counters, teller windows and information counters for State
and local government facilities where goods or services are sold or distributed to the public. 



Comment. 

There was general support from a majority of commenters for providing access to such counters. The NPRM asked questions
regarding the appropriateness of applying the examples of equivalent facilitation contained in ADAAG 7.2.(2)(iii)
to State and local facilities. Those examples included a folding shelf or space on the side of a counter in lieu of a lowered
counter. Commenters were divided on this issue. The commenters who favored including the examples viewed the examples
as effective alternatives for access to sales and service counters, teller windows, and information counters. Some
commenters stated that a great deal of writing may be required at counters in some State and local government facilities.
For example, testing, licensing and, applications for building permits require completing forms and other paperwork.
In these instances, commenters viewed a folding shelf and certain other alternative means as not constituting equivalent
facilitation. Many commenters opposed including the examples for new construction. They recommended they be applied
only where alterations are made to existing counters. 



Response. 

Many commenters did not support including specific examples of equivalent facilitation and no such examples have
been included for sales and service counters, teller windows and information counters in State and local government
facilities. While counters in State and local government facilities may physically resemble those in places of public
accommodation and in commercial facilities, specific examples of equivalent facilitation in 7.2.(3)(iii) have
not been included because activities at counters covered in this section may require more writing or face-to-face
contact with personnel on the opposite side of the counter. However, it should be noted that ADAAG 2.2 provides an option
for equivalent facilitation which applies to all technical and scoping provisions including those in this section.
A folding shelf, in certain circumstances, may provide equal or greater access while it will not in others. The reference
to ADAAG 7.2(2) was removed from proposed ADAAG 7.2(3) and the text was rewritten so as not to include examples of equivalent
facilitation. 



Comment. 

The NPRM also proposed that where counters or teller windows have solid partitions, a method for facilitating voice
communication such as a grille, talk-through baffle, or an intercom be provided. The majority of commenters supported
the provision and regarded it necessary to facilitate voice communication at counters or windows with solid partitions.
The NPRM asked whether there were other design solutions that could facilitate voice communication. Commenters
offered a number of options including portable or hardwired assistive listening systems and TTYs for meeting this
requirement. 



Response. 

No substantive changes were made to ADAAG 7.2(3)(iii). Language has been added to the appendix to clarify that where
counters are used only by persons in a seated position a method to facilitate communication for standing persons is
not necessary. 



Comment. 

The NPRM asked whether there should be specific requirements for mounting equipment that displays information.
It further asked whether an eye level range of 43 inches to 51 inches would be sufficient in providing access for persons
using wheelchairs or mobility aids. Few commenters provided specific information regarding the effect of a requirement
for mounting equipment. 



Response. 

Requirements for the mounting height of equipment have not been included in the absence of supporting technical data.





10. Transportation Facilities



10.4Airports
10.4.1New Construction
10.4.1(8)Security Systems



This provision requires an accessible route complying with ADAAG 4.3 to be provided at each single security barrier
or group of security barriers (i.e., two or more security barriers, adjacent to each other, at a single location) in
airports covered by title II of the ADA. 



Comment. 

Commenters from national, State, and local organizations representing persons with disabilities supported the
provision as written. Airport operators and State governmental agencies also generally supported the provision.
One designer suggested that providing an accessible route could increase cost, but did not provide any cost information.
One comment recommended that the provision cover non-fixed security systems.

The NPRM sought comment on the availability of any technologies which would accommodate more persons with disabilities
and limit the need for individual security searches. Commenters who responded to the question supported the use of
metal detector ``wands'' and hand searches but did not have any information on alternative technologies. An airport
operator pointed out that the screening devices are specifically designed to react to metal, such as might be found
in braces and wheelchairs; and that, if devices did not so react, it would not be long before a terrorist pretended to
be a person with a disability to circumvent security. 



Response. 

ADAAG contains design and construction requirements for accessibility and does not cover equipment. This does not
mean, however, that portable or non-fixed equipment is not covered by the ADA. Equipment and operational issues are
covered by the Department of Justice regulations implementing titles II and III (28 CFR Parts 35 and 36) and by the Department
of Transportation regulations implementing the Air Carrier Access Act (14 CFR Part 382). No changes were made to this
provision.




11. Judicial, Legislative and Regulatory Facilities



This section addresses those facilities where judicial, legislative, and regulatory functions occur. Judicial
facilities consist of courthouses. Legislative facilities include town halls, city council chambers, city or county
commissioners' meeting rooms, and State capitols. Typically, a State capitol would contain Senate and House chambers
if bicameral, or one chamber if unicameral; and committee rooms, public meeting rooms, and other assembly areas.
Regulatory facilities are those which house State and local entities whose functions include regulating, governing,
or licensing activities. For example, this section would address those rooms where school board meetings, zoning
appeals, and adjudicatory hearings (e.g., drivers license suspensions) are held.


