 

A professional association commented that the proposed 5-day limit on the use of sick leave to care for a family member
is unnecessary and too restrictive and that it contravenes the FMLA, which imposes no such limit. The association
believes the FMLA already permits Federal employees to substitute their accrued or accumulated sick leave for any
or all of the 12 weeks of unpaid FMLA leave to care for a family member. Under 5 U.S.C. 6382(d), an employee may elect to
substitute paid accrued or accumulated annual or sick leave for any part of the 12-week period of FMLA leave, ``except
that nothing in this subchapter shall require an employing agency to provide paid sick leave in any situation in which
such employer would not normally provide any such paid leave.''
The association believes the legislative history of the FMLA shows that Congress intended that employees would be
entitled to unlimited substitution of sick leave for unpaid leave provided by the FMLA. The association raised these
same objections in its comments to the Department of Labor (DOL) on its Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (58 FR 13394,
March 10, 1993) requesting assistance in developing interim regulations implementing Title I of the FMLA and to OPM
on its interim regulations implementing Title II of the FMLA (58 FR 39596, July 23, 1993). The association further
stated that since OPM has not yet issued final regulations on the FMLA and has not resolved the issue of substitution
of sick leave, it is premature for OPM to promulgate a sick leave rule that may contradict OPM's final FMLA regulations.
DOL addressed the professional association's objections in its interim regulations implementing Title I of the
FMLA in 29 CFR part 825 (58 FR 31794, June 4, 1993). DOL stated that ``the history of this provision lacks an explanation
that it is so intended and cannot, therefore, overcome the clearer reading of the statutory language.'' OPM agrees
with DOL's assessment that the legislative history does not support the idea that Congress intended unlimited substitution
of paid sick leave for FMLA leave without pay. In addition, 630.1205(b)(1) of OPM's interim regulations implementing
Title II of the FMLA specifically states that an employee may elect to substitute annual or sick leave for unpaid FMLA
leave, ``consistent with current law and regulations governing the granting and use of annual and sick leave.''
Most of the agencies commenting on the 5-day limitation suggested that OPM impose no limit on the amount of sick leave
that an employee may use to provide care for an ill or injured family member. Two agencies recommended that, because
of the similarity of purpose between this initiative and the Family and Medical Leave Act, the sick leave regulations
should be amended to permit employees to substitute sick leave for any or all of the 12 weeks of unpaid leave provided
by the FMLA. One agency noted that by aligning the sick leave regulations with the FMLA, OPM could reduce the need for
another set of tracking systems covering time off to care for family members. Several agencies reported that tracking
and monitoring the proposed 5-day limit would impose an additional administrative burden on their payroll and timekeeping
functions because they would be required to track two types of sick leave_sick leave used for the employee's own medical
needs and sick leave used for family needs. One agency stated that the potential for abuse appears high, since an employer
may have difficulty verifying the medical status of family members.
A professional organization stated that limiting the use of sick leave to 5 days per year for family care or bereavement
purposes is both inadequate and impractical to administer and would send a mixed message to Federal employees that
family-friendly programs are encouraged but only minimally supported. The organization objected to what it characterized
as OPM's patronizing tone in expressing a need to exercise caution in making changes in the sick leave regulations
that might allow for abuse or harm the employee's ability to save enough sick leave for his or her own personal use. The
organization suggested that employees should be viewed as fully responsible for accommodating their own personal
and family needs and recommended allowing employees to use an unlimited amount of sick leave for family care purposes.
As noted above, the Federal Employees Family Friendly Leave Act establishes a maximum limitation of 104 hours (13
workdays) of sick leave that may be used by most employees to care for a family member or for bereavement purposes. Consistent
with the limitations established by this legislation and in response to the comments described above, the final regulations
provide that all covered full-time employees may use a total of up to 40 hours (5 workdays) of sick leave each year for
family care or bereavement purposes. In addition, a covered full-time employee who maintains a balance of at least
80 hours of sick leave may use an additional 64 hours (8 workdays) of sick leave per year for these purposes, bringing
the total amount of sick leave available for family care and bereavement purposes to a maximum of 104 hours (13 workdays)
per year for employees who satisfy this condition. (See 630.401 (b) through (d).)


