 

In response and as stated above, under section 129 of the Act, the EPA is mandated only to develop model State training
and certification programs for operators of high capacity fossil fuel-fired plants. These model programs will be
made available to the States for their use. The EPA agrees that a mechanism should be included in any State rules regarding
training and certification to allow facilities to satisfactorily demonstrate the equivalency of their program.
With regard to certification, this is similar to the provision included in the EPA regulations for MWC units where
EPA allows certification by ASME or an equivalent State-approved certification program.


4. Applicability


Many comments dealt with the coverage of the training and certification programs. These comments included:
a. They questioned the EPA's interpretation of high capacity fossil fuel-fired plants as inclusive of boilers with
relatively small capacity (i.e., as low as 10 million Btu per hour heat input). These commenters suggested that the
EPA target training for operators of boilers with 100 million Btu per hour heat input or greater. They commented that
many of the boilers in the 10 to 100 million Btu per hour range operate automatically with little attention, without
air pollution control equipment and do not incorporate operator adjustment features that could adversely affect
air pollution, and are mostly fueled by gas or light oil. Adjustments to these boilers are made on an annual or twice
per year basis by qualified outside contractors that specialize in boiler controls and adjustments. The commenters
further indicated that the narrow range of adjustments that an operator could make on a gas-fired boiler less than
100 million Btu per hour has a minor influence on emissions and that NO

X

 emissions are determined primarily by design factors such as configuration of the combustion chamber and the burner
design. Neither of these are under control of the operator.
b. A provision should be included in the final model State program to allow for acceptance of alternative training
and certification programs for facilities with low capacity factors. The EPA should include an exemption for training
for those units with annual capacity factors less than 15%. The required definition of high capacity fossil fuel-fired
plants would not be altered if such an exemption were provided for these units.
c. Many commenters believe that the training and certification requirement was intended to apply only to units subject
to Subparts Da, Db, and Dc.


* * * * *


In response to the above, the range of boiler sizes selected by the EPA for inclusion in the model State training program
was based on the range of boiler sizes covered by the various existing EPA emission regulations for steam generating
units. These emission regulations cover the size range from 10 million Btu per hour heat input and greater.
Potential air pollution problems can result from poor operation and maintenance of a boiler and associated air pollution
control system when operators do not understand the combustion and air pollution control processes and are inadequately
trained. The EPA feels that the training of boiler operators, regardless of the size or capacity factor, would result
in improved operation, be relatively inexpensive and would reduce emissions.
The reference made to Subparts Da, Db, and Dc in the October 6, 1993 

Federal Register

 notice was intended only to give the reader an indication of the types and sizes of the boilers that were selected for
discussion in the training course. Subparts Da, Db, and Dc list definitions for various aspects covered in the training
materials, such as, fossil fuel, electric utility steam generating unit, heat input, fluidized bed combustion,
etc. The reference to Subparts Da, Db, and Dc was not to suggest that the training course was only intended for operators
of boilers subject to these subparts. The training course was designed to be appropriate for operators of any boiler
with a capacity above 10 million Btu per hour heat input.


III. Model State Training Program


The training program developed for boiler operators is intended to provide the operator with a basic understanding
of the principles of fuel combustion and air pollution control and to identify good operating practices. The program
is intended to supplement rather than substitute for site-specific ``hands-on'' training of the operator. The objectives
of the training program are: to instruct operators in the basic principles of proper operation and maintenance of
boilers and air pollution control systems; to help assure that the boiler is continuously operated in a manner which
complies with State and Federal regulations; to enhance the operators appreciation for their role in minimizing
air pollution; and to increase the operators awareness of regulatory requirements.


