 

(9) All test data obtained by the manufacturer on each 
test engine; 

(10) An unconditional statement certifying that all 
engines in the engine family comply with all requirements of 
this part and the Clean Air Act. 

(b) At the Administrator's request, the manufacturer 
must supply such additional information as may be required 
to evaluate the application including, but not limited to, 
projected nonroad engine production. 



89.11696 

Engine families. 



(a) A manufacturer's product line is divided into 
engine families that are comprised of engines expected to 
have similar emission characteristics throughout their 
useful life periods. 

(b) The following characteristics distinguish engine 
families: 

(1) Fuel; 

(2) Cooling medium; 

(3) Method of air aspiration; 

(4) Method of exhaust aftertreatment (for example, 
catalytic converter or particulate trap); 

(5) Combustion chamber design; 

(6) Bore; 

(7) Stroke; 

(8) Number of cylinders, (engines with aftertreatment 
devices only); and 

(9) Cylinder arrangement (engines with aftertreatment 
devices only). 

(c) Upon a showing by the manufacturer that the useful 
life period emission characteristics are expected to be 
similar, engines differing in one or more of the 
characteristics in paragraph (b) of this section may be 
grouped in the same engine family. 

(d) Upon a showing by the manufacturer that the 
expected useful life period emission characteristics will be 
different, engines identical in all the characteristics of 
paragraph (b) of this section may be divided into separate 
engine families. 



89.11796 

Test fleet selection. 



(a) The manufacturer must select for testing, from each 
engine family, the engine with the most fuel injected per 
stroke of an injector at maximum power. 

(b) Each engine in the test fleet must be constructed 
to be representative of production engines. 

(c) After review of the manufacturer's test fleet, the 
Administrator may select from the available fleet one 
additional test engine from each engine family. 



89.11896 

Service accumulation. 



(a)(1) Each test engine in the test fleet must be 
operated with all emission control systems operating 
properly for a period sufficient to stabilize emissions. 

(2) A manufacturer may elect to consider as stabilized 
emission levels from engines with no more than 125 hours of 
service. 

(b) No maintenance, other than recommended lubrication 
and filter changes, may be performed during service 
accumulation without the Administrator's approval. 

(c) Service accumulation should be performed in a 
manner using good engineering judgment to ensure that 
emissions are representative of in-use engines. 

(d) The manufacturer must maintain, and provide to the 
Administrator if requested, records stating the rationale 
for selecting the service accumulation period and records 
describing the method used to accumulate service hours on 
the test engine(s). 



89.11996 

Emission tests. 



(a) 

Manufacturer testing.

 (1) Upon completion of 
service accumulation, the manufacturer must test each test 
engine using the specified test procedures, except as 
provided in 89.11496. The procedures to be used are set 
forth in: 

(i) Subpart E of this part; 

(ii) The California Regulations for New 1996 and Later 
Heavy-Duty Off-Road Diesel Cycle Engines. This procedure 
has been incorporated by reference. See 89.6; and 

(iii) Part 86, subpart I of this chapter. 


