 

<TABLE>





Public Service Rate Structure Using Rate of Return Standards 

1Line 
1Description
 


1. 
Adjusted Operating Revenue. 
2. less 
Adjusted Operating Expense. 
3. equals 
Adjusted Operating Profit (Loss). 
4. less 
Adjusted Interest Expense. 
5. equals 
Adjusted Earnings Before Tax. 
6. less 
Federal Tax Allowance. 
7. equals 
Net Income. 
8. 
Return Element (Net Income plus Interest). 
9. divided by 
Investment Base (Separately determined). 
10. equals 
Return on Investment (ROI).

</TABLE>
 

This NPRM defines the elements of this basic structure for Great Lakes Pilotage Rates below. 
1.

 Adjusted Operating Revenue: 

Adjusted Operating Revenue is the sum of all operating revenues received by the pilot organizations for their pilotage
services, less revenues from ancillary pilotage services that are offset against operating expenses, discussed
below. 
2. 

Adjusted Operating Expense: 

Adjusted Operating Expense is the sum of all operating expenses incurred by the pilot organizations for their pilotage
services, less the sum of all disallowed expenses, discussed below. 
3. 

Adjusted Operating Profit (Loss): 

Adjusted Operating Profit (Loss) is the Adjusted Operating Revenue, less the Adjusted Operating Expense. 
4. 

Adjusted Interest Expense: 

Adjusted Interest Expense is the reported pilot association interest expense on operations, adjusted to exclude
any interest expense attributable to non-pilotage operations. 
5. 

Adjusted Earnings Before Tax: 

Adjusted Earnings Before Tax is the Adjusted Operating Profit (Loss), less the Adjusted Interest Expense. 
6. 

Federal Tax Allowance: 

The Federal Tax Allowance is the Federal statutory tax on Earnings Before Tax, for those pilot organizations subject
to federal tax. 
7. 

Adjusted Net Income: 

Adjusted Net Income is the Adjusted Earnings Before Tax, less the Federal Tax Allowance. 
8. 

Return Element: 

The Return Element is the Adjusted Net Income, plus Adjusted Interest Expense. The return element can be considered
the sum of the return to equity capital (the net income) and the return to debt (the interest expense). Both interest
expense and net income must be summed to determine the return to the combined debt and equity investment, below. 
9. 

Investment Base: 

The Investment Base is the net capital invested in the pilot organization, including both equity and debt. Should
capital be invested in other than pilotage operations, that capital and related revenues and expenses would be excluded
from the rate base. The investment base is defined below. 
10. 

Return on Investment: 

The Return on Investment (ROI) is the Return Element, divided by the Investment Base, and expressed as a percent. 
Putting actual data into the format described above would generate the pilot organizations' actual financial performance
for a past period. This NPRM proposes to establish prospective rates, however, and therefore propose several additional
regulatory adjustments. These adjustments include establishing a prospective return to investment, adjusting
for inflation, and projecting the need for pilotage services. These adjustments are described in Part A. 


2. Investment Base 


The Investment Base is the recognized capital investment in the useful assets employed by the pilot groups. In general,
it is the sum of available cash and the net value of real assets, less the value of land. This NPRM proposes to establish
the investment base through the use of the balance sheet accounts, as amended by material supplied in the Notes to the
Financial Statement, discussed below. Below are the accounts and methodology this NPRM proposes to use. The account
numbers are taken from the accounting revisions in Part B.


