 

The routine uses proposed for this system are compatible with the stated purposes of the system. The first routine
use permitting disclosure to a congressional office is proposed to allow subject individuals to obtain assistance
from their representatives in Congress, should they so desire. Such disclosure would be made only pursuant to a request
of the individual. The second routine use allows disclosure to the Department of Justice to defend the Federal Government,
the Department, or employees of the Department in the event of litigation. The third routine use allows disclosure
to contractors and subcontractors for the purpose of processing, maintaining and refining records in the system.
Contracting for such services is advisable because the agency lacks necessary internal resources and because processing
or refining the records using contractors will be cost-effective. The contractors will maintain and will be required
to ensure that subcontractors maintain Privacy Act safeguards with respect to such records. The fourth routine use
permits disclosure of a record for an authorized research purpose under specified conditions.
The following notice is written in the present, rather than future tense, in order to avoid the unnecessary expenditure
of public funds to republish the notice after the system has become effective.



Dated: March 25, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Wilford J. Forbush,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Office of Management.


09250172


System name:


Clinical Research: National Center for Human Genome Research, HHS/NIH/NCHGR.


Security classification:


None.


System location:


National Center for Human Genome Research, National Institutes of Health, Building 38A, room 617, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, and at hospitals, medical schools, universities, research institutions, commercial
organizations, collaborating State and Federal Government agencies, and Federal Records Centers. A list of locations
is available upon request from the System Manager.


Categories of individuals covered by the system:


Patients with diseases of genetic origin, normal healthy volunteers who serve as controls for comparison with patients,
relatives of patients and other individuals whose characteristics or conditions are being studied for possible
genetic connections with the occurrence of the diseases under investigation.

</SIGNJOB>
