 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>21 CFR Parts 73, 74, 168, 172, 173, 182, and 184</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93N0348]</RINDOCK>


Lead in Food and Color Additives and GRAS Ingredients; Request for Data


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Advance notice of proposed rulemaking.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing that it intends to take several related actions to reduce the
amount of lead in food from the use of food and color additives and food ingredients whose use is generally recognized
as safe (GRAS). This action is part of its ongoing efforts to reduce the levels of lead in food. In this document, the
agency is identifying the lead levels that it intends to propose as new, lower lead specifications for the most heavily
used food and color additives and GRAS ingredients. Before proposing these specifications, however, the agency
is requesting information on whether these levels are feasible, and, if they are not, information on why higher levels
will not endanger the public health, and on what levels are feasible. The agency is requesting specific data and information
on the lead levels and the methods for detecting lead in these substances. Additionally, the agency is requesting
information on the economic and environmental effects of lowering the lead levels. 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments and information provided by May 5, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Submit written comments and information to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration,
rm. 123, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Helen R. Thorsheim, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS216), Food and Drug Administration,
200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022549511.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

In this advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPRM), the agency is announcing its intention to decrease the amount
of lead derived from food and color additives and GRAS food ingredients in the diet through several actions. These
actions are prompted by the results of recent studies showing that deleterious health effects are caused by much lower
levels of lead than previous results indicated, especially in fetuses, infants, and young children. Also, the development
of more sensitive analytical methods has made it possible to detect lower lead levels in food ingredients.


This ANPRM has four purposes: (1) To discuss the toxic effects of lead and to describe the multiple sources of lead in
the human environment; (2) to summarize actions that FDA and other Federal agencies have taken to reduce lead exposures;
(3) to discuss available data and potential exposures to lead from the consumption of food, including food and color
additives and GRAS ingredients used in food; and (4) to describe the need for new petitions for moderate and high consumption
food and color additives and GRAS ingredients to include specific information on the levels of lead in these substances.
This information is necessary to assess the substance's contribution of lead to the diet, and, therefore, whether
it is safe for its intended use. 
The agency intends to propose new, lower lead specifications for moderate and high consumption food ingredients
that either are the subject of premarket review or are currently in use, to ensure that the amount of lead contributed
to the diet from the use of these food and color additives and GRAS ingredients is as low as feasible. The agency intends
to propose adopting specifications of 0.5 part per million (ppm) for moderate consumption food ingredients and 0.1
ppm for high consumption food ingredients, unless information is submitted to show that such levels are not feasible
and that higher specifications will not endanger the public health. Finally, the ANPRM requests specific information
on the lead levels and the methods used to detect lead in the moderate and high consumption substances identified and
on the economic and environmental effects of lowering the lead levels in these food and color additives and GRAS ingredients.
FDA will review the information provided in response to this ANPRM before it proposes modifications to the current
specifications for lead in these food and color additives and GRAS ingredients. 


I. Background


A. Lead Toxicity


Lead affects numerous essential body functions and has no known physiological value. The primary targets of lead
are the central and peripheral nervous systems, the kidneys, and red blood cells. Recent scientific evidence indicates
that lead has deleterious effects on human health at levels that were once thought to be innocuous. In fact, there is
no known level of lead intake that does not produce adverse health effects.
FDA discussed the well-documented adverse health effects of lead in an ANPRM on lead in food published in the 

Federal Register

 of August 31, 1979 (44 FR 51233); in a proposed rule on the migration of lead from ceramic pitchers published in the 

Federal Register

 of June 1, 1989 (54 FR 23485); in a proposed rule on tin-coated foil capsules for wine bottles published in the 

Federal Register

 of November 25, 1992 (57 FR 55485); and in a proposed rule on lead-soldered food cans published in the 

Federal Register

 of June 21, 1993 (58 FR 33860). Also, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP) discuss lead's effects
in their 1991 document entitled ``Preventing Lead Poisoning in Young Children'' (Ref. 1). 
In this ANPRM, FDA's primary concern is the effects of low levels of lead on fetuses, infants, and children from consumption
of food and color additives and GRAS ingredients used in food. The adverse health effects of lead exposure in fetuses,
infants, and children occur at lower blood lead levels than in adults. In particular, lead is harmful to the developing
major organs, such as the brain and nervous system, of these sensitive population groups. Fetuses are sensitive to
maternal dietary lead intake, especially during the development of their nervous systems. Further, infants and
children ingest and absorb a larger amount of lead per unit of body weight than adults, and they also retain a larger
fraction of absorbed lead.
Blood lead levels of a large number of children in the United States remain above the toxicity standards recommended
by the CDCP (Ref. 1). Additionally, recent studies show a correlation between impaired childhood development and
lead exposure at levels as low as 10 micrograms/deciliter (&mu;g/dL) of lead in blood and below. Decreased stature
or growth, decreased hearing acuity, impaired neurobehavioral development, and decreased intelligence have all
been linked to these low levels of lead exposure in children (Ref. 1). Lead also interferes with the synthesis of vitamin
D and heme, the iron containing component of hemoglobin, at blood lead levels of 10 to 15 &mu;g/dL. 
The symptoms of lead exposure at these low levels are not pronounced and are therefore difficult to assess. A technique
of grouping data from different studies (meta-analysis), which enhances the ability to detect a true effect, has
been used to retrospectively analyze 12 studies reported since 1981 on the relationship between childhood lead exposures
and neurobehavioral development (Ref. 2). The results of this analysis strongly support the hypothesis that there
is an inverse relationship between lead exposure and childhood intelligence quotient (IQ), even at very low doses.
Similarly, a coordinated study by eight countries showed a significant relationship between increases in blood-lead
concentration and decreases in behavioral test performance for blood-lead levels ranging from 5 to 60 &mu;g/dL (Ref.
3).
Long-lasting adverse effects from low level childhood lead exposures have also been observed. Early postnatal exposure
results in decreased cognitive performance in the preschool and early school years (Refs. 4 and 5). Academic success
and the fine motor skills of young adults were also shown to be inversely related to the amount of lead in the teeth shed
by children in the first and second grades (Ref. 6).
Fetuses are also at risk to low levels of lead. The available data show that the placenta is not a significant barrier
to fetal lead uptake. Maternal and umbilical cord blood-lead levels of 10 to 15 &mu;g/dL are associated with reduced
gestational age and reduced weight at birth (Ref. 4). Additionally, there are several studies in which prenatal blood-lead
levels were monitored, followed by monitoring of the blood-lead level and childhood development for several years
after birth. In most of these studies, prenatal exposures were associated with slower sensory motor development
and delayed early cognitive development (Ref. 1). Some of these associations may decrease as the child ages, if postnatal
exposures are low, and subsequent socioeconomic conditions are favorable (Ref. 7). 
Adult exposure to lead has been associated with higher occurrences of cardiovascular disease when blood lead levels
are as low as 25 to 30 &mu;g/dL (Ref. 8). In particular, there is an increased incidence of high blood pressure, which
may lead to an increase in hypertension-related diseases. Red blood cell protoporphyrin elevation and peripheral
nerve dysfunction have also been observed at these same blood lead levels (Ref. 8).
As the amount and duration of lead exposure increases, lead's effects on the body become more severe. Blood-lead levels
above 40 &mu;g/dL in all population groups can result in permanent kidney damage, acute anemia, peripheral nerve
dysfunction, and severe gastrointestinal symptoms. Higher levels of lead affect the central nervous system. Blood
levels greater than 80 &mu;g/dL in children and greater than 100 &mu;g/dL in adults can lead to acute encephalopathy,
characterized by massive accumulation of fluid in the brain, gross mental retardation in children, convulsions,
coma, and even death (Ref. 8). 


B. Sources of Lead


Lead is ubiquitous in industrial societies. Known sources of lead include paint containing lead-based pigments,
leaded gasoline, and lead solder. Lead exposure occurs through pathways such as food, air, dust, soil, and water.
For children under 5 years of age, lead-based paint remains the primary source of high level lead poisoning, with ingestion
of dust and soils contaminated with this paint being the primary exposure pathway. In contrast, low level lead exposure
in all population groups is often caused by contributions through a variety of pathways, with no single source or pathway
predominating. Because the effects of lead from all sources are additive, contributions from any single source should
be well below the amount known to cause deleterious health effects. 
In 1990, FDA estimated that, on average, 16 percent of a 2-year-old child's lead intake was derived from food (Ref.
9). Most of the rest of the lead was ingested from dust (75 percent). FDA has also estimated that women of childbearing
age ingest 43 percent of their lead from food and 53 percent from dust and water. Children, through play and normal hand-to-mouth
activities, ingest larger amounts of lead from dust and soil than adults.
Lead is introduced into food through a variety of pathways. It can enter the food chain through water, dust, soil, or
air. Naturally occurring levels of lead in the environment are generally negligible compared to those caused by humans
(Ref. 10). Lead in water comes primarily from the plumbing systems used for water distribution. Airborne lead, from
the exhaust of cars and machinery that use leaded gasoline and from industrial activities that emit lead, can be deposited
directly on plants. Lead is also deposited on soil from these sources. In addition, lead in soils is in part the result
of the historical use of lead-based pesticides. Lead deposited on soil remains a long-term source of lead exposure
because it does not biodegrade or decay, and it is immobilized by the organic component of soil (Ref. 10).
Food processing also contributes lead to food. Lead can be introduced through the machinery and water used in food
processing, from food and color additives and GRAS ingredients used in food, and from food packaging. Cans with lead-soldered
seams have been a predominant source of lead contamination in food in the recent past. If lead-based paint is present
in a food manufacturing or processing facility, paint dust containing significant quantities of lead may also contaminate
the food.


II. Previous Regulatory Action on Lead


A. FDA Actions


FDA has been involved in reducing the amount of lead in the diet since the 1930's. Initial efforts were aimed at controlling
the use of lead-containing pesticides on fruits and vegetables. Subsequent attention has been directed at lead contributions
from a variety of sources including ceramicware, lead-soldered food cans, and tin-lead capsules for wine bottles.
In the 

Federal Register

 of August 31, 1979 (44 FR 51233), the FDA published an ANPRM (the 1979 ANPRM) that described the sources of lead in foods,
the health concerns arising from the presence of lead in foods, and the agency's plan to reduce the level of dietary
lead intake derived from the use of lead solder in food cans. The 1979 ANPRM identified the maximum tolerable level
of total lead intake from all sources. The notice also announced the agency's tentative plan to reduce contributions
of lead from other sources in foods and requested information on existing lead levels in foods.
The agency also published a proposed rule in the 

Federal Register

 of June 1, 1989 (54 FR 23485) that proposed limitations on the amount of lead that could leach from ceramic pitchers
(excluding creamers) that are intended for food contact. This document also proposed that decorative ceramicware
that leaches high lead levels must be permanently labeled or modified in such a way as to preclude its use for holding
foods. The agency recently revised its Compliance Policy Guide to include lower enforcement level guidelines for
ceramic foodware (July 6, 1992, 57 FR 29734).
Beginning in 1992, FDA has accelerated its actions to reduce the level of lead in food. In the 

Federal Register

 of November 25, 1992 (57 FR 55485), the agency published a proposed rule to prohibit the use of tin-coated lead foil
capsules as coverings on wine bottles. This action was based on evidence that under ordinary conditions of use, lead
in these capsules can become a component of wine. In that document, the agency discussed the relationship between
lead exposure and lead in blood and tentatively defined a provisional tolerable total intake level (PTTIL) for lead
from all food and non-food sources. The agency calculated the PTTIL based on the most up-to-date knowledge of lead's
lowest toxic effect levels. The agency tentatively set the PTTIL at 25 micrograms per day (&mu;g/day) for pregnant
women, who are surrogates for fetal exposure, and 75 &mu;g/day for other adults. These values are provisional because
they are based on the current lowest observed effect level (LOEL) of lead in the blood (30 &mu;g/dL for adults and 10
&mu;g/dL for infants, children, and pregnant women), which may need to be reduced further if additional research
shows that even lower blood-lead levels cause adverse health effects.
In a proposed rule published in the 

Federal Register

 of January 5, 1993 (58 FR 389), the agency proposed to establish a maximum level of 0.005 milligram per liter (mg/L)
as the quality standard for lead in bottled water.
In a proposed rule published in the 

Federal Register

 of June 21, 1993 (58 FR 33860), the agency proposed to ban the use of lead solder for domestic and imported food cans.
In that document, the agency tentatively defined the PTTIL for infants and children. The agency used the LOEL of 10
&mu;g/dL to arrive at a PTTIL of 6 &mu;g/day for infants and children (Ref. 8). This lower PTTIL is based on the fact that
children absorb lead more efficiently than do adults. In a notice published in the 

Federal Register

 of April 1, 1993 (58 FR 17233), the agency also announced emergency action levels for lead in foods packed in lead-soldered
cans. These action levels are an interim measure to protect infants and young children from adverse effects that could
result from daily consumption of foods packaged in lead-soldered cans, pending completion of the rulemaking to prohibit
the use of lead solder in food cans. 
In a final rule published in the 

Federal Register

 of January 12, 1994 (59 FR 1638), the agency amended its regulations to require that decorative ceramicware, which
may leach hazardous amounts of lead into food, bear adequate indications to distinguish it from ceramic foodware
(i.e., ceramicware intended for holding, storing, or serving food). This rule requires a statement and a stick-on
label on the exterior surface of the decorative ceramicware that the piece is not for food use, and that it may poison
food. Alternatively, the rule provides that a hole may be bored through the possible food-contact surface of the piece.



B. Other Federal Agency Actions


The elimination of lead poisoning is a coordinated effort by several Federal agencies. In 1988, the Agency for Toxic
Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) published a report to Congress summarizing the nature and extent of lead
poisoning in children. The report found that in 1984, 17 percent of metropolitan preschool children had blood lead
levels that exceeded 15 &mu;g/dL (Ref. 11). In February 1991, the Department of Health and Human Services announced
a ``Strategic Plan for the Elimination of Childhood Lead Poisoning.'' This document called for a concerted, society-wide
elimination effort and described the need for a more comprehensive evaluation of blood lead levels and environmental
lead contamination (Ref. 1).
CDCP also addressed the issues of lead toxicity and poison prevention in children in their October 1991 document entitled
``Preventing Lead Poisoning in Young Children'' (Ref. 1). This document included multitiered program, based on
blood lead levels, that CDCP devised to replace the previous single definition of lead poisoning. The CDCP threshold
for initiating action to reduce lead exposure was lowered from 25 &mu;g/dL to 10 &mu;g/dL in children because of the
large amount of data showing lead's deleterious effects on development at blood lead levels of 10 &mu;g/dL and above.
The CDCP are also helping laboratories to improve the reliability of blood lead measurements and are developing improved
instrumentation for analysis of blood lead levels.
In 1978, the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) banned both paint containing more than 0.06 percent lead by
weight and the deliberate addition of lead to paint for use on residential surfaces, toys, and furniture. In addition,
in the 

Federal Register

 of April 30, 1992 (57 FR 18418), the CPSC announced that it was investigating the further reduction of this maximum
allowable limit to 0.01 percent. Lead-based paint is still available for industrial, marine, and military use. 
In a plan for the abatement of lead-based paint published in 1990, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) found that approximately 74 percent of occupied, privately-owned houses built before 1980 still contained
lead-based paint. The CDCP report (Ref. 1) summarizes the results of this report and discusses methods for decreasing
lead exposure in houses painted with lead-based paint.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has been working for many years on the removal of lead in gasoline, pesticides,
and, more recently, drinking water (June 7, 1991, 56 FR 26460). EPA has also recently released a report to Congress
outlining a strategy to reduce human lead exposures from the environment, as summarized in the CDCP report (Ref. 1).
As part of this strategy, EPA published a final rule on June 30, 1993 (58 FR 35314), that decreased the minimum quantity
of several lead compounds, as emissions from manufacturing facilities, that must be reported to the agency. 


III. Lead in Food and Color Additives and Gras Ingredients


A. Exposure to Lead from Food and Food Ingredients


Based upon the results of FDA's Total Diet Study (the agency's annual market-basket survey of foods (Ref. 12)), from
1988 through 1990, FDA estimates that 2-year-old children consume about 4.5 &mu;g of lead each day from food alone,
while women of childbearing age consume about 9 &mu;g/day (Ref. 9). For a 2-year-old child, lead intake from food is
nearly equal to the PTTIL of 6 &mu;g/day for lead from all sources, even though food is estimated to account for only
16 percent of the child's total daily intake of lead (Ref. 9). 
In its 1988 report to Congress, ATSDR estimated that, in 1987, approximately 1 million young children in this country
consumed sufficient lead in food to cause blood lead levels of 10 &mu;g/dL and greater (Ref. 11). 
The relation between dietary lead and lead uptake in the body is complex. Absorption of lead from the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract in adults is normally about 10 to 15 percent, but it can be as high as 45 percent under fasting conditions (Ref.
8). This difference may be important, for example, when foods containing lead are consumed between meals. It has been
empirically estimated that for low exposures, resulting in blood lead levels of up to 30 &mu;g/dL, the ingestion of
1 &mu;g of lead per day in the diet results in an increase of 0.04 &mu;g/dL of lead in the blood of adults (Ref. 13). 
Children are even more efficient at absorbing lead through the GI tract than are adults, with a rate of absorption of
approximately 50 percent (Ref. 8). In children, for exposures resulting in blood lead levels up to 10 &mu;g/dL, every
microgram of lead ingested per day from the diet increases the blood lead level by 0.16 &mu;g/dL. This level is approximately
four times as much lead in the blood per equivalent dose as in adults.


B. Need for Action to Lower Lead Specifications


Since FDA began to regulate food additives in 1958, the agency has generally considered that the public health was
adequately protected by specifications of 3 ppm for arsenic, 10 ppm for lead, and 40 ppm for total heavy metals (as lead)
(Ref. 14). The agency believed that these specifications could readily be met in food additives produced under current
good manufacturing practice (CGMP) conditions, and that these specifications would ensure that food additives
would not contribute significant amounts of heavy metals to the diet. The agency also believed that the actual heavy-metal
levels achieved through adherence to CGMP's would be significantly lower than these limits (Ref. 15). 
When the Food Chemicals Codex was established by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) in 1961, the Food Chemicals
Codex committee adopted these specifications for nearly all food additives. These levels have remained until recently
as the levels used as guidance in establishing specifications in Food Chemicals Codex monographs for food ingredients.

However, with today's increased knowledge of lead's deleterious effects at low ingestion levels, it is necessary
to decrease lead specifications for food and color additives and GRAS ingredients to protect the public health. Specifications
must be set at the lowest lead levels attainable through the diligent application of CGMP's to ensure that lead is reduced
to its lowest possible levels in food.
The potential exists, with the high current levels of lead specifications, that food and color additives and GRAS
ingredients will contribute significant amounts of lead to the diet. Even if most food ingredients do not contain
the maximum amount of lead permitted by the specifications, lead ingested from the use of food and color additives
and GRAS ingredients will comprise a small, although not readily quantifiable, percentage of a person's total dietary
lead intake. Because low level lead exposure is often the result of contributions from multiple small sources, significant
reductions in a person's overall lead exposure can result from reductions in the levels of lead in many of those sources.
Although some sources may be difficult to control, the agency believes that industry has the ability to reduce lead
levels in food and color additives and GRAS ingredients, either through tighter control of starting material purities
or improvements in manufacturing processes.
To illustrate the potential lead exposure from food and color additives and GRAS ingredients, FDA has calculated
the possible per capita lead intake from the use of those additives and GRAS ingredients that are added to the U.S. food
supply in amounts greater than 25 million pounds per year1. These high consumption substances (currently 38) constitute
over 80 percent by weight of all substances in the 1987 NAS survey. The agency recognizes that the absolute poundages
of these substances may not be accurately portrayed in the survey because the information is voluntarily reported.
However, the agency believes that the data accurately reflect the relative ranking of the substances. Therefore,
the data are useful for illustrative purposes and can serve as a means of prioritizing actions on food ingredients
based on relative usage levels.

The 38 substances are listed in Table 1 in decreasing order of reported use, along with their maximum lead specifications.
When possible, the lead specifications that are either listed or referenced in FDA regulations for lead or heavy metals
(as lead) are shown. If no lead specification is referenced in FDA regulations, the most recent specification in the
Food Chemicals Codex (Refs. 16 through 18) is listed. For the few food substances that have no lead specification,
FDA used a lead level of 1 ppm to calculate the potential lead exposure. 


<TABLE>





Table

 1_

Most Widely Used Food Substances and Their Current Lead Specifications

1

1Substance2

1Lead Limit3 ppm

1Substance2

1Lead Limit3 ppm



High fructose corn syrup



0.5





d-Sorbitol





10.0


Sucrose



0.5



Lactose

-
Corn syrup 



0.5



Calcium oxide



10.0


Corn gluten

-



Sodium bicarbonate





5.0


Soybean oil



0.1





Mono-diglycerides





10.0


Sodium chloride



4.0



Palm kernel oil



0.1


Sucrose liquid

-

Phosphoric acid



10.0


Corn oil



0.1



Maltodextrin



0.5


Dextrose



0.1





Iron, reduced





25.0




Whey





10.0





Niacin





20.0




Calcium carbonate





10.0



Sodium phosphate, di-



10.0


Coconut oil



0.1



Monosodium glutamate



10.0




Caramel





10.0



Peanut oil



0.1


Diatomaceous earth



10.0

Casein

5.0


Starch, food, modified



5.0



Azodicarbonamide



10.0


Cottonseed oil



0.1





Calcium sulfate





10.0




Cocoa butter substitute





10.0



Sulfuric acid



5.0




Sodium hydroxide





10.0



Glycerin



5.0


Citric acid



10.0



Sodium citrate



10.0




1Substances are listed in decreasing order of poundage. High volume substances (poundages greater than 100 million
pounds per year) are listed on the left, while moderate volume substances (25 million to 100 million pounds per year)
are on the right.


2Boldface substances have specifications in the Code of Federal Regulations.


3The type of lead specification is indicated by the font type: Boldface type means that the level is an actual lead specification,
italics mean that the lead level is from a specification denoted ``heavy metals as lead,'' and a dash indicates that
there is no available lead specification. 

</TABLE>
 

Based upon the lead levels listed and the per capita intake of these substances, FDA calculates that the theoretical
maximum per capita intake of lead from the food use of these 38 widely used substances could reach 164 &mu;g/day if all
lead levels were at their maximum specification limits. Although it is clear from FDA's total diet study (Ref. 9) that
the amount of lead consumed (4.5 &mu;g/day for a 2-year-old child and 9 &mu;g/day for women of childbearing age) is
not nearly as high as the sum of these specifications would permit, the calculation illustrates the potential lead
exposure if food and color additives and GRAS ingredients were consistently produced with lead levels near the specification
limits. It also demonstrates that these specification levels are collectively well in excess of the levels of lead
in the ingredients actually being added to food.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
This calculation is based upon disappearance data from a 1987 survey by the NAS on the quantities of food substances
added by the U.S. industry to food (Ref. 19). FDA recognizes that disappearance data identify the amounts of substances
available for use in food and food processing, but do not necessarily mean that all of these amounts are consumed in
food. 

</FOOTNOTE>


The agency has also calculated the potential effect on the ingestion of lead if all of the lead specifications for these
38 substances were reduced. If the agency were to replace the current lead specifications with lower lead levels of
0.1 ppm for high volume substances (those with disappearance poundages greater than 100 million pounds/year) and
0.5 ppm for those of moderate volume (between 25 million and 100 million pounds per year), FDA has estimated that the
theoretical per capita intake of lead from these 38 most widely used food ingredients could be reduced from 164 &mu;g/day
to 13 &mu;g/day (Refs. 19 and 20). Although lead levels are generally not as high as current lead specifications allow,
lowering these specifications is likely to have the effect of lowering lead exposure. Manufacturers will be more
concerned about monitoring and controlling the lead content of their products to ensure that the lead levels are substantially
below the new specification levels, and that the normal variations in lead content that occur from batch to batch do
not produce a violative product. Also, lower lead specifications will protect subsets of the population that might
eat food that has been produced with food ingredients containing unusually high lead levels, if, for example, a particular
manufacturer uses a process that results in the food ingredient having a higher level of lead than average.
As a further illustration, the agency has calculated the potential decrease in lead intake from reduction of lead
specifications in a specific color additive, caramel. Caramel currently has a 10 ppm lead limit specification in
FDA regulations (21 CFR 73.85). However, the food industry usually controls for contaminants at levels that are significantly
lower than the established specification levels to ensure that all production batches will be in compliance. From
informal conversations with industry, the agency believes that a reasonable control level might be one-fifth the
specification level. Using the data from the 1987 NAS poundage survey (Ref. 19), and assuming that all caramel is produced
with lead levels at one-fifth the specification, or 2 ppm, the agency calculates that the potential per capita lead
exposure from caramel could still be as high as 1.6 &mu;g/day. Reducing the specification to 0.1 ppm could result in
a potential 100-fold reduction in lead levels in caramel. 
High fructose corn syrup (HFCS), one of the most heavily used food ingredients in the United States according to the
NAS poundage survey, illustrates the efforts industry has made to aid FDA and a Food Chemicals Codex committee in setting
lower lead specifications that more accurately reflect actual lead levels. HFCS has been commercially produced
since 1967, and FDA listed HFCS containing 43 percent fructose as GRAS in 1983 (21 CFR 182.1866). The listing, however,
does not include any specifications for impurities such as lead. In the absence of lead specifications, industry
was guided by the Food Chemicals Codex committee's general impurities policy that included a 10 ppm lead specification
(Ref. 16). It was not until 1986 that a Food Chemicals Codex monograph was developed for HFCS, which set a lead specification
of 1 ppm (Food Chemicals Codex, 3d ed., 2d supp. (Ref. 17)). The Food Chemicals Codex lead specification was further
reduced in 1992 to 0.5 ppm as a result of cooperative interactions between FDA, the Food Chemicals Codex, and industry.
In response to a request by the agency in 1990, industry provided preliminary data on lead levels in a small sampling
of HFCS measured by methods that are more sensitive than routine quality control methods. Actual lead levels ranged
between 0.002 and 0.073 ppm in the samples analyzed (Refs. 21 and 22). Although measurements with this level of sensitivity
are not yet done on a routine basis, these results suggest the actual amounts of lead in HFCS. Using these measurements,
a 12-ounce (oz) can of soda that contains 10 percent HFCS probably contains lead in the range of 0.07 to 2.6 &mu;g, whereas
existing lead specifications would allow 18 &mu;g of lead. Lowering the specification for lead in HFCS to 0.1 ppm would
reduce the maximum allowable lead from HFCS in a 12 oz can of soda to 3.6 &mu;g.


C. Changes in Food Chemicals Codex Lead Specifications


As part of FDA's initiative to reduce lead in food, the agency has been working with the Food Chemicals Codex committee
of the NAS to review lead specifications for selected food ingredients. The 3d edition of the Food Chemicals Codex
and its four supplements contain specifications and analytical methodologies for over 900 food ingredients. The
specifications are used by food processors and manufacturers of food ingredients in the United States and in other
countries as guidelines for their products' purity. The specifications are also often incorporated by reference
into FDA's regulations for food and color additives and GRAS ingredients.
The agency's concerns regarding lead levels in food ingredients were presented to the Food Chemicals Codex committee
during a workshop on May 2, 1991. For many substances, the Food Chemicals Codex currently specifies a 10-ppm lead limitation
(see section III.B. of this document). Following the workshop, the Food Chemicals Codex committee updated its policy
for establishing lead specifications for food ingredients. Previously, lead specifications were set at the lowest
practicable levels based on CGMP and the capability of analytical methodology to determine the lead level in individual
food ingredients. The Food Chemicals Codex committee's policy, announced in the 

Federal Register

 of July 15, 1993 (58 FR 38129), now provides that the Food Chemicals Codex will set lead specifications by also considering
the estimated lead intake from use of the food ingredient and the potential health hazard of these intake levels, in
a fashion similar to that which the agency is considering.
As an outgrowth of the Food Chemicals Codex committee workshop, new and revised lower lead specifications have been
published for several food ingredients in the Food Chemicals Codex (3d ed., 3d supp. (Ref. 18)). For example, included
are lead specifications of 0.1 ppm for dextrose and fructose and 0.5 ppm for less refined products, such as glucose
syrups, maltodextrin, and polydextrose. The Food Chemicals Codex committee has been reviewing and revising the
lead specifications for other food and color additives and GRAS ingredients as well (Ref. 23). The Food Chemicals
Codex committee is expected to continue reducing lead specifications in future monograph revisions for inclusion
in the fourth edition of the Food Chemicals Codex. 


IV. Changes in FDA Lead Specifications


Because of the possibility that significant amounts of lead might be introduced into food from regulated food and
color additives and GRAS ingredients, and because of the increased knowledge of the deleterious health effects of
low level lead exposure, FDA has started to take action to limit the potential dietary intake of lead from these sources.
Based on the considerations discussed in section III. of this document, the agency is focusing on high and moderate
consumption substances, such as those listed in Table 1 of this document.
The agency has begun requesting that information on lead levels be included in certain food and color additive and
GRAS affirmation petitions. FDA is asking that petitions for either new uses of regulated high and moderate consumption
substances, or new substances that are expected to be consumed in significant quantities, show that lead levels in
the petitioned products are as low as CGMP's allow. Given the toxicity of lead, such evidence is necessary if the agency
is to make a determination on the safety of the additive for its proposed use. The agency will evaluate the data that
it receives on lead levels during the petition review process and set lead specifications at levels that are necessary
to ensure that there is a reasonable certainty of no harm from use of the additive.
Lower specifications, to be meaningful, will need to be supported by analytical methods that allow quantification
of lead at the reduced levels. Recent advances in instrumentation should allow for reliable, quantitative detection
of lead in food ingredients at much lower levels than possible with previous analytical methods. For example, in the
Food Chemicals Codex (3d ed., 3d supp. (Ref. 18)), a graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrophotometric method
is described that detects lead in substances such as edible oils at levels less than 1 
&mu;g/g (1 ppm) of lead. A similar method has been developed for nutritive sweeteners (Ref. 24). Development of more
sensitive routine analytical procedures or expertise in more sophisticated methods will facilitate routine testing
for lead below 0.1 ppm and will enable industry to further control and eliminate lead from food ingredients. Thus,
the agency is asking petitioners to provide analytical methodologies that are capable of detecting lead at sub-ppm
levels and to show that these methodologies have been validated.
FDA recognizes the need to lower its lead specifications for high and moderately high consumption food and color additives
and GRAS ingredients to ensure that their use is safe. Thus, in the absence of persuasive comments to the contrary,
the agency intends to propose setting specifications at 0.1 ppm lead for high-poundage ingredients (greater than
100 million pounds per year, such as substances in the left column of Table 1) and 0.5 ppm lead for moderately high-poundage
ingredients (between 25 and 100 million pounds per year, such as substances in the right column of Table 1). FDA plans
to propose establishing these specifications for new ingredients, new uses of previously regulated ingredients,
and currently regulated ingredients. Also, FDA is considering only adopting Food Chemicals Codex lead specifications
for individual ingredients when it finds that the levels are low enough to protect the public health.
Comments on these approaches to setting specifications for lead, and suggestions for alternative approaches for
developing consistent lead specifications for all current and future uses of food and color additives and GRAS ingredients
that still protect the public health, are requested.


V. Request for Information


Although FDA has extensive information concerning lead in its files, additional information on the following topics
will greatly assist the agency both in setting specifications for lead in food and color additives and GRAS ingredients
and in minimizing the exposure to lead in a consistent manner:
1. Current data on actual lead levels in: (a) Food and color additives and GRAS ingredients, the variation in these
levels, and suggested lead specifications for each substance. Of particular interest are the high consumption substances
in the left column of Table 1 of this document and the moderate consumption substances in the right column of Table 1.
Also of interest are other substances that, although consumed at a lower rate, contain sufficiently high levels of
lead to be of concern; (b) agricultural commodities that are raw materials for many food ingredients; and (c) nutrient
supplements (e.g., calcium, iron).
2. Analytical methods for detecting sub-ppm levels of lead in food components, including detection limits, reliability
of the methods for different food and color additives and GRAS ingredients, and validation data. Of particular interest
are improvements in graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrophotometry and studies of its applicability to the
38 substances listed in Table 1.
3. Information on the potential economic impact, if any, associated with the manufacture of the 38 food and color additives
and GRAS ingredients listed in Table 1 if the lower lead levels are adopted. FDA is required to assess the economic consequences
of any regulation it proposes, but it does not possess data that would permit detailed assessment of the economic impact
of adopting lower lead specifications.
4. Information on the potential environmental impact that may be associated with the manufacture of the 38 food and
color additives and GRAS ingredients if lower lead specifications are adopted. Under the National Environmental
Policy Act, FDA must consider the environmental impact of its actions. However, the agency does not now possess the
data that would permit detailed analysis of the environmental impact of adopting lower lead levels. Therefore, the
agency is requesting environmental information that includes, but is not limited to, the following: (a) A description
of the additional steps, if any, required to produce these food and color additives and GRAS ingredients with the reduced
lead specifications and of the environmental impact of these steps; (b) the environmental impact of additional testing,
if any, performed to ensure compliance with the lower lead specifications; and (c) a description of measures that
could be taken to avoid or mitigate adverse environmental impacts, if such impacts are predicted to result from this
action.


VI. Conclusion


FDA has had a longstanding goal of reducing lead exposure from all dietary sources. Because lead is ubiquitous, and
exposure to lead is from a multitude of different sources, lead levels from each source must be sufficiently low to
ensure that a person's total lead exposure is not harmful. The agency believes that lead specifications in food and
color additives and GRAS ingredients can be lowered to help achieve this goal and protect the public health. Therefore,
the agency intends to lower lead specifications in food and color additives and GRAS ingredients that are consumed
in large amounts by the general population to levels that will offer adequate protection.
FDA plans to propose lead specifications of 0.5 ppm for moderate consumption food ingredients and 0.1 ppm for high
consumption food ingredients. The agency is requesting information on current lead levels in food ingredients and
analytical methods for determining these lead levels, and on the economic and environmental effects of complying
with these specifications. The information received in response to this ANPRM will be used to determine the feasibility
of adopting these target specifications. The agency intends to propose these specifications unless information
is submitted to show that such levels are not feasible and higher specifications will not endanger the public health.



VII. References


The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


1. CDCP, Department of Health and Human Service, Public Health Service, ``Preventing Lead Poisoning in Young Children,''
October 1991.
2. Needleman, H. L., and C. A. Gatsonis, ``Low-Level Lead Exposure and the IQ of Children,'' 

Journal of the American Medical Association

, 263:673678, 1990. 
3. Winneke, G., A. Brockhaus, U. Ewers, U. Kramer, and M. Neuf, ``Results from the European Multicenter Study on Lead
Neurotoxicity in Children: Implications for Risk Assessment,'' 

Neurotoxicity and Teratology

, 12:553559, 1990.
4. Bellinger, D., A. Leviton, C. Waternaux, H. Needleman, and M. Rabinowitz, ``Longitudinal Analyses of Prenatal
and Postnatal Lead Exposure and Early Cognitive Development,'' 

New England Journal of Medicine

, 316:10371043, 1987.
5. Baghurst, P. A., A. J. McMichael, N. R. Wigg, G. V. Vimpani, E. F. Robertson, R. J. Roberts, and S. L. Tong, ``Environmental
Exposure to Lead and Children's Intelligence at the Age of Seven Years: The Port Pirie Cohort Study,'' 

New England Journal of Medicine

, 327:12791284, 1992.
6. Needleman, H. L., A. Schell, D. Bellinger, A. Leviton, and E. N. Allred, ``The LongTerm Effects of Exposure
to Low Doses of Lead in Childhood: an 11-year Follow-up Report,'' 

New England Journal of Medicine

, 322:8388, 1990. 
7. Bellinger, D., J. Sloman, A. Leviton, M. Rabinowitz, H. L. Needleman, and C. Waternaux, ``LowLevel Lead
Exposure and Children's Cognitive Function in the Preschool Years,'' 

Pediatrics

, 87:219227, 1991.
8. Memorandum, dated November 18, 1991, from Contaminants Team, Standards and Monitoring Branch, to Additives Evaluation
Branch, ``Clarification of Terminology Used in the Development of the Provisional Total Tolerable Intake Levels
for Lead.''
9. Bolger, P. M., C. D. Carrington, S. G. Capar, and M. A. Adams, ``Reductions in Dietary Lead Exposure in the United
States,'' 

Chemical Speciation and Bioavailability

, 3:3136, 1991.
10. Elias, R. W., ``Lead Exposures in the Human Environment,'' in 

Dietary and Environmental Lead: Human Health Effects

, edited by K. R. Mahaffey, Elsevier Science Publishers, B. V., Amsterdam, pp. 79107, 1985.
11. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, Public Health Service, ``The Nature and Extent of Lead Poisoning
in Children in the United States: A Report to Congress,'' pp. (VI44)(VI49), July 1988.
12. Pennington, J. A. T. and E. L. Gunderson, ``History of the Food and Drug Administration's Total Diet Study_1961
to 1987,'' 

Journal of the Association of Official Analytical Chemists

, 70:772782, 1987.
13. Carrington, C. D. and P. M. Bolger, ``An Assessment of the Hazards of Lead in Food,'' 

Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology

, 16:265272, 1992.
14. Excerpts from ``Chemical Problems Encountered in the Administration of the Food Additives Amendment,'' a speech
given by L. L. Ramsey at ``Symposium on Analytical Methods for Food Additive and Pesticide Chemicals,'' American
Chemical Society, New York, NY, September, 1960.
15. Excerpt from 

Food Chemicals Codex Advisory Panel Bulletins

, December 1962, letter from Dr. Henry Fischbach, FDA, to Dr. Justin L. Powers, Food Chemicals Codex Director, NAS.
16. Food Chemicals Codex, 3d ed., National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1981. 
17. Food Chemicals Codex, 3d ed., 2d supp., National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1986.
18. Food Chemicals Codex, 3d ed., 3d supp., National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1992.
19. Memorandum, dated July 17, 1992, from Food and Color Additives Review Section, to Indirect Additives Branch,
``Lead in Food Additives_Hypothetical Effects on Dietary Lead Intake of Lowering Lead Specifications.''
20. Memorandum, dated December 16, 1993, from Chemistry Review Branch, to Indirect Additives Branch, ``Lead in Food
Additives. Fructose Disappearance Data and Predicted Lead Intake. Request for Additional Information dated 121493.''
21. Letter, dated February 5, 1990, from Kyd D. Brenner, Corn Refiners Association, Inc., to John W. Gordon, FDA. 
22. Letter, dated March 22, 1990, from Kyd D. Brenner, Corn Refiners Association, Inc., to John W. Gordon, FDA.
23. Bigelow, S. W., ``Role of the Food Chemicals Codex in Lowering Dietary Lead Consumption: A Review'' 

Journal of Food Protection

, 55:455458, 1992.
24. ILSI North America, Subcommittee on Trace Minerals in Foods, ``Report to the FCC Committee on Methodology for
Lead in Sweeteners,'' June 28, 1993. 

VIII. Comments


Interested persons may, on or before May 5, 1994, submit to the Dockets Management Branch (address above) written
comments regarding this advance notice of proposed rulemaking. Two copies of any comments are to be submitted, except
that individuals may submit one copy. Comments are to be identified with the docket number found in brackets in the
heading of this document. Received comments may be seen in the office above between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through
Friday.
Trade secret and commercial confidential information should be submitted to the contact person identified above.
Trade secret and commercial confidential information will be protected from public disclosure in accordance with
21 CFR part 20.




Dated: January 12, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 942472 Filed 2394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

