 

Section 4. Assignment of Guarantees. All guarantees of materials and workmanship running in favor of the Bidder shall
be transferred and assigned to the Owner prior to the time the Bidder receives final payment. 



ARTICLE V_REMEDIES 



Section 1. Completion on Bidder's Default. If default shall be made by the Bidder or by any subcontractor in the performance
of any of the terms of this Proposal, the Owner, without in any manner limiting its legal and equitable remedies in the
circumstances, may serve upon the Bidder and the Surety or Sureties, if any, upon the Contractor's Bond or Bonds a written
notice requiring the Bidder to cause such default to be corrected forthwith. Unless within twenty (20) days after
the service of such notice upon the Bidder such default shall be corrected or arrangements for the correction thereof
satisfactory, to both the Owner and the Administrator shall be made by the Bidder or its Surety or Sureties, if any,
the Owner may take over the construction of the Project and prosecute the same to completion by Contract or otherwise
for the account and at the expense of the Bidder, and the Bidder and its Surety or Sureties, if any, shall be liable to
the Owner for any cost or expense in excess of the Contract price occasioned thereby. In such event the Owner may take
possession of and utilize, in completing the construction of the Project, any materials, tools, supplies, equipment,
appliances, and plant belonging to the Bidder or any of its subcontractors, which may be situated at the site of the
Project. The Owner in such contingency may exercise any rights, claims or demands which the Bidder may have against
third persons in connection with this Contract and for such purpose the Bidder does hereby assign, transfer and set
over unto the Owner all such rights, claims and demands. 

Section 2. Liquidated Damages. The time of the Completion of Construction of the Project is of the essence of the Contract.
Should the bidder neglect, refuse or fail to complete the construction within the time herein agreed upon, after giving
effect to extensions of time, if any, herein provided, then, in that event and in view of the difficulty of estimating
with exactness damages caused by such delay, the Owner shall have the right to deduct from and retain out of such moneys
which may be then due, or which may become due and payable to the Bidder the sum of 

XXXX

 dollars (

XXXX

) per day for each and every day that such construction is delayed on its completion beyond the specified time, as liquidated
damages and not as a penalty; if the amount due and to become due from the Owner to the Bidder is insufficient to pay in
full any such liquidated damages, the Bidder, shall pay to the Owner the amount necessary to effect such payment in
full: Provided, however, that the owner shall promptly notify the Bidder in writing of the manner in which the amount
retained, deducted or claimed as liquidated damages was computed. 




