 

Public Sidewalk



The word ``public'' has been added to this definition for clarification. The definition remains in ADAAG 14.1.1.
See the discussion of this definition and appendix material at ADAAG 14.1.1 (Definitions).



Public Sidewalk Curb Ramp



A reference to this new definition has been added to ADAAG 3.5 (Definitions). The definition remains in ADAAG 14.1.1.
See the discussion of this definition at ADAAG 14.1.1 (Definitions).



Site Infeasibility



This definition remains in ADAAG 14.1.1. See the discussion of this definition at ADAAG 14.1.1 (Definitions).



Technically Infeasible



A reference to the definition of ``technically infeasible'' in ADAAG 4.1.6(1)(j) has been added here for the convenience
of the reader.



Transient Lodging
 
 



Comment.

 In the NPRM, the words ``one or more dwelling units'' were deleted from the ADAAG definition for transient lodging
because ``dwelling unit'' only refers to residential facilities covered in ADAAG 13. Transient lodging includes
facilities used on a transient basis and excludes residential facilities or medical care facilities. Resorts, hotels,
motels, and dormitories used on a transient basis are examples of transient lodging. Some commenters requested that
the guidelines distinguish between the terms transient lodging and dwelling unit. 



Response.

 The definition of dwelling unit in ADAAG 3.5 has been deleted to reduce confusion and a new definition of dwelling unit
has been added at ADAAG 13.1(1). For clarification of the term dwelling unit, see ADAAG 13.1. As proposed in the NPRM,
the definition of transient lodging has been changed to clarify that a transient lodging facility is not considered
a residential facility. With respect to the operation of certain types of facilities, either ADAAG 9 (Accessible
Transient Lodging) or ADAAG 13 (Accessible Residential Housing), or both, may be applicable. An appendix note has
been added to clarify that the Department of Justice's policy and rules will further define what is covered as transient
lodging. 




4. Accessible Elements and Spaces: Scope and Technical Requirements


4.1Minimum Requirements.
4.1.1Application.
4.1.1(1)General.
4.1.1(2)Application Based on Building Use.
 

