 

G. 

Limitations on Use.

 In the March 1994, ANPR, FSIS tentatively proposed that, in certain cases, poultry product produced by mechanical
separation should be restricted from use as an ingredient in other products. It was considered that imposing such
restrictions was necessary for mechanically separated poultry because of the potential fluoride contribution
of mechanically separated poultry made from fowl (i.e., mature female chickens). It was also tentatively suggested
that use restrictions for all poultry product produced by mechanical separation be considered (i.e., any product
with bone solids not greater than 1 percent) based on the characteristics of such product, including the kind of poultry
from which it is made, and its consistency. 


 Thirteen commenters addressed the issue of limitation on use of poultry product produced by mechanical separation,
in general, as an ingredient in other products. Twelve of the commenters disagreed with the general premise of establishing
any use limitations on mechanically separated poultry products because there are no safety or health concerns regarding
poultry product produced by mechanical separation. The commenters also stated that the marketplace is a much better
judge of quality (i.e., use levels of poultry product produced by mechanical separation) than FSIS. 


 FSIS believes that poultry products that are mechanically separated should not be used in poultry products that are
represented as being composed of whole poultry muscle, other than where it is used as a binding agent (i.e., a substance
that holds muscle pieces together) at a level that is sufficient for this purpose. When used as a binder, it is FSIS'
belief that, without the declaration of mechanically separated poultry as an ingredient on the labels of the poultry
and meat food products that purport to be intact, whole muscle products, the labels of such products would be misbranded.



 It is poultry meat, particularly muscle(s), that characterizes parts and cuts of poultry. The physical and sensory
characteristics (i.e., mouthfeel, texture, color) associated with a part or cut of poultry can be retained when trimmings
removed during processing are reincorporated; and the characteristics associated with the cut remains when there
is chunking, chopping, or grinding of the muscle as in versions of turkey ham product (9 CFR 381.171). FSIS regards
these processes as different than using product made by the mechanical separation of bones with attached poultry
tissue. Poultry product produced by mechanical separation does not, in FSIS' view, retain the characteristics of
the cuts themselves. It appears inconsistent with the basic characteristics expected of products represented as
having been made from a particular part or cut of the poultry carcass, to include this finely comminuted ingredient,
especially when the muscle from that part is essentially intact or has been processed only to the extent of cutting
or grinding. Therefore, FSIS continues to support its tentative position stated in the March 1994 ANPR that poultry
product produced by mechanical separation not be permitted in products expected to be composed of whole muscle or
pieces of muscle, e.g., ``(Kind) steak or (Kind) fillet'' (9 CFR 381.162). 


 FSIS agrees with commenters that, except for the potential health effects associated with the fluoride content of
mechanically separated chicken from fowl, there are no health and safety concerns regarding the use of poultry products
produced by mechanical separation. Issues raised in the past concerning cholesterol and calcium content are addressed
by the requirements of the new nutrition labeling. Calcium and cholesterol contents of most foods will be required
as part of the nutrition label. However, FSIS continues to support its consideration, as stated in the March 1994 ANPR,
that poultry product produced by mechanical separation, i.e., any such product with no greater than 1 percent bone
solids, made, in whole or in part, from fowl (i.e., mature female chickens, as defined in 9 CFR 381.170(a)(1)(vi))
not be permitted in baby, junior, or toddler foods. The basis for this is that the fluoride content associated with
mechanically separated chicken made from fowl has potential health implications. There were no data submitted in
response to the ANPR to support opposition to this aspect of use 
limitations for mechanically separated poultry. 





