 

Among the areas identified in the RTI study is mechanically separated product. It notes that regulations exist on
the use of MS(S), but not on the use of MDP. The RTI study concluded that, in general, ``the regulations covering meat
and poultry have been designed with the same intent_to protect `the health and welfare of consumers by assuring that
meat and meat food products [or poultry products] are wholesome, not adulterated, and properly marked, labeled,
and packaged' (21 U.S.C. 602 and 451). Although the intent of the regulations remains the same, the actual requirements
are quite different.'' The study further concludes that the bases for no comparable regulation for MDP are ``unfavorable
consumer perceptions and court decisions resulting in label and use restrictions for MS(S); poultry has no definitional
requirements for MS(S) (e.g., can be defined as `chicken' or `turkey').'' 
Mechanically separated red meat food product became the subject of consumer criticism in the mid-1970's after USDA
proposed to allow its use in meat products and to allow it to be labeled as meat (i.e., beef or pork). USDA also issued
an interim rule that included standards for the use of mechanically separated red meat product. A lawsuit soon followed
in which the court found that this product is not ``meat'' as traditionally defined within the scope of the Federal
Meat Inspection Act. The court further found that USDA had not considered adequately the health and safety effects
of mechanically separated red meat food product. 
To respond to questions on health and safety raised by the court, a panel of government scientists was convened to examine
the questions. The panel found that scientific studies established no unique health risks associated with mechanically
separated red meat food product, but that the product is sufficiently different from muscle tissue meat in consistency
and composition to require separate labeling. The panel recommended, among other things, that usage limitations
be placed on this product.

4

 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
The panel's conclusions and recommendations were published in reports titled ``Health and Safety Aspects of the
Use of Mechanically Deboned Meat, Volume I_Final Report and Recommendations, Select Panel'' and ``Health and Safety
Aspects of the Use of Mechanically Deboned Meat, Volume II_Background Materials and Details of Data.'' These reports
are available for public review in the FSIS Docket Clerk's office. 
</FOOTNOTE>


The panel reports, among other things, led FSIS to issue final regulations on June 20, 1978, that established preparation,
composition, usage, and labeling requirements for mechanically separated red meat food product and required that
it be produced only under a quality control program approved by the Agency (43 FR 26416). This rule established a definition
and standard of identity for this product that necessitated it being listed separately from meat in the ingredients
statement of a product in which it was used. Additional rulemaking on June 29, 1982, reaffirmed the Agency's position
that the product, now called MS(S), is not ``meat'' as traditionally defined (47 FR 28214). 
During this same period, MDP underwent product development separately from mechanically separated red meat food
product without similar FSIS regulation. Early distinctions in regulatory treatment were largely due to historical
differences in how the two industries used these products and the way in which they came to public attention. One significant
difference is that mechanically separated red meat food product was being considered for use in products that had
previously contained muscle meat. The use of MDP in poultry hotdogs created less controversy. Poultry hotdogs did
not exist before they were made with MDP. Thus, consumers had no prior expectations about the formulation. 
Differences in regulatory treatment of the product, now called MS(S), and MDP have continued since that time. The
meat industry claims that the effect of those differences has been a reluctance on the part of processors to use MS(S),
while MDP use has expanded. In response to the early rulemakings on MS(S), the meat industry claimed that consumers
would not buy products if MS(S) is listed on the label. Similarly, in responding to the March 1994 advance notice of
proposed rulemaking (ANPR) on MDP (discussed later in this document), the poultry industry claimed that, if they
had to label MDP as a poultry ingredient, consumers would be misled into thinking that they are purchasing products
inferior to what they have historically purchased or that the product has changed. If the industry believes that consumers
will be misled into thinking the product has changed, it should find some way other than inaccurate labeling to assure
them it is the same product. The Agency believes that if the current labeling is misleading, it has no choice but to assure
that the ingredients statement accurately informs the consumer what is in the product. If consumers would behave
differently with different information, then that is itself evidence that the information is important to them.
It is the Agency's responsibility under its consumer protection mission to assure the information is accurate and
not misleading. 


