 

(2) When evaluating a savings association's overall lending performance, the OTS shall weigh its assessments of
the savings association's home mortgage lending, small business and small farm lending, and (at the savings association's
option) consumer lending to reflect the relative importance of each category of lending to the savings association's
overall business. 

(3) The OTS shall weigh the savings association's community development lending according to the characteristics
and needs of the savings association's service area(s), the capacity and constraints of the savings association,
and the opportunities available to the savings association for this lending. 

(b) 

Assessment criteria.

 The OTS shall evaluate a savings association's lending performance pursuant to the following criteria: 

(1) 

Geographic distribution.

 The geographic distribution of the savings association's lending (based on the location of the loan as provided in
563e.12 of this part), including: 

(i) The proportion of total lending in the savings association's service area(s); 

(ii) The dispersion of lending throughout the savings association's service area(s); and 

(iii) The number and amount of loans in low-, moderate-, middle-, and upper-income geographies in the savings association's
service area(s); 

(2) 

Borrower characteristics.

 The distribution, particularly in the savings association's service area, of the savings association's lending
(based on borrower characteristics), including: 

(i) The number and amount of home mortgage loans to low-, moderate-, middle-, and upper-income individuals; 

(ii) The number and amount of small business and small farm loans to businesses and farms with gross annual revenues
less than or equal to $1 million; 

(iii) The number and amount of small business and small farm loans by size of loan; and 

(iv) At the savings association's option, the number and amount of consumer loans to low-, moderate-, middle-, and
upper-income individuals; 

(3) 

Community development lending.

 The savings association's community development lending, including the number and amount of community development
loans outstanding, their complexity and innovativeness, and the number and amount of lines of credit, commitments,
and letters of credit for community development purposes; and 

(4) 

Innovative or flexible lending practices.

 The savings association's use of innovative or flexible lending practices to address the credit needs of low- or moderate-income
individuals or geographies. 

(c) 

Affiliate lending.

 (1) The OTS shall, if the savings association elects, consider in its assessment of a savings association's lending
performance under this section lending by an affiliate of the savings association, if the savings association, or
its affiliate, reports or collects the lending data pursuant to 563e.42 of this part. 

(2) The OTS may consider in its assessment lending by a savings association's affiliate even if the savings association
has chosen not to have the affiliate's lending considered if the OTS determines that this lending is integral to the
business of the savings association. 

(3) Consideration of affiliate lending shall be subject to the following constraints: 

(i) No affiliate may claim the same loan as another institution; and 

(ii) If the OTS considers loans within a particular lending category (e.g., home mortgage, small business, small
farm, consumer or community development lending) made by one or more of the savings association's affiliates in a
particular service area, the OTS shall consider all the loans within that lending category made by all of the savings
association's affiliates in that particular service area. 

(d) 

Consortia and third-party lending.

 Community development loans made through consortia in which the savings association participates or through third
parties in which the savings association has invested: 

(1) Shall be considered under the lending test, if the savings association elects, provided the data pertaining to
these loans are reported by the savings association under the applicable provisions of 563e.42 of this part;
and 

(2) May be allocated among participants or investors as they choose for purposes of the lending test, provided that
no participant or investor claims the same loan or part of a loan as another participant or investor, or claims in the
aggregate greater than its percentage share (based on the level of its participation or investment) of the total loans
made by the consortium or third party. 

(e) 

Lending performance rating.

 The OTS shall rate a savings association's lending performance as provided in Appendix A of this part. 





