 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Department of the Air Force</USBUREAU>


Notice of Intent To Prepare Environmental Impact Statement for the Conversion of F15 Fighter Aircraft at Dobbins
AFB, Marietta, Georgia, to B1B Bomber Aircraft at Robins AFB, Warner Robins, GA


The United States Air Force and the Air National Guard are announcing their intent to prepare an Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS) to analyze the proposed action regarding the conversion of F15 fighter aircraft at Dobbins
AFB, Marietta, GA to B1B bomber aircraft at Robins AFB, Warner Robins, GA. This will be known as the Robins B1B
EIS.
The Air National Guard also proposes to modify training airspace that services the Savannah Combat Readiness Training
Center (CRTC) area. Existing charted airspace which includes the Quick Thrust Military Operations Areas (MOAs),
Fort Stewart MOAs, Gator MOAs, would be modified and named Coastal MOA. Restricted Area R3007 would also be
modified. These proposed modifications are primarily designed to accommodate realistic training requirements
for military fighter units including Air Force, Navy and Marines and would also satisfy realistic training requirements
of the B1B.
The proposed actions under consideration would address the conversion of the F15 aircraft to B1B aircraft
and the resultant potential environmental impacts at both sites, the airspace training requirements for the B1B
in the region, and the modification of training airspace servicing the Savannah CRTC.
The Air Force and Air National Guard are planning to conduct a series of Scoping meetings on the following dates and
times at the indicated locations:



1. A. L. Burruss Auditorium, Southern College of Technology, Marietta, Georgia, January 5, 1995, 7:00 PM.
2. Wellston Center, 155 Maple Street, Warner Robins, Georgia, January 10 and 11, 1995, 7:00 PM
3. Altamaha Technical Institute Auditorium, Jesup, Georgia, January 12, 1995, 7:00 PM.



The purpose of these meetings is to present information concerning the proposed actions and alternatives under consideration
and to solicit public input with respect to issues to be addressed, effort to be expended, and alternatives that should
be addressed in the EIS. Questions or clarifications concerning the proposal or any other information presented
will be answered as they relate to the scope of the effort anticipated.
The Scoping meetings will include opportunities for clarification of the proposal and statements from representatives
of government agencies and the public. To ensure the maximum opportunity for public participation, initial presentations
and questions by individuals will be limited to a maximum of five minutes until all those desiring an opportunity to
speak have been accommodated. Additional presentations and questions will be accepted at the end of the meeting.
Submission of written comments and questions will be accepted. Submission of written comments is encouraged but
is not required. Written comments and questions of any length submitted at the meeting or during the scoping period
will be considered in their entirety and will carry the same weight as oral comment.
To ensure the Air Force and the Air National Guard have sufficient time to consider public input on issues and alternatives
in the preparation of the Draft EIS, comments should be submitted to the address below by February 1, 1995. The Air Force
and Air National Guard will accept comments at the address below at any time during the environmental impact analysis
process.
For further information concerning the preparation of the EIS for the Robins B1B EIS, or to provide written
comment, contact: Program Manager, Robins B1 EIS, Air National Guard Readiness Center, ANGRC/CEVP, 3500
Fetchet Avenue, Andrews Air Force Base, MD 203315157.


<SIGNER>
Patsy J. Conner,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Air Force Federal Register Liaison Officer.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9430979 Filed 121594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 391001P
</BILLING>

