 

I. Aerosols. 
J. Tobacco Expansion. 
K. Adhesives, Coatings and Inks. 


X. Additional Information. 
XI. References. 

Appendix A: Class I and Class II Ozone-Depleting Substances. 
Appendix B: Summary of Listing Decisions. 
Appendix C: Data Confidentiality Claims. 



II. Background 


A. Regulatory History 



The stratospheric ozone layer protects the earth from dangerous ultraviolet-B (UVB) 
radiation. Depletion of stratospheric ozone allows more UVB radiation to penetrate to the 
earth's surface. Increased radiation, in turn, has been linked to higher incidence of certain 
skin cancers and cataracts, suppression of the human immune system, damage to crops and 
aquatic organisms, and increased formation of ground-level ozone. Further, increased 
radiation can cause economic losses from materials damage such as more rapid weathering of 
outdoor plastics. (See 53 FR 30566 (August 12, 1988) for more information on the effects of 
ozone depletion.) 

In response to scientific concerns and findings on ozone depletion, the United States 
and twenty-three other nations signed the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the 
Ozone Layer on September 16, 1987. The original agreement set forth a timetable for 
reducing the production and consumption of specific ozone-depleting substances, including 
CFC11, CFC12, CFC113, CFC114, CFC115, Halon 1211, Halon 1301, and Halon 2402.

EPA implemented the original Protocol through regulations allocating production and 
consumption allowances equal to the total amount of production and consumption granted to 
the United States under the Protocol. (See 53 FR 30566.) 

The Parties to the Montreal Protocol met in London June 2729, 1990 to consider 
amendments to the Protocol. In response to scientific evidence indicating greater than 
expected stratospheric ozone depletion, the Parties agreed to accelerate the phaseout schedules 
for the substances already controlled by the Protocol. They also added phaseout requirements 
for other ozone-depleting chemicals, including methyl chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, and 
other fully-halogenated chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). 

On November 15, 1990, then-President Bush signed the Clean Air Act Amendments 
(CAAA) of 1990. Title VI, section 604 of the amended CAA requires a phaseout of CFCs, 
halons, and carbon tetrachloride by 2000, which is identical to the London Amendments to 
the Montreal Protocol, but with more stringent interim reductions. Title VI also differs from 
the London Amendments by mandating a faster phaseout of methyl chloroform (2002 instead 
of 2005), a restriction on the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) after 2015, and a ban 
on the production of HCFCs after 2030. In Title VI, section 602, the CFCs, halons, carbon 
tetrachloride, and methyl chloroform are defined as class I substances; HCFCs are referred to 
as class II substances. Appendix A of this final rule lists the class I and class II substances 
identified in the CAA. 

In addition to the phaseout requirements, Title VI includes provisions to reduce 
emissions of class I and II substances to the ``lowest achievable level'' in the refrigeration 
sector and to maximize the use of recycling and recovery upon disposal (section 608). It also 
requires EPA to ban certain nonessential products containing ozone-depleting substances 
(section 610); establish standards and requirements for the servicing of motor vehicle air 
conditioners (section 609); mandate warning labels on products made with or containing 
class I or containing class II substances (section 611); and establish a safe alternatives 
program (section 612). The development and implementation of the safe alternatives program 
under section 612 is the subject of this final rule. 

In October 1991, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 
announced new findings documenting ozone depletion over the last decade that was more 
severe than had previously been predicted by atmospheric modeling or measurements. In 
particular, NASA found 2.9 percent ozone depletion over the northern mid-latitudes over the 
past decade in summertime_the first time a trend showing ozone depletion had been detected 
in the U.S. during that time of year, when risks from depletion are greatest. 

Partly in response to these findings, on February 11, 1992, then-President Bush 
announced an accelerated phaseout schedule for class I substances as identified in the CAA, 
as amended, section 606. This final schedule, published in the 

Federal Register

 (58 FR 
65018; December 10, 1993), implements a January 1, 1996 phaseout of class I chemicals. 
The President also ordered an accelerated review of substitutes that reduce damage to the 
ozone layer. The expedited phaseout schedule and the President's directive regarding 
alternatives added urgency to EPA's effort to review and list substitutes for class I and II 
substances under section 612. 


B. Subgroup of the Federal Advisory Committee 




