 

The damage to manufactured homes by Hurricane Andrew was so extensive 
that many were rendered unrecognizable. Ninety-seven percent of all 
manufactured homes in Dade County were totally destroyed, while only eleven 
percent of single-family homes were destroyed. The American Red Cross 
reported that of the 1,176 licensed and registered manufactured homes in 
Homestead, Florida, 1,167 were completely destroyed. The American Red Cross 
and FEMA have also reported a total of 11,213 manufactured homes destroyed in 
Florida and Louisiana in Hurricane Andrew, and an additional 3,016 
manufactured homes experienced major damage. Almost 36% of all housing units 
destroyed during Hurricane Andrew were manufactured homes. 
The loss of these units had implications extending beyond the loss of 
the homes and possessions of their owners. These homes, shredded by the 
winds, also became dangerous flying missiles, inflicting more property damage 
on neighboring structures. 
In its October 1992 report on Hurricane Andrew, the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) stated that, ``in all areas, mobile homes 
(manufactured housing) were most susceptible to damage or destruction. Many 
mobile homes imploded from the wind loads of Hurricane Andrew. In coastal 
areas, where mobile homes were properly `cradled' and elevated, the cradled 
foundations remained intact, but the mobile homes mounted to these foundations 
were often heavily damaged or destroyed.'' 
Concerns for potential losses during high winds in coastal and other 
areas were identified previously in a May 1991 report by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), which predicted that the United States can expect 
more hurricanes of greater intensity during the 1990s and early 2000s than it 
has experienced in recent years. Furthermore, estimates suggest that by the 
year 2010 the population density on Florida's coasts will have increased about 
130 percent from the 1988 level. Moreover, as the national population ages, 
an increasing percentage of coastal inhabitants will probably be older 
individuals, a group more likely to occupy manufactured houses. The American 
Association of Retired Persons (AARP) reports that 40 percent of the 
purchasers of new manufactured homes are at least 50 years old. The elderly 
can be more difficult to evacuate and may be more prone to be injured during 
periods of extreme high winds. 
The technology for achieving economical wind resistant designs in 
housing is available. It involves calculations of risk for extreme wind-prone 
coastal areas and the establishment of construction standards based upon these 
risk calculations. Through use and implementation of this approach, risks of 
injury and death can be minimized and economic loss limited to acceptable 
levels in coastal areas subject to high winds. 
In determining a course of action to address these issues, the 
Department had to balance two competing concerns: (1) The need to raise 
manufactured housing standards, to protect individuals, their homes, and their 
neighbors from future high winds; and (2) the need to preserve the 
affordability of a key source of low-cost housing. This rule is the result of 
the Department's decision to improve protection of homeowners in hurricane- 
prone areas as soon as possible, but to delay making changes to the standards 
in lower wind-risk areas, in order to give adequate consideration to cost 
factors. Although the changes are expected to increase costs to consumers in 
the high-wind areas, the Department has concluded that the increases are 
justified, because the improved standards will significantly reduce future 
losses to occupants and the public by strengthening the features that make 
manufactured homes vulnerable to damage and destruction in high winds. 
Perhaps more importantly, the improved standards may help avoid the 
inestimable costs of devastation to people's lives and emotional health and to 
the communities, in the likelihood that another powerful hurricane hits a 
community of manufactured homes in the hurricane-prone regions of the country. 


Field Investigations_Hurricane Andrew 


Among the major deficiencies contributing to manufactured housing damage 
in Hurricane Andrew were inadequate connections between exterior roof or wall 
coverings and supporting sheathing or framing and between walls, roofs and 
floors. In particular, losses of roof coverings were widespread, and were 
considered by some to be the first mode of failure for manufactured homes 
damaged in Hurricane Andrew. Other roof-related damage was due to loss of 
sheathing, failure of connections, or a combination of these problems. 
Numerous failures of uplift straps also occurred, when the staples pulled out 
through the metal straps, permitting the straps to tear away from the members 
to which they had been fastened. In some cases, entire sections of roofs were 
blown away. 
Another common area of failure was loss of exterior wall siding. Metal 
or plastic siding used in manufactured housing was readily damaged or 
penetrated by flying debris during the high winds in Hurricane Andrew. Loss 
of roof or wall cladding allows the building to be penetrated by the weather 
and has far-reaching consequences beyond the area of envelope integrity. 
As a result of these losses, and damage to windows and doors, there was 
significant water damage and deterioration to many manufactured homes. In 
addition, failure of coverings or attachments to the manufactured home 
structure also caused missile-type damage to other homes. 



