 

Section 160.07717Additional Requirements

(b)(4) There have been no field complaints concerning failure of the inflation chamber on hybrid inflatable PFD's.
Studies conducted by the USCG Auxiliary (INFLATABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE STUDY, Report No. CGM581)
and The Boat/U.S. Foundation for Boating Safety (``INFLATABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE STUDY: An Examination
of Inflatable PFD Performance and Reliability in Public Use'' dated March 11, 1993) have provided additional information
on fully inflatable PFD's which leads the USCG to conclude that one inflation chamber can provide reliability equivalent
to dual chambers in hybrid PFD's. Therefore, the required number of inflation chambers on commercial hybrid PFD's
has been reduced from two to one. However, if the device is marked as a ``lifejacket'' meeting the Safety of Life at Sea
(SOLAS) requirements, two inflation chambers must still be provided.
(b)(8) Adults have a wide range of chest sizes. To provide all passengers with a suitable size PFD, the Coast Guard proposes
to add a requirement that adult commercial hybrid PFD's to be universally sized.(b)(9) Operators of commercial vessels
may be required to have PFD's with approved PFD lights attached. The USCG proposes to drop the requirement for commercial
hybrid PFD's to be provided with an approved PFD light at time of manufacture as discussed in 160.07713(d).
Instead, a requirement will be added to provide all commercial hybrid PFD's with a PFD light attachment at time of manufacture.
This change is intended to provide vessel operators with an option to attach a PFD light, relieve manufacturers of
this requirement, and avoid potential damage to the inflation chamber due to improper light attachment in the field.

Section 160.07723Over-pressure

(h)(4) The inflation chambers on hybrid PFD's sometimes fail to hold the required pressure during the over-pressure
test although they remain serviceable. The loss of pressure is often attributed to the stretching of the inflation
chamber material, thus increasing the volume of the chamber and reducing the static pressure reading. This paragraph
revision is proposed to allow prestressing of the inflation chamber.

Section 160.07723Air Retention

(h)(5) For the same reasons discussed in the paragraph covering 160.07723(h)(4) above, the Coast Guard
proposes revision of this paragraph to allow prestressing of the inflation chamber prior to the Air Retention test.

Section 160.07723Disposition of PFD's Rejected in Testing or Inspections

(k)(1) The paragraph will be changed to indicate that an authorized representative of the Commandant may also allow
reworking of the lot to correct the defect in a rejected PFD lot. In addition, this paragraph will be revised to delete
the text ``(GMVI3)'' in response to the change in definition of ``Commandant,'' discussed in 160.0773(a)
under ``

Changes to make editorial corrections.

''(k)(2) The paragraph will be changed to indicate that an authorized representative of the Commandant may allow
reexamination or reinspection of any PFD rejected in a final lot examination or inspection. In addition, this paragraph
is to be revised to delete the text ``(GMVI3)'' in response to the change in definition of ``Commandant,''
discussed in 160.0773(a) under 

``Changes to make editorial corrections.''



Section 160.07727Pamphlet

(a) through (f) In keeping with 160.0777(a), Type I, II, and III hybrid PFDs will not have the approval
limitations of a Type V hybrid PFD. In consideration of this change, a requirement will be added for a different pamphlet
for each hybrid PFD Type. The proposed method of change is to adopt revisions to Underwriters Laboratories ``Standard
for Safety'', UL 1517, section 39, ``Information Pamphlet,'' if the necessary revisions can be made in a timely manner.
In this SNPRM, the text of the proposed changes is published in its entirety where the current text of UL 1517 is not applicable
to Type I, II and III hybrids. Text in this SNPRM would be used in the final rule if UL 1517 is not revised at that time.

Section 160.07729Manual Contents

(b) through (e) It is anticipated that the designs for Type I, II, III, or V Recreational hybrid PFDs will be different.
Therefore, paragraph (b) will be revised and several new paragraphs added to require that each Type I, II, III, or V
Recreational Hybrid PFD be provided with an owner's manual appropriate to that type PFD. The proposed method of change
is to adopt revisions to Underwriters Laboratories ``Standards for Safety'', UL 1517, section 40, ``Owners Manual,''
if the necessary revisions can be made in a timely manner. In this SNPRM, the test of the proposed changes is published
in its entirety where the current text of UL 1517 is not applicable to Type I, II, and III hybrids. Text of this SNPRM would
be used in the final rule if UL 1517 is not revised at that time. Former paragraph (c) is redesignated (f), which is discussed
later in this preamble. The new paragraph (c) addresses the manual for Type I, II, or III recreational hybrids PFDs
which do not have to be worn to meet carriage requirements. The requirements for Type V recreational hybrid PFD owner's
manual remains the same but is moved to paragraph (d). The requirements of former paragraph (b)(2) are now in paragraph
(e).

Section 160.07729Commercial Hybrid PFD

(c)(2) This paragraph will be changed to indicate that commercial hybrid PFDs approved as a ``Work Vest Only'' or Type
I PFD must contain the information required by the Approval Certificate or in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.

Section 160.07730Spare Operating Components

(a) The changes to the Scope, 160.0771(b) allow hybrid PFDs to be approved as Type I, II, III, or V. In response
to the changes in the Scope this paragraph will be amended to require all Types of hybrid PFDs to be provided with spare
operating components at the time of sale.

