 

II. Summary of Rule Changes Since Proposal



A. TSDF Tanks, Surface Impoundments, and Containers 

B. TSDF Miscellaneous Units

C. Generator 90-Day Tanks and Containers

D. Other RCRA Regulatory Actions

E. Test Methods



III. Summary of Final Rule Impacts



IV. Background

A. Implementation of RCRA Section 3004(n)

B. Public Participation in Rulemaking

C. Relationship to Other RCRA Standards

D. Relationship to CERCLA Standards

E. Relationship to Clean Air Act Standards

F. Relationship to Nuclear Regulatory Commission Standards



V. Basis for Final Rule



A. New Control Options

B. Control Option Impacts

C. Selection Rationale



VI. Summary of Responses to Comments on Proposed Rule 



A. Development of Air Standards Under RCRA

B. Revised Impacts Analysis 

C. Container Air Standards

D. Generator 90-Day Tanks and Containers

E. Implementation of RCRA Air Standards

F. Waste Stabilization in Tanks



VII. Requirements of Final Rule



A. TSDF Tank, Surface Impoundment, and Container Requirements

B. TSDF Miscellaneous Unit Requirements

C. 90-Day Tanks' and Containers' Requirements

D. Amendments to Subparts AA and BB Standards



VIII. Implementation of Final Rule



A. Existing Sources

B. New Sources

C. State Authority



IX. Test Methods



A. Method 25D

B. Method 25E



X. Administrative Requirements



A. Paperwork Reduction Act

B. Executive Order 12866 Review

C. Regulatory Flexibility Act

D. Docket



XI. Legal Authority



I. Compliance Dates



The final rule promulgated today establishes additional air standards for TSDF owners and operators subject to 40
CFR part 264 or 40 CFR part 265. In addition, this rule amends the conditions for hazardous waste generators accumulating
waste on-site in RCRA permit-exempt tanks and containers pursuant to 40 CFR 262.34(a) to include air emission control
requirements. All of these rule requirements are effective as of June 5, 1995. All hazardous waste placed in the affected
tanks, surface impoundments, containers, and other affected units on and after this date must be managed in accordance
with the requirements of the final rule. This includes implementing the required air emission controls on an affected
unit or performing the required waste determinations and recordkeeping to indicate that the affected unit is exempted
from these air emission control requirements. Under circumstances when the air emission control equipment required
to comply with the rule cannot be operational at an existing TSDF by June 5, 1995, an implementation schedule for installation
of the equipment must be developed and placed in the facility operating records no later than June 5, 1995. In such cases,
the facility owner or operator must have all air emission controls required by the final rule in operation no later
than December 8, 1997.

