 

The actual reduction in VOC emissions from 1987 to 1990 was 61 TPD which reflects growth in emissions from some sources
and reductions in emissions due to all control measures. 

In association with its emission inventory discussed in Section 5.A. below, the State demonstrated that point source
VOC emissions were not artificially low due to local economic downturn. The BAAQMD included trend data for vehicle
miles traveled (VMT) and employment in the maintenance plan to demonstrate that attainment was not due to economic
downturn. These trend data indicate that neither VMT growth nor daily VMT actually decreased during the attainment
period. In addition, using employment data as an indicator for stationary source emissions, the BAAQMD demonstrated
a modest decrease during the calendar years 1991 and 1992. The overall effect on the stationary source inventory should
have been less than a 2% reduction, not enough to significantly affect the San Francisco Bay Area's attainment of the
ozone NAAQS. EPA finds that the combination of existing EPA-approved SIP and Federal measures contribute to the permanence
and enforceability of reductions in ambient ozone levels that have allowed the area to attain the NAAQS. 



5. Fully Approved Maintenance Plan Under Section 175A 



In today's document, EPA is proposing approval of the State's maintenance plan for the San Francisco Bay Area because
EPA finds that the BAAQMD's submittal meets the requirements of section 175A. If EPA determines after public notice
and comment that it should give final approval to the maintenance plan, the San Francisco Bay Area nonattainment area
will have a fully approved maintenance plan in accordance with section 175A. Section 175A of the Act sets forth the
elements of a maintenance plan for areas seeking redesignation from nonattainment to attainment. The plan must demonstrate
continued attainment of the applicable NAAQS for at least ten years after the Administrator approves a redesignation
to attainment. Eight years after the redesignation, the State must submit a revised maintenance plan which demonstrates
attainment for the ten years following the initial ten-year period. To provide for the possibility of future NAAQS
violations, the maintenance plan must contain contingency measures, with a schedule for implementation, adequate
to assure prompt correction of any air quality problems. Each of the section 175A plan requirements is discussed below.





5.A. Emissions Inventory_Base Year Inventory. 

The BAAQMD adopted comprehensive inventories of VOC, NO

X

, and CO emissions from area, stationary, and mobile sources using 1990 as the base year for calculations to demonstrate
maintenance of the ozone NAAQS. EPA has determined that 1990 is an appropriate year on which to base attainment level
emissions because EPA policy allows States to select any one of the three years in the attainment period as the attainment
year inventory.

6

 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
6

</FOOTNAME>
``Procedures for Processing Requests to Redesignate Areas to Attainment,'' John Calcagni, Director, Air Quality
Management Division, September 4, 1992. 

</FOOTNOTE>


CARB originally submitted the annual and peak ozone season 1990 comprehensive inventories of actual emissions as
a SIP revision on November 12, 1992, and revised them in a submission dated November 18, 1993. CARB also submitted the
San Francisco Bay Area's ozone maintenance plan on November 12, 1993 which contained a comprehensive 1990 emission
inventory. EPA policy (September 29, 1992, Calcagni and Laxton) allows the public hearing and adoption of the 1990
base year inventories to occur with the first related regulatory submittal. CARB developed the inventories to meet
the requirements of sections 172(c)(3) and 182(a)(1), in accordance with EPA guidance. 



The State submittal contains the detailed inventory data and summaries by county and source category. The BAAQMD
provided the stationary source estimates, based on source test and mass balance computations, as required for annual
permit renewal. The CARB and BAAQMD generated area source emissions for each source category based on emission and
activity factors for each county in the nonattainment area. These factors are cited or their sources referenced in
Methods for Assessing Area Source Emissions in California, California Air Resources Board, September 1991. 


CARB based on-road mobile source emission and activity estimates on CARB's EMFAC7F and BURDEN7C models, respectively.
Different emission factors and activity rates apply to each type of vehicle, roadway, and road condition. Vehicle
mix and age data from vehicle registration vary within each county. Off-road engine estimates were derived from both
State and local sources, as cited in the area source document, referenced above. The CARB derived VMT estimates from
a mix of the California ``Highway Performance Monitoring System'' (HPMS) and local surveys. Actual, as opposed to
allowable, emission estimates were used for all source categories. 



The comprehensive base year emissions inventory discussed above has been entered into the Aerometric Information
Retrieval System (AIRS). AIRS is EPA's computerized data storage system for air quality and emission source data.
EPA, under contract with Radian Corporation, has entered the base year emissions inventory of stationary sources
into AIRS and has also prepared computer software to convert the California Emission Data System stationary source
data to AIRS/AFS format for entry into AIRS. California is responsible for entering 1990 area and mobile source (AMS)
data into AIRS by October 1994, according to a fiscal year 1994 Clean Air Act section 105 air program grant agreement.
EPA's TSD contains a more detailed analysis of the base year inventory for the San Francisco Bay Area. 



