 

1. Area Source Finding 


The HAP emitted from this source category include 
benzene, toluene, hexane, xylene, and ethylbenzene from 
gasoline and crude oil loading as well as approximately 
60 HAP from alcohols and specialty chemicals. Of the 
approximately 1,800 marine vessel terminals in this source 
category, at least 60 emit 25 ton/year of HAP or more, and 
are therefore considered major sources. In addition, under 
section 112(a)(1), a marine vessel terminal may be a part of 
a major source if it is part of a ``group of stationary 
sources located within a contiguous area and under common 
control that emits or has the potential to emit considering 
controls, in the aggregate, 10 tons per year or more of any 
hazardous air pollutant or 25 tons per year or more of any 
combination of hazardous air pollutants.'' There are 
approximately 600 refineries and chemical production 
facilities in the United States; all of these are considered 
to be major sources. While the Agency does not have the 
data in its marine vessel data base to estimate how many of 
these facilities have bulk marine loading terminals that are 
contiguous to and under the same control as the main 
facility, there is a high correlation between large 
refineries and production facilities and large bulk loading 
terminals. Therefore, at a minimum, for purposes of this 
analysis, the Agency assumed that approximately 
300 terminals are major sources because they are likely to 
be located at major sources such as refineries or chemical 
production facilities. This leaves approximately 
1,200 facilities that are considered likely area sources. 
Based on the emissions data contained in the Agency's data 
base, these 1,200 facilities represent only 2 percent of 
nationwide HAP emissions. 
Section 112(c)(3) states that categories of area 
sources emitting HAP may be listed and regulated if the 
Administrator finds the sources, individually or in the 
aggregate, present a threat of adverse effects to human 
health or the environment. Based on limited data available 
to the Agency, the Administrator is unable to determine a 
threat of adverse effects at this time. Therefore, the 
Agency is proposing not to regulate such area sources in 
this rulemaking. This is consistent with the Agency's 
decision not to include in its initial list of source 
categories those categories that contained no major sources 
and for which the Agency had not made a finding of threat of 
adverse effects (57 FR 31576, July 16, 1992). The Agency 
may, however, revisit these sources in the future, if 
additional data become available. 


2. Determination of Subcategories 


The source category to be regulated is major sources of 
marine vessel loading and unloading operations. As part of 
the NESHAP development process, the source category was 
evaluated to determine if subcategorization of the source 
category was justified. Although the Act does not specify 
the criteria from which subcategories can be developed, 
section 112(d)(1) of the Act states that the ``Administrator 
may distinguish among classes, types, and sizes of sources 
within a category or subcategory ***.'' The Agency believes 
that these same criteria are acceptable criteria to use in 
making subcategory determinations. 
Size appears to be a likely candidate for a 
distinguishing feature, and using total estimated HAP 
emissions as an indicator for size, the EPA evaluated marine 
tank vessel loading operations to determine whether it was 
appropriate to subcategorize the source category on the 
basis of size. The limit for determining subcategories was 
examined in 0.5 Mg increments of HAP emissions from 
0.5 Mg/yr to 2.0 Mg/yr. A subcategory based on 1 Mg of 
HAP emissions per year was selected for the following 
reasons. First, facilities that emit less than 1 Mg of 
emissions are likely to be area sources and therefore not 
subject to the proposed standards, or are facilities that 
are represented by relatively minimal, episodic emissions. 
For example, a typical river barge holds 10,000 barrels or 
420,000 gallons of gasoline. An uncontrolled facility below 
a 1-Mg cutoff could be loading less than 30 barges per year. 
These facilities also typically emit less frequently than 
facilities emitting more than 1 Mg/yr and typically only 
load a single commodity. Additionally, these facilities 
also tend to load (and therefore emit) commodities having 
lower vapor pressures than commodities loaded at other, 
larger, facilities. Also, facilities that emit 1 Mg or more 
of HAP emissions contribute approximately 98 percent of HAP 
emissions to the national inventory. (See Docket A9044) 





