 

364.53 


What records must be maintained for the individual? 




For each applicant for IL services and for each individual receiving IL services, the service provider shall maintain
a consumer service record that includes_


(a) Documentation concerning eligibility or ineligibility for services; 


(b) The services requested by the consumer; 


(c) Either the IL plan developed with the consumer or a waiver signed by the consumer stating that an IL plan is unnecessary;



(d) The services actually provided to the consumer; and 


(e) The IL goals or objectives_


(1) Established with the consumer, whether or not in the consumer's IL plan; and 


(2) Achieved by the consumer.





(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c), 712 and 796c(m)(4)(B)) 



364.54 


What are the durational limitations on IL services? 





The service provider may not impose any uniform durational limitations on the provision of IL services, except as
otherwise provided by Federal law or regulation.




(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c) and 796796f5) 



364.55 


What standards shall service providers meet? 





In providing IL services to individuals with significant disabilities, service providers shall comply with_



(a) The written standards for IL service providers established by the DSU pursuant to 34 CFR 365.31; and 



(b) All applicable State or Federal licensure or certification requirements.




(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c) and 796796f5) 




364.56 


What are the special requirements pertaining to the protection, use, and release of personal information? 





(a) 

General provisions.

 The State plan must assure that each service provider will adopt and implement policies and procedures to safeguard
the confidentiality of all personal information, including photographs and lists of names. These policies and procedures
must assure that_



(1) Specific safeguards protect current and stored personal information; 



(2) All applicants for, or recipients of, IL services and, as appropriate, those individuals' legally authorized
representatives, service providers, cooperating agencies, and interested persons are informed of the confidentiality
of personal information and the conditions for gaining access to and releasing this information;



(3) All applicants or their legally authorized representatives are informed about the service provider's need to
collect personal information and the policies governing its use, including_



(i) Identification of the authority under which information is collected; 



(ii) Explanation of the principal purposes for which the service provider intends to use or release the information;




(iii) Explanation of whether providing requested information to the service provider is mandatory or voluntary
and the effects to the individual of not providing requested information; 



(iv) Identification of those situations in which the service provider requires or does not require informed written
consent of the individual or his or her legally authorized representative before information may be released; and




(v) Identification of other agencies to which information is routinely released; 



(4) Persons who are unable to communicate in English or who rely on special modes of communication must be provided
an explanation of service provider policies and procedures affecting personal information through methods that
can be adequately understood by them; 



(5) At least the same protections are provided to individuals with significant disabilities as provided by State
laws and regulations; and 



(6) Access to records is governed by rules established by the service provider and any fees charged for copies of records
are reasonable and cover only extraordinary costs of duplication or making extensive searches. 



(b) 

Service provider use.

 All personal information in the possession of the service provider may be used only for the purposes directly connected
with the provision of IL services and the administration of the IL program under which IL services are provided. Information
containing identifiable personal information may not be shared with advisory or other bodies that do not have official
responsibility for the provision of IL services or the administration of the IL program under which IL services are
provided. In the provision of IL services or the administration of the IL program under which IL services are provided,
the service provider may obtain personal information from other service providers and cooperating agencies under
assurances that the information may not be further divulged, except as provided under paragraphs (c), (d), and (e)
of this section. 



(c) 

Release to recipients of IL services.

 (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section, if requested in writing by a recipient of IL
services, the service provider shall release all information in that individual's record of services to the individual
or the individual's legally authorized representative in a timely manner. 



(2) Medical, psychological, or other information that the service provider determines may be harmful to the individual
may not be released directly to the individual, but must be provided through a qualified medical or psychological
professional or the individual's legally authorized representative. 



(3) If personal information has been obtained from another agency or organization, it may be released only by, or under
the conditions established by, the other agency or organization. 




