 

III



Pursuant to 10 CFR 73.5, ``Specific exemptions,'' the Commission may upon application of any interested person or
upon its own initiative, grant such exemption in this part as it determines are authorized by law and will not endanger
life or property or the common defense and security, and are otherwise in the public interest. The Code of Federal Regulations
at 10 CFR 73.55 allows the Commission to authorize a licensee to provide alternative measures for protection against
radiological sabotage provided the licensee demonstrates that the alternative measures have the same ``high assurance''
objective, that the proposed measures meet the general performance requirements of the regulation, and that the
overall level of system performance provides protection against radiological sabotage equivalent to that which
would be provided by the regulation.

Currently, unescorted access into the protected area for both employee and contractor personnel into the Calvert
Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, Unit Nos. 1 and 2, is controlled through the use of picture badges. Positive identification
of personnel which are authorized and request access into the protected area is established by security personnel
making a visual comparison of the individual requesting access and that individual's picture badge. In accordance
with 10 CFR 73.55(d)(5), contractor personnel are not allowed to take their picture badges offsite. In addition,
in accordance with the plant's physical security plan, the licensee's employees are also not allowed to take their
picture badges offsite.

The proposed system will require that all individuals with authorized unescorted access have the physical characteristics
of their hand (hand geometry) registered with their picture badge number in a computerized access control system.
Therefore, all authorized individuals must not only have their picture badge to gain access to the protected area,
but must also have their hand geometry confirmed. All individuals, including contractors, who have authorized unescorted
access into the protected area will be allowed to keep their picture badges in their possession when departing the
Calvert Cliffs site.

All other access processes, including search function capability and access revocation, will remain the same. A
security officer responsible for access control will continue to be positioned within a bullet-resistant structure.
It should also be noted that the proposed system is only for individuals with authorized unescorted access and will
not be used for those individuals requiring escorts.

Sandia National Laboratories conducted testing which demonstrated that the hand geometry equipment possesses
strong performance characteristics. Details of the testing performed are in the Sandia report, ``A Performance
Evaluation of Biometric Identification Devices,'' SAND910276 UC906 Unlimited Release, June 1991.
Based on the Sandia report and the licensee's experience using the current photo picture identification system,
the false acceptance rate for the proposed hand geometry system would be at least equivalent to that of the current
system. To assure that the proposed system will continue to meet the general performance requirements of 10 CFR 73.55(d)(5),
the licensee will implement a process for testing the system The site security plans will also be revised to allow implementation
of the hand geometry system and to allow employees and contractors with unescorted access to keep their picture badges
in their possession when leaving the Calvert Cliffs site.



IV



For the foregoing reasons, the NRC staff has determined that the proposed alternative measures for protection against
radiological sabotage meet the same high assurance objective and the general performance requirements of 10 CFR
73.55. In addition, the staff has determined that the overall level of the proposed system's performance will provide
protection against radiological sabotage equivalent to that which is provided by the current system in accordance
with 10 CFR 73.55.

Accordingly, the Commission has determined that, pursuant to 10 CFR 73.5, this exemption is authorized by law, will
not endanger life or property or common defense and security, and is otherwise in the public interest. Therefore,
the Commission hereby grants the following exemption:




The requirement of 10 CFR 73.55(d)(5) that individuals who have been granted unescorted access and are not employed
by the licensee are to return their picture badges upon exit from the protected area is no longer necessary. Thus, these
individuals may keep their picture badges in their possession upon leaving the Calvert Cliffs site.




Pursuant to 10 CFR 51.32, the Commission has determined that the granting of this exemption will not result in any significant
adverse environmental impact (59 FR 38214).

This Exemption is effective upon issuance.




Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 29th day of July.




For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.



<SIGNER>
Steven A. Varga,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Division of Reactor Projects_I/II, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9420418 Filed 81894; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M
</BILLING>

