 

(d) 

Allocations of output facilities and systems_

(1) 

Facts and circumstances analysis.

 Whether output sold under a contract is allocated to a particular facility (for example, a generating unit), to the
entire system of the seller of that output (net of any uses of that system output allocated to a particular facility),
or to a portion of a facility is based on all the facts and circumstances, including whether the transaction is inconsistent
with the purpose of section 141. In general, output is allocated to a facility or system only to the extent that it is
physically possible. For example, output from a generating unit that is fed directly into a lower voltage distribution
system of the owner of that unit generally cannot leave that distribution system and, therefore, must be allocated
to those receiving electricity through that distribution system. Output may be allocated without regard to physical
limitations, however, if exchange agreements, or similar agreements, provide output to a purchaser where, but for
the exchange agreements, it would not be possible for the seller to provide output to that purchaser.

(2) 

Factors. 

Except as provided in paragraph (d)(1) of this section, contractual terms relating to the delivery of the output (such
as delivery limitations and options or obligations to deliver power from additional sources) are the most significant
factor in allocating output to a facility or system. For example, a contract to provide a specified amount of electricity
from a system, but only when at least that amount of electricity is being generated by a particular unit, generally
is allocated to that unit. Similarly, a contract to buy 20 Mw of system power with a right to take up to 40 percent of the
actual output of a specific 50 Mw facility whenever total system output is insufficient to meet all of the seller's
obligations generally is allocated to the specific facility rather than the system. The method of pricing output
under the contract and the consistency of the contract with commercially reasonable terms are also significant factors.
For example, output sold under a contract to provide peaking capacity from a combustion turbine generally is allocated
to that turbine if the contract provides for pricing that is typical of peaking unit pricing, this pricing is based
on the capital and generating costs of that turbine, or no power need be delivered if that turbine is inoperable.

(3) 

Allocations among users. 

A facility or system (or portion thereof) that, under this paragraph (d), is allocable to two or more users generally
is allocated among those users on a ratable basis. Payments for output provided by an output facility financed with
two or more issues of bonds generally are allocated ratably among the issues according to the relative amounts of proceeds
of each issue used to finance that facility.

(4) 

Electric transmission facilities. 

If a contract for use of a transmission facility provides for payments for transmission services using a more accurate
method of measuring the transmission facilities used than the contract path specified by the parties (for example,
a method that accounts for loop flow or a method based on load share ratios of a network), that method must be used to determine
use under this paragraph. In other cases, the determination of use of an electric transmission facility may be based
on the contract path specified by the parties to the contract, if reasonable.

(5) 

Conservation facilities. 

In general, the financing of an output conservation improvement is treated as the acquisition of an output facility
by the utility sponsoring the improvement. The use of a conservation improvement is allocated under the rules in this
paragraph (d). Thus, generally, the output attributable to a conservation improvement is allocable to the beneficiary
of that output.



