 

(b) A request for a modification of an approved AHP application 
must include, at a minimum: 

(1) A description of how the proposed modification differs from 
the original application; 

(2) The reason for the proposed modification; and 

(3) Any other information that the Bank determines is 
necessary to review the proposed modification. 

(c)(1) The Bank shall review the request for modification, 
shall re-score the application as proposed to be modified 
according to the scoring criteria used in the AHP funding cycle in 
which the application was originally approved, and may approve 
such request if the following factors are satisfied: 

(i) The project as proposed to be modified continues to meet 
all of the requirements of this part; and 

(ii) The project as proposed to be modified continues to score 
high enough that it would have been approved in its AHP funding 
cycle. 

(2) If the application does not satisfy the requirements in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the Bank in its discretion may 
approve the request for modification if the reason for the 
modification is due to circumstances outside the control of the 
applicant or sponsor. 

(d) The Bank shall forward to the Board a detailed summary of 
any modification of an AHP application approved by the Bank, 
including how the Bank re-scored the project, within 30 calendar 
days of the approval of such modification. 
 


Subpart F_Use and Verification at Initial Disbursement of AHP 
Subsidized Advances or Direct Subsidies 



960.12 

Use of AHP subsidized advances or direct subsidies 
within reasonable period of time and verification of reasonable 
progress. 



(a) The Bank shall in its AHP implementation plan identify what 
constitutes reasonable progress by the sponsor towards using 
subsidized advances or direct subsidies within a reasonable period 
of time after the approval of an AHP application for different 
types of projects, and explain how it intends to verify such 
reasonable progress. 

(b) The sponsor must demonstrate that reasonable progress is 
being made towards using the requested funds within a reasonable 
period of time after approval of the AHP application, as 
determined by the Bank under paragraph (a) of this section. 

(c) The Bank shall verify the efforts of the sponsor to 
determine whether it has satisfied the requirement in paragraph 
(b) of this section. 

(d) If the sponsor fails to satisfy the requirement in 
paragraph (b) of this section, the Bank shall cancel the AHP 
award, and shall not disburse any subsidized advances or direct 
subsidies through the applicant to the sponsor, and the full 
amount of any previously disbursed subsidized advances or direct 
subsidies shall be returned to the Bank. 



960.13 

Verification at initial disbursement of AHP subsidized 
advances or direct subsidies. 



At the time of initial disbursement of a subsidized advance or 
a direct subsidy by a Bank for an approved AHP application, the 
Bank shall verify in writing that the project complies with all 
applicable requirements contained in 960.9 and all obligations 
committed to in the approved AHP application. The Bank shall 
verify the amount of subsidy being provided in connection with the 
application and being charged against the AHP fund. The Bank 
shall include in its AHP implementation plan its verification 
procedures for such purposes. 



Subpart G_Monitoring and Reporting Requirements 



960.14 

Monitoring requirements. 



(a) 

Monitoring by the Banks. 

Each Bank has the responsibility 
to monitor the projects funded through its AHP according to the 
monitoring requirements described in this section. 

(b) 

Monitoring plan. 

Each Bank shall include in its AHP 
implementation plan an explanation of how it intends to meet the 
monitoring requirements of this section. 

(c) 

Monitoring by Bank's designee. 

A Bank may contract with an 
applicant, a state housing finance agency, or other entity to 
perform the tasks required to meet the monitoring requirements 
described in paragraphs (e) through (h) of this section; however, 
the Bank remains ultimately responsible for compliance with the 
monitoring requirements of this section.


