 

The Secretary signed the EIS Record of Decision on June 15, 1994. A letter of concurrence was signed by the Secretary
of Agriculture on July 13, 1994. The decision directed the Service to implement its proposed action plan as soon as
practical. 

Two nonessential experimental population proposed rules, one for the Park and one for central Idaho, were published
in the 

Federal Register

 on August 16, 1994 (59 FR 42108 and 59 FR 42118, respectively). On September 6, 1994, a brochure containing the Record
of Decision, proposed rules, and schedule of public hearings was mailed to about 50,000 people. From September 1422,
1994, a legal notice announcing the proposed rules, hearings, and inviting public comment was published in the Seattle
Post-Intelligencer, Olympia Olympian, New Paper Agency (Salt Lake City Papers), Washington Times, Lewiston Morning
Tribune, The Idaho Statesman, Wyoming Tribune, Casper Star Tribune, Bozeman Daily Chronicle, and Billings Gazette.


The Service held six public hearings on the proposed rules. Notice of the availability of the Record of Decision, public
hearings, and proposed rules was published in the 

Federal Register

 on September 14, 1994 (59 FR 47112). Copies of the proposed rules were distributed to all interested parties. Public
hearings were held on September 27, 1994, in Boise, Idaho; Cheyenne, Wyoming; and Helena, Montana, and on September
29, 1994, in Salt Lake City, Utah; Washington, DC; and Seattle, Washington. About 90 people testified at these hearings
and about 330 people submitted written comments. Comments on the proposed rules were accepted until October 17, 1994.


In Montana, the Service has an active wolf management program due to the presence of breeding pairs of wolves. The Service's
program monitors wolves to determine their status, encourages research, provides the public with accurate information,
and controls wolves that attack domestic livestock. Wolves that depredate on livestock are translocated or removed.
Such action is required to reduce livestock losses, to foster local tolerance, and promote and enhance conservation
of wolves. The relocation of wolves under the control program is not intended to accelerate the natural expansion
of wolves into unoccupied historic habitat. Although 19 wolves have been removed under the control program, the number
of wolves has continued to expand in Montana at about 22 percent per year for the past 9 years. 

4. 

Reintroduction Site: 

The Service decided to reintroduce wolves into central Idaho on or near Federal lands managed by the USDA Forest Service.
The Idaho location was selected as a site for experimental wolves because of the following factors. The central Idaho
site is a vast area of about 53,000 km2 (20,000 mi2) of contiguous National forests, including the Bitteroot, Boise,
Challis, Clearwater, Nez Perce, Payette, Sawtooth, Salmon, and Panhandle National Forests. The central area is
comprised of three wilderness areas: the Frank Church River-of-no-Return, Selway Bitteroot, and Gospel-Hump.
These wilderness areas have about 16,000 km2 (6,000 mi2) of quality wolf habitat and several good potential release
sites. The area is also far from the natural southern expansion of wolf packs from Montana. Thus, any wolves documented
inside the central Idaho experimental area would probably be from reintroduction efforts rather than naturally
dispersing extant wolf populations from Canada or northwestern Montana. The Service will also reintroduce wolves
into Yellowstone National Park as a nonessential experimental population published under a separate rule in the


Federal Register

. 

The Service determined that reintroduction of wolves into central Idaho had the highest probability to succeed due
to ecological and political considerations (Service 1994). The reintroduction effort will enhance wolf viability
by increasing genetic diversity through genetic interchange between segments of the population. The reintroduction
plan should help in achieving wolf recovery goals 20 years sooner than under current natural recovery policy. 

Because reintroduced gray wolves will be classified as a nonessential experimental population, the Service's management
practices can reduce local concerns about excessive government regulation on private lands, uncontrolled livestock
depredations, excessive big game predation, and the lack of State government involvement in the program. 

Establishment of gray wolves in central Idaho will initiate wolf recovery in one of the three recovery areas described
as necessary for the species' recovery in the northern Rocky Mountains. No existing or anticipated Federal or State
actions identified for this release site are expected to have major effects on the experimental population. Yellowstone
National Park is identified as the only other alternative site; it will also receive wolves for reintroduction, which
will facilitate recovery in that experimental area. 

5. 

Reintroduction Protocol: 

The wolf reintroduction project is undertaken by the Service in cooperation with the National Park Service, Forest
Service, other Federal agencies, potentially affected tribes, the States of Idaho and Montana, and entities of the
Canadian government. To obtain wolves, the Service will enter into formal agreements with the Canadian and Provincial
governments and/or resource management agencies. 






