 

Section 4911, relating to the excise tax on certain lobbying activities of certain electing public charities, contains
a definition of ``influencing legislation'' that is essentially identical (as it relates to direct, as opposed to
grassroots, lobbying) to the definition of that term in section 162(e)(4)(A). Because of this similarity, these
proposed regulations adopt rules that are similar to the rules applicable to direct lobbying communications under
56.49112(b)(1). However, section 162(e) differs from section 4911 in certain material respects.
For example, section 4911(d)(2) contains exceptions to the term ``influencing legislation,'' while section 162(e)(4)
does not. Moreover, these proposed regulations under section 162(e) and the regulations under section 4911 differ
in some respects due to the nature of charitable organizations described in section 501(c)(3) as compared to, for
example, organizations described in section 501(c)(6) and for-profit entities. Accordingly, taxpayers should
not infer that these proposed regulations reflect an interpretation of section 4911 or the regulations thereunder.



Discussion of Selected Considerations 


The proposed regulations define ``influencing legislation'' in the same terms as the statutory definition in section
162(e)(4)(A), which requires a ``communication'' with a government official or employee. With respect to that communication,
the proposed regulations adopt rules similar to the rules in the section 4911 regulations. Those rules require that
the communication refer to specific legislation and reflect a view on that legislation. This approach was believed
to be more appropriate than a general facts and circumstances analysis because it provides reasonably objective
criteria for determining whether an attempt to influence legislation has been made. 
The proposed regulations also provide rules for determining which activities support a lobbying communication
and, therefore, are considered part of the attempt to influence legislation. The principal issue in this regard is
whether the mere fact that an activity is used in some manner to support a lobbying communication should be sufficient
to treat that activity as part of the attempt to influence legislation. This approach has been referred to by some commentators
as a ``lookback'' rule, in that lobbying activities would be identified solely by ``looking back'' from the lobbying
communication to those activities which supported it. While a lookback approach would appear to be consistent with
the legislative history, numerous comments suggested that the administrative burdens associated with a lookback
rule could be onerous, particularly if the period of the lookback were long or unlimited. Accordingly, these comments
recommended that a lookback rule not be adopted, or, if adopted, that it be limited to a brief period of time. Some of
the comments suggested that an appropriate period of time may be six months, by analogy to the limited lookback rule
applicable to certain grassroots lobbying activities under the section 4911 regulations. 
Upon consideration of the statute, its legislative history, and the comments received, it was concluded that a lookback
rule would not be appropriate. Instead, the proposed regulations provide that only those activities engaged in for
the purpose of making or supporting a lobbying communication will be treated as a lobbying activity. This approach
strikes an appropriate balance between taxpayers' need for greater contemporaneous certainty regarding whether
a particular activity may be treated as a lobbying activity, and Congress' objective of not allowing a deduction for
lobbying activities. 
Treasury and the IRS view the legislative history on this point as voicing a concern that taxpayers may attempt to abuse
an intent- or purpose-based rule by labelling their lobbying activities as ``mere monitoring.'' To protect against
that potential abuse, while also providing greater certainty regarding those activities that are less likely to
be lobbying activities, the proposed regulations provide presumptions regarding the purpose for engaging in certain
activities. 
Because the temporal connection between the lobbying communication and the related activity is an important factor
in assessing whether the related activity was engaged in for the purpose of supporting the lobbying communication,
the presumptions turn to a considerable extent on whether the activity occurred during the taxable year in which the
lobbying communication was made or the immediately preceding year. It was believed that the mere closing of the annual
accounting period was insufficient, in some cases, to affect this temporal connection, and, consequently, that
the presumption would need to operate in more than one annual accounting period. Thus it was believed that the presumption
period was an appropriate period during which to treat this temporal connection as indicating (rebuttably) the purpose
for engaging in the activity without creating significant difficulties for taxpayers in determining, at the time
they file their returns, whether the presumption is likely to operate with respect to that activity. 
The proposed regulations also address those supporting activities that are engaged in for both lobbying and non-lobbying
purposes. In this connection, some of the comments have suggested that a principal or primary purpose test be adopted.
Under this approach, an activity would be treated as influencing legislation if the principal or primary purpose
for engaging in that activity was to make or support a lobbying communication, even if the activity was engaged in for
other, non-lobbying purposes as well. Conversely, an activity would be treated as not involving lobbying if the principal
or primary purpose for engaging in that activity was a non-lobbying purpose, even though a substantial purpose of
the activity was to support lobbying. 

