 

NMFS intends to enter into an agreement with the SCS to serve as the administrative intermediary for the habitat restoration
program. The SCS would enter into agreements with the appropriate state conservation agency, conservation commission,
or association of conservation districts, who, in turn, would develop: A grant solicitation process, including
guidelines for making a grant application; a grant application review process; deadlines for grant applications;
and a monitoring and evaluation process. Each state conservation agency, conservation commission, or association
of conservation districts would develop agreements with state employment departments to establish a program to
determine the eligibility of commercial fishermen according to the criteria described elsewhere in this notice.

NMFS has selected the SCS as the administrative intermediary because it has the necessary expertise, experience,
and other desirable features, as well as the ability to implement this program quickly by making use of existing governmental
organizations, while avoiding duplication of effort. The SCS has an established relationship with conservation
districts, which have project selection networks that extend to the local level and can be used for soliciting proposals.
SCS provides technical assistance to the conservation districts through its district offices, which are widely
distributed and are typically at the county level. Many of these conservation districts have previously received
Federal grants, and arrangements are in place to receive grants under this project. For each district, there are approximately
five officials who are landowners and are either appointed or elected via the general election process. These officials
make recommendations concerning private lands. The SCS reviews these recommendations and provides technical expertise
in the areas of forestry, range management, conservation, agronomy, etc. 
The SCS has significant expertise in habitat restoration and enhancement on private lands and on the grounds contracting
capability. This is important, since almost all Federal funding has gone toward restoration of habitat on public
lands. The SCS has demonstrated the capability and the flexibility to work with diverse organizations and proposal
applicants, such as other Federal agencies, state agencies, and local governments. The SCS is already involved in
the prevention of soil erosion through its watershed identification, habitat restoration, preservation, and enhancement
projects in Oregon, California, and Washington. The SCS is also already aware of Northwest salmon habitat issues,
as evidenced in working relationships with the Bonneville Power Administration and the Northwest Power Planning
Council (Council), and has initiated a program for habitat restoration in response to the Council's comprehensive
strategy for salmon and steelhead restoration in the Columbia River Basin. 
A number of SCS studies have already been developed that might be submitted for the review process. For example, in
the California Trinity River District, there is a project that may employ up to 75 fishermen. A similar project, which
could employ another 40 fishermen, has been developed for the Garcia River. 
While it is NMFS' intention and desire to make financial assistance available as soon as possible, it should be noted
that, due to the season and the need for project review, planning, and implementing, it is unlikely that many fishermen
will start receiving wages in this program prior to April 1, 1995. Every effort to expedite the program will be made.



C. Data Collection Jobs Program 


Commercial fishermen have voiced considerable interest in a jobs program associated with collecting information
or performing tasks that would be of use to scientists and fishery managers. 
Under this proposed program, eligible commercial fishermen, both tribal and non-tribal, would be hired on a first-come,
first-served basis, at a ``living wage,'' up to $1015 per hour, to perform various tasks by contractors associated
with approved projects. Examples of these tasks include collecting tissue samples for genetic research, measuring
parameters of the ocean environment (temperature, upwelling, etc.), performing baseline surveys of habitat, participating
in test fisheries to determine ocean fish distribution, and assisting hatchery technicians in collecting information
or in improving hatchery operations. Commercial fishing vessels may also be chartered to do research. For some tasks,
as with the habitat restoration program, training of fishermen will be required.


