 

b.

 Benefits.

 In the past 7 years, there have been at least 
37 cases of pediatric fatality from the accidental ingestion of 
iron-containing products, or a mean of 5.3 deaths per year. Data 
on the potency of the product consumed is available for 25 cases. 
In all cases for which information is available, the product 
consumed contained at least 40 mg of iron. In the same 7-year 
period, there were nearly 190 poisonings reported that were life 
threatening or that resulted in permanent injury, and over 2,000 
reported poisonings requiring some form of treatment. FDA 
believes that most, if not all, such deaths and some poisonings 
can be prevented by requiring that higher-potency iron-containing 
products be packaged in unit-dose packaging. Studies indicate 
that the child is less likely to consume the number of dosage 
units that may be fatal. 
Although no studies have attempted to directly estimate the 
value of reducing the risk of death and illness to children in 
particular, many studies have attempted to estimate the value of 
reducing these risks to adults. Most of these estimates are 
based on wage differences between high and low risk jobs and, 
thus, are derived from the labor market decisions of middle-aged 
adults. Although these estimates cluster around a fairly small 
range, $2 million to $10 million, it is not clear that these 
estimates are valid when applied to children. 
FDA has used estimates of the value of reducing risks to 
adults to a level that would avoid one statistical fatality 
between $1.5 million and $5 million in past rulemaking 
proceedings, including recent food labeling regulations and a 
current proposal to require domestic and foreign processors and 
importers of fish and fishery products to establish Hazard 
Analysis Critical Control Points (HAACP) controls to prevent the 
occurrence of hazards that could affect the safety of these 
seafood products (59 FR 4142, January 28, 1994). One method of 
estimating the value of reducing risks to children is to adjust 
the value of reducing risks to adults by accounting for the 
difference in the number of life-years saved. Under this 
approach, an often used estimate of the value of the risks to 
adults to a level that would avoid one statistical fatality is $5 
million for a middle-aged adult. If this value does not vary 
with life years remaining (that is, if we assume that an infant 
is willing to pay the same amount to avoid risk of death as a 40-
year old would be willing to pay and assuming the same 
distribution of wealth exists in both age groups), then $5 
million is a reasonable estimate. If, however, this value does 
vary with life years remaining, then the corresponding value for 
reducing the risks to small children would be $11 million. FDA 
will use these figures ($5 to 11 million) to provide a range of 
estimates. Although FDA is using these values in this analysis, 
FDA stresses the tentative nature of these estimates and requests 
comments on an appropriate method of estimating the value of 
reducing risks to children. 
The number of fatalities prevented by requiring unit-dose 
packaging for iron-containing products at any potency level less 
than 60 mg iron/dosage unit will not be significantly different. 
Because all fatalities for which FDA has information resulted 
from ingestion of dosage units of at least 40 mg iron potency, 
all three of these options (all products, 30 mg and above, and 40 mg and above) would result in benefits of reducing an
average of 
5.3 deaths per year, valued at between $280 million and $618 
million over 20 years (discounted at 7 percent). 
If, however, FDA were to select the option of requiring 
unit-dose packaging for all iron-containing products of potencies 
of 60 mg iron per dosage unit and above, an average of 5 deaths 
would be prevented per year leading to total discounted benefits 
of preventing fatalities over 20 years of between $265 million 
and $583 million. 
Requiring unit-dosage packaging for iron-containing products 
will also reduce the number of nonfatal cases of pediatric iron 
poisoning. FDA has obtained from CPSC case reports for 78 iron 
ingestions necessitating emergency room treatment reported over 7 
years, or an average of 11 illnesses per year. The potency of 
the product consumed was reported for 12 cases. In five of those 
cases, the potency reported was under 30 mg iron/dosage unit. In 
seven cases, the potency reported was over 60 mg iron/dosage 
unit. AAPCC data shows that from 1986 through 1992 there were 
nearly 190 reported poisonings that were life threatening or that 
resulted in permanent injury, and over 2,000 reported poisonings 
requiring some form of treatment as a result of accidental 
ingestion of adult and pediatric iron-containing products, or an 
average of 286 per year. FDA is unable to predict the percentage 
of these nonfatal poisonings which would be prevented by 
substituting unit-dose packaging for bottles. It is possible 
that not all nonfatal poisonings will be prevented because a 
child can still gain access to the product. However, he or she 
will gain access to fewer dosage units than if the product is in 
a bottle. FDA requests comments on this issue. 
Using a methodology developed previously for FDA to value 
morbidity risks, FDA is able to estimate the value of reduced 
risk of nonfatal poisoning. By comparing similar symptoms and 
medical interventions, the agency has derived an estimate of the 
value of preventing a nonfatal pediatric iron poisoning of 
$20,000 per case. (Ref. 37) As stated previously, 7 out of 12 
cases of nonfatal poisonings were a result of ingestion of 
products of potencies over 60 mg iron per dosage unit. If this 
proportion can be extrapolated to the remaining cases for which 
information is unknown, and if unit-dose packaging will prevent 
all nonfatal cases (at least 2,000 cases in 7 years), then 
requiring unit-dose packaging for products of 60 mg or more iron 
per dosage unit will add approximately $35 million to the 
benefits over the next 20 years (discounted at seven percent). 
Because no nonfatal cases for which information is known were a 
result of ingesting products with potencies between 30 mg and 60 
mg iron per dosage unit, the options of requiring unit-dose 
packaging for products with potencies of 40 mg and 30 mg iron per 
dosage unit will not add more to the benefits than the previous 
option. Still assuming that all nonfatal cases can be prevented 
by unit-dose packaging, requiring packaging changes for all 
products would result in reduced morbidity valued at $61 million 
over the next 20 years. 




