 

B. 

Overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes. 

Although not currently known to be a factor, unrestricted collecting for scientific or horticultural purposes or
excessive visits by individuals interested in seeing rare plants could seriously impact three of these taxa. 

Ctenitis squamigera

, 

Diplazium molokaiense

, and 

Pteris lidgatei 

each number fewer than 100 individuals and fewer than 10 populations, making them especially vulnerable to human
disturbance. Such disturbance could promote erosion and greater ingression of alien plant taxa. 
C. 

Disease or predation

. No evidence of disease has been reported for the four endangered fern taxa. Predation by feral goats and/or sheep
has been reported for 

Asplenium fragile 

var. 

insulare 

at Pohakuloa Training Area (Shaw 1992, R. Shaw, 

in litt

., 1993). Because no colonies have been completely decimated by the animals, they apparently do not seek out this fern.
However, further predation may occur if their preferred forage is not available. Predation by feral goats is a potential
threat to the other two sizable known populations of this fern at Keauhou and Kulani (Linda Cuddihy, Hawaii Volcanoes
National Park, pers. comm., 1992). 
D. 

The inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms

. Three of the endangered fern taxa have populations located on privately owned land. All four also occur on State and
Federal lands. The known populations of these species located on Federal lands are inadequate to ensure their long-term
survival. There are no State laws or existing regulatory mechanisms at the present time to protect or prevent further
decline of these plants on State or private land. However, Federal listing automatically invokes listing under Hawaii
State law. Hawaii's Endangered Species Act (HRS, Sect. 195D4(a)) states, ``Any species of aquatic life, wildlife,
or land plant that has been determined to be an endangered species pursuant to the Endangered Species Act [of 1973]
shall be deemed to be an endangered species under the provisions of this chapter.'' This State law prohibits cutting,
collecting, uprooting, destroying, injuring, or possessing any listed species of plant on State or private land,
or attempting to engage in any such conduct. However, the regulations are difficult to enforce because of limited
personnel. Further, the State law encourages conservation by State government agencies. The State may enter into
agreements with Federal agencies to administer and manage any area required for the conservation, management, enhancement,
or protection of endangered species (HRS, Sect. 195D5(c)). Funds for these activities could be made available
under section 6 of the Federal Act (State Cooperative Agreements). Listing of these four plant taxa therefore triggers,
reinforces and supplements the protection available under State law. The Act also provides additional protection
to these four species because it is a violation of the Act for any person to remove, cut, dig up, damage, or destroy any
such plant in an area not under Federal jurisdiction in knowing violation of State law or regulation or in the course
of any violation of a State criminal trespass law. 

E. 

Other natural or manmade factors affecting their continued existence. 

The small number of populations and of individual plants of these taxa increases the potential for extinction from
stochastic events. The limited gene pool may depress reproductive vigor, or a single human-caused or natural environmental
disturbance could destroy a significant percentage of the individuals or the only known extant population. For example,
only 4 populations of 

Diplazium molokaiense 

are known, totaling 23 individuals. 

Pteris lidgatei 

is known from 3 populations totaling 26 individuals, 

Ctenitis squamigera 

from 7 populations, and 

Asplenium fragile 

var. 

insulare 

from 8 populations. Three of the endangered taxa are estimated to number no more than 100 known individuals and the
fourth (

Asplenium fragile 

var. 

insulare

) numbers fewer than 300 known individuals. 
All four endangered fern taxa are threatened by competition with one or more alien plant taxa. Koster's curse, a noxious
shrub first reported on Oahu in 1941, had spread through much of the Koolau Mountains by the early 1960s, and spread
to the Waianae Mountains by 1970 (Cuddihy and Stone 1990). This shrub replaces native plants of the forest understory
and poses a serious threat to the population of 

Pteris lidgatei 

located in Kaluanui Valley on the windward side of the Koolau Mountains (J. Lau, pers. comm., 1992). It also poses a
threat to populations of 

Ctenitis squamigera 

and 

Diplazium molokaiense 

in the Waianae Mountains (HHP 1991; J. Lau, pers. comm., 1992). 


