 



Response:

 The practice known as ``permit-as-a-shield'' is derived from an exercise of the EPA's regulatory authority and was
first codified in the 1980 implementing regulations of the RCRA permit program (45 FR 33290, May 19, 1980). It is not
a provision of RCRA and is therefore no part of the statutory mandate by Congress to manage the Nation's hazardous wastes.


Shell Oil

 v. 

EPA,

 950 F.2d at 741, 762 (D.C. Cir. 1991). Because it is a regulatory and not a statutory provision, the EPA can modify the
``permit-as-a-shield'' practice in any situation where the Agency determines that the practice does not serve the
EPA's mandate to protect human health and the environment. For the final subpart CC standards, the EPA estimates that
baseline nationwide excess cancer incidence resulting from exposure to TSDF organic emissions is 48 cases per year.
In addition, total nationwide organic emissions from TSDF are estimated to be approximately 1 million Mg/yr and,
thus, contribute significantly to the formation of atmospheric ozone. These health and environmental impacts are
very high relative to the impacts of emissions from other sources regulated under RCRA and the CAA. Accordingly, the
EPA has determined that the health and environmental impacts resulting from organic air emissions from TSDF are of
a magnitude to warrant narrowly rescinding the ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice for this limited case.
The ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice is not a consequence of Constitutional or statutory obligations of the EPA
to any individual and its removal does not violate any substantive or procedural due process rights of individuals.
The ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice was established by regulations promulgated by the EPA and therefore can be
modified when the EPA determines it is necessary to do so for the protection of human health and the environment. Numerous
government regulations have a direct effect on regulated entities, and the EPA's ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice
does not vest the regulated community with a right to a variance from all new RCRA regulations. Furthermore, the proposal
put the public on notice that the EPA was planning to modify the ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice in this rule, and
the public has therefore had an opportunity for meaningful comment on the issue.

The EPA continues to believe that the permit process and requirements are fundamental components of the RCRA program
and that, by and large, compliance with the permits should constitute compliance with the RCRA program. For the other
rulemakings for which the EPA rescinded the ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice, the EPA determined that the risk to
human health and the environment was too high to allow the practice to continue (for remaining permit periods), and
required that all TSDF comply with the new requirements regardless of their permit status. The EPA has determined
that allowing owners and operators of permitted TSDF to be shielded from compliance with the regulatory requirements
of subparts AA, BB, and CC standards will allow excessively high risks. Today's action by the EPA does not negate the
value of the RCRA permit program or the ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice. Instead, the EPA is making a distinction
between a provision that is sufficiently protective in most cases and one that, under specific situations, is not
sufficiently protective.
The EPA disagrees with the commenters' claims that the permit modification process can adequately accommodate the
timely implementation of the subpart CC standards. For the EPA to apply the subpart CC standards into permits by way
of modifications would require a significant and unreasonable resource commitment. Furthermore, the fact that
existing permits can be modified to incorporate new regulatory requirements [per 40 CFR 270.41(a)(3), which implements
RCRA section 3005(c)(3)] shows that ``permit-as-a-shield'' is hardly an inviolate principle. The ruelmaking simply
accomplishes nationally what a modification would accomplish individually. Accordingly, the EPA developed the
subpart AA, BB, and CC standards to be ``self-implementing'' so that State and Regional permit writers will not be
required to reopen and rewrite permits to incorporate the provisions. Permitted facilities will be able to comply
directly with the regulatory standards in the same way that interim-status facilities must comply. Modifying ``permit-as-a
shield'' for these rules eliminates any confusion or ambiguity as to which TSDF is subject to the requirements.

As noted by the commenters, the EPA stated a policy for ``permit-as-a-shield'' in the so-called consolidated permit
regulations issued in 1980 (45 FR 33290). However, this does not mean that the policy for ``permit-as-a-shield''
can never be amended. The EPA has never agreed to ``bind'' itself to any particular policy or provision. Instead, the
EPA may adhere to a general practice or policy with the understanding that, if the circumstances warrant and the EPA
provides a rational explanation, it can modify or rescind a particular provision. It should be noted, for example,
that Congress has since amended RCRA to require that air emissions from TSDF be controlled, and in the same amendments
provide that the EPA may reopen permits to add conditions reflecting new control practices and to redress potential
risks posed by the facility (RCRA section 3005(c)(3) and S. Rep. No. 284, 98th Cong. 1st Sess. at 31). Here, the EPA is
determining that there are excessively high risks from these facilities, and therefore that these more protective
provisions should become effective immediately.
It should also be noted that the EPA does not intend to rescind ``permit-as-a-shield'' on a regular or frequent basis
for other rulemakings. As stated earlier, the EPA generally does view ``permit-as-a-shield'' as a beneficial and
legitimate part of the RCRA program and that, in most cases, it will apply.


