 

In response to the Commission's request for comment on the new safe harbor, the National Association of State Securities
Administrators (NASAA) urged the Commission to provide the safe harbor only for foreign and domestic reporting companies
and foreign companies that have obtained a Rule 12g32(b) exemption if such information is deemed material
to the marketplace. NASAA expressed concerns that, as proposed, the safe harbor was overbroad in its applicability
to companies without a public market, and thus particularly vulnerable to abuse. The Commission agrees that it would
be appropriate in introducing the safe harbor that it be limited to reporting companies and foreign companies that
have obtained a Rule 12g32(b)

47

 exemption. As adopted, the safe harbor is so limited. Given the safe harbor's requirement that copies be filed or provided
to the Commission and its exclusion of announcements for the purpose of conditioning the market, the rule should provide
adequate means to address abuses without a materiality requirement. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


47

</FOOTNAME>
17 CFR 240.12g32(b). 

</FOOTNOTE>


In all other respects, the terms and conditions of the new safe harbor are being adopted substantially as proposed.
The information permitted in the announcement is limited to that which is allowed under the safe harbor for pre-filing
announcements with respect to registered offerings.

48

 In addition, the announcement must contain a legend stating that the securities are not registered under the Securities
Act and may not be sold in the United States absent registration or an applicable exemption from the registration requirements.
To rely on the safe harbor, a company must file or submit the announcement with the Commission under Form 8K or
6K, as applicable, or provide it to the Commission in accordance with Rule 12g32(b) if the issuer is relying
on that exemptive rule. The safe harbor is not available if the announcement is being used for the purpose of conditioning
the market in the United States for the securities being offered. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


48

</FOOTNAME>
Rule 135 under the Securities Act (230.135). Rule 135 also is being amended to conform to the new safe harbor
so as to allow statements or legends required by foreign law to be included in such notices. 

</FOOTNOTE>


B. Broker-Dealer Research Reports 



The amendments to Rule 139 under the Securities Act are adopted today in the form proposed. The amendments provide
that broker-dealers may rely upon the simpler conditions of the Rule 139 safe harbor with respect to certain foreign
issuers that have had securities listed or quoted on a designated offshore securities market for at least 12 months.




V. Cost-Benefit Analysis 



No specific data were provided in response to the Commission's request regarding the costs and benefits of the rule
and amendments being adopted today. The commenters did not address specifically the costs and benefits of the proposed
rule and amendments. Eight commenters generally opposed the proposals in the belief that they would be detrimental
to U.S. investors. Seventeen commenters addressed specific aspects of the proposals and generally supported the
proposals. The Commission is not aware of any costs that will result from the rule and amendments. The Commission believes
that the adoption of these rules will be beneficial to U.S. investors, as it will encourage more foreign companies
to list their securities and raise capital in the United States and be consistent with investor protection. 



VI. Availability of Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 



A Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act has been prepared with
respect to the final rule and amendments. A summary of a corresponding Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis was
included in the Proposing Release. Members of the public who wish to obtain a copy of the Final Regulatory Flexibility
Analysis should contact Annemarie Tierney, Office of International Corporate Finance, Division of Corporation
Finance, Securities and Exchange Commission, 450 Fifth Street, NW., Mail Stop 39, Washington, DC 20549, (202)
2723246. 



VII. Statutory Bases 



The final rule and amendments to the Commission's rules and forms are being adopted pursuant to sections 6, 7, 8, 10
and 19(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and sections 3(b), 4A, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 23 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934. 



VIII. Effective Date 



The final rule and amendments to the Commission's rules and forms shall be effective immediately upon publication
in the 

Federal Register

, in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, which allows effectiveness in less than 30 days after publication
for, 

inter alia, 

``a substantive rule which grants or recognizes an exemption or relieves a restriction.'' 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(1).




List of Subjects in 17 CFR Parts 229, 230, 239 and 249 



Confidential business information, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Securities. 





