 



Passenger terminal 

means any structure used for the assembling, processing, embarking, or disembarking of passengers or baggage for
vessels subject to this part. It includes: Piers, wharves, and similar structures to which a vessel may be secured;
land and water under or in immediate proximity to these structures; buildings on or contiguous to these structures;
and equipment and materials on or in these structures.


Unlawful act 

means an act that is a felony under U.S. federal law or under the laws of the state where the vessel is located.


Voyage 

means the passenger vessel's entire course of travel, from the first port at which the vessel embarks passengers until
its return to that port.


120.120


Incorporation by reference.


(a) Certain material is incorporated by reference into this part with the approval of the Director of the Federal Register
in accordance with 54 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. To enforce any edition other than that specified in paragraph
(b) of this section, the Coast Guard must publish notice of change in the 

Federal Register 

and make the material available to the public. All approved material is on file at the Office of the Federal Register,
1100 L Street NW., Washington, DC, and at the U.S. Coast Guard, (GMPS), 2100 Second Street SW., Washington,
DC, 205930001, and is available from the sources indicated in paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) The materials approved for incorporation by reference in this part and the sections affected are:






American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)


1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103
ASTM F79282, Design and Use of Ionizing Radiation


Equipment for the Detection of Items Prohibited in Controlled Access Areas, 1982_120.430


120.130


Alternatives.


(a) The Commandant may consider and approve alternative procedures or standards for an operator of a vessel to which
this part applies to use instead of any procedure or standard required by this part if upon the Commandant's determination_
(1) Compliance with the one required is economically or physically impracticable;
(2) The alternative provides an equivalent level of security; and
(3) The operator submits a written request for the alternative, which contains sufficient information to establish,
to the satisfaction of the Commandant, that the alternative provides an equivalent level of security.
(b) The Commandant will approve or disapprove the request, in writing, within 30 days of receipt of the written request.


Subpart B_Security Program


120.200


General.


(a) Each operator of a vessel to which this part applies shall implement for each vessel a program that_
(1) Provides for the safety of persons and property traveling aboard the vessel, against acts of piracy and criminal
violence;
(2) Prevents or deters the carriage aboard the vessel of any prohibited weapon, incendiary, or explosive on or about
any person or within his or her personal articles or baggage, and the carriage of any prohibited weapon, incendiary
or explosive in stowed baggage, cargo, or stores;
(3) Prevents or deters unauthorized access to the vessel and to restricted areas aboard the vessel;
(4) Provides means to meet the requirements of this part for normal operations and addresses increased security measures
to be implemented when advised by the Commandant or COTP of an increased threat to the vessel or persons on the vessel;
(5) Designates, by name, a ship security officer for the vessel;
(6) Ensures that all members of the crew are adequately trained to perform their duties relative to security;
(7) Provides for coordination with terminal security while in port; and
(8) Includes the equipment, plans, and procedures required by Subparts B and C of this part.
(b) Each operator of a vessel to which this part applies shall, where practicable, work with the operator of each terminal
at which the vessel embarks or disembarks passengers, to provide security for the passengers and the vessel. The vessel,
however, need not duplicate any provisions of this part fulfilled by the terminal unless directed by the Commandant.


