 

c. 

Grade weighting. 

On February 26, 1993, EPA proposed that average fuel parameter values be determined first for each grade of gasoline
produced, and the resulting values weighted by the fraction of each grade sold in the period over which the value is
determined. Based on comments, the proposal has been modified and, for this final rule, ``grade'' shall mean each
traditional grade of gasoline produced in the refinery in 1990, e.g., regular, midgrade, and premium, not each different
integer octane number. 

d. 

Equations. 

The equations have been modified slightly from the February 1993 proposal to require that specific gravity be included
in the determination of baseline sulfur and oxygen contents. Because both of these fuel parameters are determined
on a weight basis, and because gasoline and blendstocks vary, sometimes significantly, in weight-to-volume ratio,
correct accounting of such terms must include a weight-to-volume conversion. Additionally, separate average baseline
fuel parameter values must be determined for summer and winter, as discussed previously. 

e. 

Oxygen in the baseline. 

In the April 16, 1992 proposal, EPA discussed several methods of accounting for oxygen in the baseline determination.
Several commenters suggested that the baseline be determined on a nonoxygenate basis so as not to penalize those who
``reformulated'', i.e., produced cleaner gasoline, early. Others supported including only the positive difference
(i.e., an increase in oxygen use) between 1990 and post-1994 oxygenate use. Others suggested variations_excluding
it in the baseline but including it in compliance, and including it as is in both the baseline and compliance calculations.
Others argued that oxygenate used in conventional gasoline designated for areas for CO reduction purposes should
not be considered. 

The anti-dumping provisions of section 211(k)(8) are based on a comparison of 1990 and post-1994 emissions, and use
of an oxygenated baseline for compliance determination would be the most appropriate baseline. EPA is therefore
requiring baseline fuel parameter values to be determined on an oxygenated basis. Section 211(k)(8)(C) of the Act
also requires that increases in NO

X

 emissions, due to conventional gasoline oxygenate use, be offset by reductions in the other three pollutants. As
stated earlier, significant VOC and CO reductions will occur even without the reformulated gasoline rulemaking.
To ensure that an increase in NO

X

 emissions is not associated with the use of oxygen, EPA is allowing refiners to choose to use either an oxygenated or
nonoxygenated baseline when determining NO

X

 emissions. Compliance would be measured on the same basis. Under this provision, a refiner could choose to switch
from a nonoxygenated to an oxygenated baseline, beginning with the next averaging period. The initial choice to use
an oxygenated baseline, or the switch from a nonoxygenated to an oxygenated baseline is, however, permanent. EPA
expects a refiner to operate its refinery to its advantage, and thus it is not likely to make such decisions (of whether
to use a nonoxygenated or an oxygenated baseline for NO

X

 purposes) lightly. Additionally, Congress intended that the anti-dumping program compare a refiner's 1990 emissions
with its post-1994 emissions, based on its fuels' actual average composition, i.e., its actual oxygenated baseline
or oxygenated compliance value. EPA is allowing refiners to use a nonoxygenated or an oxygenated baseline when determining
NO

X

 emissions in order to fulfill the provision that NO

X

 increases due to oxygenates be offset. However, to minimize unnecessary administrative complications due to every
refiner potentially changing its baseline NO

X

 value annually, EPA is allowing only the one-time change. 

In determining the nonoxygenated parameter values from the oxygenated values, only the physical dilution and distillation
effects of the oxygenate shall be considered. Adjustments to refinery operations that would have been different
had oxygenates not been used (i.e., octane) shall not be included because many potential adjustments are possible.
For instance, if a refiner's actual (oxygenated) baseline aromatics were 30 volume percent and actual oxygenate
use was 5 volume percent, the nonoxygenated baseline aromatics value would be 31.6 volume percent, or 30/(100%^5%).
While it is likely that reformer severity may have been higher had oxygenates not been used (thus resulting in perhaps
even a higher aromatics baseline value) such operational effects due to oxygenate use shall not be considered because
they cannot be known with certainty. Additionally, while the oxygen content and the effects of oxygenate volume on
parameters will be excluded from the nonoxygenated baseline determination, the total gasoline volume (including
actual 1990 oxygenate use and the volume of oxygenate assumed or shown to have been blended with gasoline blendstock
as discussed in paragraph 3.b) will be used to determine the individual 1990 baseline volume. 




