 

The Deputy Commissioner for Operations has considered Mr. Brancato's arguments and concludes that they are unpersuasive
and fail to raise a genuine and substantial issue of fact requiring a hearing. The legal arguments that Mr. Brancato
offers do not create a basis for a hearing because hearings are not granted on matters of policy or law, but only on genuine
and substantial issues of fact (see 21 CFR 12.24(b)(1)). Additionally, the material submitted in support of Mr. Brancato's
hearing request does not justify a hearing because hearings will not be granted on the basis of mere allegations, denials,
or general descriptions of positions and contentions (see 21 CFR 12.24(b)(2)). Moreover, all of Mr. Brancato's arguments
are unconvincing for the reasons discussed below. 



II. Conclusions of the Deputy Commissioner Concerning 
Mr. Brancato's Arguments in Support of a Hearing 



A. Mandatory Debarment of Individuals Applies Retroactively to 
Convictions Occurring Within the Past 5 Years 



Mr. Brancato first alleges that the debarment provisions do not apply to conduct which occurred prior to the effective
date of the act. Mr. Brancato does not support this claim with further argument. 

The provision of the act applicable to Mr. Brancato is section 306(a)(2) of the act. Initiation of debarment proceedings
under that section is not limited by when the conduct underlying the conviction occurred, but rather, by when the conviction
occurred. Under section 306(a)(2) of the act, debarment proceedings must be initiated within 5 years of the conviction
(see section 306(l)(2) of the act). Debarment of Mr. Brancato is appropriately based upon his January 5, 1990, conviction,
occurring less than 4 years ago. Because the 5-year statute of limitations has not expired, Mr. Brancato's argument
fails to raise a genuine and substantial issue of fact. 

It is unclear from Mr. Brancato's first argument whether he intended to further allege that the debarment provisions
do not apply retroactively to convictions occurring prior to the effective date of the act. Nevertheless, this issue
is addressed below. 

Congress intended section 306(a)(2) of the act to be retroactive as evidenced by comparing section 306(a)(2) of the
act, applicable to mandatory debarment of individuals, to section 306(a)(1) of the act, applicable to mandatory
debarment of corporations. The act treats corporations differently from individuals with respect to retroactivity.
Mandatory debarment of corporations under section 306(a)(1) of the act is not retroactive because debarment of corporations
is explicitly limited to convictions occurring ``after the date of enactment.'' Conversely, section 306(a)(2)
of the act, pertaining to mandatory debarment of individuals, does not contain any such limiting language. The exclusion
of language barring retroactivity for section 306(a)(2) implies that section 306(a)(2) of the act was intended by
Congress to be implemented retroactively. 

In addition, section 306(l)(2) of the act shows that section 306(a)(2), pertaining to mandatory debarment of individuals,
was intended to be retroactive. Section 306(l)(2) of the act sets out the effective dates for each provision of the
act. As noted above, the effective dates pertaining to section 306(a)(2) of the act state that any relevant conviction
may be used as the basis for mandatory debarment of individuals, so long as the conviction occurred no more than 5 years
prior to the initiation of debarment proceedings. Section 306(l) of the act states that certain other debarment provisions
shall not be retroactive by limiting application of those provisions to actions occurring on or after June 1, 1992.
Thus, where Congress intended a section not to be retroactive, it provided an effective date in section 306(l) of the
act. The omission of an effective date for section 306(a) of the act and the inclusion of an effective date for other
sections reveals Congress' intent that this section be retroactive. 

Thus, as intended by Congress, and as supported by the explicit language of the act, mandatory debarment applies retrospectively
and, thus, mandatory debarment applies to 
Mr. Brancato's conviction, which occurred within 5 years prior to the effective date of the act. Accordingly, Mr.
Brancato's claim fails to raise a genuine and substantial issue of fact. 



B. The Decision To Debar Mr. Brancato Was Based Upon the 
Relevant Considerations and Was Made by an Authorized Designee of the Secretary 



Mr. Brancato next argues that notice to him of his proposed debarment does not reflect consideration by the Secretary
of Health and Human Services or his designee. Mr. Brancato does not support this claim with facts or further argument.





