 

The second method for estimating a fair base value comes from the 1983 Grazing Market Rental Appraisal (GMRA) on BLM
and Forest Service lands. The GMRA involved interviews with approximately 100,000 people and generated 7,246 records
for researching livestock grazing operation costs and fees. The GMRA divided the 16 Western States into 6 pricing
regions and concluded that the value of public land grazing use ranged from $4.68 per head month in the southwest pricing
region to $8.55 per head month in the northern plains pricing region. In 1992, the GMRA was updated. The update identified
values ranging from $4.68 per head month in the southwest pricing region to $10.26 per head month in the northern plains
pricing region. The $4.68 value was selected for the second base value. It was considered to have the least impact on
the permittee's livestock grazing operations.
The FVI will be used to make adjustments each year to the base value. Production costs, and the value of the livestock
produced, influence the prices paid for grazing livestock on private lands and, thus, are implicit in the FVI.
This proposed rule would establish 1996 as the base year for the FVI. The FVI would not be used to annually adjust the
fee in response to market conditions until the year 1997. This proposed rule would establish the 1995 grazing fee at
$2.75, and the 1996 grazing fee at $3.50. Thereafter, the fee would be calculated using the base value of $3.96 multiplied
by the revised FVI. By definition, the FVI in the year 1997 would equal one; yielding a 1997 grazing fee of $3.96. In subsequent
years, the calculated fee would depend on changes in the FVI.
Under the proposed fee system presented in the ANPR, the fee would have been adjusted annually by a FVI based on the average
price paid for private grazing in the years 1990 through 1992. Assuming that the FVI would have remained constant until
the end of the phase-in period provided in the ANPR, the grazing fee system would have yielded a fee of $4.28 as compared
to a 1997 fee of $3.96 using the revised FVI. This change in the derivation of the FVI is proposed in order to reduce the
uncertainty in fee changes in the immediate future that might result from using a FVI based on less current PGLLR data.
After the 3-year phase-in, the grazing fee would be allowed to change by no more than 25 percent annually, plus or minus,
from the amount charged the previous year. The 3-year phase-in and the 25 percent per year limit are designed to minimize
impact of fee increases on ranch operations. By comparison, the 1994 grazing fee established under the existing regulations
is $1.98.
It is the intent of the two Departments to develop a system for earning incentives that may be used to promote rangeland
reform. New provisions have been added to the proposed rule that would provide for an incentive-based grazing fee
and would prohibit implementation of the $3.96 base value until such time as a separate regulation is issued which
sets forth the qualification criteria for the incentive-based grazing fee. These criteria would focus primarily
upon those permittees and lessees who agree to participate in special rangeland improvement programs characterized
by best management practices, the furtherance of resource condition objectives, and comprehensive monitoring.
However, the proposed rule does explain that, upon issuance of the separate rule establishing qualification criteria
and upon demonstrating compliance with said criteria, a permittee would be eligible for a 30 percent reduction of
his or her grazing fee. The Departments intend to use its best efforts to issue a final rule establishing qualification
criteria in time to provide an opportunity for the reduced fee in grazing year 1996. A 30 percent discount would result
in a grazing fee of $2.77 in 1996 and 1997 for qualifying permittees and lessees. To ensure timely development of the
rule establishing criteria for the incentive-based grazing fee, this proposed rule would provide that the base value
shall remain at $3.50 and would not increase until that rule is adopted. Reviewers are asked to provide suggested criteria
for qualifying for the reduced fee that address the improvement and maintenance of rangeland health.


Section 222.52_National Grassland Fee Adjustments for Conservation Practices.


Section 222.52 of the current rule would be revised in its entirety. The heading would be revised to read as follows:


National Grasslands Fee Adjustments for Conservation Practices.

 This new section would place into regulation a program based on the accumulation of conservation practice credits
for sound conservation practice used by a permittee on national grasslands. Since the 1950's, the Forest Service
has allowed credit, applied to grazing fee billings, for required conservation practices and administrative activities
performed by grazing associations on the national grasslands. Allowing credit for required conservation practices
is authorized by section 32(c), title III, Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act of 1937. This policy has previously been
issued as agency directives to Title 2200 of the Forest Service Manual. The agency believes these provisions are more
appropriate in regulation than in directive form.
The use of credit for required conservation practices on the national grasslands is similar to the use of range betterment
funds used on National Forest System in the 16 contiguous Western States for implementing rangeland improvement
activities. The range betterment fund is not authorized for national grasslands. In the case of the national grasslands,
the costs to the permit holders of performing conservation practices required by the Forest Service would be subtracted
before the Forest Service collects the grazing fee from the permittee. In addition, provision is made for giving credit
for administrative costs that would otherwise be a cost to the Forest Service. For example, the cost to a grazing association
of issuing individual permits and monitoring the number of grazing livestock could be credited against the fees charged.


Sections 222.53 and 222.54_Grazing Fees in the Eastern States


Currently the grazing fees in the Eastern States do not apply to National Forest System land in Oklahoma or national
grassland in Texas. As previously noted, under the grazing fee system proposed by this rulemaking, all national grasslands
would be subject to the same grazing fee as that applicable to western national forests. Therefore, it is necessary
to make a conforming amendment to paragraph (a) in both 222.53 and 222.54 to clarify that the grazing
fee system applicable in the East would not apply to grazing on the national grasslands in Oklahoma and Texas but would
apply to grazing on national forest land in Oklahoma and Texas, which are administered as part of the Southern Region
of the Forest Service.
Under the proposed rule, terms referring to the process of allotment management planning have been replaced by terms
specifying grazing permit terms and conditions. These changes in terminology would coincide with proposed changes
in rangeland management plans. Several other editorial changes are proposed in this section to clarify permit procedures.



Conclusion



