 

Under current regulations, many, but not all, blind or disabled persons living in a group home may be certified for
food stamps. The reasons for this are discussed in detail in the proposed rule. The Department proposed to amend the
regulations to expand the provisions governing the eligibility of blind or disabled persons living in group homes
to include all persons defined as blind or disabled under Section 3 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended (7 U.S.C.
2012) (the Act). This expansion was authorized by section 901 of the FACT Act which amended section 3(g)(7) and 3(i)
of the Act (7 U.S.C. 2012 (g) and (i)) to expand eligibility to receive food stamps and to use them to purchase meals provided
by certified group living arrangements, to all individuals who meet the Act's definition of ``disabled'' contained
in section 3(r)(2)(7) of the Act (7 U.S.C. 2012 (r)(2)(7)). 

The Department received three comments, all supporting the proposal. Two of the three commenters requested clarifications
about the rule. One of these two commenters requested that the provision be expanded to clarify whether the provisions
regarding eligibility of individuals residing in group homes applied to homes with less than four residents and group
homes not required to be licensed by the State. This provision does not modify the eligibility criteria of the group
home in which eligible individuals may reside; rather, it addresses the eligibility criteria of certain residents
of a group home. Thus, the commenter's concern is outside of the scope of this rulemaking. 

The second commenter requesting clarification wished to know how participation of residents in group homes would
be accomplished in an electronic benefit transfer (EBT) issuance system. The specifics of EBT interface in group
homes, drug/alcoholic treatment programs, shelters for battered women and children, and other specialized arrangements
need to be addressed during the development of a State agency's EBT system. Therefore, we are not addressing this concern
in this final rule. 

Accordingly, the Department is adopting as proposed the definitions of ``Eligible foods'' and ``Group living arrangement''
at 7 CFR 271.2. The Department is also adopting as proposed the provisions at 7 CFR 273.1(e)(1)(iii) and 273.11(f)
so that disabled or blind persons as (defined in 7 CFR 271.2) may apply for and receive food stamps and use their food
stamps to pay for meals provided by a group living arrangement. 



Exclude Plans for Achieving Self-Support (PASS) from Income 



Under 7 CFR 273.9(c) of the food stamp regulations, certain items are excluded from income in determining food stamp
eligibility and calculating benefits. Section 903 of the FACT Act and the provisions of Public Law 102265 (making
technical corrections to the FACT Act) require that funds provided for a PASS plan be excluded from income for food
stamp purposes. The PASS program is designed to help Supplemental Security Income (SSI) recipients become self-supporting.
The plans, which must be approved by the Social Security Administration (SSA), permit an individual to set aside a
specified amount of money to be used or deposited into a special account for an approved purpose. The Department proposed
to amend the regulations at 7 CFR 273.9(c) to exclude PASS funds from income in determining food stamp eligibility
and benefits. The Department received four comments on this provision, three from State agencies and one from a public
interest group. Two commenters supported the provision; two commenters opposed the provision. 

One State agency opposed the provision because the State agency does not know how to identify income for a PASS account
and thus believes that there is a potential for error in excluding such income. The State agency believes that it is
necessary to establish a way for such income to be reported as PASS income before such income can be excluded. The exclusion
is required by statute; therefore, the Department must require that such income be excluded. It is the household's
responsibility to report and verify that such income is necessary for fulfillment of its PASS on order for the income
to be excluded. The household should be able to provide such verification because the SSA approves the individual's
PASS in writing, identifying the amount of income that shall be set aside each month to fulfill the PASS. Further, SSA
requires that the household provide for clear identification of the funds that are to be set aside. Eligibility workers
should ask SSI recipients during the interview whether they have a PASS. 


