 



Response:

 See response to previous comment. 


Comment:

 The Sanctuary should provide mutually agreed upon requirements for aquaculture activities among the oyster growers
of Willapa Bay. 


Response:

 The boundary of the Sanctuary does not include Willapa Bay. 


Comment:

 The discussion in the FEIS/MP on the impacts of aquaculture needs to be expanded and the proposal to not regulate aquaculture
in the Sanctuary should be re-assessed. The FEIS/MP needs to address the use of drugs in farm-raised fish. 


Response:

 The discussion of aquaculture within the Sanctuary is intended only to evaluate the current status of the industry
in the study area_it is not intended to measure aggregate impacts. The request for expanded discussion of resources
does not identify specific issues of discussion. A reassessment of aquaculture vis-a-vis the Sanctuary reveals
that the industry is adequately regulated by existing state and Federal requirements. However, any discharges from
such operations into the Sanctuary would be prohibited. The Sanctuary has no jurisdiction over the use of drugs in
aquaculture_such determinations are under the purview of the Washington State Department of Health (WDH) and the
Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 


Comment:

 All aquaculture should be banned from within the Sanctuary. 


Response:

 See responses to previous comments regarding aquaculture. 


Comment:

 Kelp harvesting should be banned or regulated within the Sanctuary. 


Response:

 At present there is no kelp harvesting within the Sanctuary. While kelp harvesting was proposed to be included within
the scope of activities listed in the Designation Document as subject to potential regulation under the Sanctuary
Program, the final Designation Document does not list kelp harvesting. Kelp is only found within the state waters
of the Sanctuary. Because the Washington Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has promulgated regulations for
the management of kelp which should adequately protect the kelp, NOAA does not believe it necessary to list kelp as
being subject to potential Sanctuary Program regulation. If the state regulations do not adequately protect the
kelp within the Sanctuary, the Sanctuary Designation Document could be amended following the same procedures used
to promulgate this Designation Document to authorize the regulation of kelp. 

Issue: Marine Mammals, Sea Turtles and Seabirds 




Comment:

 Clarify ``takings''. The prohibition on the taking of marine mammals and seabirds within the Sanctuary is redundant
with the ESA, the MMPA and the MBTA, and what further impact it will have on the fishing community. 


Response:

 ``Taking'' is defined in section 925.3 of the regulations to mean: (1) For any marine mammal, sea turtle or seabird
listed as either endangered or threatened pursuant to the ESA to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap,
capture, collect or injure, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct and, (2) for any other marine mammal, sea turtle,
or seabird, the term means to harass, hunt, capture, kill, collect or injure, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct.
While marine mammals, seabirds and endangered and threatened species are protected under the MMPA, ESA and MBTA,
NOAA believes that the higher penalties afforded under the MPRSA will provide a stronger deterrent. 


The MBTA sets maximum criminal fines at either $500 or $2,000 per violation, depending on the violation. The MMPA sets
maximum civil penalties at $10,000 and maximum criminal fines at $20,000. The ESA sets maximum civil penalties at
$500, $12,000 or $25,000 per violation, depending on the violation; maximum criminal fines are set at $50,000. (All
three statutes also provide for imprisonment for criminal violations.) 




