 

One thousand four hundred and eighty-seven commenters supported identifying MDP in the ingredients statement on
the labels of meat and poultry products in which it is used. These commenters include 1452 consumers, 8 food manufacturers/distributors,
17 food retailers, 4 trade associations, 4 individuals, one food consultant, and one law firm representative. The
commenters provided the following general reasons why MDP should be identified on a finished meat or poultry product
label. They stated that: (1) Consumers have a right to know that MDP is present in a product, (2) meat and poultry products
should be labeled the same, i.e., there should be parity in labeling regulations, (3) MDP contains higher amounts
of ``calcium,'' ``cholesterol,'' and/or ``bone particles'' and, therefore, should be identified, and (4) MDP should
be identified because there is ``a difference'' between MDP and hand-deboned poultry. The eight food manufacturers/distributors
and four consumers also stated that consumers should be made aware (through labeling) that MDP contains ``kidneys,''
``sex glands,'' and ``lungs.'' The food manufacturers/distributors also pointed out that mechanical deboning
processes that crush or grind bones should be labeled as such, regardless of kind (i.e., species). Most of the food
manufacturers/distributors encouraged FSIS to work with industry's scientific experts and the meat community
to define ``meat'' and ``poultry'' through standards of ``product safety and nutritional composition.''
The remaining 1,257 commenters did not support identifying MDP in the ingredients statement on the labels of finished
meat and poultry products for the following reasons: (1) The Agency's current policy should continue and MDP has a
history of safe use for 25-plus years without labeling it as anything other than ``chicken,'' ``turkey meat,'' etc.,
(2) nutrition labeling will be a means of educating consumers about product composition and will address any concerns
with regard to the nutrient qualities of the products they purchase, (3) listing MDP separately in the ingredients
statement would mislead consumers into thinking they are purchasing products that are inferior to what they have
(historically) purchased, (4) any changes in labeling regulations on MDP would only serve to confuse consumers into
believing something ``has been added to their products'' when, in fact, no changes have been made, and (5) a change
in labeling would result in a severe negative economic impact ``on the entire poultry industry and U.S. economy, as
well as many U.S. trading partners that now use these items as a food source.'' One food manufacturer stated that beef
and pork are different species with obvious differences in bone mass, skeletal size, amount of calcification, and
bone hardness, and, therefore, MDP should not be labeled the same as MS(S), which incorporates bone and the constituents
of bone in the product. Some of the trade associations recommended that if MS(S) meets the same criteria for MDP in 9
CFR 381.117, it should be entitled to analogous labeling. Some of the trade associations also believe that MDP and
MS(S) should not be defined by the process used to make them.
The academicians stated that the method of removal of meat tissue from bones of carcasses should not become part of
the name of the product, and, as long as the end products are comparable and meet the ``rules'' for starting materials,
composition, sanitation, etc., the method of processing should not become part of the product name. The commenters
also stated that MDP is an excellent source of protein and calcium.


FSIS's Response to the Comments on the June 15, 1993, ANPR and Issues Regarding Poultry Products Produced by Mechanical
Deboning


In its June 15, 1993, ANPR, FSIS solicited comments, information, scientific data, and recommendations regarding
the consideration of the need for labeling of poultry product produced by mechanical deboning and products in which
such poultry product is based. FSIS did not receive any new data regarding the health and safety aspects of the use of
such products, and, therefore, FSIS believes that there are no new health and safety concerns.
Although, many of the commenters of the June 15, 1993, ANPR raised concerns regarding the labeling of calcium and cholesterol
contents of poultry product produced by mechanical deboning, the provisions of the nutrition labeling regulations
(58 FR 632) published by FSIS, which are to be effective July 6, 1994, would be a means of educating consumers regarding
certain nutrients and other components of processed meat and poultry products containing poultry product produced
by mechanical deboning, including calcium and cholesterol. Calcium and cholesterol declaration becomes necessary
on the labeling of most multi-ingredient poultry and meat products upon the effective date. These regulations also
establish a voluntary nutrition labeling program for single-ingredient, raw products, and specify that FSIS will
evaluate significant participation of the voluntary program. If significant participation is not found, FSIS shall
initiate rulemaking to require nutrition labeling on those products under the voluntary program. Therefore, with
certain exceptions, consumers will have complete information about the nutrients in poultry products. Such information
will ensure that consumers are not mislead about the composition of products containing poultry products produced
by mechanical deboning.





