 

(c) 

Rights in derivative computer software or computer software documentation.

 The Government shall retain its rights in the unchanged portions of any computer software or computer software documentation
delivered under this contract that the contractor uses to prepare, or includes in, derivative computer software
or computer software documentation.
(d) 

Third party copyrighted computer software or computer software documentation.

 The contractor shall not, without the written approval of the contracting officer, incorporate any copyrighted
computer software or computer software documentation in the software or documentation to be delivered under this
contract unless the contractor is the copyright owner or has obtained for the Government the license rights necessary
to perfect a license or licenses in the deliverable software or documentation of the appropriate scope set forth in
paragraph (b) of this clause, and prior to delivery of such_
(1) Computer software, has provided a statement of the license rights obtained in a form acceptable to the contracting
officer; or,
(2) Computer software documentation, has affixed to the transmittal document a statement of the license rights obtained.
(e) 

Identification and delivery of computer software and computer software documentation to be furnished with restrictions
on use, release, or disclosure.
(1) This paragraph does not apply to restrictions based solely on copyright.
(2) Except as provided in subparagraph (e)(3) of this clause, computer software that the contractor asserts should
be furnished to the government with restrictions on use, release, or disclosure is identified in an Attachment to
this contract (``the Attachment''). The contractor shall not deliver any software with restrictive markings unless
the software is listed on the Attachment.
(3) In addition to the assertions made in the Attachment, other assertions may be identified after award when based
on new information or inadvertent omissions unless the inadvertent omissions would have materially affected the
source selection decision. Such identification and assertion shall be submitted to the contracting officer as soon
as practicable prior to the scheduled date for delivery of the software, in the following format, and signed by an official
authorized to contractually obligate the contractor:



``Identification and Assertion of Restrictions on the Government's Use, Release, or Disclosure of Computer Software.
The contractor asserts for itself, or the persons identified below, that the Government's rights to use, release,
or disclose the following computer software should be restricted_


<TABLE>





1Computer Software to be Furnished With Restrictions*

1Basis for Assertion**

1Asserted Rights Category***

1Names of Person Asserting Restrictions****





i0(LIST) 

i0(LIST) 

i0(LIST) 

i0(LIST) 

</TABLE>


*Generally, development at private expense, either exclusively or partially, is the only basis for asserting restrictions
on the Government's rights to use, release, or disclose computer software.
**Indicate whether development was exclusively or partially at private expense. If development was not at private
expense, enter the specific reason for asserting that the government's rights should be restricted.
***Enter asserted rights category (e.g., restricted or government purpose rights in computer software, government
purpose license rights from a prior contract, rights in SBIR software generated under another contract, or specifically
negotiated licenses).
****Corporation, individual, or other person, as appropriate.



Date
Printed Name and Title



Signature 

XXXXXXXX

''


(End of Identification and Assertion)


(4) When requested by the contracting officer, the contractor shall provide sufficient information to enable the
contracting officer to evaluate the contractor's assertions. The contracting officer reserves the right to add
the contractor's assertions to the Attachment and validate any listed assertion, at a later date, in accordance with
the procedures of the ``Validation of Asserted Restrictions_Computer Software'' clause of this contract.
(f) 

Marking requirements.

 The contractor, and its subcontractors or suppliers, may only assert restrictions on the government's rights to
use, modify, reproduce, release, or disclose computer software by marking the deliverable software or documentation
subject to restriction. Except as provided in paragraph (f)(5) of this clause, only the following legends are authorized
under this contract: the government purpose rights legend at subparagraph (f)(2); the restricted rights legend
at subparagraph (f)(3) of this clause; or, the special license rights legend at subparagraph (f)(4); and/or a notice
of copyright as prescribed under 17 U.S.C. 401 or 402.


