 

Subpart I_Disaster Relief Employment Assistance 



A new Subpart I, to be administered under the title III National Reserve Grants program, provides for Disaster Relief
Employment Assistance, as authorized by the new Amendments to title IVJ of the Act. 

Section 631.84(a) discusses the projects that a unit of general local government in a disaster area may operate under
this subpart. One commenter suggested substituting the phrase, ``Davis-Bacon provisions shall apply on all projects
related to demolition, cleanup, repair ***'' for ``on projects regarding demolition, cleanup,
repair ***.'' 

While Davis-Bacon does apply to Federal programs, the inclusion of this phrase does not change or clarify the meaning
of this provision. Therefore, the section will remain unchanged. 

Section 631.85 outlines the participant eligibility criteria under the Disaster Relief Employment Assistance
Program. The statutory language regarding eligibility is not accurately reflected in this section. The final rule
is revised to correct this problem. In addition, one commenter thought the Department should have the authority to
declare persons who are eligible for titles II-A and II-C programs eligible for title III Disaster Relief Programs.
Since the statute does not grant the Department this blanket authority, expansion of participant eligibility criteria
will not occur.

Section 631.86 limits the length of disaster relief employment. One commenter questioned the difference between
this type of employment and public service employment which is prohibited under titles II and III. 

Although the statute prohibits public service employment funded under title IIA and C and title IIIA,
public service employment is contemplated under title IV-J of the Act. Disaster relief employment is narrowly defined
and exclusively limited to the activities described under 
631.84. Allowable activities will not be expanded beyond the statutorily established parameters. 

This same commenter asked how costs incurred for disaster relief employment should be classified and what criteria
should be used in determining the monetary extent to which a cost category has benefited. The Department has chosen
not to issue detailed regulations for this program. Specific information regarding Disaster Relief Employment
Assistance projects, including any guidance on cost classification issues, will be contained in application guidelines
published by the Secretary. Until they are issued, an applicant for these funds should follow the guidelines and information
published in the July 9, 1992 

Federal Register

 regarding Emergency Dislocated Worker Projects. 



PART 637_JOBS FOR EMPLOYABLE DEPENDENT INDIVIDUALS (JEDI) 



Several commenters addressed this section of the interim final regulations. 

The majority of the comments addressed inconsistencies in the numbering of the sections and in the cross-references.
The part has been revised to correct the numbering. 

In addition, several of the commenters raised questions concerning how the program can be implemented in the absence
of any Congressional appropriation. While bonuses will not be awarded under title V of the Act until funds are appropriated
by Congress, individuals who are eligible to be counted for title V purposes may be served under other titles of the
Act. Since those individuals who would be eligible to be counted for the incentive bonuses under title V must also be
eligible for, and have participated in, other activities under the Act, the costs associated with their participation
in these activities would be charged to the appropriate program(s) and title(s) of the Act. If a State wishes to participate
in the title V bonus program, if it is ever funded, the State may wish to keep track of the outcomes of training for individuals
eligible to be counted for bonus purposes. 



Effective Date



The Department recognizes that the regulations are being issued after the beginning of a program year. To avoid administrative
difficulties, the Department has made the effective date of the regulations June 30, 1995, the beginning of Program
Year 1995. This will give states and SDA's/SSG's time to plan for the changes that may result from the amendments made
in this final rule. States or SDA's/SSG's are, of course, free to implement any of the changes that they find will benefit
their programs earlier than the effective date and the Department will treat those changes as legally effective when
adopted in any subsequent monitoring or audit resolution activity. Consistent with the Department's desire to enable
states and SDAs to implement the beneficial changes in the final rule as quickly as they choose, the provisions of 627.210,
authorizing the Department to grant waivers of regulatory requirements are made effective within 30 days of publication
to enable states to apply for waivers to be effective before the beginning of PY 1995. 



Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number



These programs are listed in the 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance

 at No. 17246, ``Employment and Training Assistance_Dislocated Workers'' (JTPA Title III Programs); and
No.17250, ``Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA)'' (JTPA Titles I, II, and V Programs). 



List of Subjects in 20 CFR Parts 626 Through 631 and 637



Dislocated worker programs, Grant programs, Labor, Manpower training programs.



Final Rule 



Accordingly, chapter V of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations is amended, as follows: 

1. Part 626 is revised to read as follows: 



PART 626_INTRODUCTION TO THE REGULATIONS UNDER THE JOB TRAINING PARTNERSHIP ACT 



Sec. 



626.1Scope and purpose of the Job Training Partnership Act. 

626.2Format of the Job Training Partnership Act regulations. 

626.3Purpose, scope, and applicability of the Job Training Partnership Act regulations. 

626.4Table of contents for the Job Training Partnership Act regulations. 

626.5Definitions. 






Authority:

 29 U.S.C. 1579(a); Sec. 6305(f), Pub. L. 100418, 102 Stat. 1107; 29 U.S.C. 1791i(e). 


