 

(4) Combinations of nonmass-detonating ammunition and explosives of different class 1 divisions shall be treated
as follows: 

(1) Determine the required separation of each division. 

(ii) Use the greatest separation of those determined. 

(b) 

Q/D computations and determinations. 

(1) Throughout these requirements, NEW is used to calculate distance by means of formula D=KW

1/3,

 where D is the distance in feet, K is the appropriate risk factor and W is the NEW in pounds. Distance requirements are
sometimes expressed by the value of K, such as K9, K11, and K18 to signify K=9, K=11, K=18, respectively. 


(2) The quantity of explosives in a magazine, operating building, or other explosives site shall be the new weight
of all the explosives contained therein. Q/D shall be based on the H/D requiring the greatest separation, unless the
NEW is divided by walls or shields for that purpose.


(i) When dividing a quantity of mass-detonating explosives into smaller stacks, a suitable barrier or adequate separation
distance shall prevent propagation from one stack to another. Barriers designed and constructed in accordance with
TM 51300/AFM 8822/NAVFAC P397,
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>
 

Structures to Resist the Effects of Accidental Explosions, 

satisfy this requirement. In such cases, the explosives content of the stack requiring the greatest distance shall
govern. Otherwise Q/D computations shall be based on the sum of the mass-detonating explosives in all of the stacks.





<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>
Tri-service document. Copies may be obtained from Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC 20402.

</FOOTNOTE>


(ii) Blast waves shall coalesce when two or more stacks of mass-detonating explosives detonate within short time
intervals (that is, when the time in milliseconds is less than 4 times the cube root of the explosive weight in pounds
for lateral target positions and less than 5.6 times the cube root of the explosive weight in pounds for axial target
positions). The resultant shock wave shall be that of a single detonation of a charge equal to the sum of the several
stacks. The actual separation time between successive detonations is influenced by the spatial separation, geometry,
and distribution of explosives; the character of the dividing wall or other barrier; and the sensitivity of the explosives.



(3) The quantity of explosives permitted in each of two or more locations shall be determined by considering each location
as a potential explosion site (PES). The quantity of explosives permitted in each of these locations shall be the amount
permitted by the distance specified in the appropriate Q/D tables considering each as a potential target site in turn,
except for service magazines (see 184.43(a)(7) and 184.43(b)(6)). 

(4) Quantity/distance tables are in Subpart F of this part. The formulae specified in Appendices A through D to Subpart
F of this part may be used to interpolate exact distances for Hazard Division 1.1 explosives. The notes to Appendix
L to Subpart F of this part provide distance formulae for Hazard Division 1.3 distances. 

(5) It is impractical to specify Q/D separations large enough to allow for the designed flight range of propulsive
units (rockets, missile motors, and catapults) that properly belong in Hazard Divisions 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3. Therefore,
maximum flight ranges for self-propelling munitions shall be disregarded. The distance required to afford protection
from fragments in credible accident situations, however, shall be established in accordance with the principles
in 184.52(f). 

(6) Separation distances for Q/D purposes shall be measured from the nearest part of an exposed structure or site,
to the nearest wall of the controlling subdivision or structure containing explosives, as appropriate. Separation
distances are measured along straight lines. 

(7) Where railroad cars or motor vehicles containing ammunition and explosives are not separated from operating
buildings, magazines, or open AE storage sites in a manner precluding their mass detonation, the separation
distance shall be based on the total quantity of explosives (see 184.41(a)) and measured form the outside wall
of the building, railcar, vehicle, or edge of open stack closest to the target. If the explosives are separated into
smaller units so that mass detonation of the explosives in the railcars and motor vehicles and inside unit or units
shall not occur, the separation distance shall be measured from the controlling explosives unit, railcar or vehicle
closest to a target. 



(c) 

Hazard Division 1.1, explosion effects, exposure controls, and degrees of safety afforded. 

Facility damage and personnel injury from Hazard Division 1.1, AE, principally depend on blast overpressure
and impulse, although for limited quantities fragment hazards may control Q/D. For general purposes, peak incident
overpressure is the blast parameter defining maximum permissible levels of exposure. However, in specific instances
the physical characteristics of exposed structures (such as mass, stiffness, ductility, and so forth) can make blast
impulse the principal damage-causing factor. 



(1) Separation distances for earth covered magazines (see Appendices D and E to Subpart F of this part) provide virtually
complete protection against propagation of explosions among earth-covered magazines by blast, fragments, or fire.
Some cracking of concrete barrels and rear walls, spalling and severe cracking of front walls, and damage to doors
and ventilators may, however, occur. 


(2) Aboveground magazine distances (see columns 10 and 12, Appendix D to Subpart F of this part) provide considerable
protection against propagation of explosions among above-ground magazines by blast. Depending on ammunition type,
however, there is a risk of delayed propagation by fragments or of fire spreading from one magazine to another. Properly
designed and placed barricades reduce the risk of communicating explosion through high-velocity, low-angle fragments.
Without barricades, this risk is high. 

(i) The above ground magazine separation distance of 6W

1/3

 feet corresponds to a peak overpressure level of 27 psi (1.8 bars) (1 bar=14.5 psi) when the explosion source is in the
open. Neither the overpressure nor any other pertinent blast parameter, such as impulse, shall be significantly
reduced by an ordinary storage building of conventional unstrengthened industrial construction at the explosion
site, or by the barricade required between aboveground magazines at this distance. A conventional unstrengthened
building exposed at this distance shall be destroyed, vehicles overturned and crushed, and all occupants killed.



(ii) The unbarricaded aboveground magazine separation distance of 11W

1/3

 feet corresponds to a peak overpressure level of 8 psi (0.5 bars) from an explosion source in the open. Blast observed
at this distance shall be suppressed only slightly by a storage building of conventional construction at the explosion
site. A conventional unstrengthened building exposed at this distance shall be destroyed. Blast will seriously
injure eardrums and lungs of any survivor, as will being blown down or stuck by fragments or building debris. Vehicles
will be severely damaged by blast and may be inoperable. 


(3) At blast overpressure of 12 psi (0.7 bars) occurring at scaled distance of 9W

1/3

 feet (see Appendices B and C to Subpart F of this part): 

(i) Unstrengthened buildings will suffer severe structural damage approaching total destruction. 

(ii) People at the exposed site will be killed or severely injured by being thrown about by blast or by building collapse.


(iii) Aircraft will be damaged beyond repair. If the aircraft are loaded with explosives, delayed explosions are
likely to result from subsequent fires. 

