 

B. Inspections and Enforcement



1. The NRC Inspectors' activities are intended to provide information for use in developing standards for the gaseous
diffusion plants and in determining whether to issue the initial certificate and/or approve a compliance plan in
accordance with the Act. NRC inspection activities are also intended to assist USEC in becoming familiar with NRC
practices.

2. The NRC Inspectors are responsible for adhering to safety requirements imposed by USEC related to personal safety
and radiological protection.

3. The NRC Inspectors may accompany the DOE Site Safety Representative during inspections, inspection entrance
and exit interviews, and enforcement meetings.

4. The DOE will provide the NRC with a copy and current updates of the DOE Manual. 

5. Safety/technical allegations or concerns received by the NRC Inspectors will be provided to the DOE for processing
in accordance with DOE procedures, including DOE procedures for confidential sources. 

6. If an NRC Inspector identifies situations with immediate safety significance, he or she will immediately communicate
this information to the USEC and the DOE Site Safety Representatives. It is essential that this information be discussed
with a DOE site representative immediately upon discovery so that DOE may take prompt action as dictated by the situation.
If the DOE Site Safety Representatives are unavailable, the NRC Inspector will transmit this information immediately
to the DOE Regulatory Oversight Manager or his designee.

7. DOE will receive copies of all written communications between USEC and NRC relating to activities of NRC Inspectors
under this agreement.

8. If potential violations of DOE regulatory requirements are identified as a result of the NRC's inspection activities,
DOE may take appropriate enforcement action as set forth in Appendix B of the ROA. Enforcement action, if any, will
be taken only by DOE.



C. Communications and Information Exchange



1. The DOE and NRC agree in good faith to make available to each other information within the intent and scope of this
Agreement. 

2. The DOE and NRC agree to meet every 6 months at mutually agreeable times and locations to exchange information on
matters of common concern pertinent to this Agreement. 

3. The DOE and NRC agree to consider each other's identified information needs and concerns when developing inspection
plans. 

4. The NRC will conform to DOE practices regarding information disclosure. For instance, the NRC must abide by DOE
protocol not to publicly disclose DOE inspection findings prior to the release of the DOE inspection report. However,
the NRC may discuss with USEC any NRC finding relative to the development of 10 CFR Part 76 standards or certification
of the gaseous diffusion plants in accordance with the Act, as amended.

5. To preclude dissemination of information which may be exempt from disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information
Act, the DOE and NRC shall consult with each other before disclosure of information related to this Agreement. 

6. The NRC will notify DOE before stationing an NRC Resident Inspector at a site.



VII. Contacts



A. The principal senior management contacts for this Agreement will be the Director, Division of Radiation Safety
and Safeguards, Region III, NRC, and the DOE Regulatory Oversight Manager. These individuals may designate appropriate
staff representatives for the purpose of administering this Agreement.

B. Identification of these contacts is not intended to restrict communication between DOE and NRC staff members on
technical and other day-to-day activities. 



VIII. Resolution of Conflicts



A. If disagreements or conflicts about matters within the scope of this Agreement arise, DOE and NRC will work together
to resolve these differences. 

B. Resolution of differences between DOE and NRC staff over the significance of findings will be the initial responsibility
of the DOE Regulatory Oversight Manager.

C. The DOE Office of Chief Counsel, Oak Ridge Operations, will have the final authority to interpret DOE's regulatory
requirements. 



IX. Effective Date, Termination, and Modification



This Agreement shall become effective upon signing by the Region III Administrator, NRC, and the DOE Regulatory Oversight
Manager, and shall remain in effect until NRC issues the initial certificate and/or approves a compliance plan, which
terminates this Agreement. A formal review, not less than 6 months after the effective date, will be performed concurrently
by the DOE and NRC to evaluate implementation of the Agreement and resolve any problems identified. This Agreement
will be subject to periodic reviews and may be amended or modified upon written agreement by both parties.



X. Separability



If any provision(s) of this Agreement, or the application of any provision(s) to any person or circumstances, is held
invalid, the remainder of this Agreement and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances
shall not be affected.




Dated: August 11, 1994.



For the U.S. Department of Energy.


<SIGNER>
J. Dale Jackson, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Regulatory Oversight Manager.






Dated: August 11, 1994.



For the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
John B. Martin,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Regional Administrator. 



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423461 Filed 92194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M
</BILLING>



