 

2542.520 

Coverage.


(a) This subpart applies to any grantee of the agency.
(b) This subpart applies to any grant, except where application of this subpart would be inconsistent with the international
obligations of the United States or the laws or regulations of a foreign government. A determination of such inconsistency
may be made only by the agency head or his/her designee.
(c) The provisions of subparts A, B, C, D and E of this part apply to matters covered by this subpart, except where specifically
modified by this subpart. In the event of any conflict between provisions of this subpart and other provisions of this
part, the provisions of this subpart are deemed to control with respect to the implementation of drug-free workplace
requirements concerning grants.


2542.530 

Grounds for suspension of payments, suspension or termination of grants, or suspension or debarment.


A grantee shall be deemed in violation of the requirements of this subpart if the agency head or his or her official designee
determines, in writing, that_
(a) The grantee has made a false certification under 2542.560;
(b) With respect to a grantee other than an individual_
(1) The grantee has violated the certification by failing to carry out the requirements of paragraphs (A) (a)(g)
and/or (B) of the certification (Alternate I in Appendix C of this part); or
(2) Such a number of employees of the grantee have been convicted of violations of criminal drug statutes for violations
occurring in the workplace as to indicate that the grantee has failed to make a good faith effort to provide a drug-free
workplace; or
(c) With respect to a grantee who is an individual_
(1) The grantee has violated the certification by failing to carry out its requirements (Alternate II of Appendix
C of this part); or
(2) The grantee is convicted of a criminal drug offense resulting from a violation occurring during the conduct of
any grant activity.


2542.540 

Effect of violation.


(a) In the event of a violation of this subpart as provided in 2542.520, and in accordance with applicable law,
the grantee shall be subject to one or more of the following actions:
(1) Suspension of payments under the grant;
(2) Suspension or termination of the grant; and
(3) Suspension or debarment of the grantee under the provisions of this part.
(b) Upon issuance of any final decision under this part requiring debarment of a grantee, the debarred grantee shall
be ineligible for award of any grant from any Federal agency for a period specified in the decision, not to exceed five
years (see 2542.280(a)(2)).


2542.550 

Exception provision.


The agency head may waive with respect to a particular grant, in writing, a suspension of payments under a grant, suspension
or termination of a grant, or suspension or debarment of a grantee if the agency head determines that such a waiver would
be in the public interest. This exception authority cannot be delegated to any other official.


2542.560 

Certification requirements and procedures.


(a) (1) As a prior condition of being awarded a grant, each grantee shall make the appropriate certification to the
Federal agency providing the grant, as provided in Appendix C of this part.
(2) Grantees are not required to make a certification in order to continue receiving funds under a grant awarded before
March 18, 1989, or under a no-cost time extension of such a grant. However, the grantee shall make a one-time drug-free
workplace certification for a non-automatic continuation of such a grant made on or after March 18, 1989.
(b) Except as provided in this section, all grantees shall make the required certification for each grant. For mandatory
formula grants and entitlements that have no application process, grantees shall submit a one-time certification
in order to continue receiving awards.
(c) A grantee that is a State may elect to make one certification in each Federal fiscal year. States that previously
submitted an annual certification are not required to make a certification for Fiscal Year 1990 until June 30, 1990.
Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, this certification shall cover all grants to all State agencies
from any Federal agency. The State shall retain the original of this statewide certification in its Governor's office
and, prior to grant award, shall ensure that a copy is submitted individually with respect to each grant, unless the
Federal agency has designated a central location for submission.
(d) (1) The Governor of a State may exclude certain State agencies from the statewide certification and authorize
these agencies to submit their own certifications to Federal agencies. The statewide certification shall name any
State agencies so excluded.
(2) A State agency to which the statewide certification does not apply, or a State agency in a State that does not have
a statewide certification, may elect to make one certification in each Federal fiscal year. State agencies that previously
submitted a State agency certification are not required to make a certification for Fiscal Year 1990 until June 30,
1990. The State agency shall retain the original of this State agency-wide certification in its central office and,
prior to grant award, shall ensure that a copy is submitted individually with respect to each grant, unless the Federal
agency designates a central location for submission.
(3) When the work of a grant is done by more than one State agency, the certification of the State agency directly receiving
the grant shall be deemed to certify compliance for all workplaces, including those located in other State agencies.
(e) (1) For a grant of less than 30 days performance duration, grantees shall have this policy statement and program
in place as soon as possible, but in any case by a date prior to the date on which performance is expected to be completed.
(2) For a grant of 30 days or more performance duration, grantees shall have this policy statement and program in place
within 30 days after award.


