 

3. Proposed Packaging Requirements 




FDA is proposing to amend its regulations to establish safe 
conditions of use for iron-containing products by requiring that 
all such products that contain 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit 
be packaged in nonreusable, unit-dose packaging. FDA tentatively 
concludes that the use of iron and iron salts in products at 
potencies at or above 30 mg iron per dosage unit is not safe 
(and, therefore, is not GRAS) unless the food to which it is added, 
or the drug which contains it, is packaged in a manner that is 
adequate to prevent unintended ingestion by children. Thus, 
while iron and several of its salts will continue to be listed as 
GRAS under 21 CFR part 182 for use as dietary supplements and 
under part 184 (21 CFR part 184) for use as nutrient supplements, 
FDA is proposing to add 170.55, which will require unit-dose 
packaging when iron or iron salts are used at a level of 30 mg or 
more per dosage unit in dietary supplements. Section 170.55 will 
also apply to approved food additive uses of iron salts in foods 
for special dietary and nutritional uses. Unit-dose packaging of 
drug products that contain 30 mg or more of iron per dosage unit 
is required under proposed 310.518(a). 


a. 

Rationale for requiring unit-dose packaging for iron-containing products with 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit.


FDA 
is proposing to require unit-dose packaging for iron-containing 
drugs and supplements with 30 mg or more iron per dosage 
unit to ensure that the use of these products is safe. FDA's tentative conclusion to use 30 mg per unit-dose as the threshold

for requiring unit-dose packaging is based on its consideration 
of a number factors including: (1) The amount of ingested iron 
that can cause pediatric fatality; (2) the amount of ingested 
iron that can cause significant iron poisoning; (3) the average 
number of dosage units associated with pediatric fatalities; (4) 
the types and potency of iron-containing products associated with 
pediatric iron poisoning fatalities; (5) information on how 
iron products are sold; and (6) the citizen petitions that were 
submitted to FDA. These factors pointed to the use of 30 mg per 
unit-dose as a threshold. 


As discussed above, the toxicity of any iron ingestion is 
related to the total amount of iron ingested and absorbed 
(section I.B. of this document). Ingestion of 250 mg iron per kg 
of body weight (2.5 g total iron for a 10 kg child) is typically 
considered to be a lethal dose of iron. However, there have been 
reports of fatalities from ingestion of lesser amounts (less than 
2.5 g) of iron, and the available data bear this out. For 
example, Table 5 shows that several pediatric fatalities have 
been associated with ingestion of approximately 1 g of iron. 
Moreover, the amount of iron that can cause serious adverse 
effects is given as 60 mg/kg (section I.B. of this document). 
For a 10 kg child this translates to 600 mg of iron. 


FDA recognizes that there is variability among individuals 
with respect to the lethal dose of iron. Because of this 
variability, and because of the variable size and age of children 
at risk, FDA tentatively concludes that, to protect the wide 
range of susceptible children, it is necessary through packaging 
measures (unit-dose packaging) to limit pediatric access to iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements at potencies
that can be 
reasonably expected to provide 1 g of iron. Restricting 
pediatric access to this amount of iron by packaging measures 
will substantially reduce the potential for a fatal or 
significant iron poisoning outcome should an accidental pediatric 
ingestion of iron-containing products occur. As discussed above, 
because of the time and effort needed to access products 
contained in unit-door packaging, the likelihood that young 
children will be able to ingest a lethal amount of iron will be 
significantly reduced, thereby reducing the likelihood that they 
will be seriously injured or die. 


In the 37 case reports of iron poisoning fatalities 
available, the average number of dosage units ingested by the 
pediatric victim was 39 tablets or capsules, with a range of 5 to 
98 (Table 2). FDA notes that ingestion of 39 tablets or capsules 
at potencies of 25 to 30 mg iron per dosage unit is sufficient to 
provide a potentially lethal dose of iron (i.e., approximately 
1,000 mg) to a young child. 




