 

The hazards of working in an oxygen-enriched atmosphere are widely recognized. The presence of greater than normal
amounts of oxygen increases the flammability of materials and lowers the flash point of flammable materials. An ignition
source, such as a spark, that would ordinarily be of insufficient energy to ignite a flammable mixture may ignite such
mixture in oxygen-enriched atmospheres. The presence of greater than normal amounts of oxygen can also increase
the chances of spontaneous combustion of flammable materials. Thus, an oxygen-enriched atmosphere in a confined
or enclosed space or other dangerous atmosphere can place employees at an unacceptable risk of injury due to fire or
explosion. Employers must take measures to find the source of oxygen and then eliminate that source and ventilate
the space in order to control the hazards involved. 
For the foregoing reasons, OSHA has adopted requirements in final 1915.12(a) that are intended to eliminate
the hazards posed by oxygen-enriched atmospheres. The Agency has adopted NFPA's criterion for oxygen enrichment
(that is, an oxygen concentration of 22 percent or more by volume). Thus, the final rule sets a standard that protects
employees to a level equal to that provided by the relevant national consensus standard for the work involved. 
The proposed rule, under 1915.12(a)(4) and (a)(5), would have required labeling spaces with oxygen-deficient
(that is less than 19.5 percent oxygen) atmospheres, but would have permitted employees to enter such spaces provided
they were wearing respirators. 
The final rule raises the minimum acceptable concentration of oxygen from 16.5 percent to 19.5 percent by volume.
As noted earlier, the NPRM proposed raising the minimum acceptable level of oxygen, and several rulemaking participants
commented on this issue (Ex. 63, 66, 610, 611, 615, 618, 624, 628,
633). All of them agreed with the proposed minimum oxygen level. For example, the Shipbuilders Council of America
(Ex. 63) stated: 



Routine entry should be allowed only if the oxygen level is at least 19.5 percent. 



Northwest Marine Chemist (Ex. 618) maintained that the existing minimum acceptable concentration of oxygen
in 1915.12(c)(1) was outdated, as follows: 



The use of 16.5% oxygen by OSHA is archaic, and not used in the industry in my area. 



Additionally, OSHA's generic confined space standard, in 1910.146(b), defines ``oxygen-deficient atmosphere''
as ``an atmosphere containing less than 19.5 percent oxygen by volume.'' 
OSHA has previously concluded that permitting employees to work in atmospheres in which the concentration of oxygen
is below 19.5 percent by volume presents an unacceptable risk of acute adverse health effects. In the preamble to final
1910.146, OSHA described the possible results of exposure to oxygen-deficient atmospheres as: dizziness,
tiredness, difficulty in breathing, confusion, unconsciousness, and death (58 FR 4476). Considering these possible
consequences, the Agency continues to believe that the minimum acceptable concentration of oxygen, in the absence
of control measures, is 19.5 percent by volume. 
As noted earlier, 1915.12(a)(2) requires spaces containing oxygen-deficient and oxygen-enriched atmospheres
to be labeled ``Not Safe for Workers'' or ``Not Safe for Workers_Not Safe for Hot Work,'' respectively. The previous
standard does not require such labeling. The proposed rule would have required labeling only for oxygen deficiency,
under 1915.12(a)(5). No one objected to the labeling requirement proposed in 1915.12(a)(5), and OSHA
believes that this labeling is necessary to warn employees to keep out of spaces containing insufficient oxygen to
work safely. Therefore, the Agency is carrying forward the proposed provision that spaces with oxygen-deficient
atmospheres be labeled ``Not Safe for Workers.'' Because OSHA has found it necessary and appropriate to prohibit
entry into oxygen-enriched atmospheres, the Agency also believes that it is necessary to label spaces containing
such atmospheres. Because of the increased risk of fire and explosion associated with these atmospheres, the final
rule requires them to be labeled as ``Not Safe for Hot Work'' as well as ``Not Safe for Workers.'' 
Final 1915.12(a)(2) requires ventilation to be provided to maintain the oxygen content of the atmosphere
in a safe range. Paragraph (c)(2) of the previous 1915.12 contains the same requirement, except that it applies
only when an oxygen deficiency is found. The proposed revision of Subpart B would not have required ventilation but
would have permitted employees to enter oxygen-deficient atmospheres if they were wearing respirators (proposed
1915.12(a)(4)). 
OSHA has decided not to allow employees to enter confined or enclosed spaces or other dangerous atmospheres that are
designated ``Not Safe for Workers,'' except under tight restriction. (See the summary and explanation of final 1915.12(c)(3),
later in this preamble, for a discussion of issues related to employee entry into such spaces.) Therefore, the final
rule adopts a requirement, similar to the one in the previous 1915.12(c)(2), for ventilation to be provided
any time a space is hazardous because of oxygen deficiency or oxygen enrichment. Once the ventilation brings the oxygen
content to a safe level, signs labeling the space as ``Not Safe for Workers'' or ``Not Safe for Workers_Not Safe for
Hot Work'' may be removed. 
Paragraph (a)(3) of final 1915.12 prohibits employees from entering any confined or enclosed space or other
dangerous atmosphere that is oxygen-deficient or is oxygen-enriched. Exceptions are granted for emergency rescue
and for entries of short duration to install ventilation equipment, provided that the atmosphere is continuously
monitored for oxygen content and that respiratory protection and other personal protective equipment and clothing
are provided in accordance with Subpart I of part 1915. 
The previous 1915.12 prohibits entry into IDLH atmospheres. Paragraph (d) of that section presents exceptions
to the general prohibition which recognize emergency entries and short duration entries performed for the purpose
of installing ventilation equipment or starting operations, provided the work is performed in accordance with paragraphs
(a) and (b) of the previous 1915.152 (contained in Subpart I) relating to respiratory protection. 
Proposed 1915.12(d) presented the same exceptions as the previous rule, but with three additional provisos:

(1) That no ignition sources are present, and 
(2) That the atmosphere in the space is maintained above the upper explosive limit, and 
(3) That the atmosphere is monitored continuously. 
The reference to the Subpart I requirements was placed in a note following the proposed paragraph. As noted earlier,
proposed 1915.12(a)(4) would also have allowed entry into oxygen-deficient atmospheres by employees wearing
respirators in accordance with Subpart I of part 1915. No restrictions on the purpose or length of entry were proposed.



