 

(ii) Development of cancer depends on many factors. Eating a diet low in fat and high in fruits and vegetables, foods
that are low in fat and may contain vitamin A, vitamin C and dietary fiber, may reduce your risk of some cancers. Oranges,
a food low in fat, are a good source of fiber and vitamin C. 
(h) 

Folate and neural tube defects

_(1) 

Relationship between folate and neural tube defects

. (i) Neural tube defects are serious birth defects of the brain or spinal cord that can result in infant mortality or
serious disability. The birth defects anencephaly and spina bifida are the most common forms of neural tube defects
and account for about 90 percent of these defects. These defects result from failure of closure of the covering of the
brain or spinal cord during early embryonic development. Because the neural tube forms and closes during early pregnancy,
the defect may occur before a woman realizes that she is pregnant. 
(ii) The available data show that diets adequate in folate may reduce the risk of neural tube defects. The strongest
evidence for this relationship comes from an intervention study by the Medical Research Council of the United Kingdom
that showed that women at risk of recurrence of a neural tube defect pregnancy who consumed a supplement containing
4 mg (4,000 micrograms (mcg)) folic acid daily had a reduced risk of having a child with a neural tube defect. (Products
that contain this level of folic acid are drugs.) In addition, based on its review of a Hungarian intervention trial
that used a multivitamin and multimineral preparation containing 800 mcg (0.8 mg) of folic acid, and its review of
the observational studies that reported use of multivitamins containing 0 to 1,000 mcg of folic acid, FDA concluded
that most of these studies had results consistent with the conclusion that folate, at levels attainable in usual diets,
may reduce the risk of neural tube defects. 
(2) 

Significance of folate. 

(i) Neural tube defects occur in approximately 0.6 of 1,000 live births in the United States (i.e., about 2,500 cases
among 4 million live births annually). Neural tube defects are believed to be caused by many factors. The single greatest
risk factor for a neural tube defect-affected pregnancy is a personal or family history of a pregnancy affected with
a such a defect. However, about 90 percent of infants with a neural tube defect are born to women who do not have a family
history of these defects. The available evidence shows that diets adequate in folate may reduce the risk of neural
tube defects but not of other birth defects. 
(ii) Prevalence rates for neural tube defects have been reported to vary with a wide range of factors, including genetics,
geography, socioeconomic status, maternal birth cohort, month of conception, race, nutrition, and maternal age
and reproductive history. Women with a close relative (i.e., sibling, niece, nephew) with a neural tube defect, those
with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and women with seizure disorders who are being treated with valproic
acid or carbamazepine are at significantly increased risk compared with women without these characteristics. Rates
for neural tube defects vary within the United States, with lower rates observed on the west coast than on the east coast.

(iii) Based on a synthesis of the results of several observational studies, the Public Health Service has estimated
that about 50 percent of neural tube defect-affected pregnancies in the United States (e.g., about 1,250) may be averted
annually if all women consume adequate amounts of folate daily (i.e., 0.4 mg) throughout their childbearing years.

(3) 

Requirements

. (i) All requirements set forth in 
317.314 shall be met. 
(ii) Specific requirements. (A) 

Nature of the claim. 

A health claim associating folate with reduced risk of neural tube defects may be made on the label or labeling of a meat
or meat food product described in paragraph (h)(3)(ii)(B) of this section; 

Provided,

 That: 
(

1

) In specifying the nutrient, the claim shall use the terms ``folate,'' ``folic acid,'' ``folacin,'' ``folate, a
B vitamin,'' ``folic acid, a B vitamin,'' or ``folacin, a B vitamin''; 
(

2

) In specifying the health-related condition, the claim shall identify the birth defects as ``neural tube defects'',
``birth defects, spina bifida, or anencephaly,'' ``birth defects of the brain or spinal cord anencephaly or spina
bifida,'' or ``spina bifida or anencephaly, birth defects of the brain or spinal cord''; 


(

3

) The claim shall state that neural tube defects have many causes and shall not imply that folate intake is the only recognized
risk factor for neural tube defects; 
(

4

) In specifying the prevalence of neural tube defects among women in the general population, the claim shall state
that such birth defects ``which, while not widespread, are extremely significant'' or ``*** birth
defects *** that, while not widespread, are extremely significant.''; 
(

5

) The claim shall not attribute any specific degree of reduction in risk of neural tube defects, including mention
of the Public Health Service estimate that 50 percent of neural tube defects may be averted annually, to maintaining
an adequate folate intake throughout the childbearing years. The claim shall state that some women may reduce their
risk of a neural tube defect pregnancy by maintaining adequate intakes of folic acid during their childbearing years;

(

6

) Claims on products that contain more than 25 percent of the Reference Daily Intake for folate (100 mcg per serving)
shall state that 1 mg folate per day is the safe upper limit of intake (e.g., ``Folate consumption should be limited
to 1,000 mcg per day from all sources''); 
(

7

) The claim shall not state that a specified amount of folate (e.g., 400 mcg in a dietary supplement) is more effective
in reducing the risk of neural tube defects than a lower amount (e.g., 100 mcg in a breakfast cereal or from diets rich
in fruit and vegetables); 







