 

In the 1990 proposal, OSHA did not propose an action level based on its tentative conclusion that workplace asbestos
concentrations below the PEL could not be reliably and reproducibily measured (55 FR 29722). The Agency asked for
comment on the advisability of setting an action level of 0.05 f/cc, and specifically asked whether the methodology
for measuring airborne asbestos levels had advanced sufficiently to allow reliable and reproducible measurements
at that level. Evidence subsequently submitted to the rulemaking record indicated that levels as low as 0.05 f/cc
could not be consistently measured reliably. The rulemaking reinforces OSHA's tentative conclusion that workplace
asbestos levels of 0.05 f/cc cannot be measured reliably (see NIOSH Tr. 215, SESAC Tr. 345). Because employers cannot
obtain reliable and reproducible measurements of airborne asbestos levels at concentrations of 0.05 f/cc, it would
be infeasible to base training and medical surveillance requirements on worker exposure to asbestos at such a level.
OSHA therefore declines to establish an action level of 0.05 f/cc. OSHA recognizes in some circumstances the general
advantages of an action level, and if future monitoring technology is developed which would allow reliable, consistent
determinations at lower fiber levels, OSHA will reconsider whether an action level would be appropriate for the asbestos
standard and whether action under section (6)(b)(7) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act which directs OSHA
to ``make appropriate modification in the *** requirements relating to *** monitoring
or measuring *** as may be warranted by experience, information, or medical or technological developments
acquired subsequent to the promulgation of the relevant standard'' is appropriate. 
The agency has, however, included provisions that require training and medical surveillance of employees exposed
below the PEL. Thus, like standards that contain an action level, these standards use training and medical surveillance
to reduce the residual significant risk that remains at the PEL. The general industry standard requires that all employees
who work in areas where ACM or PACM is present be given a prescribed level of awareness training. The construction and
shipyard standards require training of all workers who install asbestos-containing products and all workers who
perform Class I, Class II, Class III, and Class IV work. These training requirements assure that all employees who
are potentially exposed to more than de minimis concentrations of asbestos can recognize conditions and activities
that can lead to asbestos exposure, know of the hazards associated with asbestos exposure, and are trained to utilize
the means prescribed by the standard to minimize their exposure. 
With respect to medical surveillance, the construction and shipyard standards require medical surveillance of
all workers who, for a combined total of 30 days per year or more, engage in Class I, II, or III work, or who are exposed
above the PEL or excursion limit. Additionally employees who wear negative pressure respirators are provided with
medical surveillance. The general industry standard requires medical surveillance of all workers exposed above
the PEL or excursion level, with no 30-day per year limitation. In crafting these provisions, OSHA has attempted to
assure that those workers for whom medical surveillance will provide relevant information and benefit are entitled
to it. In construction and shipyard work, employees who do not engage in Class I, II, or III work are unlikely to be exposed
above 0.05 f/cc (the potential ``action level'') because the work practices mandated in the standard should result
in negligible asbestos exposure to workers who do not specifically engage in asbestos-related work. Employees who
engage in only Class IV work also should not be exposed above 0.05 f/cc because of the lower asbestos exposures associated
with such work. OSHA therefore believes that the construction and shipyard provisions target medical surveillance
where it is needed. 
In general industry, the vast majority of workers who are exposed below the PEL will also be exposed below 0.05 f/cc.
The work practices mandated for brake and clutch repair, by far the largest general industry segment subject to the
standard, should result in virtually all such workers being exposed below 0.05 f/cc. Another large general industry
segment, custodial workers, will also be generally exposed below 0.05 f/cc. While some small number of workers in
both categories as well as in the manufacturing of asbestos products may be exposed between 0.05 f/cc and 0.10 f/cc
on some days, the difficulty of obtaining reliable and reproducible measurements at those levels makes it difficult
to identify those workers accurately. Therefore, if medical surveillance were triggered by exposure above 0.05
f/cc, the employees subject to such surveillance would likely be chosen on the basis of the vagaries of the monitoring
process rather than on any realistic assessment of the risk that they face. OSHA therefore concludes that it would
be infeasible, and would not reduce significant risk, to require medical surveillance for workers in general industry
exposed below the PEL or excursion limit. 



