 

(iv) Stations located within 80 kilometers (50 miles) transmitting with 25 kW or more ERP in the primary plane of polarization
in the azimuthal direction of Table Mountain Receiving Zone.

(3) Applicants concerned are urged to communicate with the Radio Frequency Management Coordinator, Department
of Commerce, Research Support Services NOAAR/E5X2, Boulder Laboratories, Boulder, CO 80303; telephone (303) 4976548,
in advance of filing their applications with the FCC.

(4) The FCC will not screen applications to determine whether advance consultation has taken place. However, such
consultation may avoid the filing of objections from the Department of Commerce or institution of proceedings to
modify the authorizations of stations that radiate signals with a field strength or power flux density at the site
in excess of those specified herein.


(c) 

Federal Communications Commission protected field offices.

 The requirements of this paragraph are intended to minimize possible interference to FCC monitoring activities.


(1) Carriers planning to construct and operate a new or modified Public Mobile Services station at a permanent fixed
location in the vicinity of an FCC protected field office are advised to give consideration, prior to filing applications,
to the need to avoid interfering with the monitoring activities of that office. FCC protected field offices are listed
in 0.121 of this chapter.

(2) Applications for stations (except mobile stations) that could produce on any channel a direct wave fundamental
field strength of greater than 10 mV/m (^65.8 dBW/m2 power flux density assuming a free space characteristic impedance
of 120
 

V

) in the authorized bandwidth at the protected field office may be examined to determine the potential for interference
with monitoring activities. After consideration of the effects of the predicted field strength of the proposed station,
including the cumulative effects of the signal from the proposed station with other ambient radio field strength
levels at the protected field office, the FCC may add a condition restricting radiation toward the protected field
office to the station authorization.

(3) In the event that the calculated field strength exceeds 10 mV/m at the protected field office site, or if there is
any question whether field strength levels might exceed that level, advance consultation with the FCC to discuss
possible measures to avoid interference to monitoring activities should be considered. Prospective applicants
may communicate with: Chief, Field Operations Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, Washington, DC 20554.

(4) Advance consultation is recommended for applicants that have no reliable data to indicate whether the field strength
or power flux density figure indicated would be exceeded by their proposed radio facilities. In general, coordination
is recommended for:

(i) Stations located within 2.4 kilometers (1.5 miles);

(ii) Stations located within 4.8 kilometers (3 miles) with 50 watts or more average effective radiated power (ERP)
in the primary plane of polarization in the azimuthal direction of the protected field offices.

(iii) Stations located within 16 kilometers (10 miles) with 1 kW or more average ERP in the primary plane of polarization
in the azimuthal direction of the protected field office;

(iv) Stations located within 80 kilometers (50 miles) with 25 kW or more average ERP in the primary plane of polarization
in the azimuthal direction of the protected field office;

(5) Advance coordination for stations transmitting on channels above 1000 MHz is recommended only if the proposed
station is in the vicinity of a protected field office designated as a satellite monitoring facility in 0.121
of this chapter.

(6) The FCC will not screen applications to determine whether advance consultation has taken place. However, such
consultation may serve to avoid the need for later modification of the authorizations of stations that interfere
with monitoring activities at protected field offices.



22.371


Disturbance of AM broadcast station antenna patterns.



Public Mobile Service licensees that construct or modify towers in the immediate vicinity of AM broadcast stations
are responsible for measures necessary to correct disturbance of the AM station antenna pattern which causes operation
outside of the radiation parameters specified by the FCC for the AM station, if the disturbance occurred as a result
of such construction or modification.

