 

&bull;Discuss plans for continuation of the program after the federally funded project period has ended. 

&bull;Provide assurances and adequate budget funds to enable at least one key person from the State agency and one
key person from each service provider site receiving funds from the grant to attend an annual three day conference
in Washington, DC. 

&bull;Provide assurances that travel to these conferences would not be subject to any limitations on travel which
may be imposed by the State on its employees. 

&bull;Provide the following assurances as required by statute: 

(1) That not more than 5 percent of the funds made available under each section of the Act would be used for State administrative
costs. 

(2) That projects funded by the State would be of sufficient size, scope and quality to achieve the objectives of the
program. 

(3) That, in the distribution of funds under the Temporary Child Care program, the State would give priority consideration
to agencies and organizations which have experience in working with disabled, terminally ill, and chronically ill
children and their families and which serve communities which demonstrate the greatest need for such services. 

(4) That, in the distribution of funds under the Crisis Nurseries program, the State would give priority consideration
to agencies and organizations with experience in working with abused or neglected children and their families; in
working with children at high risk of abuse and neglect and their families; and in serving communities which demonstrate
the greatest need for such services. 

(5) That Federal funds made available under these programs would be used to supplement and, to the extent practicable,
increase the amount of State and local funds available for these purposes, and in no case supplant such State or local
funds. 

(6) That the State would use the definition of children with disabilities found in Public Law 102119, the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act, in implementing programs under the Temporary Child Care program. 

(7) That all agencies and organizations funded under the Temporary Child Care for Children with Disabilities program
would provide child care only on a sliding fee scale with hourly and daily rates. 

(8) That the services provided under the Crisis Nurseries program would be provided without fee and for a maximum of
30 days in any year. 



Federal Share of Project Costs:

 The maximum Federal share may not exceed $200,000 for the first 12-month budget period or $600,000 for a 3-year project
period. 



Matching or Cost Sharing Requirements:

 The applicant must provide at least 25 percent of the total cost of the project. The total approved cost of the project
is the sum of the ACYF share and the non-Federal share. The non-Federal share may be cash or in-kind contributions,
although applicants are encouraged to meet their match requirements through cash contributions. Therefore, a project
requesting $600,000 in Federal funds must include a match of at least $200,000 (25 percent of the total project cost
of $800,000). 





