 

(2) Treatment necessary to eliminate hazards of lead-based paint shall conform to the procedures described in 35.24(b)(4).



* * * * * 


9. Section 35.62 would be revised to read as follows: 


35.62 

Federal construction; prohibition against use of lead-based paint. 


1. No Federal agency shall, in any residential structure constructed or rehabilitated by such agency, use or permit
the use of lead-based paint. 
10. Section 35.63 would be amended by revising paragraph (a) and adding a heading to paragraph (b), to read as follows:



35.63 

Federally assisted construction; prohibition against use of lead-based paint. 


(a) 

Regulations required. 

Each agency head shall issue regulations and take such other steps as in his or her judgment are necessary to prohibit
the use of lead-based paint on or in any residential structure constructed or rehabilitated by such agency under any
federally assisted program. 
(b) 

Contents of regulations.

 * * * 


PART 200_INTRODUCTION 


11. The authority citation for part 200 would be revised to read as follows: 






Authority:

 12 U.S.C. 17011715z18; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d)). 



12. Section 200.805 would be amended by removing the definition of ``Applicable surface''; and by revising the definitions
of ``Chewable surface'', ``Defective paint surface'', and ``Elevated blood lead level or EBL'', to read as follows:



200.805 

Definitions. 




Chewable surface 

means any intact protruding painted surface up to five feet from the floor or ground that is readily accessible to children
less than six years of age. 


Defective paint surface

 has the same meaning as the term is defined in 35.22 of this title. 


Elevated blood lead level or EBL

 has the same meaning as the term is defined in 35.3 of this title. 


* * * * * 


13. Section 200.815 would be amended by revising paragraphs (b), (c), and (d), to read as follows: 


200.815 

HUD-owned single family property disposition. 


* * * * * 


(b) For residential structures constructed prior to 1978, HUD shall cause the property to be inspected for defective
paint surfaces before the closing of the sale of the property. In the case of a sale to a non-owner-occupant purchaser,
treatment may be made a condition of sale, with sufficient sale funds escrowed to assure treatment. Defective paint
surfaces either: 
(1) Must be tested for lead content and, if found to contain lead at concentrations equal to or exceeding levels specified
in 35.24(b)(3) of this title, abated as described in 35.24(b) of this title; or 
(2) If not tested, the presence of lead-based paint shall be assumed and the surfaces abated as described in paragraph
(d) of this section. 
(c) 

Chewable surfaces.

 This subsection applies to dwellings constructed before 1978, except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section.
If the purchaser is an owner-occupant and the occupant family contains one or more children less than six years of age,
closing of the sale shall be deferred until completion of the following procedures. Where a blood lead level screening
program is determined by HUD to be reasonably available, screening of each occupant child less than six years of age
will be required. If an EBL condition is identified, HUD will cause the dwelling to be tested for lead-based paint on
chewable surfaces or follow treatment procedures. Testing shall be conducted by a State or local health or housing
agency, an inspector certified or regulated by a State or local health or housing agency, a qualified HUD inspector
or an organization recognized by HUD. Testing shall be performed using an X-ray fluorescence analyzer (XRF) or by
laboratory analysis of paint samples. Test readings of 1 mg/cm2 or higher using an XRF shall be considered positive
for the presence of lead-based paint. If the laboratory reports the results in percent by weight, 0.5 percent or 5000
parts per million shall be considered positive. Where lead-based paint on chewable surfaces is identified, the entire
interior or exterior chewable surface shall be treated. Treatment shall consist of covering or removal of the paint
surface in accordance with 35.24(b)(4) of this title. 
(d) 

Abatement without testing.

 In the case of a residential structure constructed before 1978, in lieu of the procedures set forth in paragraph (c)
of this section, HUD, at its option, may forgo testing and abate all chewable and defective paint surfaces in accordance
with the methods set out in 35.24(b)(4) of this title. 
14. Section 200.820 would be amended by redesignating paragraphs (d) and (e) as paragraphs (f) and (g), respectively;
by revising the third sentence in paragraph (a) and paragraphs (b), (c)(1), (c)(2), the second sentence in paragraph
(c)(3), and (c)(4); and by adding new paragraphs (d) and (e), to read as follows: 


200.820 

Multifamily insurance and coinsurance. 





