 



Response: 

As noted in the EA, gray whales were sighted by Forney and Barlow (1993)

6

 off the SCB in the winter/spring surveys, but not in the OSTR (

i.e.,

 Area 2); 39 percent were located in Area 1 (inshore SCB) and 61 percent were found north of Pt. Conception. In addition,
the EA notes that Jones and Swartz (1990)

7

 documented gray whale occurrence around the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary during January 1986 and 1987
via aerial surveys and that most gray whales (78 percent of cow-calf pairs and 94 percent of all other whales) were within
3 nm (5.6 km) of the islands. Animals classified by researchers as ``calves of the season'' comprised nearly 12 percent
of the raw counts. Ninety-four percent of the cow-calf pairs were seen east of Santa Rosa Island. It should also be noted
that pregnant gray whales are in the vanguard of the south-bound migration and, because they give birth from January
to mid-February in and near the lagoons in Baja California, should have migrated south through the SCB by February,
the time of the proposed testing. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


6

</FOOTNAME>
Forney, K.A. and J. Barlow. 1993. Winter abundance estimates for cetaceans along the California coast based on 1991
and 1992 aerial surveys. NMFS Doc. SOCCS 2. 29pp. 


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


7

</FOOTNAME>
Jones, M.L. and S. L. Swartz. 1990. Abundance and distribution of gray whales in the Channel Islands National Marine
Sanctuary during the southward migration in January 1986 and 1987. IWC Gray Whale Workshop. paper SC/A90/G17. 15pp.


</FOOTNOTE>


Guadalupe Fur Seal/Steller Sea Lion 




Comment: 

One commenter questioned the Navy's rationale for not requesting an incidental take of Guadalupe fur seals and NMFS'
position should this species be taken. Another had similar concerns regarding the Steller sea lion. 


Response: 

The Navy made a determination not to request an incidental take authorization for Guadalupe fur seals and Steller
sea lions because their population sizes in the SCB (one to five fur seals and 100 sea lions) were low and that mitigation
measures would likely detect these species if an individual was there. In the event a Guadalupe fur seal or a Steller
sea lion is taken, such taking would be in violation of the MMPA (and the LOA). Alternatively, if one is seen in the area
prior to the test but not taken because the test is delayed until the animal leaves, then the Navy may elect to request
an amendment to its LOA and the authorizing regulations for future tests. 


Noise in the Ocean 




Comment: 

One commenter recommended NMFS implement regulations to limit decibel levels from all human activity in the marine
environment. 


Response: 

Such a proposal is outside the scope of this rulemaking. 


Outer Sea Test Range 




Comment: 

Many commenters were concerned over the choice of the OSTR because of its proximity to the Channel Islands. Many were
concerned that alternative sites to the OSTR had not been adequately explored. One commenter believed the test site
should be moved another 100 nm west, another that the test area should be limited to south of 33
&cir;27
&rsquo;N. latitude, while another was concerned that utilizing the southern and western extremities of the OSTR
would put the test near the San Juan Seamount, an area of high primary and fish productivity. 


Response: 

The EA listed the criteria that the Navy established for locating ship shock trials. Refer to that document for a list
of these criteria. However, it should be recognized that the Pacific Missile Range is an oceanic area designated for
military activities since it was established by the Department of Defense in 1946. According to the Navy, the OSTR
has been used for ship shock trials since 1990. The only other West Coast site where ship shock trials of this magnitude
have been conducted is within a military operations area east of San Clemente Island. However, since 1990, environmental
concerns and the large number of fleet operations (greater than 200,000 per year), preclude the use of this area for
ship shock trials. Thus, this alternative was eliminated from further consideration by the Navy. For a discussion
on utilizing portions of the OSTR, refer to similar concerns under ``National Environmental Policy Act Concerns''
above and ``Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary Concerns'' below. 
It should also be noted that the San Juan Seamount is approximately 12 nm west of the western boundary of the OSTR. Because
the 2-nm safety zone will be within the OSTR, at a minimum, the test site will be 14 nm from the eastern slope of the seamount.
The Navy believes, and NMFS concurs, that there will be little or no impact on the resources of the seamount. 


Comment: 

One commenter was concerned about the impact of duds and projectiles that sink to the bottom and either explode later
or at a greater depth. 


Response: 

For the ship shock trials, the explosive is not allowed to free fall through the water column but is towed to the site,
armed, buoyed at the appropriate depth (125 ft (38 m) or 200 ft (61 m) depending upon the charge weight) and detonated.
Unexploded ordnance is towed to a deep-water site for safe disposal. 






