 

(b) The PHA has fewer vacancies on the date of its application than it had on September 1, 1993, and the PHA had expended
funds on rehabilitation of the unit in reasonable anticipation of reimbursement from Vacancy Reduction Program
funds. The PHA may be reimbursed for the cost of the rehabilitation only if funds remain available after HUD has funded
all other eligible costs at all PHAs applying for funds. 



Lead-based paint activity

 includes lead-based paint risk assessments, risk management (interim containment), testing, and abatement, consistent
with the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 48214826) and HUD implementing regulations
at 24 CFR parts 35, 965, and 968. 



Marketable

 means that there is a waiting list for units of the applicable size and that either the past experience of the PHA would
indicate that the unit should lease reasonably quickly after completion of the work funded under this program, or
other available data indicates that physical and management improvements, including more extensive outreach,
would likely result in a demand for the units. 



Repair

 includes routine maintenance when essential to the reoccupancy of the eligible vacant units. 



Vacancy Reduction Plan

 means a plan developed by the PHA that includes the following: 

(1) The statements required by 968.407(b) of the final rule (also see Appendix to this NOFA) published elsewhere
in today's 

Federal Register

; 

(2) For all vacant units, reported by development, information on the: 

(i) Number and percentage of units vacant at the time of application under this NOFA; 

(ii) Number and percentage of units expected to be occupied by each semiannual date after the submission of the PHA's
vacancy reduction plan, as provided under paragraph (3) of this definition, including date of full occupancy; 

(iii) Source of funding and expected percentage of funds to be obligated and expended by each semiannual date, as provided
under paragraph (3) of this definition; and 

(iv) Expected date of any demolition or disposition, and the number of units involved in this activity. 

(3) A schedule, by chart or time line, indicating milestones for vacancy reduction activities (all vacant units must
be included regardless of whether they require funding and whether they have already been funded). The schedule shall
indicate all actions that will have been taken as of the end of each semiannual period, either September 30 or March
31. 

(i) Actual calendar dates shall be used for units that do not require vacancy reduction program funding, but will be
funded from sources within the control of the PHA (e.g., CGP and the operating budget) or have already been funded by
another governmental program (e.g., CIAP, the Severely Distressed Public Housing Program). 

(ii) For units for which specific calendar dates cannot be given because approval from HUD is a prerequisite to the
action, the schedule shall specify semiannual dates from the expected HUD approval (e.g., first semiannual reporting
date after approval, second semiannual reporting date after approval, etc.). Such units include those for which
the PHA is requesting or intends to request funding under the Vacancy Reduction Program or another HUD program (e.g.,
CIAP or the Severely Distressed Public Housing Program), or for which approval of demolition/disposition is required
but has not yet been granted. 



E. PHA Eligibility 



(1) Indian Housing Authorities are not eligible for the Vacancy Reduction Program. 

(2) To be eligible under this NOFA, a PHA must: 

(a) Have had a vacancy rate that exceeded 15.9% on March 30, 1993, the date used in the HUD survey of vacancies; 

(b) Have had a receiver appointed for the PHA pursuant to section 6(j)(3) of the United States Housing Act of 1937; or


(c) Have been a designated troubled or mod-troubled PHA any time within the twelve-month period that ended September
1, 1993. Such a PHA must also meet either of the conditions described in paragraphs (i) and (ii) below: 

(i) The PHA has demonstrated substantial progress on the following vacancy related Public Housing Management Assessment
Program (PHMAP) indicators: 1 (Vacancy Number and Percentage), 2 (Modernization), 5 (Unit Turnaround), 6 (Outstanding
Work Orders), or 7 (Annual Inspection and Condition of Units and Systems), as demonstrated by a PHMAP score of ``C''
or better. If the PHA does not have a score of ``C'' or better on these indicators, substantial progress may be demonstrated
as follows: 

(

A

) Evidence that the PHA, based on more recent data would qualify for a score of ``C'' or better on the indicators; or 

(

B

) A statement of alternative arrangements that have been made to assure effective administration of the function
covered by the indicator, i.e., rehabilitation and modernization activities (in regard to the units for which funding
is requested) and the PHA-wide administration of unit turnaround, work orders, and preventive maintenance; or 

(ii) The PHA has provided a reasonable assurance that substantial progress will be made to remedy any management deficiencies
identified by the assessment team, or any vacancy-related management deficiencies related to PHMAP indicators
1, 2, 5, 6, and 7, through activities that have already begun or will be initiated in the next six months, including activities
to be funded under this NOFA. The assurance may cross-reference management improvement activity described in its
vacancy reduction plan. 




