 




<RINDOCK>[OPP66194; FRL48965] </RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Notice of Intent to Cancel the Registrations of Nuclo Dry Granular Algaecide, Nuclo Dry Algaecide 90, Winterizing
Algaecide, and Algicil Plus </DOCTITLE>





<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 




</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of Intent to Cancel (NOIC).






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 Pursuant to section 6(b) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), this Notice announces
EPA's intent to cancel the following pesticide registrations for simazine products used in swimming pools, hot tubs,
and whirlpool baths: Nuclo Dry Granular Algaecide (EPA Reg. No. 712432) and Nuclo Dry Algaecide 90 (EPA Reg.
No. 712493), produced by Alden Leeds, Inc.; and Winterizing Algaecide (EPA Reg. No. 343233) and Algicil
Plus (EPA Reg. No. 343254), produced by N. Jonas Company. EPA is taking this action because it believes that
the use of the products, in accordance with widespread and commonly recognized practice, generally causes unreasonable
adverse effects on the environment. Specifically, EPA is concerned with potential cancer and non-cancer effects
resulting from exposure to simazine in swimming pools. EPA believes that the risks from this particular simazine
use exceed the benefits derived from this use. Effective the date of final cancellation, EPA will not allow further
sale, distribution, or use of existing stocks of these products, as described in this Notice. Holders of existing
stocks are subject to FIFRA section 6(g) reporting requirements.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Requests for a hearing by a registrant must be received by the Office of the Hearing Clerk at the address given below
on or before August 5, 1994, or on or before 30 days from receipt of this Notice by the registrant, whichever occurs later.
Requests for a hearing by other adversely affected parties must be received by the Office of the Hearing Clerk on or
before August 5, 1994. 




</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Requests for a hearing must be submitted to: Hearing Clerk (1900), U.S. EPA, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460. Additional
information supporting this action is available for public inspection from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday,
except legal holidays in: Information Services Branch, Program Management and Support Division (7502C), Office
of Pesticide Programs, Environmental Protection Agency, Rm. 236, Crystal Mall #2, 1921 Jefferson Davis Highway,
Arlington, VA. 




</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 By mail: Jeff Morris, Special Review and Reregistration Division (7508W), Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental
Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460. Office location and telephone number: 3rd Floor, Crystal
Station #1, 2800 Crystal Drive, Arlington, VA. Telephone: 7033088029. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 



I. Introduction 



This Notice announces EPA's intent to cancel the following pesticide registrations for simazine products used in
swimming pools, hot tubs, and whirlpool baths: Nuclo Dry Granular Algaecide (EPA Reg. No. 712432), Nuclo Dry
Algaecide 90 (EPA Reg. No. 712493), Winterizing Algaecide (EPA Reg. No. 343233), and Algicil Plus (EPA
Reg. No. 343254). For the reasons set forth below, the Administrator has made the determination that these
products, when used in accordance with widespread and commonly recognized practice, generally cause unreasonable
adverse effects on the environment. 



A. Organization of this Notice 



This Notice is divided into 13 units. This unit provides introductory information and describes the legal authority
for this action. Unit II gives the background information on how EPA arrived at its decision to cancel these products.
Unit III summarizes EPA's toxicology concerns. Unit IV outlines the exposure assessment. Unit V discusses EPA's
risk concerns. Unit VI examines the benefits of these products and the impact of this proposed cancellation action.
Unit VII provides the risk/benefit analysis. Unit VIII describes the role of the Scientific Advisory Panel and the
Secretary of Agriculture. Unit IX discusses disposition of existing product stocks. Unit X provides the required
notification for possession of canceled products. Unit XI outlines the procedures for implementing the actions
required by this Notice, as well as the procedures for requesting a hearing. Unit XII lists the references to the supporting
documentation. Unit XIII gives information on the public docket. 



B. Legal Authority 



Before a pesticide product may be lawfully sold or distributed in either intrastate or interstate commerce, the product
must be registered by EPA pursuant to FIFRA section 3(a) (7 U.S.C. 136a(a)). A registration is a license allowing a
pesticide product to be sold and distributed for specified uses in accordance with use instructions, precautions,
and other terms and conditions of the registration. 

In order to obtain a registration for a pesticide under FIFRA, an applicant must demonstrate that the pesticide satisfies
the statutory standard for registration, section 3(c)(5) of FIFRA (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)(5)). That standard requires,
among other things, that the pesticide performs its intended function without causing ``unreasonable adverse effects
on the environment.'' The term ``unreasonable adverse effects on the environment'' is defined under FIFRA section
2(bb) as ``any unreasonable risk to man or the environment, taking into account the economic, social, and environmental
costs and benefits of the use of any pesticide'' (7 U.S.C. 136(bb)). This standard requires a finding that the benefits
of the use of the pesticide exceed the risks of use, when the pesticide is used in compliance with the terms and conditions
of registration or in accordance with commonly recognized practices. The burden of demonstrating that a pesticide
product satisfies the statutory criteria for registration is at all times on the proponents of registration, and
continues as long as the registration is in effect 
(

Industrial Union Dept. v. American Petroleum Institute

, 448 U.S. 607, 653 n.61 (1980);

 Environmental Defense Fund V. EPA

, 510 F. 2d 1292, 1297 (D.C. Cir. 1975)). 

Under FIFRA section 6(b), EPA may issue a notice of intent to cancel the registration of a pesticide product whenever
it appears to the Administrator that the product, when used in accordance with widespread and generally recognized
practice, generally causes unreasonable effects (7 U.S.C. 136d(b)). 

Registrants and other adversely affected persons may request a hearing on the cancellation of a specified registration
and use. If they do so in a legally effective manner, the registration and use will be continued pending a decision at
the conclusion of an administrative hearing. 



II. Background 



In 1989, EPA classified simazine as a possible human carcinogen (Ref. 1). Simazine is used primarily as an agricultural
herbicide; swimming pool use accounts for less than 2 percent of total simazine usage. In August 1993, EPA conducted
a risk assessment for the swimming pool use (Ref. 2). The risk assessment revealed high potential cancer and non-cancer
health risks to children and adults exposed to water treated with simazine algaecides. 

Because of its risk concerns, EPA requested that the 13 registrants of the simazine swimming pool algaecides cease
product formulation and voluntarily cancel their product registrations (Refs. 3 and 4). In response to EPA's request,
nine of the registrants--A  V, Great Lakes Biochemical, Applied Biochemists, Aqua Clear Industries, Western
Purity Biochemical, Poolmaster, Leslie's Pool Supplies, York Chemical, and Quantum Biochemical--requested a
FIFRA section 6(f) voluntary product cancellation. Also, pursuant to FIFRA section 4(i)(5)(D), EPA canceled two
registrations held by EZ-Clor Systems and one held by N. Jonas Company, for failure to pay the annual registration
maintenance fees for those registrations. The cancellation order for the registrations held by these 11 registrants
was published on April 15, 1994 (59 FR 18120). A separate order, cancelling the registration of Aladdin Winter Care
(EPA Reg. No. 1132917) for failure to pay the annual registration maintenance fee for that product registration,
was signed on May 16, 1994. The order was published in the 

Federal Register

 and became effective on May 25, 1994 (59 FR 27016). 

Alden Leeds and N. Jonas Co. still hold the following registrations for the following simazine products: Nuclo Dry
Granular Algaecide (EPA Reg. No. 712432), Nuclo Dry Algaecide 90 (EPA Reg. No. 712493), Winterizing
Algaecide (EPA Reg. No. 343233), and Algicil Plus (EPA Reg. No. 343254). 

The three registrants of technical simazine--Ciba-Geigy, Drexel Chemical, and Oxon-Italia--are not supporting
the swimming pool simazine use. That is, these manufacturers of the simazine active ingredient do not have their simazine
products registered for swimming pool-related uses. None of Drexel Chemical's products were registered for aquatic
use, and Ciba-Geigy and Oxon-Italia had ceased supporting all aquatic uses before EPA conducted its risk assessment.
The aquatic-use cancellation for Ciba-Geigy, the supplier of technical simazine for the swimming pool products,
was published in the 

Federal Register

 on July 1, 1992 (57 FR 29309) and became effective on October 9, 1992. The notice of Oxon-Italia's request for aquatic
use cancellations was published in the 

Federal Register

 on February 9, 1994 (59 FR 6021), and became effective 90 days from that publication date. At EPA's request, Ciba-Geigy
and Oxon-Italia have amended their product labels to explicitly prohibit reformulation of their products into swimming
pool products; Drexel has amended its technical simazine label to prohibit formulation into aquatic-use products.
Because manufacturers of simazine swimming pool products must formulate their products from technical simazine,
the effect of these actions is that there is no legal source of simazine active ingredient from which the swimming pool
product manufacturers may formulate any simazine products. 



III. Summary of Toxicological Concerns 



Based on toxicological studies in laboratory animals, EPA has determined that simazine may pose cancer and non-cancer
risks to individuals exposed to this pesticide. The results of these studies, as well as the EPA classification of
the carcinogenic potential of simazine, are described below. 



A. Carcinogenicity 



EPA reviewed the simazine toxicological data base, including rat and mouse chronic feeding/carcinogenicity studies,
in its evaluation of the carcinogenic potential of simazine. 

1.

 Rat study.

 In a 2year chronic feeding carcinogenicity study, simazine technical was administered in the diet of 340 male
and 340 female Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (MRID No. 40614405). The study had two phases: a carcinogenicity phase and
a chronic phase. An equal number of male and female rats were randomly divided into four major groups; 50 animals/sex/group
were used in the carcinogenicity phase, and 30 to 40 animals/sex/group were used in the chronic phase. Animals were
dosed at 0 (control), 10, 100, or 1,000 ppm of simazine for 2 years (corresponding to 0.41, 4.17, or 45.77 mg/kg/day
in males; and 0.52, 5.34, or 63.10 mg/kg/day in females). 

For the carcinogenicity phase, results in the female SD rats indicated that there was a statistically significant
dose-related trend in mammary gland carcinomas, as well as in combined adenomas and carcinomas. The incidence of
mammary gland carcinomas was statistically significantly increased at both the 100 and 1,000 ppm groups, as compared
to the controls. Also, the incidence of combined adenomas and carcinomas was statistically significantly higher
in the highest dose tested (HDT) group, as compared to the controls. Mammary gland carcinomas in the main study contributed
to increased mortality in the HDT animals. A higher incidence of mammary gland carcinomas was also seen in the recovery
study (52 weeks of treatment at 1,000 ppm, followed by 52 weeks of recovery) for the control (1/10) and the HDT (4/10)
animals. 

The incidence of hyperplastic changes (cystic glandular hyperplasia) in the mammary glands of female rats was statistically
significantly higher in the HDT animals than in the controls. This finding correlates with the observed high incidence
of tumors in the HDT group. It is generally understood that the higher tumor incidence correlates directly with a higher
incidence of hyperplastic changes. 

In the female rats, the incidence of pituitary carcinomas was found to be statistically significantly higher in the
HDT animals than in the controls. The incidence of pituitary adenomas was found to be extremely high in all groups.
Further statistical analysis of these tumors (total tumor analysis) indicated that the incidence of combined adenomas/carcinomas
in the mid- and high-dose groups was statistically significantly higher than in the controls, and also exhibited
a significant increasing dose-related trend. 

There was a statistically significant dose-related trend for the incidence of kidney tubular adenomas in female
rats. However, the tumors occurred only at the HDT, and the incidence was not statistically significant as compared
to the control animals. 

In the male SD rats, the incidence of hepatocellular adenomas or carcinomas was very low in all treated and control
groups. The incidence of combined hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas was statistically significantly higher
in the HDT group, as compared to the control group. These incidences fell within the historical control range for this
testing facility. 

A very low incidence of kidney tubular adenomas and carcinomas was seen in male rats. A statistically significant
dose-related trend was observed for the incidence of carcinomas, as well as for the incidence of combined adenomas
and carcinomas. However, tumors occurred only at the HDT, and tumor incidences were not statistically significantly
elevated as compared to concurrent controls. 

For this study, the Health Effects Division (HED) of the Office of Pesticide Programs Cancer Peer Review Committee
concluded that the highest dose exceeded the Maximum Tolerated Dose (MTD) for female rats, based on excess deaths
and body-weight-gain reductions. The Committee also agreed that the highest dose in male rats appeared to have exceeded
the MTD, based on a significant decrease in body-weight gain. However, the mid-level dose was well below the MTD, and
mammary gland tumors in the female rat were statistically significantly increased at both the mid- and high-dose
levels. In addition, the Committee concluded that there was too great an interval between the mid (100 ppm) and high
(1,000 ppm) doses. These factors were taken into account in the weight-of-evidence considerations that led the Committee
to classify simazine as a possible human carcinogen (Ref. 2). 

2.

 Mouse study.

 There is no evidence of a relationship between simazine exposure and carcinogenicity in the mouse. In a 1988 chronic
feeding/carcinogenicity study in mice, simazine technical was administered in the diet to a group of 60 male and 60
female CD1 (ICR) BR mice at 0 (control), 40, 1,000, or 4,000 ppm for 95 weeks (MRID No. 40614404). There were no increases
in neoplasms reported for any dosed group and no evidence of compound-related effect on survival or target organ toxicity.


3.

 Classification of carcinogenic potential.

 Based on the weight-of-evidence, the HED Cancer Peer Review Committee concluded that simazine should be classified
as a Group C possible human carcinogen (Ref. 2). This determination was primarily based on results from the 2year
chronic feeding/carcinogenicity study in rats. Based on EPA's evaluation of the data presented in this study, EPA
concluded that technical-grade simazine is carcinogenic in female SD rats, inducing the formation of mammary gland
carcinomas. There is evidence in the published literature that simazine has genotoxic activity, and this was considered
in the weight-of-evidence evaluation of simazine's carcinogenicity classification. 



B. Systemic Effects 



1.

 Rat study.

 EPA determined that the 2year rat chronic feeding study, described in unit III. A.1. of this notice, was appropriate
for assessing non-cancer risks for ``competitive'' exposure to simazine. A No Observed Effect Level (NOEL) of 0.52
mg/kg/day was established based on decreased body weight gain and depression of hematological parameters that occurred
at 5.34 mg/kg/day. These effects, which include depressed red-blood-cell count, hemoglobin, and hematocrit, are
considered to be reversible when exposure is terminated. 

2.

 Rabbit study.

 For evaluation of non-cancer risks from ``recreational'' exposure to simazine, EPA based its risk assessment on
the results of a rabbit developmental toxicity study (MRID No. 001611407). 

In this study, 19 female New Zealand White rabbits per dose level were artificially inseminated and administered
technical grade simazine once daily by gastric intubation at doses of 5 mg/kg, 75 mg/kg, and 200 mg/kg of body weight.
A significant reduction in mean fetal weight and a significant increase in the incidence of fetuses with skeletal
variations were observed at the 200 mg/kg dose level. Therefore, the developmental NOEL for this study is 75 mg/kg
of body weight. In the mothers, significant decreases in body weight gain, tremors, and abortions were observed in
the mid- and high-dose groups (75 and 200 mg/kg dose levels). The maternal NOEL was therefore established at 5 mg/kg
of body weight. 



IV. Exposure Assessment 



EPA developed four exposure scenarios based on the frequency and duration of exposure (competitive versus recreational
swimming), and on the age and weight of the swimmer (6yearold child versus 35yearold male).
The assessment assumed exposure to the entire body through dermal, oral, buccal and sublingual, orbital and nasal,
aural, and inhalation routes. High-exposure frequency, or ``competitive,'' 6yearold and 35yearold
swimmers are assumed to have daily exposures of 3 and 5 hours, respectively, for 150 days per year (Ref. 5). Based on
these assumptions, EPA estimates that ``competitive'' swimmers are exposed to an Actual Daily Exposure (ADE) of
0.12 mg/kg/day for children, and 0.07 mg/kg/day for adults. Low-exposure frequency, or ``recreational,'' swimmers
of both age groups are assumed to be exposed for 30 minutes per day, 5 days a year. This low exposure results in an ADE of
0.02 mg/kg/day for children and 0.0073 mg/kg/day for adults. EPA assumed that lifetime exposure constitutes 30 years
of exposure over a 75year lifetime. 

Simazine concentrations in swimming pool water were calculated based on label application rates. Although simazine
is soluble to only 3.5 parts per million (ppm) in water at 68 
&cir;F, EPA assumed that swimmers could be exposed to average simazine concentrations of 5 ppm, because solubility
could increase at temperatures above 68 
&cir;F. 

EPA has concluded that it is not necessary to conduct a separate exposure assessment for the simazine product that
is used to control algae in swimming pools during the off-season or winter months. A separate assessment is unnecessary
because the exposure levels for the winter-use (winterizer) product are comparable to the exposure levels for the
non-winterizer simazine swimming pool products. Label application rates for winterizer and 
non-winterizer products are similar. In addition, label directions do not require swimming pools that have been
treated with winterizer products to be drained before they are used by swimmers. Because EPA has no data concerning
simazine dissipation, EPA must assume that following initial or subsequent winterizer treatment, simazine does
not dissipate from swimming pool water. Consequently, swimmers could be exposed to unacceptable levels of simazine
when winterized swimming pools are opened for use. Therefore, EPA believes that the individual risk posed to swimmers
from exposure to simazine used as a winterizer is not significantly different from other exposure scenarios. 



V. Risk 



A. Cancer 



1.

 Potency factor (Q

1

*). EPA calculated the cancer potency, or Q

1

*, for simazine as 1.20 

&times;

 10

-1

 (mg/kg/day)

-1

, based on mammary gland cancer in laboratory animals. The Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP) reviewed the carcinogenicity
of simazine in September 1989 and, while agreeing with the Group C classification, did not recommend the use of a quantitative
risk assessment (Ref. 6). The SAP noted that certain pesticides, such as simazine, may alter endocrine physiology
in the rat and influence the incidence of mammary gland tumors; the SAP therefore recommended that EPA formulate a
position on the regulation of chemicals with this mechanism.

At a subsequent OPP Cancer Peer Review Committee meeting, the Peer Review Committee evaluated the SAP's recommendation
and concluded that it is appropriate to use the Q

1*

 to quantify the carcinogenic risks from exposure to simazine until data are provided showing a hormonally mediated
mechanism (Ref. 7). EPA has not received data adequate to support this hypothesis. 

2. 

Cancer risk.

 The excess individual lifetime cancer risk is calculated by multiplying the Q

1

* by the Lifetime Average Daily Exposure (LADE), expressed in mg/kg/day. EPA estimates that the excess risk to an individual
exposed to simazine over a 75year lifetime (i.e., 30 years of exposure) ranges from 4.8 

&times;

 10

-6

 to 1.4 

&times;

 10

-3

. Risk to most competitive and recreational swimmers is estimated to fall within this range, although in some instances
the risks could be higher or lower. EPA generally considers any risk to the general public greater than 1 

&times;

 10

-6

 to be unacceptable. 



B. Non-Cancer 



EPA measures non-cancer risks by calculating a margin of exposure (MOE), which is a comparison of the NOEL to actual
daily exposure, both of which are expressed in milligrams of chemical dose per kilogram of body weight per day. An MOE
less than 100 generally represents an unacceptable risk. 

1. 

Non-cancer risk to swimmers from high exposure frequency.

 The high exposure frequency assumed for the competitive swimmer categories necessitated the use of a long-term toxicity
study to calculate non-cancer risk. The 2year chronic rat feeding study was therefore used to calculate the
MOEs for competitive swimmers. The risks to swimmers for the non-cancer effects seen in the chronic study--reduction
in body weight gain and depression of hematological parameters (anemia)--are reflected in MOEs of 4.3 for children
and 7.4 for adults. The MOEs for swimmers in the competitive category, based on effects seen in the chronic feeding
study, are well below 100 and therefore indicate an unacceptable risk. 

2.

 Non-cancer risk to swimmers from low exposure frequency.

 EPA does not consider swimmers exposed at a low exposure frequency (i.e., a few short exposures per year) to be at risk
of exhibiting non-cancer effects (Ref. 8). Because of the low exposure frequency assumed for the recreational swimmer
categories, the rabbit developmental toxicity study was used to calculate MOEs. The effects of reduction in maternal
body weight gain, abortions, and tremors were manifested at very high dose levels and are considered signs of general
systemic toxicity in the test animals. EPA calculated MOEs of 250 for children and 685 for adults exposed to simazine
in swimming pools. This indicates that recreational swimmers are not at risk from the effects seen in the developmental
toxicity study. 

The following table summarizes the risk numbers derived from the assessment: 



<TABLE>




1Swimmer Category 
1Cancer Risk 
1Non-Cancer Risk (MOE)




Competitive 6yearold (3 hours/day, 150 days/year) 

2.4 

&times;

 10

-3

 
4.31

Competitive 35yearold male (5 hours/day, 150 days/year) 
1.4 

&times;

 10

-3

 
7.41

Recreational 6yearold (0.5 hour/day, 5 days/year) 
1.4 

&times;

 10

-5

 
2502
Recreational 35yearold male (0.5 hour/day, 5 days/year) 
4.8 

&times;

 10

-6

 
6852


1 2year chronic feeding study in rats, MRID 40614405. NOEL = 0.52 mg/kg/day, based on decreased body weight
gain and depression of hematological parameters at 5.34 mg/kg/day. 


2 Developmental toxicity study in rabbits (13day length of exposure), MRID 00161407. NOEL = 5.0 mg/kg/day,
based on tremors, abortions, and decreased body weight gain (all maternal toxicity effects) at 75 mg/kg/day. 


</TABLE>


VI. Benefits and Impact of Cancellation 



Under FIFRA, a pesticide registration may only be maintained if the benefits of the use of the pesticide exceed the
risks of use. EPA has found that at least some of the registered alternative algaecides provide comparative control
at comparative prices, during summer season use. EPA has concluded that the benefits associated with Nuclo Dry Granular
Algaecide, Nuclo Dry Algaecide 90, and Algicil Plus are negligible when compared to the total operating costs on a
perpool basis. The cancellation of these products for summer use will have a negligible impact on the pool industry
and the public. 

EPA has also found that the benefits associated with Winterizing Algaecide are relatively small. This information
is based on the fact that there are a number of alternatives to simazine winterizing products on the market, and the
labels of many of these alternative products indicate that they are used at a similar frequency as simazine. Although
EPA has anecdotal information that suggests simazine may have a longer duration of activity, which could, if true,
result in a cost savings, there are no data to support this. Therefore, EPA concludes that the loss of simazine winterizing
products would have only a small impact on the swimming pool industry and the public. 

The cancellation of the four products subject to this Notice will not have a significant economic impact in part because
they account for only a small share of the algaecide market for swimming pool use. EPA estimates that all 22 simazine
products account for less than 10 percent of the market for algaecides for swimming pool use. Registrants of 18 of these
products have already requested voluntary cancellation of their registrations, or have had their registrations
canceled for maintenance fee non-payment. The remaining four products subject to this Notice account for less than
1 percent of the total swimming pool algaecide market. 

The economic impact of cancelling these four products is minimized by the availability of registered alternative
algaecides for swimming pool use. Because these alternatives have a substantially greater market share than simazine,
the cancellation of the four products subject to this Notice should not result in significant price increases in the
non-simazine products. For the same reasons, EPA does not expect market dislocations due to the inability to produce
the alternative algaecides to meet demand. 

Alden Leeds and N. Jonas Co. indicated to EPA that they have accounted for approximately 25,000 gallons of liquid product
in their possession or in the channels of trade, and 14,000 pounds of unformulated Ciba-Geigy simazine product that
Ciba-Geigy has agreed to buy back. Given the small amount of these products and the over 3 million swimming pools in
the United States that could use simazine pool products, cancellation of these products would have little impact
on the swimming pool industry. Section 6(b) of FIFRA requires EPA to consider the impact of cancellation upon the agricultural
economy (7 U.S.C. 136d(b)). EPA has determined that the cancellation of these products will have no impact upon the
agricultural economy because these products are registered for swimming pool use, and not for agricultural uses.




VII. Risk/Benefit Assessment 



Under section 6(b) of FIFRA, the Administrator may cancel a pesticide due to unreasonable adverse effects, if the
pesticide generally causes an ``unreasonable risk to man or the environment, taking into account the economic, social,
and environmental costs and benefits'' of the pesticide's use (7 U.S.C. 136d(b)). 

As discussed in the preceding sections of this Notice, the cancer and non- cancer risks to human health from continued
registration of Nuclo Dry Granular Algaecide, Nuclo Dry Algaecide 90, Winterizing Algaecide, and Algicil Plus are
significant, while the benefits of continued registration are negligible for summer use, and are relatively small
for the winterizing use. EPA believes that the risks posed by continued registration are unreasonable when compared
to the benefits, and that simazine use in swimming pools should be canceled.

In making its determination to propose cancellation, EPA has also examined whether any measures short of cancellation
exist to reduce exposure to acceptable levels, and has concluded that there are none. For the summer use, no measures
could be identified to reduce risk to an acceptable range. For the winterizer use, EPA considered allowing registrants
to retain that use, if data were submitted that showed that superchlorination of pools following simazine use eliminated
the product from treated water. No such data were submitted to EPA. Therefore, EPA has determined that for both the
summer and winter use, there are no acceptable measures short of cancellation. 



VIII. Role of the Scientific Advisory Panel and the Secretary of Agriculture 



Sections 6(b) and 25(d) of FIFRA provide certain opportunities for the FIFRA Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP) and
the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture (USDA) to review and comment upon a draft NOIC, and in the case of USDA,
an analysis of the impact of the proposed action on the agricultural economy. These reviews may be waived, and when
they are, the Notice may be published without delay. 

On April 5, 1994, EPA asked the SAP and Secretary of USDA to waive their rights to review and comment on this Notice (Refs.
9 and 10). On April 12, 1994, Nancy Ragsdale, Director, National Agricultural Pesticide Impact Assessment Program,
USDA, notified EPA that the Secretary would waive review of this action (Ref. 11). On May 25, 1994, the SAP notified
EPA that it waived its review of this action (Ref. 12). Because the SAP and USDA have waived their review of this action,
EPA is issuing this Notice without delay. 



IX. Disposition of Existing Stocks 



For purposes of this Notice, existing stocks are defined as those stocks of simazine products for use in swimming pools
that were in the United States and were packaged, labeled, and released for shipment prior to July 6, 1994. 

EPA has an established policy for determinations concerning the sale, distribution, and use of existing stocks of
canceled pesticides (56 FR 29362, June 26, 1991). That policy states that in cases where EPA has identified a significant
risk concern and the registration is canceled, EPA will make existing stocks determinations on a case-by-case basis.
In most cases EPA will not permit the continued sale, distribution, or use of existing stocks of a canceled product
raising risk concerns unless it can be demonstrated that the benefits exceed the risks. EPA reserves the right to amend
this existing stocks provision, should conditions warrant such amendment. 

The swimming pool use of simazine poses unreasonable cancer and non- cancer risk. As discussed in units VI and VII of
this Notice, the benefits of continued sale, distribution, and use of existing stocks are negligible and do not outweigh
the risks. Finally, EPA has taken steps to minimize the amount of stocks that are currently in the hands of registrants,
retailers, and distributors. In December 1993, EPA notified registrants of the risks associated with the products
and asked them to stop formulating, selling, and distributing their products (Ref. 4). 

EPA has determined that no person may sell, distribute, or use the existing stocks of any product subject to this Notice
except for: (1) Sale or distribution up through the chain of distribution to the former registrant of that product,
or (2) for lawful disposal. It is the responsibility of the basic registrants to notify any and all supplementally
registered distributors of their product(s) that this Notice also applies to their supplementally registered products.
Registrants may be held liable for violations committed by their distributors. Any sale, distribution, or use of
existing stocks of canceled products other than as provided in this Notice will be considered a violation of FIFRA
12(a)(2)(J). 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Notice, the distribution or sale of canceled products will be allowed
if such distribution or sale is for the purpose of collecting products for relabeling, reformulation, disposal,
or export to a country where the use of simazine is not prohibited, or any other lawful purpose not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Notice. In order for exported existing stocks of canceled simazine to qualify for this exception,
such stocks must comply with all the labeling requirements identified in FIFRA section 17(1)(a) and the foreign purchaser
acknowledgement requirements identified in FIFRA section 17(a)(2). In order to be considered to be in compliance
with these provisions, the exporter must follow the procedures specified in the EPA's Export Policy and Procedures
for Exporting Unregistered Pesticides at 40 CFR part 168, subpart D. 



X. Required Notification of Possession of Canceled Products 



Pursuant to FIFRA section 6(g), any producer or exporter, registrant, applicant for a registration, applicant or
holder of an experimental use permit, commercial applicator, or any person who distributes or sells any pesticide,
who possesses any stocks of pesticide products containing simazine subject to this Notice that are canceled by a final
order issued either in the absence of or following a hearing on cancellation (hereafter, referred to as ``affected
persons,'' which includes affected individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, or any organized
group of persons whether incorporated or not) must notify the EPA and appropriate State and local officials of: (1)
Such possession; (2) the quantity of canceled simazine pesticide product possessed; and, (3) the place at which the
canceled simazine pesticide product is stored. Notification by affected persons to EPA and designated State and
local officials pursuant to FIFRA section 6(g) shall be in accordance with the procedures, time frames, and requirements
set out in this Unit. End users, except commercial applicators, are not required to report their stocks of canceled
simazine products. 



A. Pesticides Required to be Reported 



Affected persons must report, pursuant to FIFRA section 6(g), the information described below for canceled simazine
pesticide products that are in their possession, regardless of the ownership of that canceled simazine pesticide
product. Canceled simazine product that is owned by one affected person, but is in the physical possession of another
affected person who is subject to section 6(g) reporting, is to be reported by the person in physical possession of
the pesticide. 

The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has given approval for the collection of information under FIFRA section
6(g), and has assigned the OMB control number 20700109. 



B. Information that Must be Included in the Submission



 To be in compliance with FIFRA section 6(g), affected persons must submit to the designated EPA and State and local
officials the following information certified by a responsible company official as true and correct: 

1. The identity and address of the affected person (company). 

2. Name and phone number of a contact person (in the company). 

3. Indication that the FIFRA section 6(g) information is being submitted for canceled pesticide products containing
simazine. 

4. The relationship of the affected person (company) to the canceled simazine pesticide products being reported
under FIFRA section 6(g) (i.e., exporter, producer, registrant, applicant for registration, applicant for or holder
of an experimental use permit, commercial applicator, distributor, retailer, etc.). 

5. The street address of each location owned, leased, or operated in the United States by the submitter where the canceled
simazine pesticide product is held. 

6. For each location listed, the quantity (pounds, gallons, or other appropriate measure) of canceled simazine pesticide
product listed by the number of units of each size container (pound, gallons, or other appropriate measure) and by
EPA registration number (e.g., x units of 5 gallon containers of EPA registration number xxxxxx). 



C. When to Report



Affected persons are advised not to report until the effective date of the final order issued either in the absence
of or following a hearing on cancellation. Reports of existing stocks submitted before the effective date of the cancellation
are not considered to meet the reporting requirements of FIFRA section 6(g). Upon the effective date of cancellation,
affected persons must submit FIFRA section 6(g) information according to the following time frames: 

1. Registrants of canceled simazine must report within 30 days of the effective date of the final order. 

2. Producers, exporters, applicants for a registration, applicants or holders of an experimental use permit, dealers,
distributors, retailers, and commercial applicators must report within 45 days of the effective date of the final
order. 

3. End users are not required to report their possession of canceled products containing simazine. 
 


D. Where to Submit Section 6(g) Information 
 


The FIFRA section 6(g) information is to be sent to each of the following locations: 
 
1.

 EPA

. Chief, Agricultural Branch, Agricultural and Ecosystems 
Division, Office of Compliance, Office of Enforcement and Compliance 
Assurance, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., 
Washington, DC 20460, ``Attention: FIFRA Section 6(g) Information.'' 
 
2. 

State

. Chief Pesticide Regulatory Official of the agency in the State government that enforces the State pesticide laws
where the canceled 
simazine pesticide product is stored. Envelopes must be marked 
``Attention: FIFRA Section 6(g) Information.'' 
 
3.

 Local.

 Chair of the Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC) for the location where the canceled pesticide is stored. Envelopes
should be marked ``Attention: Notification of Possession of Canceled Pesticides.'' To identify the name and address
of the chair of the LEPC, contact the State Emergency Response Commission (SERC) or call the Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-Know (EPCRA) information Hotline at 18005350202. 
 
 


E. Confidentiality of FIFRA Section 6(g) Information 
 


EPA does not consider FIFRA section 6(g) information to be confidential business information (CBI) under the provisions
of FIFRA section 10. Such information may be made available by EPA to the public without further notice. 
 


F. Enforcement 
 


Failure to submit complete and accurate FIFRA section 6(g) information, and/or failure to submit accurate section
6(g) information in the required time frames, is a violation of FIFRA section 12(a)(2)(K), and violators may be subject
to civil penalties up to $5,000 per offense. Affected persons who possess canceled or suspended pesticide in multiple
locations may be fined up to $5,000 per offense for each location for which the FIFRA section 6(g) information is not
submitted, submitted late, incomplete, or inaccurate. Persons who knowingly submit false section 6(g) reports
are in violation of FIFRA section 12(a)(2)(M) and may also be subject to civil penalties up to $5,000 per offense. Knowing
violations of the requirements of FIFRA section 6(g) may also result in criminal penalties under section 14(b) of
FIFRA, or 18 U.S.C. 1001. 
 
For additional information regarding FIFRA section 6(g) requirements, contact Phyllis Flaherty or David Stangel
of the Agriculture Branch, Agriculture and Ecosystems Division, Office of Compliance, at (703) 3088383.

 


XI. Procedural Matters 
 


This Notice announces EPA's intent to cancel the registrations of Nuclo Dry Granular Algaecide (EPA Reg. No. 712432),
Nuclo Dry Algaecide 90 (EPA Reg. No. 712493), Winterizing Algaecide (EPA Reg. No. 343233), Algicil
Plus (EPA Reg. No. 343254), and any products with these registration numbers that are supplementally distributed.
This action is taken pursuant to authority in section 6(b) of FIFRA. Under FIFRA section 6(b)(1), registrants and
other adversely affected parties may request a hearing on the cancellation actions that this Notice initiates. Any
hearing concerning cancellation of the registration for any affected pesticide product will be held in accordance
with FIFRA section 6(d). Unless a hearing is properly requested in accordance with the provisions of this Notice,
the registrations will be canceled. This unit of the Notice explains how such persons may request a hearing in accordance
with the procedures specified in this Notice, and the consequences of requesting or failing to request a hearing.

 


A. Procedures for Requesting a Hearing 
 


Requests for a hearing by a registrant must be received by the Office of the Hearing Clerk at the address given below
on or before August 5, 1994, or on or before 30 days from receipt of this Notice by the registrant, whichever occurs later.
Requests for a hearing by other adversely affected parties must be received by the Office of the Hearing Clerk on or
before August 5, 1994. All registrants and other adversely affected persons who request a hearing must file the request
in accordance with the procedures established by FIFRA and EPA's Rules of Practice Governing Hearings (40 CFR part
164). These procedures require that all requests identify the specific registration by Registration Number and
state the basis for objecting to the cancellation of the product for which a hearing is requested. Requests must be
received by the Hearing Clerk within the applicable 30day period. Failure to comply with these requirements
will result in denial of the request for a hearing. Requests for a hearing must be submitted to: Hearing Clerk (1900),
Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M Street, SW, Washington, DC 20460. 
 
1. 

Consequences of filing a timely and effective hearing request.

 If a hearing on any action initiated by this Notice is requested in a timely and effective manner, the hearing will be
governed by EPA's Rules of Practice Governing Hearings under FIFRA section 6 (40 CFR part 164). All hearings will be
held in Washington, DC. In the event of a timely and effective request for a hearing, each cancellation action concerning
the specific use of the specific registered product that is the subject of the hearing request will not become effective
except pursuant to an order of the Administrator at the conclusion of the hearing. 
 
2.

 Consequences of failure to file in a timely and effective manner.

 If a hearing concerning the cancellation of a specific product subject to this Notice is not requested in a timely and
effective manner by the end of the applicable 30day period, registration of that product will be canceled automatically.

 


B. Separation of Functions 
 


 EPA's rules of practice forbid anyone who may take part in deciding this case, at any stage of the proceeding, from discussing
the merits of the proceeding ex parte with any party or with any person who has been connected with the preparation or
presentation of the proceeding as an advocate or in any investigative or expert capacity, or with any of his/her representatives
(40 CFR 164.7). 
 
Accordingly, the following EPA offices, and the staffs thereof, are designated as the judicial staff of EPA in any
administrative hearing on this Notice of Intent to Cancel: the Office of Administrative Law Judges, the Environmental
Appeals Board, the Deputy Administrator and the members of the staff in the immediate office of the Deputy Administrator,
and the Administrator and the members of staff in the immediate office of the Administrator. The following offices
are designated as the trial staff in any proceeding which may arise under this Notice: the Office of General Counsel,
the Assistant Administrator for the Office of Prevention, Pesticides, and Toxic Substances and immediate staff,
the Office of Pesticide Programs, and the Office of Compliance Monitoring. None of the persons designated as the judicial
staff may have any ex parte communications with the trial staff or any other interested person not employed by EPA on
the merits of any of the issues involved in these proceedings, without fully complying with the applicable regulations.

 


XII. References 
 


1. June 16, 1989, ``Peer Review of Simazine.'' HED Peer Review Committee review of the weight of the evidence on simazine
with particular reference to its oncogenic potential. 
 
2. August 18, 1993, memo from Henry Spencer, HED/OPP, to Joanne Miller, RD/OPP. RE: exposure assessment and subsequent
assessment of cancer risk from simazine-treated swimming pools. 
 
3. November 29, 1993, letter from Daniel Barolo, SRRD/OPP, to the simazine algaecide registrants. RE: EPA's risk
concerns and invitation to December 6, 1993 meeting. 
 
4. December 8, 1993, letter from Daniel Barolo to the simazine algaecide registrants. RE: request for voluntary cancellation.

 
5. July 28, 1993, memo from Judy Smith, HED/OPP, to Henry Spencer. RE: request for swimmer exposure assessment for
simazine-treated pools. 
 
6. October 16, 1989, Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP), ``A Set of Scientific Issues Being Considered by the Agency
in Connection with the Peer Review Classification of Simazine as a Class C Oncogen.'' 
 
7. May 24, 1990, ``Peer Review of Simazine Following SAP Review.'' HED Peer Review Committee met to reconsider the
evaluation of simazine following the presentation to the SAP. 
 
8. November 23, 1993, memo from Henry Spencer to Joanne Miller. RE: addendum to assessment of non-cancer health risk
from simazine-treated swimming pools. 
 
9. April 5, 1994, memo from Douglas Campt, OPP, to Bruce Jaeger, SAP. RE: Request for waiver of SAP's right to review
the NOIC. 
 
10. April 5, 1994, letter from Douglas Campt to Nancy Ragsdale, USDA. RE: Request for waiver of USDA's right to review
the NOIC. 
 
11. April 12, 1994, letter from Nancy Ragsdale to Douglas Campt. RE: USDA waiver of NOIC review. 
 
12. April 25, 1994, memo from R. Bruce Jaeger to Douglas Campt. RE: SAP waiver of NOIC review. 
 


XIII. Public Docket 
 


The public docket containing the above supporting documentation is located at 1921 Jefferson Davis Highway, Room
1128, Arlington, Virginia. The references can be viewed from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, except legal
holidays. 
 
 


 

Dated: June 24, 1994. 


 
</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Lynn R. Goldman, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Administrator for Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances. 


 
</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9416334 Filed 7594; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>

