 





<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 71</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Airspace Docket No. 94ASW05]</RINDOCK>



Establishment of Class E Airspace Areas



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule; request for comments.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This action establishes Class E airspace areas at Roswell, NM; Enid, OK; and Lawton, OK. Presently, these areas are
designated as Class D airspace when the associated control tower is in operation. However, controlled airspace to
the surface is needed when the control towers located at these areas are closed. The intended effect of this action
is to provide adequate Class E airspace for instrument flight rule (IFR) operations when these control towers are
closed.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Effective date:

 0901 u.t.c., June 23, 1994.






Comment date:

 Comments must be received on or before June 16, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Send comments on the rule in triplicate to Manager, System Management Branch, Air Traffic Division, Southwest Region,
Docket No. 94ASW05, Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Fort Worth,
TX 761930530.



The official docket may be examined in the Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel, Southwest Region, Federal Aviation
Administration, 2601 Meacham Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX, between 9:00 a.m. and 3 p.m. Monday through Friday, except
Federal holidays. An informal docket may also be examined during normal business hours at the System Management Branch,
Air Traffic Division, Southwest Region, Federal Aviation Administration, 2601 Meacham Boulevard, Fort Worth,
TX.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Alvin DeVane, System Management Branch, Air Traffic Division, Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation
Administration, Fort Worth, TX 761930530; telephone: (817) 2225595.

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Request for Comments on the Rule


Although this action is a final rule, and was not preceded by notice and public procedure, comments are invited on the
rule. This rule will become effective on the date specified in the DATES

 section. However after the review of the comments and, if the FAA finds that further changes are appropriate, it will
initiate rulemaking proceedings to extend the effective date of the rule or amend the regulation.
Comments that provide the factual basis supporting the views and suggestions presented are particularly helpful
in evaluating the effects of the rule, and in determining whether additional rulemaking is required. Comments are
specifically invited on the overall regulatory, aeronautical, economic, environmental, and energy-related aspects
of the rule that might suggest the need to modify the rule.


The Rule


This amendment to part 71 of the Federal Aviation Regulations establishes Class E airspace areas at Roswell, NM; Enid,
OK; and Lawton, OK. Currently, this airspace is designated as Class D when the associated control tower is in operation.
Nevertheless, controlled airspace to the surface is needed for IFR operations at Roswell, NM; Enid, OK; and Lawton,
OK, when the control towers are closed. The intended effect of this action is to provide adequate Class E airspace for
IFR operations at these airports when these control towers are closed. As noted in the Airspace Reclassification
Final Rule, published in the 

Federal Register

 on December 17, 1991 (56 FR 65645), airspace at an airport with a part-time control tower should be designated as a Class
D airspace area when the control tower is in operation, and as a Class E airspace area when the control tower is closed.
The coordinates for this airspace docket are based on North American Datum 83. Class E airspace areas designated as
surface areas for airports are published in Paragraph 6002 of FAA Order 7400.9A dated June 17, 1993, and effective
September 16, 1993, which is incorporated by reference in 14 CFR 71.1 (58 FR 36298; July 6, 1993). The Class E airspace
designations listed in this document will be published subsequently in the Order. Under the circumstances presented,
the FAA concludes that there is an immediate need to establish these Class E airspace areas in order to promote the safe
and efficient handling of air traffic in these areas. Therefore, I find that notice and public procedures under 5 U.S.C.
553(b) are impracticable and contrary to the public interest.
The FAA has determined that this regulation only involves an established body of technical regulations that need
frequent and routine amendments to keep them operationally current. It, therefore: (1) Is not a ``significant regulatory
action'' under Executive Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures
(44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979); and (3) does not warrant preparation of a regulatory evaluation as the anticipated
impact is so minimal. Since this is a routine matter that will only affect air traffic procedures and air navigation,
it is certified that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities
under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.


List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 71


Airspace, Incorporation by reference, Navigation (air).

</SUPPLEM>
