 


(2) 

Packaging. 

The NDMA specifically requested that FDA 
deny the request made by the AG petition to require that iron- 
containing products containing 30 mg or more of iron per tablet 
be packaged in child-resistant individual blister packs. In 
support of this request, NDMA pointed out that its voluntary 
program calls for the packaging of all iron-containing products 
with 30 mg or more iron per dose in complying CRP (i.e., there 
will be no CRP-exempt sizes for this type of product). (See 
discussion on CRP requirements of CPSC in section II.B. of this 
document.) NDMA noted that its voluntary program is being 
carried out in conjunction with a national consumer education 
campaign that it launched with CPSC on September 27, 1993, in 
conjunction with CPSC's Conference on Pediatric Iron Poisonings 
and Fatalities, which was held on September 28, 1993, in 
Washington, DC. 



(3) 

Formulation. 

The NDMA stated that iron-containing 
products with greater than or equal to 30 mg iron per solid 
dosage form will not be formulated with sweet outer coatings. 




2. The Consumer Product Safety Commission Conference 





CPSC held this conference because of the increase in iron 
poisonings of children. The objective of the conference was to 
provide a forum for health care professionals and representatives 
of government and industry to identify solutions to this problem. 
The conference included invited speakers from CPSC, AAPCC, 
Georgetown University, FDA, NDMA, the National Nutritional Foods 
Association (NNFA), and the Office of the New York State Attorney General. This conference highlighted the seriousness
of 
the pediatric iron poisoning problem and the steps that were 
being taken to address the problem. 



Factors that may have contributed to the increased incidence 
of pediatric iron poisonings were discussed, including the 
requirement by many women for iron supplementation during 
pregnancy; the use of iron-containing products in homes where 
small children are present; the ability of older siblings of 
potential victims to open CRP; the misconception that vitamin and 
mineral products are inherently safe; improper use or failure to 
properly close child-resistant closures; and the formulation of 
some iron-containing products to appear like candy, potentially 
explaining why some children consumed large quantities of tablets 
(30 to 100 tablets). 



CPSC described the regulations that it issued in 1978 under 
the Poison Prevention Packaging Act, which require CRP on most 
drugs and food supplements with more than 250 mg of iron per 
container (see section II.B. of this document). CPSC noted that 
its Office of Compliance and Enforcement recently discovered that 
several manufacturers of iron-containing products were not using 
CRP, and that some of these manufacturers had voluntarily agreed 
to recall these products. 



At this conference, FDA explained that most iron-containing 
products are regulated as dietary supplements under the food 
provisions of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act). 
FDA noted that, although there are currently no specific regulations for iron-containing supplements, the general
food 
safety and food labeling provisions of the act require that all 
foods, including iron-containing supplements, be safe under their 
intended conditions of use, and that their labeling be truthful 
and nonmisleading. FDA also noted that iron-containing products 
that are regulated as drugs under the drug provisions of the act 
must be approved before marketing as safe and effective for their 
intended conditions of use and are subject to labeling and good 
manufacturing practice requirements. 



The industry's voluntary efforts in response to the iron 
poisoning problem were described by representatives of NDMA and 
NNFA. NDMA described its newly initiated voluntary program of 
packaging, labeling, and formulation changes which it had 
petitioned FDA to adopt into regulation. NDMA also described the 
newly launched joint consumer education campaign that it had 
developed in cooperation with CPSC to inform adults how to 
protect children from accidental iron poisoning. (See section 
IV.B. of this document.) 



NNFA stated that its members were adopting a voluntary 
program similar to NDMA's, with the added provision that iron 
will be limited to a maximum of 30 mg per dosage unit and 30 mg 
per recommended dose. 



In an open discussion of possible solutions, several ways to 
address the problem of pediatric iron poisoning were suggested. 
These suggestions included:




