 

In order to compete for the program, applicants must participate in a telemedicine network that includes at least
three sites: A multispecialty entity (tertiary care hospital, multi-specialty clinic, or a collection of facilities
that, combined, could provide 24-hour a day specialty consultations), a small rural hospital (fewer than 100 beds),
a rural primary care practitioner office or clinic. Networks that include a long-term care facility are especially
encouraged. The network may include additional rural sites, such as mental health clinics, school-based clinics,
emergency service providers, home health providers, community and migrant health centers, rural health clinics,
Federally qualified health centers, health professions schools, etc. The telemedicine network must be used to provide
clinical consultations between the multispecialty entity (hub) and the rural sites (spokes). Projects that use
low cost technologies are particularly encouraged. 
For purposes of this grant program, a telemedicine network is characterized by a full partnership among all the members
that includes the following elements: (1) Resource participation; (2) a specific role for each member; (3) a contractual
relationship; (4) a long-term commitment to the project by each member; (5) documentation of the network's activities;
and (6) active participation by each member so that the network is not solely dependent on any particular member organization.

The applicant must be willing to participate in an evaluation of telemedicine services. This may include, but is not
limited to, collecting data, completing surveys, and participating in on-site observations by independent evaluators.

In order to facilitate an evaluation of telemedicine, it is important that there be some level of uniformity in the
types of clinical services provided among the projects. All projects, at a minimum, must be able to provide teleconsultations
in the following services: Teleradiology, cardiology, dermatology, mental health and/or substance abuse, obstetrics
and gynecology, orthopedics, subspecialties of pediatrics, and resuscitation of trauma patients. Applicants
may propose to provide teleconsultations for additional services. 
This grant program is intended to support telemedicine for medical diagnosis and treatment of patients, including
patient counseling. It is not for didactic distance learning programs, such as lectures or other programs designed
solely for the purposes of instructing health care personnel or patients. 
Applicants must develop projects to address specific, well-documented needs of the rural communities. In doing
so, applicants are advised to consider both the health care needs of the rural communities served by the project, and
the extent to which the project can build upon existing telecommunications capacity in the communities to facilitate
efficient use of that capacity by multiple users. Needs can be established through a formal needs assessment or by
population specific demographic data. 
All the grant funding must be used for services provided to or in rural communities. A majority of grant dollars must
actually be spent in rural communities for direct services to those communities, including salaries, maintenance
of equipment, and transmission costs. 


Eligible Applicants 


A grant award will be made only to an entity that is part of a telemedicine network and can provide a wide range of specialty
consultation services on a 24-hour basis to rural spoke sites. The grant recipient can be a public (non-Federal) or
private entity located in either a rural or urban area. Rural spoke sites may be public or private entities, either
nonprofit or for-profit. All spoke facilities supported by this grant must meet one of the two requirements stated
below.



(1) The facility is located outside of a Metropolitan Statistical Area as defined by the OMB. A list of the cities and
counties that are designated as being within a Metropolitan Statistical Area will be included with the application
kit. 
(2) The facility is located in a rural census tract of one of the counties listed in Appendix I to this announcement.
Although each of these counties is a Metropolitan Statistical Area, or part of one, large parts of the counties are
rural. Facilities located in these rural areas are eligible for the program. Rural portions of these counties have
been identified by census tract since this is the only way we have found to clearly differentiate them from urban areas
in the large counties. Appendix I provides a list of these census tracts for each county. Appendix II includes the telephone
numbers for regional offices of the Census Bureau. Applicants may call these offices to determine the census tract
in which they are located. 


Review Procedure 


Applications will be assessed by the Office of Grants Management for responsiveness to this notice. Any applications
that are judged nonresponsive because they are inadequately developed, in an improper format, exceed the specified
page length, or otherwise are unsuitable for peer review and funding consideration, will be returned without further
consideration. All responsive applications will undergo objective peer review. 



Review Consideration 


Grant applications will be evaluated on the basis of the following criteria: 





