 

List of Subjects 


42 CFR Part 405 


Administrative practice and procedure, Health facilities, 
Health professions, Kidney disease, Laboratories, Medicare, 
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Rural areas, X-rays. 


42 CFR Part 410 


Health facilities, Health professions, Kidney diseases, 
Laboratories, Medicare, Rural areas, X-rays. 


42 CFR Part 413 


Health facilities, Kidney diseases, Medicare, Puerto Rico, 
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 


42 CFR Part 414 


End-stage renal (ESRD), Health professions, Laboratories, 
Medicare. 


42 CFR CHAPTER IV HEALTH CARE FINANCING ADMINISTRATION, 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 


The interim rule with comment period that was published 
on September 4, 1991, at 56 FR 43706, to amend Parts 405, 
410, 413, and 414 of this chapter is adopted as final with 
the changes set forth below. 


PART 405_FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE FOR THE AGED AND 
DISABLED 
Subpart U_Conditions for Coverage of Suppliers of End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) Services 


1. The authority citation for subpart U continues to 
read as follows: 





Authority:

 Secs. 1102, 1861, 1862(a), 1871, 1874, and 
1881 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1302, 1395x, 
1395y(a), 1395hh, 1395kk, and 1395rr), unless otherwise 
noted.

 

2. Section 405.2137 is amended to revise paragraph 
(b)(7), to read as follows: 


405.2137 

Condition: Patient long-term program and 
patient care plan. 


* * * * * 


(b) 

Standard: Patient care plan

. * * * 
(7) For a home dialysis patient who uses EPO in the 
home, the plan must provide for monitoring home use of EPO 
that includes the following: 
(i) Review of diet and fluid intake for indiscretions 
as indicated by hyperkalemia and elevated blood pressure 
secondary to volume overload. 
(ii) Review of medications to ensure adequate provision 
of supplemental iron. 
(iii) Ongoing evaluations of hematocrit and iron 
stores. 
(iv) A reevaluation of the dialysis prescription taking 
into account the patient's increased appetite and red blood 
cell volume. 
(v) A method for physician followup on blood tests and 
a mechanism (such as a patient log) for keeping the 
physician informed of the results. 
(vi) Training of the patient to identify the signs and 
symptoms of hypotension and hypertension. 
(vii) The decrease or discontinuance of EPO if 
hypertension is uncontrollable. 
3. Section 405.2163 is amended to revise paragraph (g) 
and add a new paragraph (h), to read as follows: 


405.2163 

Condition: Minimal service requirements for a 
renal dialysis facility or renal dialysis center. 


* * * * * 


(g) 

Use of EPO at home: Patient selection. 

The 
dialysis facility, or the physician responsible for all 
dialysis-related services furnished to the patient, must 
make a comprehensive assessment that includes the following: 
(1) 

Pre-selection monitoring. 

The patient's hematocrit 
(or hemoglobin), serum iron, transferrin saturation, serum 
ferritin, and blood pressure must be measured. 
(2) 

Conditions the patient must meet. 

The assessment must 
find that the patient meets the following conditions: 
(i) Is a home dialysis patient. 
(ii) Has a hematocrit (or comparable hemoglobin level) 
that is as follows: 
(A) For a patient who is initiating EPO treatment, no 
higher than 30 percent unless there is medical documentation 
showing the need for EPO despite a hematocrit (or comparable 
hemoglobin level) higher than 30 percent. (Patients with 
severe angina, severe pulmonary distress, or severe 
hypertension may require EPO to prevent adverse symptoms 
even if they have higher hematocrit or hemoglobin levels.) 
(B) For a patient who has been receiving EPO from the 
facility or the physician, between 30 and 33 percent. 
(iii) Is under the care of_
(A) A physician who is responsible for all dialysis-related services and who prescribes the EPO and follows the 
drug labeling instructions when monitoring the EPO home 
therapy; and 
(B) A renal dialysis facility that establishes the plan 
of care and monitors the progress of the home EPO therapy. 
(3) 

Conditions the patient or the patient's caregiver 
must meet. 

The assessment must find that the patient or a 
caregiver who assists the patient in performing self-dialysis meets the following conditions: 
(i) Is trained by the facility to inject EPO and is 
capable of carrying out the procedure. 
(ii) Is capable of reading and understanding the drug 
labeling. 
(iii) Is trained in, and capable of observing, aseptic 
techniques. 
(4) 

Care and storage of drug. 

The assessment must 
find that EPO can be stored in the patient's residence under 
refrigeration and that the patient is aware of the potential 
hazard of a child's having access to the drug and syringes. 
(h) 

Use of EPO at home: Responsibilities of the 
physician or the dialysis facility. 

The patient's physician 
or dialysis facility must_
(1) Develop a protocol that follows the drug label 
instructions; 
(2) Make the protocol available to the patient to 
ensure safe and effective home use of EPO; and 
(3) Through the amounts prescribed, ensure that the 
drug ``on hand'' at any time does not exceed a 2-month supply. 






