 




<DOCTITLE>Cooperative Agreement With the National Coalition of Hispanic Health and Human Services Organization</DOCTITLE>



The Office of Minority Health (OMH), Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health, PHS, announces that it will enter
into an umbrella cooperative agreement with the National Coalition of Hispanic Health and Human Services Organization
(COSSMHO). This cooperative agreement will establish the broad programmatic framework within which specific projects
can be funded as they are identified during the project period.

The purpose of this cooperative agreement is to assist the coalition in expanding and enhancing its activities in
the following areas: service delivery, health prevention, health promotion, and health services research opportunities
with the ultimate goal of improving the health status of minorities and disadvantaged people. The OMH will provide
consultation, administrative and technical assistance as needed for the execution and evaluation of all aspects
of this cooperative agreement. The OMH will also participate and collaborate with the awardee in any workshops or
symposia to exchange current information, opinions, and research findings.



Authorizing Legislation



This cooperative agreement is authorized under the grant-making authorities of the Office of Minority Health. Refer
to Section 1707(d)(1) of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by Public Law 101527.



Background



Assistance will be provided only to COSSMHO. No other applications are solicited. COSSMHO is the only organization
capable of administering this cooperative agreement because it is the only organization that has:




1. Developed, expanded, and managed an infrastructure to coordinate and implement various medical intervention
programs within local communities and physician groups that deal extensively with Hispanic health issues. The coalition
has also established several oversight committees that provide a foundation upon which to develop, promote, and
manage health intervention, education, and training programs which are aimed at preventing and reducing unnecessary
morbidity and mortality rates among most minority populations.

2. Established itself and its members as an organization with professionals who serve as leaders and experts in planning,
developing, implementing, and evaluating health education, prevention, and promotion programs aimed at reducing
excessive mortality and adverse health behaviors among Hispanic communities.

3. Developed databases and directories of health services, health care accessibility issues, and professional
development initiatives that deal exclusively with Hispanic populations that are necessary for any intervention
dealing with this minority population.

4. Assessed and evaluated the current education, research and disease prevention, and health promotion activities
for its members, affiliated groups, and represented sub-populations.

5. Developed a national organization whose members are all predominately minority health care professionals and
providers with excellent professional performance records.

6. Developed a base of critical knowledge, skills, and abilities related to serving Hispanic clients with a range
of health and social problems. Through the collective efforts of its members, its affiliated community-based organizations,
sponsored research, and sponsored health education and prevention programs, the COSSMHO has demonstrated (1) the
ability to work with academic institutions and official health agencies on mutual education, service, and research
endeavors relating to the goal of disease prevention and health promotion of minorities and disadvantaged peoples,
(2) the leadership necessary to attract minority students into public health careers, and (3) the leadership needed
to assist health care professionals work more effectively with Hispanic clients and communities. Hispanics, as
well as other minority populations.




This cooperative agreement will be awarded in FY 1995 for a 12-month budget period within a project period of 5 years.
Continuation awards within the project period will be made on the basis of satisfactory progress and the availability
of funds.



Where To Obtain Additional Information



If you are interested in obtaining additional information regarding this project, please contact Dr. Clay E. Simpson,
Public Health Service, 5515 Security Lane, Suite 1000, Rockville, Maryland 20852, telephone (301) 4435084.



<SIGNER>
Audrey F. Manley,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9431316 Filed 122094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416017M
</BILLING>

