 

Statutory Requirements 


CERCLA section 105(a)(8)(B) directs EPA to list priority sites ``among'' the known releases or threatened releases
of hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants, and section 105(a)(8)(A) directs EPA to consider certain
enumerated and ``other appropriate'' factors in doing so. Thus, as a matter of policy, EPA has the discretion not to
use CERCLA to respond to certain types of releases. Where other authorities exist, placing sites on the NPL for possible
remedial action under CERCLA may not be appropriate. Therefore, EPA has chosen not to place certain types of sites
on the NPL even though CERCLA does not exclude such action. If, however, the Agency later determines that sites not
listed as a matter of policy are not being properly responded to, the Agency may place them on the NPL. 
The listing policies and statutory requirements of relevance to this proposed rule cover sites subject to the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (``RCRA'') (42 U.S.C. 69016991i) and Federal facility sites. These policies
and requirements are explained below and have been explained in greater detail in previous rulemakings (56 FR 5598,
February 11, 1991). 


Releases From Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Sites 


EPA's policy is that non-Federal sites subject to RCRA Subtitle C corrective action authorities will not, in general,
be placed on the NPL. However, EPA will list certain categories of RCRA sites subject to Subtitle C corrective action
authorities, as well as other sites subject to those authorities, if the Agency concludes that doing so best furthers
the aims of the NPL/RCRA policy and the CERCLA program. EPA has explained these policies in detail in the past (51 FR
21054, June 10, 1986; 53 FR 23978, June 24, 1988; 54 FR 41000, October 4, 1989; 56 FR 5602, February 11, 1991). 
Consistent with EPA's NPL/RCRA policy, EPA is proposing to add one site to the General Superfund Section of the NPL
that may be subject to RCRA Subtitle C corrective action authorities, the Raymark Industries, Inc. site in Stratford,
Connecticut, which is being proposed based on ATSDR health advisory criteria. Material has been placed in the public
docket establishing that the facility operated as a hazardous waste generator and land disposal facility. Raymark
Industries, Inc. is a RCRA Subtitle C regulated facility which has initiated bankruptcy proceedings. Listing of
the Raymark Industries, Inc. site on the NPL under these circumstances is consistent with EPA's NPL/RCRA deferral
policy. 


Releases From Federal Facility Sites 


On March 13, 1989 (54 FR 10520), the Agency announced a policy for placing Federal facility sites on the NPL if they meet
the eligibility criteria (e.g., an HRS score of 28.50 or greater), even if the Federal facility also is subject to the
corrective action authorities of RCRA Subtitle C. In that way, those sites could be cleaned up under CERCLA, if appropriate.

This rule proposes to add ten sites to the Federal Facilities Section of the NPL. 


ATSDR Health Advisory Based Proposed Sites 


Raymark Industries, Inc. in Stratford, Connecticut, Lower Ecorse Creek Dump in Wyandotte, Michigan, and Tennessee
Products in Chattanooga, Tennessee, are being proposed for the NPL on the basis of section 425(c)(3) of the NCP, 40
CFR 300.425(c)(3) (55 FR 8845, March 8, 1990). 


Raymark Industries, Inc. 


The Raymark Industries, Inc. site includes the Raymark Industries, Inc. facility and other locations where Raymark
Industries, Inc. facility waste has come to be located and that EPA determines pose a significant threat to public
health. The Raymark Industries, Inc. facility comprises about 500,000 square feet of office, storage and production
space on 33.4 acres next to Interstate Route 95. A public recreation park containing a baseball diamond and recreation
field is located immediately northwest of the site. The facility began operations at this location in 1919 and primarily
manufactured asbestos brake linings and other automotive asbestos products until operations ceased in 1989. The
facility operated as a hazardous waste generator and land disposal facility. The hazardous waste produced on-site
consisted primarily of lead-asbestos dust, metals and solvents. From 1919 to July 1984, Raymark Industries, Inc.
used a system of lagoons to attempt to capture the waste lead and asbestos dust produced by its manufacturing process.
Over this 65 year period, these lagoon systems were located throughout the western and central areas of the facility.
As the lagoons filled with sludge they were covered with asphalt and often built upon. Dredged materials were also
landfilled at other locations, including the adjacent ballfield. Interim actions intended to stabilize waste have
been conducted at the Raymark Industries, Inc. facility and the ballfield. 
An intensive surficial sampling program of the other locations where waste from Raymark Industries, Inc. is known
or suspected to have been received and used as fill was instituted by the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection and EPA in April 1993. Based upon the analytical results of this activity, which indicated concentrations
of lead, asbestos, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), ATSDR issued a public health advisory on May 26, 1993 for
``Raymark Industries/Stratford Asbestos Sites''. The advisory recommended dissociation of the public from areas
where exposure to Raymark Industries, Inc. waste at levels of health concern can occur. The presence of dioxin in Raymark
Industries, Inc. waste has subsequently been confirmed. The advisory was based on the concern that people could be
exposed to site-related contaminants through inhalation, direct dermal contact, ingestion of waste present in
the soil, and consumption of potentially contaminated area seafood. 







