 

5.2.3. Exposure Assessment 



This step of the risk assessment process determines the source, route, dose, and 
duration of human exposure to an agent. The results of the dose-response assessment are 
combined with an estimate of human exposure to obtain a quantitative estimate of risk. As 
either the effect of or the exposure to an agent approaches zero, the risk of neurotoxicity 
approaches zero. It should be recognized that exposures to multiple agents may produce 
synergistic or additive effects. 

Exposure can occur via many routes, including ingestion, inhalation, or contact with 
skin. Sources of exposure may include soil, food, air, water, or intended vehicle (e.g., drug 
formulation). The degree of exposure may be strongly influenced by a number of factors, 
for example, the occupation of the individual involved. 

The duration of exposure (i.e., acute or chronic) and interval of exposure (i.e., 
episodic or continuous) are variables of exposure that are common to all types of risk 
assessments, including carcinogenicity (OSTP, 1985). 

Although not routinely used, biological markers or biomarkers of exposure could 
theoretically improve the exposure assessment process and, thereby, improve the overall risk 
assessment of neurotoxicants. Exposure biomarkers may include either the quantitation of 
exogenous agents or the complex of endogenous substances and exogenous agents within the 
system (Committee on Biological Markers, 1987). A limited number of examples of 
biomarkers of exposure have been reviewed by Slikker (1991) and include blood or dentine 
lead concentrations (Needleman, 1987), cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of dopamine 
metabolites following MPTP administration (Kopin and Markey, 1988), cerebrospinal fluid 
concentrations of a serotonin metabolite following MDMA exposure (Ricaurte et al., 1986), 
and serum esterase concentrations following organophosphate exposure (Levine et al., 
1986). The use of muscarinic receptor binding in peripheral plasma lymphocytes has also 
been described as a potential biomarker of exposure for the organophosphates (Costa et al., 
1990). These examples suggest that biomarkers of exposure are available for some agents, 
but more effort will be required to demonstrate that these biomarkers can routinely be used 
to improve the exposure assessment process. 



5.2.4. Risk Characterization 



The final step of the risk assessment process combines the hazard identification, the 
dose-response assessment, and the exposure assessment to produce the characterization of 
risk. As previously stated, the current practice is to divide the NOAEL by the appropriate 
safety factor to obtain the RfD. The magnitudes of the safety factors used to determine RfDs 
[interspecies extrapolation (10), intraspecies extrapolation (10), and acute vs. chronic 
exposure (10) = 1000] are based more on conservative estimates than on actual data 
(Sheehan et al., 1989; McMillan, 1987) and have been questioned for empirical reasons 
(Gaylor and Slikker, 1990). Uncertainty factors may be decreased as more data become 
available. Modifying factors are also employed under certain circumstances to account for 
the completeness of data sets. Along with this RfD numerical value, any uncertainties and 
assumptions inherent in the risk assessment should also be stated (OTA, 1990). Although the 
RfD provides a single numerical value, it does not provide information concerning the 
uncertainty of this number nor does the RfD approach attempt to estimate the potential risk 
as a function of dose or consider the potential risk at the NOAEL. The risk at the NOAEL 
generally is greater than zero and has been estimated to be as high as about 5 percent 
(Crump, 1984; Gaylor, 1989). Concern has been expressed that the application of the RfD 
approach to all neurotoxicants is unlikely to be biologically defensible in light of mechanistic 
data (NRC, 1992). Several other quantitative risk assessment procedures have recently 
emerged as alternatives to the RfD approach (Kimmel and Gaylor, 1988). 

Quantitative risk assessment may be defined as a data-based process that uses dose-response information and measurements
of human exposure to arrive at estimates of risk. 
Assumptions are required to extrapolate results from high to low doses, to extrapolate from 
animal results to humans, and to extrapolate across different routes and durations of 
exposure. 

In a step toward quantitative risk assessment, Crump (1984) suggested the use of a 
benchmark dose defined as ``a statistical lower confidence limit corresponding to a small 
increase in effect over the background level.'' The benchmark dose is determined with a 
mathematical model and is less affected by the particular shape of the dose-response curve. 
Although the benchmark approach avoids several problems inherent in the RfD approach 
(e.g., lack of precision in defining the LOAEL; Kimmel, 1990), the same final step of 
dividing by arbitrary safety factors is obligatory. 

Another approach to quantitative risk assessment is the statistical or curve-fitting 
approach. If quantal information concerning the proportion of response at a given dose is 
available but mechanistic information is lacking, statistical models can be used to fit 
population data (Wyzga, 1990). This approach has been used to fit various models to data of 
lead toxicity. The data were sufficient to allow discrimination of several models in terms of 
goodness of fit; the nerve-conduction velocity data from children exposed to environmental 
lead as a function of blood lead concentration fit a ``hockey-stick'' type dose-response curve 
rather than a logistic or quadratic model (Schwartz et al., 1988). These statistical approaches 
not only provide a method to extrapolate data to lower exposure conditions but also can 
provide circumstantial evidence to support a proposed mechanism of action. 

The development of quantitative risk assessment approaches depends, in part, on the 
availability of information on the mechanism of action and pharmacokinetics of the agent in 
question. In the development of a biologically based, dose-response model for MDMA 
neurotoxicity, Slikker and Gaylor (1990) considered several factors, including the 
pharmacokinetics of the parent chemical, the target tissue concentrations of the parent 
chemical or its bioactivated proximate toxicant, the uptake kinetics of the parent chemical or 
metabolite into the target cell and membrane interactions, and the interaction of the chemical 
or metabolite with presumed receptor site(s). Because these theoretical factors contain a 
saturable step due to limited amounts of required enzyme, reuptake, or receptor site(s), a 
nonlinear, saturable dose-response curve was predicted. In this case of neurochemical effects 
of MDMA in the rodent, saturation mechanisms were hypothesized and indeed saturation 
curves provided relatively good fits to the experimental results. The conclusion was that use 
of dose-response models based on plausible biological mechanisms provide more validity to 
prediction than purely empirical models. Concomitant with attempts to develop quantitative 
risk assessment procedures, it is imperative that regulatory policy or risk management 
procedures also be developed to use appropriately the type of data generated by quantitative 
risk assessment. However, until alternative risk assessment procedures have been validated, 
the available RfD approach with its limitations will most likely continue to be used. 



5.3. Generic Assumptions and Uncertainty Reduction 



The purpose of risk assessment is to determine the risk associated with human 
exposure to a hazard. The quality of the data from toxicological studies differs. In the case 
of therapeutic products where human effects information is available, risk assessments rely 
primarily on the result of controlled clinical trials. Even when clinical trial data are 
available, however, conducting a risk assessment is complicated by many uncertainties. In 
the face of these uncertainties, conservative assumptions are usually made at several steps in 
the risk assessment process. For example, unless adequate clinical data are available, the 
most sensitive experimental species is frequently used. While conservative assumptions may 
lead to a risk assessment that adequately protects the human population, this may result in an 
increased financial burden on the public (e.g., manufacturing costs or loss of jobs); even then 
it is impossible to be certain that the total population will be protected. Conversely, errors 
leading to allowable exposure levels that are too high reduce the safety margin for human 
health and increase health care costs. Thus, there are compelling public health and economic 
reasons to obtain more precise risk assessments; all assumptions cannot be completely 
eliminated, but the degree of uncertainty associated with certain specific assumptions can at 
least be reduced (Sheehan et al., 1989). 





