 

Availability of NPRMs 



Any person may obtain a copy of this NPRM by submitting a request to the FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate, ANM103,
Attention: Rules Docket No. 93NM63AD, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056.




Discussion 



A proposal to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations to add an airworthiness directive (AD), applicable
to all Airbus Model A320 series airplanes, was published as a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) in the 

Federal Register

 on July 27, 1993 (58 FR 40077). That NPRM would have required revising the Limitations Section of the FAA-approved
Airplane Flight Manual (AFM) to prohibit the airplane from extended overwater operations. That action also would
have provided for an optional terminating action of modification of the lanyard that attaches the overwater survival
kit to the slide/raft; once accomplished, the AFM limitation could be removed.

NPRM was prompted by a report that, during an emergency evacuation demonstration, the subject lanyard became entangled
on the girt bar indicator mechanism, and subsequently prevented an exit door from opening fully to a locked position.
That condition, if not corrected, could impede the successful evacuation of passengers through the door during an
overwater operation where ditching is required. 


Since the issuance of that NPRM, the FAA has reconsidered its position on certain of the proposed requirements, based
on the comments received in response to the notice. 


One commenter, Airbus Industrie (Airbus), questions the justification for the proposed rule, and requests that
the FAA withdraw it . Airbus contends that, according to the international bilateral airworthiness agreements,
the responsibility to determine the existence and extent of an unsafe condition with respect to any reported incident
lies within the jurisdiction of the primary authority, in this case, the Direction G&eacute;n&eacute;rale de l'Aviation
Civile (DGAC), which is the airworthiness authority for France. Airbus states that the DGAC made a decision not to
issue a French airworthiness directive to mandate a modification of the airplane design because (1) the slide was
correctly deployed during the incident upon which this proposed rule is based; and (2) although the door did not go
to the fully-open position during that incident, it did not interfere with the passenger flow during evacuation.
Airbus also states that the door will remain in the not-fully-open position until it is pushed to the fully-open position
by the assisting cylinder, which is maintained pressurized until the door reaches the fully-open and locked position.
During the incident, the door did not initially go to the fully-open position because the overwater survival kit lanyard
was caught by the visual indicator bracket and became entangled between the door and the fuselage. When the crew untangled
the lanyard, the door went into the fully-opened and locked position. 


The FAA does not concur with the commenter's suggestion to withdraw the proposal. While the United States and France
observe the provisions of the bilateral airworthiness agreement, it remains the responsibility of the FAA to monitor
and maintain the continuing airworthiness of U.S.-type certificated and -registered airplanes. The bilateral
airworthiness agreements do not restrict the FAA from issuing AD's based upon its own finding of an unsafe condition,
regardless of the decision made by another airworthiness authority relative to the same subject. The FAA has examined
the analyses of the evacuation demonstration, has reviewed all other available data, and has determined that an unsafe
condition exists with regard to problem of the lanyard becoming entangled on the girt bar indicator mechanism and
preventing the exit door from opening fully to a locked position. Therefore, the FAA has determined that AD action
is necessary for airplanes of this type design that are certificated for operation in the United States. 


One commenter requests that the applicability of the proposed rule be limited to only those Model A320 series airplanes
that are equipped with slide/raft evacuation systems eligible for overwater operations. The commenter contends
that the scenario for the occurrence of the addressed unsafe condition would not apply to those airplanes without
the slide/raft evacuation systems; therefore, they should be exempt from the proposed rule. The FAA concurs and has
revised the applicability of this supplemental NPRM accordingly. 


Two commenters request that the proposal be revised to include the installation of Modification 23605, described
in Airbus Service Bulletin A320251109, dated April 20, 1993, as an acceptable modification that would
permit the removal of the proposed limitation in the AFM (prohibiting extended overwater operations). This modification
entails replacing the existing girt bar indicator bracket with a red arrow placard on the slide/raft decorative covers.
The FAA does not concur totally with the commenters' request. The FAA has evaluated the referenced modification and
has found that, while removal of the brackets will prevent possible interference between the overwater survival
kit lanyard and the slide/raft decorative cover, the placards do not provide for an acceptable means of girt bar position
indication. 


The FAA has reviewed the current design of the visual girt bar position indicator brackets (plates) and finds that,
as designed and installed, these brackets contribute to the problem of lanyard entanglement that leads to the unsafe
condition addressed by this AD. In light of this, the FAA has revised this proposed rule to require that, in lieu of modifying
the lanyard, operators may remove the girt bar visual indicator brackets from all doors that are equipped with them.
(The girt bar position/arming indicator in the cockpit, however, would be unaffected by this action; it would remain
as a source to obtain positive indication of the position of the girt bar.) The FAA considers that this proposed action
will be as effective 
in addressing the unsafe condition and as timely to accomplish 
as the modificatin of the lanyard. Additionally, since removal of the brackets or modificaiton of the lanyard will
eliminate the problem of entanglement of the lanyard and the subsequent problems of opening the exit door properly,
the FAA has deleted the previously proposed requirement that would have prohibited extended overwater operation
of the affected airplanes.


This is considered interim action. Airbus Industrie has advised the FAA that it is developing an alternative method
of girt bar position indication that will not entail a design feature that would contribute to the addressed problem
of lanyard entanglement. Once this modification is developed, approved, and available, the FAA may consider further
rulemaking. 


Since the change described above expands the scope of the originally proposed rule, the FAA has determined that it
is necessary to reopen the comment period to provide additional opportunity for public comment. 


The FAA estimates that 59 Model A320 airplanes of U.S. registry would be affected by this proposed AD.

Accomplishment of the removal of the girt bar visual indicator brackets would take approximately 1 work hour per airplane,
at an average labor rate of $55 per work hour. Based on these figures, the total cost impact of this proposed removal
action on U.S. operators who elect to accomplish it is estimated to be $55 per airplane.


The time necessary to accomplish the modification of the lanyard may vary from operator to operator, depending upon
the design submitted for approval by the FAA. However, the FAA estimates that a typical modification would require
an average of 2 work hours to accomplish, at an average labor rate of $55 per work hour. Based on these figures, the total
cost impact of this proposed modification action on U.S. operators who elect to accomplish it is estimated to be $110
per airplane.

Based on the figures discussed above, the total cost impact of this proposed AD on U.S. operators is estimated to be
between $3,245 and $6,490. This total cost impact figure is based on assumptions that no operator has yet accomplished
any of the proposed requirements of this AD action, and that no operator would accomplish those actions in the future
if this AD were not adopted. 


The regulations proposed herein would not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this proposal would not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment. 


For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this proposed regulation (1) is not a ``significant regulatory action''
under Executive Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under the DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44
FR 11034, February 26, 1979); and (3) if promulgated, will not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative,
on a substantial number of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. A copy of the draft
regulatory evaluation prepared for this action is contained in the Rules Docket. A copy of it may be obtained by contacting
the Rules Docket at the location provided under the caption 

ADDRESSES

.



List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39 



Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Safety. 



The Proposed Amendment 




Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration
proposes to amend 14 CFR part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations as follows: 



PART 39_AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES 




1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows:


 




Authority:

 49 U.S.C. App. 1354(a), 1421 and 1423; 49 U.S.C. 106(g); and 14 CFR 11.89.



