 

c. Executive Order 12612 

d. National Environmental Policy Act 

e. Executive Order 12778 



I. Background 



a. Statutory Origins of This Rulemaking 



This final rule regarding child booster seats responds to the NHTSA Authorization Act of 1991 (sections 25002509
of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (``ISTEA''), Pub. L. 102240), which directed the
agency to initiate rulemaking on child booster seat safety and other issues. This rule was preceded by an advance notice
of proposed rulemaking (ANPRM) published on May 29, 1992 (57 FR 22682), and an NPRM published on September 3, 1993 (58
FR 46928). 

The ISTEA directive on booster seats originated in S. 1012, a bill reported by the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation and added verbatim to the Senate's surface transportation bill (S. 1204). The Senate Commerce
Committee report on S. 1012 expressed concern about suggestions that booster seats, ``depending on their design,
can be easily misused or are otherwise harmful,'' and that some child booster seats ``may not restrain adequately
a child in a crash.'' The Committee's concerns grew out of a study

1

 performed by Calspan Corporation. Calspan found that then-manufactured booster seats could adequately restrain
the 3-year-old (33 pound) test dummy that is used to test the seats for compliance with Standard 213. However, Calspan
also found that when the booster seats were tested with a 9-month-old and a 6-year-old test dummy, the booster seats
could not adequately restrain those dummies. Yet, the booster seats were recommended by their manufacturers as being
suitable for children in the 9-month-old and 6-year-old weight ranges. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
``Evaluation of the Performance of Child Restraint Systems'' (DOT HS 807 297, May 1988). NHTSA's follow-up testing
to the Calspan study is discussed in ``Evaluation of Booster Seat Suitability for Children of Different Ages and Comparison
of Standard and Modified SA103C and SA106C Child Dummies,'' VRTC890074, February 1990. 

</FOOTNOTE>


The Calspan study indicated that booster seat safety could be improved if booster seats were capable of properly restraining
the wide range of manufacturers' recommended child sizes. Belt-positioning booster seats are capable of accommodating
a wider range of child sizes than currently manufactured shield-type booster seats. Moreover, belt-positioning
seats used with vehicle lap/shoulder belts appear to perform better than shield booster seats used with vehicle lap/shoulder
belts. 

Pursuant to the ISTEA directive, NHTSA issued two notices of proposed rulemaking (NPRM's). The first addressed booster
seat performance and labeling requirements; the second, dummies for use in testing booster seats and other child
restraint systems. 



b. Booster NPRM 



NHTSA proposed to amend Standard No. 213, 

Child Restraint Systems, 

to facilitate the manufacture of ``belt-positioning'' child seats (boosters designed to be used with the vehicle's
lap/shoulder belts). The NPRM would add a definition of ``belt-positioning seat'' to the standard, and amend the
definition of ``booster seat'' to include belt-positioning booster seats. Standard 213's compliance test procedures
would be amended to specify that belt-positioning seats are dynamically tested when restrained to the test apparatus
with a lap/shoulder belt. The NPRM described the test apparatus in detail to ensure that the test would be carefully
controlled. NHTSA also proposed to amend labeling and informational requirements to decrease the likelihood that
belt-positioning booster seats would be misused. The agency believed that the proposed performance and labeling
requirements would be more appropriate than Standard 213's current criteria for these boosters. 



c. Dummy NPRM 



NHTSA also issued an NPRM to add additional child compliance test dummies to Standard 213. (59 FR 12225, March 16, 1994.)
The NPRM tentatively selected three new child dummies to add to Standard 213. These dummies are the newborn infant
dummy described in subpart K of 49 CFR part 572 (NHTSA's regulation on anthropomorphic test dummies), the 9-month-old
dummy in subpart J, and the instrumented 6-year-old dummy in subpart I. Subjecting booster seats and other child restraint
systems to more thorough compliance testing with additional dummies better ensures that each child restraint safely
restrains the range of children for whom the restraint is recommended. (Readers should note that, if proposals from
the March 1994 NPRM are adopted, those amendments could modify some of the requirements adopted today, such as the
labeling specified for booster seats.) 



d. Overview of Comments on Booster NPRM 



The response to the NPRM was very favorable. Commenters included vehicle and child seat manufacturers (Volvo, Ford,
Chrysler and Cosco) and child passenger groups and consultants (Tarrant County Child Car Safety Coalition, Solutions
Unlimited, the University of Michigan-Child Passenger Protection Program (UMCPP), Ms. Deborah Davis Stewart,
Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety). Commenters also included the American Academy of Pediatrics, the Air Transport
Association and the National Transportation Safety Board. All commenters supported permitting the manufacture
of belt-positioning booster seats. Many suggested changes about specific proposals, and several had suggestions
for or commented on future work on belt-positioning and other booster seats. All comments were fully considered and
the significant ones are addressed below. 


