 

(vii) If the exposure is to radar, television, or other microwave transmitters, the actual blasting circuit, with
blasting cap included but without other explosives, shall be used to test for extraneous electricity. Personnel
performing such tests shall be protected from the effects of an exploding blasting cap.

(viii) Blasting and demolition operations shall be suspended during electrical storms, approaching as well as in
progress. At first sign of an electrical storm, cap wires and lead wires shall be short-circuited, and all personnel
removed from the demolition area to a safe location.

(ix) A galvanometer shall test the firing circuit for electrical continuity before it connects with the blasting
machine. Before completing the circuit at the blasting machine or panel and signaling for detonation, the individual
assigned to make the connections shall confirm that everyone in the vicinity is in a safe place. This individual shall
not leave the blasting machine or its actuating device for any reason and, when using a panel, shall lock the switch
in the open position until ready to fire, retaining the only key.

(x) When transported by vehicles with two-way radios, and when in areas presumed to have extraneous electricity,
blasting caps shall be in closed metal boxes.

(3) When conditions prevent the use of electrical initiators for detonation, safety fuses shall be used. At the beginning
of each day's operation and whenever a new coil is used, the safety fuse's burning rate shall be tested. The fuse shall
be long enough for personnel to retire to a safe distance. Under no circumstances shall the fuse length be less than
that required for a 2-minute burning time. Approved crimpers shall be used to fix fuses to detonators. Only fuses small
enough in diameter to enter the blasting cap without forcing shall be used. All personnel except the fuse-actuator
shall retire to the personnel shelter or leave the demolition area before ignition.

(c) 

Servicing of destruction site. 

(1) Vehicles transporting explosive material to burning or demolition grounds shall meet the requirements of this
part. No more than two persons shall ride in the cab. No one shall ride in the truck bed.

(2) Vehicles should be unloaded immediately and withdrawn from the burning or demolition area until destruction
operations are completed. Containers of explosives shall not be opened before the vehicle has departed.

(3) Containers of explosives or ammunition items to be destroyed at the destruction site shall be spotted and opened
at least 10 feet from each other and from explosive material set out earlier, to prevent rapid transmission of fire
if premature should occur.

(4) Empty containers shall be closed and removed to prevent charring or damage during burning of explosives. Delivery
vehicles on the return trip shall pick up empty containers.



184.192 

Destruction by burning.



(a) No mixing of an explosive with extraneous material, other explosives, metal powder, detonators, or similar items
shall occur without authorization.

(b) Because of the danger of detonation, ammunition and explosives shall not be burned in containers or in large masses,
except as directed by competent contractor authority.

(c) Beds for burning explosives shall be no more than 3 inches deep. Wet explosives may require a thick bed of readily
combustible material underneath and beyond to ensure that all the explosives shall be consumed upon ignition. An
ignition train of combustible material leading to the explosives shall be arranged so that both it and the explosives
burn against the wind. When wind velocity exceeds 15 miles per hour, no disposal by burning shall take place. For direct
ignition of a combustible train, either a safety fuse long enough to permit personnel to reach protective shelter
or a black powder squib initiated by an electric current controlled from a distance or protective structure shall
be used. Tying two or more squibs together may be necessary to ensure ignition of the combustible train. Combustible
materials are not needed for burning solid propellants ignited by squibs. The sites of misfires shall be evacuated
for at least 30 minutes, after which two qualified persons shall approach the position of the explosives: one shall
examine the misfire; the other shall act as backup. Watching the examination from a safe distance, with natural or
artificial barriers or other obstructions for protection, the backup shall be prepared to rush to the examiner's
aid should an accident occur.

(1) Loose, dry explosives may be burned without being place on combustible material if burning shall be complete,
leaving the ground uncontaminated. The ground shall be decontaminated often, for the safety of personnel and operations.
Volatile flammable liquids shall not, at any stage, be poured over explosives or the underlying combustible material
to accelerate burning.

(2) Wet explosives shall always be burned on beds of nonexplosive materials.

(3) RDX should be burned in wet form to prevent detonation.

(4) Pyrotechnic materials in oil containers shall be emptied into shallow metal pans before burning. The open containers
may be burned with the explosives.

(d) Parallel beds of explosives prepared for burning shall be separated by not less than 150 feet. In subsequent burning
operations, care shall be taken to prevent material being ignited from smoldering residue or from heat retained in
the ground from previous burning operations. Unless a burned-overplot has been saturated with water, then passed
a safety inspection, 24 hours shall elapse before the next burning.



184.193 

Destruction by detonation.



(a) Detonation of ammunition or explosives being destroyed should occur in a pit not less than 4 feet deep and covered
with not less than 2 feet of earth. The components should be placed on their sides or in that position exposing the largest
area to the influence of initiating explosives. Demolition blocks shall be placed in intimate contact on top of the
item to be detonated, secured by earth packed over them. Under certain circumstances, materials such as bangalore
torpedoes and bulk high explosives may be substituted for demolition blocks.

(b) Local regulations, atmosphere conditions, earth strata, etc., determine how many projectiles and explosives
shall be destroyed at one time, both in pits and open sites. Taking these variables into account, the acceptable quantity
shall be based on criteria in Subpart D of this part. The procedure should be used for destruction of fragmentation
grenades, HE projectiles, mines, mortar shells, bombs, photoflash munitions, and HE rocket heads that have been
separated from motors. When a demolition area is remote from inhabited buildings, boundaries, work areas, and storage
areas, detonation may be accomplished without the aid of a pit, space permitting.

(c) After each detonation, the surrounding area shall be searched for unexploded material and items.

(d) In cases of misfires, the procedures in 184.182(c) shall apply.



184.194 

Destruction by neutralization.



Certain ammunition and explosives may be disposed of by neutralization. Methods of neutralization include dissolving
water-soluble material and chemical decomposition. The contractor, responsible for investigation which of these
is most appropriate, shall comply with all applicable local, State, and Federal requirements for disposal and contamination
operations.



