 

Combination Care and Prevention Services Programs



Applicants proposing to provide both care and prevention services must meet the requirements for both categories
as described above. They must also propose to make a substantial effort in each of the two areas and indicate clearly
in the application and budget the proportion of effort to be expanded in each component.



Evaluation



Section 2006(b)(1) of Title XX requires each grantee to expend at least one percent but not more than five percent of
the Federal funds received under Title XX on evaluation of the project. As this is a demonstration program, all applications
are required to have an evaluation component of high quality consistent with the scope of the proposed project and
the funding level. All project evaluations should monitor program processes to determine whether the program has
been carried out as planned and measure the program's outcomes. Waivers of the five percent limit on evaluation (see
sec. 2006(b)(1)) may be granted in cases where a more rigorous or comprehensive evaluation effort is proposed. 

Section 2006(b)(2) requires that an organization or an entity independent of the grantee providing services assist
the grantee in evaluating the project. The OAPP strongly recommends extensive collaboration between the applicant
organization and the proposed evaluator in the development of the intervention, development of the evaluation hypothesis(es),
identification of the variables to be measured and a timetable for initiation of the intervention, baseline measurement,
and ongoing evaluation data collection and analysis. 



Application Requirements



Applications must be submitted on the forms supplied (PHS 51611, Revised 7/92) and in the manner prescribed
in the application kits provided by the OAPP. Applicants are required to submit an application signed by an individual
authorized to act for the applicant agency or organization and to assume for the organization the obligations imposed
by the terms and conditions of the grant award. 

Applications sent by FAX will not be accepted.



Applicants must be familiar with the entire statute, which is included in the application kit, to ensure that they
have complied with all applicable requirements. 

It should be noted that grantees may not teach or promote religion in their AFL project. Each grant project must be accessible
to the public generally, not just to those of a particular religious affiliation. 

Under section 2011(a) of the Act, AFL projects may not provide abortions or abortion counseling or referral either
directly or through subcontract and may not advocate, promote or encourage abortion. However, if both the adolescent
and her parents request abortion counseling, a project may provide referral for such counseling. 



Additional Requirements



Applicants for grants must also meet the following requirements:

(1) 

Requirements for Review of an Application by the Governor. 

Section 2006(e) of Title XX requires that each applicant shall provide the Governor of the State in which the applicant
is located a copy of each application submitted to OAPP for a grant for a demonstration project for services under this
Title. The Governor has 60 days from the receipt date in which to provide comments to the applicant.

An applicant may comply with this requirement by submitting a copy of the application to the Governor of the State in
which the applicant is located at the same time the application is submitted to OAPP. To inform the Governor's office
of the reason for the submission, a copy of this notice should be attached to the application. 

(2) 

Review Under Executive Order 12372. 

Applications under this announcement are subject to the review requirements of E.O. 12372 State Review of Applications
for Federal Financial Assistance, as implemented by 45 CFR part 100 (Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs).
E.O. 12372 sets up a system for state and local government review of proposed Federal assistance applications. As
soon as possible the applicant (other than federally-recognized Indian tribal governments) should contact the
Governor's Office in each state in the area to be served for information regarding the particular review process designed
by the state. For proposed projects serving more than one State, the applicant is advised to contact the Governor's
Office of each affected State. The State comment(s) should be forwarded to the Grants Management Office, Office of
Population Affairs, East-West Towers, Suite 200, West Building, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857. Such comments
must be received by the Office of Population Affairs by May 22, 1995 to be considered. 

The application kit contains information to guide applicants in fulfilling the above requirements. 



Application Consideration and Assessment



Applications which are judged to be late or which do not conform to the requirements of this program announcement will
not be accepted for review. Applicants will be so notified, and the applications will be returned. All other applications
will be reviewed by a multidisciplinary panel of independent reviewers and assessed according to the following criteria:

(1) The capacity of the proposed applicant organization to provide rapid and effective use of resources needed to
conduct the project, collect data and evaluate it. This includes personnel, time and facilities. (30 points) 

(2) The applicant's rationale for use of the proposed approach and its worth for testing and/or replication based
upon its previous demonstration, review of the literature and/or evaluation findings. (20 points) 

(3) The applicant's presentation of an appropriate project design, consistent with the requirements of Title XX,
including a clear statement of goals and objectives, reasonable methods for achieving the objectives, a reasonable
workplan and timetable and a clear statement of results or benefits expected. (30 points)

(4) The applicant's presentation of a detailed evaluation plan, indicating an understanding of program evaluation
methods and reflecting a practical, technically sound approach to assessing the project's achievement of program
objectives. (20 points)

Final grant award decisions will be made by the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Populations Affairs. In making these
decisions, the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Population Affairs will take into account the extent to which grants
approved for funding will provide an appropriate geographic distribution of resources, the priorities in sec. 2005(a),
and the other factors in sec. 2005, including consideration of: 

(1) The applicant's capacity to administer funds responsibly;

(2) The incidence of adolescent pregnancy and the availability of services in the geographic area to be served;

(3) The population to be served;

(4) The community commitment to and involvement in planning and implementation of the demonstration project;

(5) The organizational model(s) for delivery of service;

(6) The usefulness for policymakers and service providers of the proposed project and its potential for complementing
existing adolescent health models;

(7) The reasonableness of the estimated cost to the government considering the anticipated results. 

OAPP does not release information about individual applications during the review process until final funding decisions
have been made. When these decisions have been made, applicants will be notified by letter of the outcome of their applications.
The official document notifying an applicant that an application has been approved for funding is the Notice of Grant
Award, which specifies to the grantees the amount of money awarded, the purpose of the grant, the terms and conditions
of the grant award, and the amount of funding to be contributed by the grantee to project costs.






Dated: November 1, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Felicia H. Stewart,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Population Affairs. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9431454 Filed 122194; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416017M
</BILLING>



