 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 

Background 



President Franklin D. Roosevelt established the Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge by Executive Order 8857 on August
14, 1941, to ``preserve the natural feeding and breeding ground of the brown bear and other wildlife.'' This action
withdrew about 1.9 million acres from unreserved public domain on Kodiak and Uganik Islands. Congress redesignated
the Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge in 1980 when it enacted the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA).
All the lands, water, interests, and submerged lands retained in federal ownership at the time of statehood were included
in the refuge. This legislation also added about 50,000 acres of public lands on Afognak and Ban Islands to Kodiak National
Wildlife Refuge. Section 303(5)(b) of ANILCA states generally that the purposes for which Kodiak National Wildlife
Refuge is established and shall be managed include: (i) To conserve fish and wildlife populations and habitats in
their natural diversity including, but not limited to, Kodiak brown bears, salmonoids, sea otters, sea lions, and
other marine mammals and migratory birds; (ii) to fulfill the international treaty obligations of the United States
with respect to fish and wildlife and their habitats; (iii) to provide, in a manner consistent with purposes set forth
in subparagraphs (i) and (ii), the opportunity for continued subsistence use by local residents; and (iv) to ensure,
to the maximum extent practicable and in a manner consistent with the purposes set forth in subparagraph (i), water
quality and necessary water quantity within the refuge.

The Kodiak Refuge Comprehensive Conservation Plan (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 1987) provides primary guidance
for management of the Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge. According to its approved alternative, ``the Service will
undertake detailed management planning to guide implementation of the plan and operation of the refuge.'' In support
of that mandate, utilizing a full spectrum of public involvement, the final draft of the Kodiak Refuge Public Use Management
Plan has been written. This interim rule and the proposed rule which is being published elsewhere in this separate
part of the 

Federal Register

 are a result of direction provided by both these planning processes. 

During 199091 the Service tested a trial bear viewing program, staffed by Refuge personnel, at the Dog Salmon
Creek Fish Pass on Kodiak Refuge. No closure was utilized for unguided use, but guided use was restricted through the
special use permit process. This trial bear viewing program was successful except that the presence of artificial
fish passage structures significantly impaired the quality of viewing opportunities available to the public. 
Public use is increasing about ten percent annually on the Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge and available information
indicates the rate of increase is even greater in the O'Malley River area. Also, a trend of increasing adverse interactions
between people and bears has occurred in the O'Malley River area in recent years. Generally, brown bears are negatively
impacted by expanding human use. Bears are often killed ``in defense of life or property'' as a consequence of increased
levels of human activity in areas that are used heavily by bears. In addition to mortality, interaction between bears
and people can impose stress on bears that ultimately affect survival and/or productivity of bears as well as jeopardize
human safety. 

In 1991, a research camp was established on the O'Malley River to study bear use of the area and potential impacts of
public use on bears. Research data document human impacts on bears in the O'Malley River area and confirm the need to
control or restrict human uses in this area. The O'Malley River area supports approximately 33% of the entire brown
bear population in the Karluk Lake basin. At least 110 different bears used the O'Malley River area during JulySeptember
1991, with peak use occurring during the second and third weeks of July. More importantly, refuge research data suggest
that frequently sighted bears represent only a small portion of the total population utilizing the O'Malley River
area. 
During approximately 250 hours of intensive observation of bear groups in the O'Malley River area in 1991, 66 interactions
between bears and people were recorded. One-third of the interactions disturbed and/or displaced the bears by causing
them to run or walk away from people. In one instance, people caused the separation of a female from one of her first-year
cubs; while trying to locate its mother, the cub was subsequently killed by another bear. 
Alternatives considered in response to the public use/bear problems in the O'Malley River area include closing the
area to all public use, which would satisfy the need to conserve bears, but would eliminate all opportunity for public
use during the period of closure. The area could be left open to provide ample public use opportunity, but this use would
have incompatible impacts on refuge bear populations. Seasonal closure in support of a bear viewing program not only
would satisfy the need to conserve bears, but would also make possible continued public use. No other alternative
could provide both benefits. 
The refuge's trial bear viewing program initiated at Dog Salmon Creek was moved to the O'Malley River area in 1992 because
of the documented problems and incompatibility between high and unregulated public use and bears in the O'Malley
area. A temporary closure, pursuant to 50 CFR 36.42, was utilized to avoid conflicts between people and bears at this
important seasonal bear concentration area. Goals of the trial O'Malley bear viewing program were: 




</SUPPLEM>
