 

A. Duly authorized representatives of the Department of Justice shall, upon written request of the Attorney General
or of the Assistant Attorney General in charge of the Antitrust Division, and on reasonable notice to any defendant
made to its principal office, be permitted:

1. Access during office hours of such defendant to inspect and copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence,
memoranda, and other records and documents in the possession or under the control of such defendant, who may have counsel
present, relating to any matters contained in this Final Judgment; and 

2. Subject to the reasonable convenience of such defendant and without restraint or interference from it, to interview
officers, employees, and agents of such defendant, who may have counsel present, regarding any such matters.

B. Upon the written request of the Attorney General or of the Assistant Attorney General in charge of the Antitrust
Division made to any defendant's principal office, such defendant shall submit such written reports, under oath
if requested, with respect to any of the matters contained in this Final Judgment as may be requested.

C. No information or documents obtained by the means provided in this section XIII shall be divulged by a representative
of the Department of Justice to any person other than a duly authorized representative of the Executive Branch of the
United States, except in the course of legal proceedings to which the United States is a party (including grand jury
proceedings), or for the purpose of securing compliance with this Final Judgment, or as otherwise required by law.

D. If at the time information or documents are furnished by any defendant to plaintiff, such defendant represents
and identifies in writing the material in any such information or documents to which a claim of protection may be asserted
under Rule 26(c)(7) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, and such defendant marks each pertinent page of such material,
``Subject to claim of protection under Rule 26(c)(7) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,'' then ten (10) days
notice shall be given by plaintiff to defendants prior to divulging such material in any legal proceeding (other than
a grand jury proceeding).



XIV


Retention of Jurisdiction



Jurisidction is retained by this Court for the purpose of enabling any of the parties to this Final Judgment to apply
to this Court at any time for such further orders and directions as may be necessary or appropriate for the construction
or carrying out of this Final Judgment, for the modification of any of the provisions hereof, for the enforcement of
compliance herewith, and for the punishment of any violations hereof.



XV


Termination



This Final Judgment will expire on the tenth anniversary of the date of its entry.



XVI


Public Interest



Entry of this Final Judgment is in the public interest.



Dated: 






United States District Judge




