 

2. Written comments were received from the Thunder Basin Coal Company (TBCC) (Administrative Record No. WY2518).
TBCC supported the proposed amendment.



Agency Comments



Pursuant to Section 503(b) of SMCRA and the implementing regulations at 30 CFR 732.17(h)(11)(i), comments were solicited
from various Federal agencies with an actual or potential interest in the Wyoming program. A summary of the comments,
and the Directors responses to them, appear below:

1. The U.S. Department of the Interior (USDI)_Bureau of Indian Affairs, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, USDI_Bureau
of Mines, USDI_Geological Survey, and the U.S. Department of Labor_Mine Safety and Health Administration each responded
that it had no comment (Administrative Record Nos. WY2522, WY2514, WY2516,
WY2515, and WY2517 respectively).

2. The U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) recommended that,




The State program be as specific as possible pertaining to time and space requirements for contemporaneous reclamation
and not completely rely on the development of case by case individual permits requirements. We believe, if there is
not adequate standards established, the State Program will have difficulty in maintaining consistency and compliance
with the intent of the Reclamation Act.




(Administrative Record No. WY2520)




As discussed previously, the State's contemporaneous reclamation regulations are as stringent and as effective
as the corresponding provisions in SMCRA and the Federal regulations. OSM is not authorized by SMCRA to require State
programs to be more stringent than SMCRA or more effective than the Federal regulations. OSM cannot, therefore, require
Wyoming to further amend its program in response to the FWS's comments.

3. The U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, commented that the proposed changes seem to be
logical and valid (administrative Record No. WY2512).



State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) and Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) Comments



As required by 30 CFR 732.17(h)(4), OSM provided the proposed amendment to the SHPO and the ACHP for comment. No comments
were received from the ACHP. The Wyoming Division of Parks and Cultural Resources_State Historic Preservation Office
commented by reminding OSM that management of cultural resources on OSM projects is conducted in accordance with
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act and Advisory Council regulations at 36 CFR part 800. The SHPO
had no objections to the proposed Wyoming amendment provided that OSM follows the procedures contained in 36 CFR part
800 (Administrative Record No. WY2519). OSM assures the SHPO that it is obligated to follow the procedures
at 36 CFR part 800.



Environmental Protection Agency Concurrence



Under 30 CFR 732.17(h)(11)(ii), the Director is required to obtain the written concurrence of the Administrator
of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) with respect to provisions of a State program amendment which relate
to air or water quality standards promulgated under the authority of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 

et seq.

) or the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 

et seq.

).

On January 7, 1994, the EPA replied that it had no comment on Wyoming's proposed amendment (Administrative Record
No. WY2513).



V. Director's Decision



Based on the above findings, the Director approves Wyoming's proposed program amendment as submitted May 1, 1986,
and as subsequently clarified on November 30, 1993.

The Federal regulations at 30 CFR part 950 codifying decisions concerning the Wyoming program are being amended to
implement this decision. This final rule is being made effective immediately to expedite the State program amendment
process and to encourage States to bring their programs into conformity with the Federal standards without undo delay.
Consistency of State and Federal standards is required by SMCRA.



VI. Procedural Determinations



Compliance With Executive Order 12866



This final rule is exempted from review by the Office of Management and Budget under Executive Order 12866 (Regulatory
Planning and Review).

 

