 

In the example above, PSA's A and B constitute the PSAs with the highest concentration of low-income minority older
individuals (see column 4) and have a combined total of 76% of the State's total low-income minority elderly population
(see column 6), which meets the 51% requirement.

This example represents a hypothetical State's proposed formula that meets the proposed criteria for approval in
that PSA's A and B would not receive less funds under the proposed formula (col. 9 ) than either would have received by
application of the current formula to the most recent decennial U.S. census data (col. 7), and neither PSA would receive
less funds under the formula (col. 9) than it would if funds were distributed solely on the basis of age and greatest
economic need (col. 8). Finally, this example shows that when more than one PSA is required to accumulate 51 percent
of the low-income minority older individuals in the State, the distribution to each such PSA must satisfy both specified
criteria.

AoA has developed the criteria for approval of an intrastate funding formula so as to ensure that social need factors
do not result in decreased funding to PSA's with the highest concentration of low-income minority older individuals.

We note that the proposed guidelines do not speak to the distributional effects on PSA's which contain the other 49
percent of the low-income minority older individuals in the State (which may also contain a significant number of
older individuals in greatest economic need, greatest social need, and low-income minority older individuals).
However, it should be observed that the law requires that SUAs, area agencies on aging, and service providers utilize
effective methods of targeting services to older individuals who are in the greatest economic need and the greatest
social need, with particular attention to low-income minority older individuals 

in all PSA's

. Thus, irrespective of the distribution of Title III funds, the SUA's, AAA's, and service providers are required
to comply with the targeting requirements in the Act, using such Title III funds and other sources as are available
to support services to individuals in targeted groups.

1321.76Appeal process to the Commissioner_this subsection is added to Subpart E to reflect the Commissioner's
new responsibilities under section 305(b)(5)(C)(i) of the 1992 amendments to the Act.

We anticipate that some Title III funds may shift among PSA's if intrastate funding formulas are modified or changed
in accordance with these proposed regulations. Although the 1992 amendments to the Act and these proposed rules do
not require a change in PSA boundaries, section 305(a)(1)(E) of the Act requires States to consider the total number
of older individuals 60+, older individuals in greatest economic need, and older individuals in greatest social
need, with particular attention to low-income minority older individuals residing in the State, in dividing the
State into distinct PSA's. As a result of the 1990 census, States may elect to change some PSA boundaries in order to
reflect changes in demographics and geographic locations of particular groups of older individuals based on the
1990 census. AoA is proposing this new rule to provide parties adversely affected by a State's decision to change PSA
boundaries with an opportunity to appeal to the Commissioner, pursuant to section 305(b)(5)(C) of the Act.

1321.77Scope_this subsection is revised to allow for alternative methods of dispute resolution, and to
reflect the requirements of the 1992 amendments to the Act which allow an appeal to the Secretary of HHS after the Commissioner
has disapproved a State's plan, plan amendment or intrastate funding formula. AoA includes these revisions in these
proposed rules in order to clarify appeals procedures that are to apply when the Commissioner does not approve the
intrastate funding formula under section 305(a)(2)(C) or otherwise finds that a State plan has failed to meet the
requirements of Section 307.

1321.79When a decision is effective_this subsection is revised to include a State's right to appeal to the
Secretary.

1321.81How the State may appeal_this subsection is revised to describe how a State may appeal to the Secretary.

