 

F. To facilitate injury control efforts supported by various governmental agencies within a geographic region.




Program Requirements 



A. Applicants must demonstrate and apply expertise in at least one of the three phases of injury control (prevention,
acute care, or rehabilitation) as a core component of the center. The second and/or third phases do not have to be supported
by core funding but may be achieved through collaborative arrangements. Comprehensive ICRC's must have all three
phases supported by core funding. 

B. Applicants must document ongoing injury-related research projects or control activities currently supported
by other sources of funding. 

C. Applicants must provide a director (Principal Investigator) who has specific authority and responsibility to
carry out the project. The director must report to an appropriate institutional official, e.g., dean of a school,
vice president of a university, or commissioner of health. The director must have no less than 30 percent effort devoted

solely to this project with an anticipated range of 30 to 50 percent. 

 D. Applicants must demonstrate experience in successfully conducting, evaluating, and publishing injury research
and/or designing, implementing, and evaluating injury control programs. 

E. Applicants must provide evidence of working relationships with outside agencies and other entities which will
allow for implementation of any proposed intervention activities. 

F. Applicants must provide evidence of involvement of specialists or experts in medicine, engineering, epidemiology,
law and criminal justice, behavioral and social sciences, biostatistics, and/or public health as needed to complete
the plans of the center. These are considered the disciplines and fields for ICRC's. An ICRC is encouraged to involve
biomechanicists in its research. This, again, may be achieved through collaborative relationships as it is no longer
a requirement that all ICRC's have biomechanical engineering expertise. 

G. Applicants must have an established curricula and graduate training programs in disciplines relevant to injury
control (e.g., epidemiology, biomechanics, safety engineering, traffic safety, behavioral sciences, or economics).


H. Applicants must demonstrate the ability to disseminate injury control research findings, translate them into
interventions, and evaluate their effectiveness. 

I. Applicants must have an established relationship, demonstrated by letters of agreement, with injury prevention
and control programs or injury surveillance programs being carried out in the State or region in which the ICRC is located.
Cooperation with private-sector programs is encouraged. 

Applicants should have an established or documented planned relationship with organizations or individual leaders
in communities where injuries occur at high rates, e.g., minority health communities. 

Grant funds will not be made available to support the provision of direct care. Studies may be supported which evaluate
methods of care and rehabilitation for potential reductions in injury effects and costs. Studies can be supported
which identify the effect on injury outcomes and cost of systems for pre-hospital, hospital, and rehabilitative
care and independent living. 

Eligible applicants may enter into contracts, including consortia agreements (as set forth in the PHS Grants Policy
Statement, dated April 1, 1994), as necessary to meet the requirements of the program and strengthen the overall application.



Evaluation Criteria 



Upon receipt, applications will be reviewed by CDC staff for completeness and responsiveness as outlined under the
previous heading ``Program Requirements.'' (A listing of where these requirements are described and/or documented
in the application will facilitate the review process.) Incomplete applications 
and applications that are not responsive will be returned to the applicant without further consideration. 

