 

Background 


1. Legal 


The Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1982, P.L. 97304, made significant changes to the Endangered Species
Act of 1973 (Act) (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq.

), including the creation of section 10(j), which provides for the designation of specific populations of listed
species as ``experimental populations''. Under previous authorities in the Act, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(Service) was permitted to reintroduce populations of a listed species into unoccupied portions of its historic
range for conservation and recovery purposes. However, local opposition to reintroduction efforts from certain
parties concerned about potential restrictions, and prohibitions on Federal and private activities contained
in sections 7 and 9 of the Act, reduced the utility of reintroductions as a management tool. 
Under section 10(j), a reintroduced population of a listed species established outside of its current range, but
within its historic range may be designated, at the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary), as ``experimental.''
The Act requires that an experimental population be separated geographically from nonexperimental populations
of the same species. Furthermore, an experimental population is treated as a threatened species, except that, solely
for section 7 purposes (except for subsection (a)(1)), an experimental population determined not to be essential
to the continued existence of a species is treated, except when it occurs in an area within the National Wildlife Refuge
System or the National Park System, as a species proposed to be listed under section 4 of the Act. Activities undertaken
on private lands are not affected by section 7 of the Act unless they are funded, authorized or carried out by a Federal
agency. 
Experimental and non-essential designations increase the flexibility for management of a reintroduced population
of a listed species. Treatment of such a population as threatened provides the Service with greater latitude in devising
management programs than would be possible for an endangered species. While Section 9 of the Act spells out directly
the prohibitions that apply for endangered species, Section 4(d) of the Act permits adoption by regulation of prohibitions
only to the extent that they are necessary and advisable to promote the conservation of a species listed as threatened.

In addition, a nonessential experimental population is not subject to the formal consultation requirement of section
7(a)(2) of the Act unless the experimental population occurs on a National Wildlife Refuge or National Park, where
the full provisions of section 7 apply. Section 7(a)(1) of the Act applies to nonessential experimental populations,
and requires that all Federal agencies use their authorities to conserve listed species. Individual organisms used
in establishing an experimental population can be removed from a source or donor population only after it has been
determined that their removal itself is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the species, and a permit
has been issued in accordance with the requirements of 50 CFR 17.22. 
In 1967, the timber wolf was listed as a subspecies (

Canis lupus lycaon

) as endangered (32 FR 4001), and in 1973 the northern Rocky Mountain subspecies, as then understood, (

C. l. irremotus

) was also listed as endangered, as was the Texas subspecies (

C. l. monstrabilis

) (38 FR 14678). In 1978, the legal status of the gray wolf in North America was clarified by listing wolves in Minnesota
as threatened and other members of the species south of Canada as endangered, without referring to subspecies (43
FR 9607). 


2. Biological 


This proposal deals with the gray wolf (

Canis lupus

), an endangered species of carnivore that was extirpated from the western portion of the conterminous United States
by about 1930. The gray wolf is native to most of North America north of Mexico City, except for the southeastern United
States, which was occupied by a similar species, the red wolf (

Canis rufus

). The gray wolf occupied nearly every area in North America that supported populations of hooved mammals (ungulates),
its major food source. 
Twenty-four distinct subspecies of gray wolf have been recognized in North America. Recently, however, taxonomists
have suggested that there are five or fewer subspecies of gray wolf in North America and that the wolves that once occupied
the northern Rocky Mountains of the United States belonged to a more widely distributed subspecies than was previously
believed. 



