 

Fishery Resource Disaster 


Although West Coast (Washington, Oregon, and California) salmon stocks experience annual fluctuations in abundance,
stock abundances in the last few years have been exceptionally low. West Coast salmon species are coho, chinook, chum,
sockeye, and pink salmon. Landings of chinook and coho, have declined significantly, from roughly 6.2 million fish
in 1988 to 2 million fish in 1993. Additional information regarding the declines in chinook and coho can be found in
the ANPR and is not repeated here. 
Chinook salmon fisheries in the ocean waters off Washington and Oregon north of Cape Falcon were closed in 1994 by the
Federal Government. Other salmon fisheries in the ocean waters off central and southern Oregon and northern California
are at reduced levels and are closed to fishing for coho. It is predicted that 1994 ocean salmon landings, coastwide,
will amount to only 289,000 chinook and zero coho. The fishing seasons for inside fisheries are the most restrictive
ever imposed in many areas. Recent estimates of the 1994 ocean chinook and coho fisheries, compared to 1993 catches,
indicate that, for the two species combined, cumulative catches through July are down 95 percent in Washington; down
76 percent in Oregon; and up 19 percent in California. California catches reflect increased availability of salmon
off southern and central California, south of Point Arena. In general, California catches are significantly below
198889 catch levels, when environmental conditions were more favorable. Harvests of salmon off northern
California have been extremely limited_commercial salmon fisheries are generally closed in this area for 1994,
except for post-peak season openings in September. 
Despite increasingly stringent management measures enacted in recent years to protect these salmon stocks, they
have reached a critical stage of depletion, due in part to environmental conditions unfavorable to salmon survival
that include: (1) An extended drought in California, in combination with the already depressed condition of northern
California stocks; (2) less than normal snowpack throughout the western United States; (3) drought followed by extensive
flooding in the State of Washington; and (4) poor upwelling, due to an extreme El Ni&ntilde;o ocean warming event during
19921993, all of which are believed to have been responsible for extremely poor salmon survival. 


Comments and Responses 


Comments on the ANPR were received from 27 entities. Many of the comments described the hardships the salmon disaster
has caused to individuals, Indian tribes, and communities. Several commenters stated that the proposed funds are
inadequate. Several also expressed appreciation for the Department of Commerce's efforts. In addition, SDI received
59 letters from affected parties, mainly as a result of the series of town meetings held to get public input on ways to
address the disaster. Correspondents included fishermen, trade associations, nonprofit organizations, state
and local government officials and agencies (including the Governors of Oregon and Washington), and members of Congress.

The ANPR requested comments on six specific questions. The following comments were received in response to those
questions. 
1. What would be appropriate goals of the program? How might salmon abundance be increased through this program? 


Comments

: An Indian tribe, two individual members of another tribe, and a charterboat operator indicated that the goal should
be complete restoration of salmon stocks. The two tribe members suggested coordinating emergency mandates to achieve
this goal. The Indian tribe stated that loss of the salmon fishery cannot be mitigated by awarding money, and the individual
noted that financial aid to commercial fishermen will not increase salmon numbers. 
Another individual said that the program should destroy or modify dams to ensure salmon passage. 


Response

: The goal of the proposed program is to compensate individual fishermen for their uninsured losses, while also protecting
the long-term viability of the fishery resources. 
2. What should be additional eligibility criteria, within statutory constraints, to receive a grant? 


Comments

: A coastal zone management association and a state senator said that grants should go to individuals actively engaged
in the commercial salmon fishery (ocean troll, ocean charterboat, and lower Columbia River gillnet). A separate
allocation should be made to each state, based only on commercial economic data reflecting the relative economic
declines, e.g., base years of 198690 compared with El Ni&ntilde;o years of 
199193. Non-charterboat recreational data should not be included. 
The Pacific Fisheries Legislative Task Force commented that the maximum grant amount should be $15,000, not $100,000,
to help more people; the $2 million ceiling for the past year's income, as contained in the IFA, is unrealistic; and,
making fishermen eligible for unemployment compensation would be helpful. 
One fisherman stated that aid should go to dislocated fishermen first, and not to related businesses. Criteria should
include being a participant in the Lower 48 salmon fishery for 50 percent or more of income, with priority given to those
who do not have an alternate fishery to fall back on, and those who need to update safety equipment. 
Another fisherman suggested a buyout of $60,000 for current permit holders that have been active for the last 10 years,
and a buyout of $20,000 for nonactive permit holders, defined as those who have not sold salmon within the last 3 years.
Deckhands who can document work on a salmon troller within the last 3 years should receive a cash grant of $7,000. In
addition, there should be a moratorium on fishing for 3 years, in exchange for a $25,000 grant per year. 
A charterboat operator stated that criteria need to be consistent coastwide and that, to be eligible, fishermen should
have at least 25 percent (up to 50 percent) of income averaged over the last 5 years from salmon fishing. Also, salmon
landing databases should be used to determine eligibility; meaningful levels of assistance should be provided to
displaced ocean salmon fishermen prior to aid to inland participants; grants should be a minimum of $5,000; and qualification
criteria should be generated by those directly involved in salmon fishing. 
A boat puller stated that boat pullers/boat hands should receive consideration for aid. 
One Indian tribe wrote to request that NMFS compensate each member of the tribe for the loss of the fishery. 
A businessman (non-fisherman) commented that owners of failed troller operations should not receive preference
over owners of other small businesses that have failed due to the salmon disaster. 
A county economic development council commented that local government agencies should be eligible for assistance.

Three Indian tribes commented that tribal governments should be eligible for grants under the program. 
An individual stated that aid should go only to those in commercial fishing for at least 10 consecutive years. Associations
should not be eligible for awards, to prevent fishermen who are association members from getting double benefits.

A tribal individual recommended eligibility for tribal members of one of the four treaty tribes along the Columbia
River and its tributaries. 


