 

(i) Successfully completed education or training programs; or 

(ii) Remained enrolled in education or training programs at the end of that award year; 

(2) Determining the number of students with high school diplomas who enrolled in education or training programs in
participating institutions during that award year; 

(3) Determining the number of students calculated in paragraph (h)(2) of this section who remained enrolled after
subtracting the number of students who subsequently withdrew or were expelled from participating institutions
and received a 
100 percent refund of their tuition under the institutions' refund policies; 

(4) Dividing the number of students determined in paragraph (h)(1) of this section by the number of students determined
in paragraph (h)(3) of this section; 

(5) Making the calculations described in paragraphs (h)(1) through (h)(4) of this section for students without a
high school diploma or its recognized equivalent who enrolled in participating institutions. 

(i) For purposes of paragraph (h) of this section, the applicable award year is the latest complete award year for which
information is available that immediately precedes the date on which the State requests the Secretary to approve
its State process, except that the award year selected must be one of the latest two completed award years preceding
that application date. 




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1091(d)) 






Note: 

This appendix will not appear in the Code of Federal Regulations. 



Appendix A to Preamble 



Ability-to-Benefit (ATB)_Summary of Discussions at Regional Meetings 



1. (a) How should the Secretary specify a passing score? 

At three of the regional meetings, it was recommended that tests be normed by different populations for students in
different educational programs. At two of the regional meetings, it was recommended that test scores be those recommended
by test publishers. At one of the regional meetings, it was recommended that test scores should be based on persistence
data. 

(b) How should ATB test validity for schools with testing centers located on campus be addressed? 

This issue was not addressed at any of the regional meetings. 

(c) What criteria should be adopted to determine whether an ATB test is independently administered? 

This provision was only addressed at one of the regional meetings where the consensus was that the current provisions
as outlined in the December 12, 1989 

Federal Register

 notice are sufficient. 

2. (a) How should the Secretary determine whether a test is independently administered? 

The consensus at all four of the regional meetings was that the Secretary should (1) continue to require the test examiner
to certify that the test was independently administered, and (2) continue to permit testing centers at a school to
administer tests provided that the testing center is separate from the admissions and financial aid process. 

(b) What standards should be established for the development, administration, and scoring of examinations? 

This issue was only addressed at two of the regional meetings. The consensus at one of the regional meetings was that
a test should determine both a student's quantitative and verbal skill levels. The consensus at the other regional
meeting was that tests should be reviewed for test biases, such as ethnicity, native language, and disability. 

3. How often must a state submit ATB plans? 

At three of the regional meetings, the consensus was that a state should only have to submit a plan once and then be required
to resubmit it if the process changed. The consensus at the other regional meeting was that a state should have to submit
its plan every 5 years at a minimum. 

4. What factors should the Secretary use to evaluate the effectiveness of a state plan? 

The consensus in all of the regional meetings was that the Secretary should consider such factors as retention, graduation
and placement rates, and other relevant measures in evaluating the effectiveness of a state plan. 




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9420138 Filed 81594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 400001P
</BILLING>

