 


(2) If the institution or servicer does not request a 
hearing but submits written material, the designated department 
official, after considering that material, notifies the 
institution or, in the case of a third-party servicer, the 
servicer and each institution affected by the alleged violations 
that_


(i) The fine will not be imposed; or 



(ii) The fine is imposed as of a specified date, and in a 
specified amount. 



(3) If the institution or servicer requests a hearing by 
the time specified in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section, the 
designated department official sets the date and the place. The 
date is at least 15 days after the designated department official 
receives the request. 



(4) A hearing official conducts a hearing in accordance 
with 668.88. 



(c) 

Expedited proceedings. 

With the approval of the 
hearing official and the consent of the designated department 
official and the institution or servicer, any time schedule 
specified in this section may be shortened. 




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1094) 






14. Section 668.85 is revised to read as follows: 



668.85

Suspension proceedings. 





(a) 

Scope and consequences. 

(1) The Secretary may suspend 
an institution's participation in a Title IV, HEA program or the 
eligibility of a third-party servicer to contract with any 
institution to administer any aspect of the institution's 
participation in any Title IV, HEA program, if the institution or 
servicer_


(i) Violates any statutory provision of or applicable to 
Title IV of the HEA, any regulatory provision prescribed under 
that statutory authority, or any applicable special arrangement, 
agreement, or limitation; or 



(ii) Substantially misrepresents the nature of_


(A) In the case of an institution, its educational program, 
its financial charges, or the employability of its graduates; or 



(B) In the case of a third-party servicer, as applicable, 
the educational program, financial charges, or employability of 
the graduates of any institution that contracts with the 
servicer. 



(2) If the Secretary begins a suspension proceeding against 
a third-party servicer, the Secretary also may begin a fine, 
limitation, suspension, or termination proceeding against any 
institution under whose contract a third-party servicer commits 
the violation. 



(3) The suspension may not exceed 60 days unless_


(i) The institution or servicer and the Secretary agree to 
an extension if the institution or servicer, as applicable, has 
not requested a hearing; or 



(ii) The designated department official begins a limitation 
or termination proceeding under 668.86. 



(b) 

Procedures. 

(1) A designated department official 
begins a suspension proceeding by sending a notice to an 
institution or third-party servicer by certified mail, return 
receipt requested. In the case of a suspension proceeding 
against a third-party servicer, the official also sends the 
notice to each institution that contracts with the servicer. The 
designated department official may also transmit the notice by 
other, more expeditious means if practical. The notice_


(i) Informs the institution or servicer of the intent of 
the Secretary to suspend the institution's participation or the 
servicer's eligibility, as applicable, cites the consequences of 
that action, and identifies the alleged violations that 
constitute the basis for the action; 



(ii) Specifies the proposed effective date of the 
suspension, which is at least 20 days after the date of mailing 
of the notice of intent; 



(iii) Informs the institution or servicer that the 
suspension will not be effective on the date specified in the 
notice, except as provided in 668.90(b)(2), if the designated 
department official receives from the institution or servicer, as 
applicable, by that date a request for a hearing or written 
material indicating why the suspension should not take place; and 



(iv) In the case of a suspension proceeding against a 
third-party servicer, informs each institution that contracts 
with the servicer of the consequences of the action to the 
institution.


