 



Comment:

 
One commenter suggested that Customs clarify whether a foreign trade zone operator is only entitled to engage in cartage
for a foreign trade zone, a container station operator only for a container station, a centralized examination station
(CES) operator only for a CES, and a bonded warehouse proprietor only for a bonded warehouse, while a licensed cartman
or bonded carrier would be entitled to engage in cartage for any of those facilities, and whether district directors
would be allowed some discretion in this matter. 


Response:

 
Customs agrees that the best policy is that a foreign trade zone operator would be limited to the transportation of
merchandise to his foreign trade zone, a container station operator to his container station, a CES operator to his
CES, and a bonded warehouse proprietor to his bonded warehouse. A licensed cartman or a bonded carrier would be entitled
to engage in transporting merchandise for any of those facilities, the cartman within the port limits and the carrier
within the district boundaries. Language to this effect has been inserted in the new 112.2(b). Once a district
director has approved the respective entity's bond, that entity may engage in transporting merchandise as provided
for in these regulations. 


Comment:

 
The commenter suggests that the conditions of the custodial bond in 19 CFR 113.63 and the foreign trade zone operators
bond in 19 CFR 113.73 should be revised to conform with the proposed change in 19 CFR 112.2(b). 


Response:

 
Section 113.63, Customs Regulations, has been altered slightly to conform with the changes. Regarding the foreign
trade zone operator's bond, Customs agrees that the current foreign trade zone operator's bond is inadequate to secure
the operator's performance with respect to movement of goods from one zone to another. Changes have been made to 19
CFR 113.73 in the final rule. 


Comment:

 
A commenter suggested that conforming changes referring to bonded carriers under 19 CFR 112.2(b) should be added
to 19 CFR 125.11 (a) and (b). 


Response:

 
Conforming changes have been made in the final rule. 


Comment:

 
One commenter suggested that the procedures in part 125 seem to refer principally to cartmen, lightermen and, as proposed
in the NPRM, bonded carriers. He suggests that procedures pertaining to bonded warehouse proprietors and to operators
of container stations, centralized examination stations, and foreign trade zones should be made clear in the final
rule. 


Response:

 
Customs agrees that procedures pertaining to cartage and lighterage by bonded warehouse proprietors and operators
of container stations, centralized examination stations and foreign trade zones should be included within part
125. Part 125 is amended accordingly.




