 

In addition to the protections provided by standard (e), standard (c) also provides an adequate safeguard against
affiliate abuse. Standard (c) states: 




[A pipeline] may not, through a tariff provision or otherwise, give its marketing affiliate preference over nonaffiliated
customers in matters relating to part 284 transportation including, but not limited to, scheduling, balancing,
transportation, storage, or curtailment priority.

20

 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


20

</FOOTNAME>
18 CFR 161.3(c). 





</FOOTNOTE>

While these reasons themselves compel modification of standard (f), further changes in the industry structure,
and in pipelines' operations mandated by Order No. 636 provide additional support. Order No. 636 will both level the
playing field for all competitors, and increase the amount of capacity information available from EBBS to all potential
shippers_marketing affiliates and all other sellers, marketers, transporters and consumers alike. 

First, Order No. 636 requires pipelines to unbundle their own sales from the transportation service. To do this each
pipeline is required to establish separate operating staffs for pipeline (transportation) operations and merchant
operations (merchant function operating unit). Each pipeline is also required to treat its merchant function operating
unit as if it were a marketing affiliate, for purposes of compliance with the standards of conduct and reporting requirements
of Order No. 497, 

et seq. 

In practice, many pipelines are establishing separate affiliates to provide the merchant services required by Order
No. 636. This change should further reduce the likelihood that a pipeline would even have sales or marketing information
to pass along to its marketing affiliate (or merchant function operating unit). Indeed, whatever sales and marketing
information a pipeline would have developed from public sources would, for the most part, be available to all other
competitors on a similar basis. 

In 

Tenneco 

the court found 




[N]o evidence in the record_and FERC points to none_for the assertion that the sales and marketing information pipelines
use today is a result of their ``

past 

monopoly over transportation.'' The [FERC's] assertion strikes us as counter-intuitive. The sales and marketing
of gas would seem to depend on 

current 

information_a surmise that 

is

 supported by evidence in the record that pipelines' sales and marketing information includes information developed
through ongoing customer calls and reviews of filings with state and federal regulatory agencies, trade publications,
and market reports.

21

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


21

</FOOTNAME>


Id. 

at 1200. 



</FOOTNOTE>

This represents a significant change from past practices. When pipelines were the primary merchants in the interstate
marketplace, merchant services were provided under long-term contracts on an ``on demand'' basis. While the pipelines
had all of the industry's information available to them, and operational control over all of the functions, this information
was aggregated over both time (monthly) and markets. Increasingly, today's merchant services focus on individual
customers and are adjustable on a daily or even hourly basis. The information needed to drive the old-style merchant
services is neither compatible with nor sufficient to meet the demands of today's marketplace. 

Second, all future sales of gas will take place at pipeline receipt or pooling points. This requires that the pipeline,
acting as a merchant, and the pipeline's marketing affiliates must sell gas at the same point on the system as other
gas sellers. This places all other natural gas sellers on a level playing field with marketing affiliates and the pipeline
as a merchant. And because the Commission has mandated that pipelines allow all shippers flexible receipt, pooling,
and delivery point authority, all shippers should have equal access to available capacity throughout the system.
The designation of pooling points, the pipeline's point of sale for merchant services, and the terms and conditions
governing flexible point authority are all subject to negotiations among the pipeline and the parties in individual
restructuring proceedings_not subject to the pipeline's sole discretion to decide. The result of negotiations
over these significant operating terms and conditions must ultimately be filed by the pipelines as part of their FERC
tariffs and apply equitably to all shippers whether they purchase from the pipeline or anyone else. 

Third, pipelines are encouraged in the Order No. 636 restructuring process to minimize transition costs by assigning_on
a voluntary non-discriminatory basis_gas supply contracts to their former sales customers. Pipelines are also
allowed 100 percent recovery of transition costs. These transition provisions are designed to fairly distribute
the burden of the historic legacy of uncompetitive pipeline purchase arrangements. Coupled with removal of burdensome
regulatory pricing structures, pipeline merchant function operating units should be left in a position to compete
fairly with other merchants without being saddled with the costs of uncompetitive purchase contracts. 

Fourth, Order No. 636 requires pipelines to establish and maintain EBBs and requires that EBB personnel function
independently of the gas marketing personnel to the maximum extent practicable. Identification of some of the data
to be maintained on the EBB is the subject of negotiation between the pipeline and the parties to the restructuring
proceedings. However, other data are required by Order No. 636 to be on the EBB at all times, 

e.g., 

length of release, rate, quantity, criteria for bid evaluation (which criteria was determined during the restructuring
proceeding) and the pipeline must identify all capacity on its system which is available directly from the pipeline.
Implementation of these EBBs will give all shippers and potential shippers instant access to the most current information
about the availability of pipeline capacity. 

Finally, Order No. 636 creates a capacity releasing program. Under this program, firm shippers of the pipeline are
allowed to resell their capacity, in whole or in part, and under terms and conditions they choose, to the highest bidding
replacement shipper. Releasing shippers are also allowed to include specific provisions for the recall of released
capacity, 

e.g., 

when temperatures drop below a pre-set minimum level. Releases may be either permanent or temporary, firm or interruptible.
Coupled with flexible receipt and delivery point authority, the capacity release program will allow existing firm
shippers to sell their capacity in the pipeline to others. This will create competition for capacity against the pipeline
itself. Although the pipeline would continue to operate the system, it would no longer be in sole control over who has
access to capacity. Again, the pipelines and their shippers are expected to work together in implementing the Order
No. 636 restructuring process to decide how the pipeline will operate in the new unbundled world. 

With respect to Northwest's request, the Commission clarifies that it will not apply standard (f) to any conduct regarding
sales or marketing information prior to the effective date of Order No. 497D. 




