 

17. Internal Functioning of Panels 
19. Computation of Time 
21. Counsel of Record 
22. Filing, Service and Communications 
28. Pleadings and Simultaneous Translation of Panel Reviews in Canada 
32. Costs 



Part II_Commencement of Panel Review 



33. Notice of Intent to Commence Judicial Review 
34. Request for Panel Review 
37. Joint Panel Reviews 
39. Complaint 
40. Notice of Appearance 
41. Record for Review 



Part III_Panels 



44. Announcement of Panel 
45. Violation of Code of Conduct 



Part IV_Proprietary Information and Privileged Information 



46. Filing or Service under Seal 
48. Disclosure Orders and Protective Orders 
55. Privileged Information 
57. Violations of Disclosure Undertakings and Protective Orders 



Part V_Written Proceedings 



58. Form and Content of Pleadings 
60. Filing of Briefs 
61. Failure to File Briefs 
62. Content of Briefs and Appendices 
62A. Appendix to the Briefs 
63. Motions 



Part VI_Oral Proceedings 



67. Location 
68. Pre-hearing Conference 
69. Oral Argument 
70. Subsequent Authorities 
71. Oral Proceedings in Camera 



Part VII_Decisions and Completion of Panel Reviews 



72. Orders, Decisions and Terminations 
75. Panel Review of Action on Remand 
76. Re-examination of Orders and Decisions 
78. Delay in Delivery of Decisions 



Part VIII_Completion of Panel Review 



Schedule_Procedural Forms 



Preamble 



The Parties, 
Having regard to Chapter Nineteen of the Free Trade Agreement between Canada and the United States of America; 
Acting pursuant to Article 1904.14 of the Agreement; 
Adopted Rules of Procedure governing all panel reviews conducted pursuant to Article 1904 of the Agreement; 
Adopt the following amended Rules of Procedure, effective on the date of publication in the 

Federal Register

, which from that day shall govern all panel reviews conducted pursuant to Article 1904 of the Agreement. 


Short Title 



1. These rules may be cited as the 

Article 1904 Panel Rules. 



Application 



1A. These rules apply to a panel review of a final determination, unless any rules of procedure made pursuant to Article
1904 of the North American Free Trade Agreement are in force and apply to a panel review of a final determination. 



Statement of General Intent 



2. These rules are intended to give effect to the provisions of Chapter Nineteen of the Agreement with respect to panel
reviews conducted pursuant to Article 1904 of the Agreement and are designed to result in decisions of panels within
315 days after the commencement of the panel review. The purpose of these rules is to secure the just, speedy and inexpensive
review of final determinations in accordance with the objectives and provisions of Article 1904. Where a procedural
question arises that is not covered by these rules, a panel may adopt the procedure to be followed in the particular
case before it by analogy to these rules or may refer for guidance to rules of procedure of a court that would otherwise
have had jurisdiction in the importing country. In the event of any ambiguity or inconsistency between the provisions
of these rules and the Agreement, the Agreement shall prevail. 

2A. Where, in respect of a panel proceeding for which a request for panel review was made before January 1, 1994, the
application of these rules would, in the opinion of the panel, be impracticable or would be prejudicial to a participant,
the panel may: 

(a) Apply one or more of the rules of procedure for Article 1904 panel proceedings that were in effect at the time the
request for panel review was made; or 

(b) Make such order, not inconsistent with the Agreement, as in the panel's opinion is in the circumstances required.




Interpretation 



3. In these rules, 

``Agreement'' means the Free Trade Agreement between Canada and the United States of America, signed on January 2,
1988; 

``Code of Conduct'' means the code of conduct established by the Parties pursuant to Article 1910 of the Agreement;


``Complainant'' means a Party or interested person who files a Complaint pursuant to rule 39; 

``Counsel'' means:

(a) With respect to a panel review of a final determination made in the United States, a person entitled to appear as
counsel before a federal court in the United States, and 


