 

Public Hearing





Persons wishing to comment at the public hearing should contact the person listed under 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT

 by 4 p.m., [e.s.t] on June 3, 1994. If no one requests an opportunity to comment at a public hearing, the hearing will
not be held. Filing of a written statement at the time of the hearing is requested as it will greatly assist the transcriber.
Submission of written statements in advance of the hearing will allow OSM officials to prepare adequate responses
and appropriate questions.




The public hearing will continue on the specified date until all persons scheduled to comment have been heard. Persons
in the audience who have not been scheduled to comment, and who wish to do so, will be heard following those scheduled.
The hearing will end after all persons scheduled to comment and persons present in the audience who wish to comment
have been heard.






Public Meeting





If only one person requests an opportunity to comment at a hearing, a public meeting, rather than a public hearing,
may be held. Persons wishing to meet with OSM representatives to discuss the proposed amendment may request a meeting
at the OSM, Lexington Field Office listed under 

ADDRESSES

 by contacting the person listed under 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT

. All such meetings will be open to the public and, if possible, notices of meetings will be posted in advance at the locations
listed under 

ADDRESSES

. A written summary of each meeting will be made a part of the Administrative Record.






IV. Procedural Determinations





Executive Order 12866




This proposed rule is exempted from review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under Executive Order 12866
(Regulatory Planning and Review).





Executive Order 12778




The Department of the Interior has conducted the reviews required by section 2 of Executive Order 12778 (Civil Justice
Reform) and has determined that, to the extent allowed by law, this rule meets the applicable standards of subsections
(a) and (b) of that section. However, these standards are not applicable to the actual language of State regulatory
programs and program amendments since each such program is drafted and promulgated by a specific State, not by OSM.
Under sections 503 and 505 of SMCRA (30 U.S.C. 1253 and 1255) and 30 CFR 730.11, 732.15, and 732.17(h)(10), decisions
on proposed State regulatory programs and program amendments submitted by the States must be based solely on a determination
of whether the submittal is consistent with SMCRA and its implementing Federal regulations and whether the other
requirements of 30 CFR parts 730, 731, and 732 have been met.





National Environmental Policy Act




No environmental impact statement is required for this rule since section 702(d) of SMCRA (30 U.S.C. 1292(d)) provides
that agency decisions on proposed State regulatory program provisions do not constitute major Federal actions within
the meaning of section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)).




Paperwork Reduction Act





This rule does not contain information collection requirements that require approval by OMB under the Paperwork
Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3507 

et seq.

).





Regulatory Flexibility Act




The Department of the Interior has determined that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

). The State submittal which is the subject of this rule is based upon counterpart Federal regulations for which an
economic analysis was prepared and certification made that such regulations would not have a significant economic
effect upon a substantial number of small entities. Accordingly, this rule will ensure that existing requirements
previously promulgated by OSM will be implemented by the State. In making the determination as to whether this rule
would have a significant economic impact, the Department relied upon the data and assumptions for the counterpart
Federal regulations.







List of Subjects in 30 CFR Part 917





Intergovernmental relations, Surface mining, Underground mining.








Dated: May 12, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Robert J. Biggi, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Assistant Director, Eastern Support Center.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412265 Filed 51894; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431005M 
</BILLING>

