 

Except as provided in paragraph (d)(4) of this section, the newly covered employee, or the spouse or minor child of
the employee, shall divest prohibited securities within 90 days after appointment to the covered position. 




(2) 

Newly prohibited securities. 

Within 30 days after publication of the prohibited securities list to which an entity's name has been added, a covered
employee who owns, or whose spouse or minor child owns, prohibited securities shall make a written report of that ownership
to the Office of the General Counsel. Except as provided in paragraph (d)(4) of this section, the covered employee,
or the spouse or minor child of the covered employee, shall divest prohibited securities within 90 days after publication
of the prohibited securities list. 


(3) 

Securities acquired without specific intent. 

Within 30 days after a covered employee, or the spouse or minor child of a covered employee, acquires securities of
an entity on the prohibited securities list as a result of marriage, inheritance, gift or otherwise without specific
intent to acquire the securities, the covered employee shall make a written report of the acquisition to the Office
of the General Counsel. Except as provided in paragraph (d)(4) of this section, a covered employee, or the spouse or
minor child of a covered employee, shall divest prohibited securities within 90 days after the date of acquisition.



(4) 

Extension of period to divest. 

Upon a showing of undue hardship, the Chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission may extend the 90 day period for
divestiture specified in paragraphs (d)(1) through (d)(3) of this section. 



(5) 

Disqualification pending divestiture. 

Pending divestiture of prohibited securities, a covered employee must disqualify himself or herself, in accordance
with 5 CFR 2635.402, from participation in particular matters which, as a result of continued ownership of the prohibited
securities, would affect the financial interests of the employee, or those of the spouse or minor child of the employee.
Disqualification is not required where a waiver described in 5 CFR 2635.402(d) applies. Procedures for obtaining
individual waivers are contained in NRC Handbook 7.7, which is available in the NRC Public Document Room. 



(6) 

Tax treatment of gain on divested securities. 

Where divestiture is required by this section, the covered employee (except a special Government employee) may be
eligible to defer the tax consequences of divestiture under subpart J of 5 CFR part 2634, pursuant to procedures in
NRC Handbook 7.7, which is available in the NRC Public Document Room. 


(e) 

Waivers. 

(1) The Chairman may grant a waiver to permit a covered employee, or the spouse or minor child of a covered employee,
to retain ownership of a security of an entity on the prohibited securities list upon a determination that the holding
of the security is not inconsistent with 5 CFR part 2635 or otherwise prohibited by law, and that: 


(i) Under the circumstances, application of the prohibition is not necessary to ensure confidence in the impartiality
and objectivity with which NRC programs are administered; 


(ii) Legal constraints prevent divestiture; or 


(iii) For a special Government employee, divestiture would result in substantial financial hardship. 


(2) Where a waiver has been granted under paragraph (e)(1) of this section, the covered employee must disqualify himself
or herself, in accordance with 5 CFR 2635.402, from participation in particular matters which, as a result of continued
ownership of the prohibited security, would affect the financial interests of the employee, or those of the spouse
or minor child of the employee unless the employee has received a waiver described in 5 CFR 2635.402(d), pursuant to
procedures in NRC Handbook 7.9, which is available in the NRC Public Document Room. 





