 




<DOCTITLE>Financial Assistance Award: University of Missouri-Rolla </DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 U.S. Department of Energy, Metairie Site Office. 


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of Intent. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Department of Energy (DOE), Metairie Site Office, announces that pursuant to 10 CFR 600.7(b)(2)(i)(D) it intends
to make a Non-Competitive Financial Assistance Award (Grant) through the Pittsburgh Energy Technology Center to
the University of Missouri-Rolla. 



</SUMMARY>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 
U.S. Department of Energy, 
Pittsburgh Energy Technology Center, 
Acquisition and Assistance Center, 
P.O. Box 10940, MS 921118, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15236, 
Attn.: Nancy Toppetta, 
Telephone: (412) 8925715.

 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
The University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) has proposed that DOE sponsor a study of Area of Review (AOR) variance possibilities
for the East Texas field, with Phase I beginning in April 1994. A further study of other high-priority areas in Texas,
Phase II, will be initiated and completed in 1995. It is expected that the Phase I data required for AOR variance consideration
will be supplied by the East Texas Salt Water Disposal Company, which operates injection wells for the field on behalf
of field owners. 



When the Underground Injection Control (UIC) regulations were promulgated under the Safe Drinking Water Act in 1980,
existing Class II injection wells were excluded from AOR requirements. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
through a Federal Advisory Committee (FAC), has recently recommended that AORs for existing wells (which were not
previously subject to that requirement) be performed within five years of promulgation of amended UIC regulations.
The FAC has, however, recognized that conditions can exist that make it unnecessary to perform well-by-well AORs
and that wells in a basin, producing trend, region or field, or a portion of such areas can be exempted from an AOR through
a variance program. 

A methodology for identifying areas that would be eligible for variance from AOR requirements based upon the FAC criteria
has been developed by a research team in the School of Mines and Metallurgy at the UMR under sponsorship of the American
Petroleum Institute (API). The methodology provides for evaluation of an area for variance based upon certain conditions
or based upon the manner by which wells in the area were constructed and abandoned. Wells not excluded by variance would
be subject to well-by-well AORs. With continuing sponsorship from the American Petroleum Institute, the AOR variance
methodology developed at the UMR has been applied to 24 oil fields undergoing injection in the San Juan Basin of New
Mexico and is currently being applied to injection fields in selected counties of the Permian basin in West Texas.
In the San Juan Basin, at least two variance criteria were found to apply to all 24 fields and are believed to provide
good possibilities for variances in 20 fields and some possibilities in the remaining four. 

The East Texas Field was discovered in 1930 and is the largest oil field in the Lower-48 states. Recovery from the field
is expected to ultimately be about 5.6 billion barrels. The AOR, which has a 1/4 mile radius, frequently includes 25
or more wells. Since the field is over 60 years old and many of the wells have been abandoned for a number of years, the
abandonment records are sometimes not readily available. More than 30,000 wells have been drilled in the field and
less than 8,000 are currently producing. Records on 22,000 abandoned and inactive wells (some of which are over 60
years old) will be hard to locate. 

Requirement for complete AORs on all existing injection wells could create an unbearable burden of proof on the East
Texas Saltwater Disposal Company and many of the independent operators in the East Texas field who can least afford
the expense of such compliance. The cost of compliance with EPA's proposed revisions to the UIC Class II regulations
is estimated to be $86.2 million to the East Texas Saltwater Disposal Company and the East Texas field operators for
the first five years after promulgation of the regulations. Variance from complete AORs for the East Texas field could
significantly reduce these anticipated costs. Successful application of the UMR variance methodology would also
further establish the potential value of the methodology to other producing areas in Texas and the United States.


In accordance with 10 CFR 600.7(b)(2)(i) criteria (D), a noncompetitive Financial Assistance Award to the UMR has
been justified. DOE support of the activity would provide that analysis be made of proprietary non-public data which
would otherwise be unavailable. In addition, DOE support would allow the results of the research to be transferred
to oil and gas operators, to the State of Texas, and to the public. This effort is therefore considered suitable for
noncompetitive financial assistance and would not be eligible for financial assistance under a solicitation. 

DOE funding for this research is estimated to be approximately $500,000 for the 24 month duration of the project. These
funds shall be used to pay for the reasonable cost of research staff, equipment, administrative support personnel,
consultants, experts, and printing costs as necessary for the research project. 





Dated: March 28, 1994.


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Richard D. Rogus, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Contracting Officer. 



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948360 Filed 4694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 645001P
</BILLING>





