 

(i) Each vessel owner or operator shall submit the vessel Operation and Maintenance manual to the USCG as part of the
SPA permit application under 33 CFR part 151 (Each vessel owner or operator that has obtained a conditional permit
under 33 CFR part 151 shall submit a vessel operation and maintenance manual within 180 days after [the effective date
of the final rule]). 
(ii) If the Administrator or Secretary determines that the manual fails to meet the requirements of this Part, the
Administrator or Secretary may submit a notice of disapproval to the owner or operator requiring that the owner or
operator make changes to the Operation and Maintenance manual. 
(iii) The owner or operator of the vessel shall make the required corrections indicated by the Administrator or the
Secretary in any notice of disapproval and resubmit the manual to the Administrator or Secretary, as appropriate,
within 90 days receipt of such notice of disapproval. 
(3) The Operation and Maintenance manual shall be made available and accessible to all employees directly associated
with municipal or commercial waste transport or handling, and to EPA or USCG officials upon request. 


237.6 


Tracking system. 


The Administrator may require owners and operators of vessels, waste sources, and/or waste facilities to install
a waste tracking system to track vessel movement of waste in coastal waters. 
(a) In determining whether to require a tracking system the Administrator will consider the following: 
(1) The owner and operator's history of compliance with SPA; 
(2) The owner and operator's history of compliance with other statutes intended to prevent deposit of municipal or
commercial waste into coastal waters; 
(3) The characteristics and amounts of waste transported loaded, or off-loaded; and 
(4) The feasibility of installing a specific kind of tracking system. 
(b) A tracking system shall be implemented or installed and placed in operation by the owner or operator of a vessel,
receiving facility or waste source within 18 months of the receipt of a notice from the Administrator requiring such
system, or sooner if the Administrator, so directs. 


237.7 


Enforcement. 


(a) Prior to imposing a civil penalty for any violation of this part, notice and opportunity for a hearing shall be provided
in accordance with 33 CFR 1.07 or in a manner consistent with the statutory language of SPA section 4108(a). 
(b) A person violating any requirement of this part is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $25,000. Each day of
a continuing violation is a separate violation. 




