 

The VOC emissions from sources at gasoline distribution facilities have also been addressed in Federal new source
performance standards (NSPS). On March 8, 1974, the Agency promulgated an NSPS (subpart K of 40 CFR part 60) regulating
VOC emissions from new petroleum liquid storage tanks. Subsequent updates (subparts Ka and Kb) require more stringent
control levels for new storage tanks. Subpart Ka was promulgated on April 4, 1980, and subpart Kb on April 8, 1987 (52
FR 11428). Tank truck loading racks at new bulk gasoline terminals are covered by subpart XX of 40 CFR part 60, which
was adopted on August 18, 1983 (48 FR 37578). On May 30, 1984, 40 CFR part 60, subpart GGG (referencing subpart VV provisions)
NSPS were promulgated covering equipment leaks of VOC at petroleum refineries. Additionally, national emission
standards for hazardous air pollutants, 40 CFR part 61, subpart J (referencing subpart V provisions) were promulgated
in June 6, 1984 covering equipment leaks from equipment in benzene service. 
The regulatory emission limits applied in some areas are more stringent than either the CTG or NSPS level. For example,
rules for the Bay Area and Sacramento Air Quality Management Districts in California have bulk gasoline terminal
emission limits that are more stringent than the levels required under the NSPS. 
Methods for control of HAP emissions from gasoline distribution facilities have also been evaluated in past studies.
In 1978, the Agency studied benzene emissions from gasoline distribution facilities (not including vehicle refueling)
and presented its findings to the National Air Pollution Control Techniques Advisory Committee (NAPCTAC). After
this presentation, the Agency decided not to proceed with a benzene standard but rather to proceed with the NSPS development
for bulk gasoline terminals. On August 8, 1984, the Agency published in the 

Federal Register

 (49 FR 31706) a notice of the availability of a document on regulatory strategies being considered for controlling
air pollutants from bulk gasoline terminals, bulk plants, and service stations. After the public comment period
on the regulatory strategies, a Federal regulation for controlling vehicle refueling (Stage II) emissions with
on the vehicle controls (onboard) was proposed on August 19, 1987, but no control requirements were included for bulk
gasoline terminals, bulk plants, or other sources at service stations. 
On February 7, 1987, in response to a petition filed in 1984 by the Natural Resources Defense Council, et. al., the United
States District Court for the District of Columbia ordered the Agency to publish either a notice of intent not to regulate
or a notice of proposed regulation. This order covered several sources of benzene emissions, including bulk gasoline
terminals, bulk plants, and gasoline service stations (including the filling of service station storage tanks by
gasoline tank trucks, but not the refueling of motor vehicles). On September 14, 1989 (54 FR 38083), the Agency proposed
regulations for the gasoline distribution facilities noted above. However, on March 7, 1990 (55 FR 8292), the Agency
withdrew these proposed standards. The rationale for this withdrawal was that the baseline benzene emissions were
found to be within a safe range with regard to health risk, and that additional controls were unnecessary to provide
an ample margin of safety. This earlier decision not to regulate these three types of gasoline distribution facilities
was based on the health effects from benzene alone and were under the provisions of the Act as amended in 1977. 
The HAP list presented in the Act section 112(b), as amended in 1990, contains additional compounds normally contained
in gasoline vapor, including, but not limited to benzene, toluene, hexane, ethylbenzene, naphthalene, cumene,
xylenes, n-hexane, 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, and methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE). Additionally, new provisions
on how to develop NESHAP were provided in the 1990 amendments to the Act. Therefore, it became necessary to reevaluate
emissions from gasoline distribution facilities to consider a combination of HAP's and the new provisions for setting
NESHAPs. 
There are other requirements and regulatory programs that will affect the HAP emissions from gasoline distribution
facilities. These include the major and area source determination provisions for pipeline facilities covered in
section 112(n)(4)(A) of the 1990 amendments, fuel volatility restrictions, and reformulated and oxygenated fuel
requirements. 
Section 112(n)(4)(A) stipulates that



``emissions from any pipeline compressor or pump station shall not be aggregated with emissions from other similar
units, whether or not such units are in a contiguous area or under common control to determine whether such units or
stations are major sources''. 



Consequently, these facilities were evaluated separately for major source determination. 


The Agency has promulgated a program that requires the use of lower volatility blends of gasoline during the summer
months, which will reduce HAP and VOC emissions from the gasoline distribution network. 


