 

Specimens used to establish an experimental population may be removed from a source or donor population, provided
their removal is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the species, and appropriate permits have been
issued in accordance with 50 CFR 17.22. Gray wolves for the reintroduction will be obtained from healthy Canadian
wolf populations with permission from the Canadian and Provincial governments. Gray wolves are common in western
Canada (tens of thousands) and Alaska (about 7,000). No adverse biological impact is expected from the removal of
about 150 wolves from the Canadian population. Consequently, the Service finds that wolves to be used in the reintroduction
effort meet the definition of ``non-essential'' (50 CFR 17.80(b)) because the loss of the reintroduced wolves is
not likely to appreciably reduce the likelihood of survival of the species in the wild. 

In 1967, the timber wolf was listed as a subspecies (

Canis lupus lycaon

) as endangered (32 FR 4001), and in 1973 the northern Rocky Mountain subspecies, as then understood, (

C. l. irremotus

) was also listed as endangered, as was the Texas subspecies (

C. l. monstrabilis

) (38 FR 14678). In 1978, the legal status of the gray wolf in North America was clarified by listing the Minnesota wolf
population as threatened and other members of the species south of Canada were listed as endangered, without referring
to subspecies (43 FR 9607). 

2. Biological: This final rule deals with the gray wolf (

Canis lupus

), an endangered species of carnivore that was extirpated from the western portion of the conterminous United States
by about 1930. The gray wolf is native to most of North America north of Mexico City, except for the southeastern United
States, where a similar species, the red wolf (

Canis rufus

), is found. The gray wolf occupied nearly every area in North America that supported populations of hoofed mammals
(ungulates), its major food source. 

Twenty-four distinct subspecies of gray wolf had been recognized in North America. Recently, however, taxonomists
have suggested that there are five or fewer subspecies or group types of gray wolf in North America and that the wolf
type that once occupied the northern Rocky Mountains of the United States was more widely distributed than was previously
believed. 

The gray wolf occurred historically in the northern Rocky Mountains, including mountainous portions of Wyoming,
Montana, and Idaho. The drastic reduction in the distribution and abundance of this species in North America was directly
related to human activities, such as the elimination of native ungulates, conversion of wildland into agricultural
lands, and extensive predator control efforts by private, State, and Federal agencies. The natural history of wolves
and their ecological role was poorly understood during the period of their eradication in the conterminous United
States. As with other large predators, wolves were considered a nuisance and threat to humans. Today, the gray wolf's
role as an important and necessary part of natural ecosystems is better understood and appreciated. 

For 50 years prior to 1986, no detection of wolf reproduction was found in the Rocky Mountain portion of the United States.
However in 1986, a wolf den was discovered near the Canadian border in Glacier National Park. This find was presumably
due to the southern expansion of the Canadian wolf population. The Glacier National Park wolf population has steadily
grown to about 65 wolves and now exists throughout northwestern Montana. 

Reproducing wolf populations are not known to occur in Idaho or Wyoming. Wolves have occasionally been sighted in
these States, but do not constitute a population as defined by scientific experts (Service 1994). Historical reports
suggest that wolves may have produced young in these States; however, based on extensive surveys and interagency
monitoring efforts (Service 1994), no wolf population presently persists in these States. 



