 

The current grant to manage the National Communication System also expires this fiscal year. A separate 

Federal Register

 announcement will be published soliciting applications to manage the National Communications System. 



II. Priorities for Ongoing Direct Service Programs



A. Priorities for Basic Centers 



Approximately 350 Basic Center grants, of which about two-thirds will be non-competitive continuations and about
one-third competitive new starts, will be funded in FY 1994 to support organizations which provide services to fulfill
the four major goals of the Runaway and Homeless Youth Program (RHYP): alleviating the problems of runaway and homeless
youth; reuniting youth with their families; strengthening family relationships; and helping youth decide upon
a future course of action. 

The goals of the RHYP are achieved through the Basic Centers, which provide services in support of the immediate needs
(temporary shelter, food, clothing, counseling, and related services) of runaway or homeless youth and their families
in a manner which is outside the law enforcement system, the child welfare system, the mental health system, and the
juvenile justice system. Further, the Basic Centers provide services, directly and through referrals, to promote
the long-term stability and safety of such youth. 

Funds for Basic Center grants are allotted annually among the States and other qualifying jurisdictions on the basis
of their relative populations of individuals who are less than 18 years of age. For the past several years, Basic Center
grants have been awarded for three-year project periods. Approximately one-third of the Basic Center grants expire
each year, requiring these agencies to compete for new awards. The remaining two-thirds of the Basic Center grants
receive non-competitive continuation awards. Within any given State, in consequence, individual grantees may
fall within any one of three different funding cycles: new starts, second-year continuations, and third-year continuations.
In FY 1994, this cyclical funding pattern will be continued, assuming satisfactory performance on the part of current
grantees and the availability of funds. Thus, approximately two-thirds of the current grantees will be awarded noncompetitive
continuation funds, and the remaining grantees (those whose grant periods expire in FY 1994) will have the opportunity
to submit new competitive applications. All other eligible youth-serving agencies not holding current awards may
also apply for these new competitive funds. 

Section 385(a)(2) of the Act requires that not less than 90 percent of the funds appropriated under Part A (The Runaway
and Homeless Youth Grant Act) be used to establish and strengthen runaway and homeless youth Basic Centers. Total
funding under Part A of the Act for FY 1994 is expected to be approximately $36.1 million. Approximately $32.5 million
will be allocated to the Basic Centers. 

An announcement of the availability of funds for the Basic Centers, along with the instructions and forms needed to
prepare and submit applications, will be published in a 

Federal Register

 announcement as early as possible in calendar year 1994 after the comment period ends. 



