 

216.2 

[Amended]



8. Section 216.2(b) is amended in the first sentence by adding the phrase ``or the alien entrepreneur'' between the
words ``spouse'' and ``must''.

9. Section 216.2(c) is amended by adding the phrase ``, or the alien entrepreneur'' between the words ``spouse'' and
``of''; and by removing the word ``joint''.

10. Section 216.3 is revised to read as follows:



216.3 

Termination of conditional resident status.



(a) 

During the two-year conditional period

. The director shall send a formal written notice to the conditional permanent resident of the termination of the alien's
conditional permanent resident status if the director determines that any of the conditions set forth in section
216(b)(1) or 216A(b)(1) of the Act, whichever is applicable, are true, or it becomes known to the government that an
alien entrepreneur who was admitted pursuant to section 203(b)(5) of the Act obtained his or her investment capital
through other than legal means (such as through the sale of illegal drugs). If the Service issues a Notice of Intent
to Terminate an alien's conditional resident status, the director shall not adjudicate Form I751 or Form I829
until it has been determined that the alien's status shall not be terminated. During this time, the alien shall continue
to be a lawful conditional permanent resident with all the rights, privileges, and responsibilities provided to
persons possessing such status. Prior to issuing the Notice of Termination, the director shall provide the alien
with an opportunity to review and rebut the evidence upon which the decision is to be based, in accordance with 103.2(b)(2)
of this chapter. The termination of status, and all of the rights and privileges concomitant thereto (including authorization
to accept or continue in employment in this country), shall take effect as of the date of such determination by the director,
although the alien may request a review of such determination in deportation proceedings. In addition to the notice
of termination, the director shall issue an order to show cause why the alien should not be deported from the United
States, in accordance with part 242 of this chapter. During the ensuing deportation proceedings, the alien may submit
evidence to rebut the determination of the director. The burden of proof shall be on the Service to establish, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that one or more of the conditions in section 216(b)(1) or 216A(b)(1) of the Act, whichever is applicable,
are true, or that an alien entrepreneur who was admitted pursuant to section 203(b)(5) of the Act obtained his or her
investment capital through other than legal means (such as through the sale of illegal drugs). 

(b) 

Determination of fraud after two years

. If, subsequent to the removal of the conditional basis of an alien's permanent resident status, the director determines
that an alien spouse obtained permanent resident status through a marriage which was entered into for the purpose
of evading the immigration laws or an alien entrepreneur obtained permanent resident status through a commercial
enterprise which was improper under section 216A(b)(1) of the Act, the director may institute rescission proceedings
pursuant to section 246 of the Act (if otherwise appropriate) or deportation proceedings under section 242 of the
Act. 

11. In 216.4, paragraph (a)(1) is amended by revising the phrase ``a Joint Petition to Remove the Conditional
Basis of Alien's Permanent Resident Status'' in the first sentence, to read: ``a Petition to Remove the Conditions
on Residence''. 

12. In 216.4, the heading is revised and paragraph (a)(1) is amended by adding a new sentence at the end of the
paragraph to read as follows: 



216.4 

Joint petition to remove conditional basis of lawful permanent resident status for alien spouse. 



(a) ***

(1) 

General procedures

. * * * Upon receipt of a properly filed Form I751, the alien's conditional permanent resident status shall be
extended automatically, if necessary, until such time as the director has adjudicated the petition. 



* * * * *



13. In 216.4, paragraph (a)(2) is amended in the last sentence, by revising the phrase ``an Application for
Waiver of Requirement to File Joint Petition for Removal of Conditions (Form I752)'' to read: ``a separate
Petition to Remove the Conditions on Residence (Form I751)''. 

14. In 216.4, paragraph (a)(6) is amended in the first sentence by removing the phrase ``or Form I752''.

15. In 216.5, the section heading and paragraph (a), introductory text, are revised to read as follows: 



216.5 

Waiver of requirement to file joint petition to remove conditions by alien spouse. 



(a) 

General

. A conditional resident alien who is unable to meet the requirements under section 216 of the Act for a joint petition
for removal of the conditional basis of his or her permanent resident status may file a Petition to Remove the Conditions
on Residence (Form I751), if the alien requests a waiver, was not at fault in failing to meet the filing requirement,
and the conditional resident alien is able to establish that:



* * * * *



216.5 

[Amended]



16. In 216.5, paragraphs (b) and (c) are amended by revising the phrase ``Form I752'' to read: ``Form
I751''.

17. A new 216.6 is added to read as follows:



216.6 

Petition by entrepreneur to remove conditional basis of lawful permanent resident status. 








