 

Adequate air mixing, which requires that an adequate number of ACH be provided to a room (Suppl. 3, Section II.B.1),
must be ensured to prevent air stagnation within the room. However, the air will not usually be changed the calculated
number of times per hour because the airflow patterns in the room may not permit complete mixing of the supply and room
air in all parts of the room. This results in an ``effective'' airflow rate in which the supplied airflow may be less
than required for proper ventilation. To account for this variation, a mixing factor (which ranges from 1 for perfect
mixing to 10 for poor mixing) is applied as a multiplier to determine the actual supply airflow (i.e., the recommended
ACH multiplied by the mixing factor equals the actual required ACH) (

51,98

). The room air supply and exhaust system should be designed to achieve the lowest mixing factor possible. The mixing
factor is determined most accurately by experimentally testing each space configuration, but this procedure is
complex and time-consuming. A reasonably good qualitative measure of mixing can be estimated by an experienced ventilation
engineer who releases smoke from smoke tubes at a number of locations in the room and observes the movement of the smoke.
Smoke movement in all areas of the room indicates good mixing. Stagnation of air in some areas of the room indicates
poor mixing, and movement of the supply and exhaust openings or redirection of the supply air is necessary. 


3. Airflow Direction in the Facility 




Purpose: 

To contain contaminated air in localized areas in a facility and prevent its spread to uncontaminated areas. 
a. Directional airflow.

The general ventilation system should be designed and balanced so that air flows from less contaminated (i.e., more
clean) to more contaminated (less clean) areas (

47,48

). For example, air should flow from corridors (cleaner areas) into TB isolation rooms (less clean areas) to prevent
spread of contaminants to other areas. In some special treatment rooms in which operative and invasive procedures
are performed, the direction of airflow is from the room to the hallway to provide cleaner air during these procedures.
Cough-inducing or aerosol-generating procedures (e.g., bronchoscopy and irrigation of tuberculous abscesses)
should not be performed in rooms with this type of airflow on patients who may have infectious TB. 

b. Negative pressure for achieving directional airflow. 

The direction of airflow is controlled by creating a lower (negative) pressure in the area into which the flow of air
is desired. For air to flow from one area to another, the air pressure in the two areas must be different. Air will flow
from a higher pressure area to a lower pressure area. The lower pressure area is described as being at negative* pressure
relative to the higher pressure area. Negative pressure is attained by exhausting air from an area at a higher rate
than air is being supplied. The level of negative pressure necessary to achieve the desired airflow will depend on
the physical configuration of the ventilation system and area, including the airflow path and flow openings, and
should be determined on an individual basis by an experienced ventilation engineer. 



<FOOTNOTE>
*Negative is defined relative to the air pressure in the area from which air is to flow.

</FOOTNOTE>


4. Achieving Negative Pressure in a Room 





Purpose: 

To control the direction of airflow between the room and adjacent areas, thereby preventing contaminated air from
escaping from the room into other areas of the facility. 

a. Pressure differential. 
The minimum pressure difference necessary to achieve and maintain negative pressure that will result in airflow
into the room is very small (0.001 inch of water). Higher pressures (" 0.001 inch of water) are satisfactory; however,
these higher pressures may be difficult to achieve. The actual level of negative pressure achieved will depend on
the difference in the ventilation exhaust and supply flows and the physical configuration of the room, including
the airflow path and flow openings. If the room is well sealed, negative pressures greater than the minimum of 0.001
inch of water may be readily achieved. However, if rooms are not well sealed, as may be the case in many facilities (especially
older facilities), achieving higher negative pressures may require exhaust/supply flow differentials beyond
the capability of the ventilation system. 


To establish negative pressure in a room that has a normally functioning ventilation system, the room supply and exhaust
airflows are first balanced to achieve an exhaust flow of either 10% or 50 cubic feet per minute (cfm) greater than the
supply (whichever is the greater). In most situations, this specification should achieve a negative pressure of
at least 0.001 inch of water. If the minimum 0.001 inch of water is not achieved and cannot be achieved by increasing
the flow differential (within the limits of the ventilation system), the room should be inspected for leakage (e.g.,
through doors, windows, plumbing, and equipment wall penetrations), and corrective action should be taken to seal
the leaks. 
Negative pressure in a room can be altered by changing the ventilation system operation or by the opening and closing
of the room's doors, corridor doors, or windows. When an operating configuration has been established, it is essential
that all doors and windows remain properly closed in the isolation room and other areas (e.g., doors in corridors that
affect air pressure) except when persons need to enter or leave the room or area. 
b. Alternate methods for achieving negative pressure. 
Although an anteroom is not a substitute for negative pressure in a room, it may be used to reduce escape of droplet nuclei
during opening and closing of the isolation room door. Some anterooms have their own air supply duct, but others do
not. The TB isolation room should have negative pressure relative to the anteroom, but the air pressure in the anteroom
relative to the corridor may vary depending on the building design. This should be determined, in accordance with
applicable regulations, by a qualified ventilation engineer. 
If the existing ventilation system is incapable of achieving the desired negative pressure because the room lacks
a separate ventilation system or the room's system cannot provide the proper airflow, steps should be taken to provide
a means to discharge air from the room. The amount of air to be exhausted will be the same as discussed previously (Suppl.
3, Section II.B.4.a). 



