 



Note 1: 

This AD applies to each airplane identified in the preceding applicability provision, regardless of whether it has
been modified, altered, or repaired in the area subject to the requirements of this AD. For airplanes that have been
modified, altered, or repaired so that the performance of the requirements of this AD is affected, the owner/operator
must use the authority provided in paragraph (b) to request approval from the FAA. This approval may address either
no action, if the current configuration eliminates the unsafe condition; or different actions necessary to address
the unsafe condition described in this AD. Such a request should include an assessment of the effect of the changed
configuration on the unsafe condition addressed by this AD. In no case does the presence of any modification, alteration,
or repair remove any airplane from the applicability of this AD.

 




Compliance: 

Required as indicated, unless accomplished previously. 

To prevent the loss of the main system hydraulics, accomplish the following: 

(a) Within 4 months after the effective date of this AD, install new case drain pipes and an additional fairlead support
for the hydraulics case drain line in the rear spar area of the engine/nacelle in accordance with Jetstream Service
Bulletin J4129005, Revision 1, dated August 12, 1994; or Revision 2, dated August 30, 1994. 

(b) An alternative method of compliance or adjustment of the compliance time that provides an acceptable level of
safety may be used if approved by the Manager, Standardization Branch, ANM113, FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate.
Operators shall submit their requests through an appropriate FAA Principal Maintenance Inspector, who may add comments
and then send it to the Manager, Standardization Branch, ANM113.

 




Note 2: 

Information concerning the existence of approved alternative methods of compliance with this AD, if any, may be obtained
from the Standardization Branch, ANM113.

 


(c) Special flight permits may be issued in accordance with sections 21.197 and 21.199 of the Federal Aviation Regulations
(14 CFR 21.197 and 21.199) to operate the airplane to a location where the requirements of this AD can be accomplished.

 


Issued in Renton, Washington, on December 12, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Darrell M. Pederson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Manager, Transport Airplane Directorate, Aircraft Certification Service. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9430945 Filed 121594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491013U
</BILLING>


