 

In proposing this action, it is not FDA's intention to 
circumvent the aim of the PPPA to allow access by elderly and 
handicapped persons who may be unable to use such household 
substances when packaged in CRP's. The agency requests comments 
on the effect that this proposed packaging requirement will have 
on the accessibility of iron-containing drugs and dietary 
supplements to elderly and handicapped persons. 
c. 

Iron-containing drug products that are removed from and 
dispensed in other than unit-dose packaging are adulterated and 
misbranded.

 In order to be exempt from the requirement in 
section 502(f)(1) of the act that a drug bear adequate 
directions for use, a prescription drug product for 
human use must bear, among other things, a statement, 
directed to the pharmacist, specifying the type of container to 
be used in dispensing the drug product to maintain the 
product's identity, strength, quality, and purity (21 CFR 
201.100(b)(7)). However, directions for repackaging are ``not 
required for prescription drug products packaged in unit-dose, unit-of-use, or other packaging format in which
the 
manufacturer's original package is designed and intended to be 
dispensed to patients without repackaging.'' (Id.) If FDA 
ultimately determines that unit-dose packaging is necessary to 
ensure the identity, strength, quality, and purity of iron- 
containing drug products, the agency would consider such products 
that are dispensed to consumers in other than unit-dose packaging 
to be adulterated and misbranded. Products marketed by the 
manufacturer in unit-dose packaging would remain exempt from the 
requirement for repackaging instructions because FDA expects that 
pharmacists will not compromise such packaging systems.
FDA has, in certain cases in the past, prohibited 
pharmacists from repackaging products because the original 
manufacturer's packaging was necessary to ensure the product's 
identity, strength, quality, and purity. In 1972, FDA concluded 
that improper packaging of nitroglycerin preparations was causing 
substantial loss of potency of the drug. Commonly used plastic 
containers and strip packaging failed to prevent appreciable 
evaporation of nitroglycerin from nitroglycerin tablets. FDA 
determined that it was necessary to require that these products 
be packaged and dispensed in glass containers to ensure the 
potency of the product ((37 FR 15859, August 5, 1972); 21 CFR 
250.300 (1973)). In addition, manufacturers were required to 
include a statement directed to pharmacists that the product 
should be dispensed only in the original, unopened container (21 
CFR 250.300(b)(1973)). 


