 

The National Appliance Energy Conservation Act separates water heaters 
into three product classes by fuel type: Gas, electric and oil.
<FOOTCITE>14</FOOTCITE>
 Also, the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act directs the Secretary to develop different standards for product
classes within an appliance type if they ``consume a different kind of energy from that consumed by other covered 
products within such type.''
<FOOTCITE>15</FOOTCITE>
 Therefore, the Department did not compare 
water heaters of different fuel types. However, the Department considered the 
effects of fuel-switching caused by the standards, as forecasted by the 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Residential Energy Model. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
14

</FOOTNAME>
``Standards for Water Heaters; Pool Heaters; Direct Heating Equipment.'' 

42 U.S.C. 6295(e).




</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
15

</FOOTNAME>
``Special Rule for Certain Types or Classes of Products'', 

42 U.S.C. 6295 (n)(1)(A).



</FOOTNOTE>


The American Gas Association and many of the gas utilities proposed 
additional classes for gas water heaters based on several factors. These 
included the utility of having hot water if the power fails and the high cost 
of bringing electricity to locations without electric outlets near the water 
heater. The American Gas Association argued that a precedent already exists 
with ranges/ovens for separate product classes with or without an electric 
cord. (American Gas Association, No. 23 at 46.) 

Several comments proposed that DOE establish four classes for gas water 
heaters: With and without draft hood, and with and without electric cord. 
(American Gas Association, No. 23 at 2; Southern Gas Association, No. 4 at 3; 
Lone Star Gas Company, No. 39 at 3; Southern Natural Gas Company, No. 46 at 2; 
LaClede Gas, No. 55 at 3; Equitable Resources, No. 72 at 1; Madison Gas  
Electric, No. 77 at 1; Louisiana Gas, No. 81 at 1; United Texas Transmission, 
No. 26 at 2; Southern Union Gas Company, No. 22 at 1; Colorado Interstate Gas, 
No. 14 at 2; Wisconsin Gas Company, No. 33 at 1; South Carolina Electric and 
Gas Company, No. 34 at 2; Bay State Gas, No. 52 at 1; Arkansas Oklahoma Gas, 
No. 56 at 1; Providence Gas, No. 62 at 1; Southern Connecticut Gas, No. 63 at 
1; Arkansas Western Gas, No. 64 at 4; ENTEX, No. 58 at 5; Essex County Gas, 
No. 69 at 1; K N Energy, No. 70 at 3; and Delta Natural Gas, No. 73 at 2.) 

The Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association stated that DOE should 
recognize the particular utility and performance characteristics of 
conventional gas water heaters and preserve the availability of this product 
to the American consumer. (Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association, No. 40 at 
3.) 

Two gas utility companies proposed three product classes for gas-fired 
water heaters: with a draft hood with and without electric cord, and with 
electric cord (no designation on presence of draft hood). (Atlantic Gas Light 
Company, No. 29 at 2; and Energen, No. 12 at 4.) 

Some gas utilities proposed two product classes for gas water heaters, 
namely, with and without electric cord. (Oklahoma Natural Gas Company, No. 57 
at 1; and Northern Indiana Public Service, No. 48 at 2.) 

The Arkansas Western Gas Company listed several benefits provided by a 
standing pilot in water heaters. These benefits include keeping the flue 
warm, helping maintain water temperature in the tank, providing a low-cost, 
fail-proof ignition system, allowing operation during power outages, and low 
operating cost. (Arkansas Western Gas Company, No. 64 at 5.) Piedmont 
Natural Gas Company, Inc. urged the Department to evaluate fully the benefits 
of standing pilot ignition systems. Many citizens in North and South 
Carolina continued to have hot water and were able to cook after hurricane 
Hugo caused extensive power outages which lasted up to several weeks. 
(Piedmont Natural Gas Company, No. 71C at 2.) 

The Department considered only one product class for gas-fired storage 
water heaters. The Department believes that designs that eliminate draft 
hoods or add electric cords do not change the utility of water heaters; 
therefore, these designs do not warrant inclusion in a separate class. These 
design options were evaluated solely on economic considerations. Additional 
installation cost to bring electricity to water heaters not close to outlets 
was included in the analysis of those design options. When condensation from 
mid-efficiency water heaters would damage masonry chimneys, the cost of 
relining or power venting was added to the installation costs. 






