 

The following summarizes the major changes in this notice of 
proposed rulemaking (NPRM): 


Part 668_Student Assistance General Provisions 




Section 668.1Scope. 

Part 668 governs the administration 
of the Title IV, HEA programs by an institution and provides for 
various enforcement measures against institutions for any 
violations of program requirements by the institution or its 
agents. A third-party servicer, as an agent of an institution, 
must currently apply the requirements of part 668 to administer 
properly the Title IV, HEA programs on behalf of an institution. 
The Secretary proposes to specify that the requirements of the 
Student Assistance General Provisions regulations would be 
applied to a third-party servicer (as proposed to be defined in 
668.2) to the extent that the servicer administers any aspect of 
an institution's participation in a Title IV, HEA program. This 
proposal would enable the Secretary, for the first time, to 
directly oversee the conduct of third-party servicers. The 
Secretary also proposes to make clear that although the Secretary 
would hold a third-party servicer responsible for compliance with 
applicable regulations, an institution that contracts with the 
servicer always remains responsible for the servicer's 
compliance. This clarification merely restates the Department of 
Education's long-standing policy and requirements with respect to 
institutional responsibility. 


Section 668.2General definitions. 

These proposed 
regulations would incorporate the statutory definition of 
third-party servicer in section 481(f) of the HEA. Under that 
definition (as amended by the Higher Education Technical Amendments of 1993 (Pub. L. 103208), enacted on December
20, 
1993), a third-party servicer is an ``individual, or any State, or 
private, profit or nonprofit organization'' that contracts with an 
eligible institution to administer any aspect of the 
institution's participation in a Title IV, HEA program. The 
statutory definition includes additional elements applicable to a 
third-party servicer's administration of the FFEL programs. 
These aspects of the definition are addressed in a subsequent 
discussion on 34 CFR part 682. 
The Secretary also proposes to include as part of the 
definition of third-party servicer examples of services which a 
third-party servicer could provide to an institution that the 
Secretary considers to constitute the administration of the 
institution's participation in a Title IV, HEA program. The 
Secretary believes that examples are necessary to alert those 
individuals and organizations that contract with an eligible 
institution of the specific activities that would be subject to 
the requirements proposed in these regulations. 
The examples that the Secretary proposes to include in the 
definition of third-party servicer are primarily examples that 
show an obvious relationship to the administration of the 
Title IV, HEA programs. The Secretary proposes these examples to 
specifically detail which activities unequivocally constitute the 
administration of an institution's participation in the Title IV, 
HEA programs. While these examples are not all-inclusive, they 
do provide a baseline to judge other activities that could be 
deemed an aspect of the administration of an institution's 
participation in the Title IV, HEA programs. 
The Secretary also proposes to include another set of 
examples that the Secretary believes do not constitute the 
administration of an institution's participation in the 
Title IV, HEA programs. For example, the Secretary does not 
consider the activity of publishing ability-to-benefit (ATB) 
tests to be a third-party servicer activity because publishers of 
ATB tests do not contract with institutions and under the statute 
would not fall within the definition of a third-party servicer. 
As another example, the Secretary does not consider 
performing activities as a Multiple Data Entry Processor (MDE) to 
be included in the scope of third-party servicer activities. 
While an MDE could be considered to administer certain aspects of 
an institution's participation in the Title IV, HEA programs, an 
MDE is bound by other Department of Education requirements. 
Therefore, the Secretary does not believe it necessary to 
separately regulate MDE activities as part of these proposed 
regulations. 
In general, the Secretary also proposes to exclude auditing 
activities from the scope of these regulations. Entities 
performing audits are required to be impartial and independent 
entities with no vested interest in the Title IV, HEA programs. 
Further, while auditors provide services needed to comply with 
Title IV, HEA requirements, their services are not directly 
connected to the day-to-day administration of Title IV, HEA 
assistance. The Secretary, therefore, believes that auditing 
activities should not be included in the scope of these 
regulations. 
Other proposed examples classified as being outside the 
scope of these regulatory requirements simply reinforce the 
Secretary's belief that certain activities performed by a 
third-party servicer that do not substantially affect the 
delivery of Title IV, HEA program aid do not constitute the 
administration of an institution's participation in the Title IV, 
HEA programs, (for example, contracting to warehouse records). 
As a result of deliberations during the negotiated 
rulemaking sessions, Federal and non-Federal negotiators 
concluded that it was not necessary to include or exclude 
computer services or software providers from the proposed 
definition of third-party servicer or the examples provided. The 
negotiators concluded that computer software and computer 
services are simply technological means to assist in carrying out 
specific administrative functions. Accordingly, the Secretary 
invites public comment on whether an individual, State, or 
organization providing computer software and services represented 
to satisfy Title IV, HEA program requirements should specifically 
be included in what the Secretary considers to constitute a 
third-party servicer's administration of an eligible 
institution's participation in a Title IV, HEA program. 






