 

Following the publication of the final nutrition labeling regulations, trade associations representing both manufacturers
and retailers asked FSIS to make an exception for ground beef and hamburger to allow the use of ``

XX

 percent lean'' on package labels. They contend that a lean descriptor standard, such as ``ground beef, not less than
(X)% lean,'' has been in use for 20 years and became a legal requirement in some States. Industry believes that such
labeling assists consumers in selecting leaner versions of these products and provides industry with incentives
to market products lower in fat than the 30 percent permitted under 9 CFR 319.15. 

Western States Meat Association, Oakland, CA, submitted a petition to FSIS, dated October 15, 1993, to permit the
use of a ``

XX

 percent lean''/``

XX

 percent fat'' statement following the product name for ground beef and hamburger. The petitioner states that, for
many years, consumers have been receiving truthful and useful information from the ``

XX

 percent lean''/``

XX

 percent fat'' labeling. The petitioner argues that the statement is widely used by both wholesalers and retailers
in the marketplace and the final nutrition labeling regulations will take this information away. Additionally,
the petitioner states that this information will accomplish the objective of the new nutrition labeling rules of
bringing more meaningful and more useful information to consumers. The petitioner urges FSIS to amend the nutrient
content claims provision of the nutrition labeling regulations (9 CFR 317.362(c)) to provide for the use of the statement
``

XX

 percent lean''/``

XX

 percent fat'' following the product name for ground beef and hamburger. 

FSIS has reviewed the information provided by the petitioner and the comments received, and has determined that,
with the preclusion of ground beef and hamburger from the use of the terms ``lean,'' ``extra lean,'' and ``

XX

 percent lean,'' these products should be labeled to permit consumers to readily identify and differentiate between
the varying lean to fat ratios in such products. Identification of fat content by means of percentage labeling of lean
and fat on ground beef and hamburger would allow consumers to recognize products at the retail level that are now frequently
marketed with terms such as ``regular,'' ``lean,'' and ``extra lean,'' or with lean percentages. Allowing such labeling
would also assist consumers in selecting leaner versions of these products and provide incentives for manufacturers
to market products lower in fat. 

FSIS also recognizes that the practice of labeling ground beef and hamburger with lean percentages has been in use
since 1973, following the development of the Uniform Retail Meat Identity Standards by representatives from the
meat industry, the Council of Better Business Bureau, the White House Office of Consumer Affairs, and the U.S. Department
of Agriculture. The standards recommend that nomenclature and specifications for retail ground beef be decided
by the lean-to-fat content and shown on the label as ``ground beef, not less than (X)% lean.''

1

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
These standards for retail ground beef are available for public inspection in the office of the FSIS Hearing Clerk.


</FOOTNOTE>


However, FSIS believes that a percentage lean and a percentage fat labeling statement on the product would be potentially
misleading unless appropriate nutrition information for the product is available to the consumer. Requiring the
percentage lean and percentage fat labeling statement to be accompanied by nutrition information would ensure that
consumers do not misinterpret the percentage lean portion of the identifying statement. 



The Proposal 



FSIS is proposing to amend the Federal meat inspection regulations by permitting percentage labeling for lean and
fat on ground beef and hamburger. Such labeling may be used only when the product is accompanied by nutrition information
which characterizes the nutrition profile of the product. Consistent with guidelines for voluntary nutrition labeling
of single-ingredient, raw meat products, FSIS is proposing that this nutrition information may be presented on the
labeling of the product or in the form of point-of-purchase materials, such as signs, notebooks or leaflets, in close
proximity to the product and readily available to the consumer. Guidelines for point-of-purchase materials, as
stated in 9 CFR 317.345 for supplying nutrition information in the absence of a nutrition claim, would apply to these
products. 





