 

Commenters proposed various ways for HCFA and the State to obviate facility consent when appointing a temporary manager.
One suggestion was that we appoint the temporary manager subject to court order. Another recommendation was that
we administratively appoint the temporary manager in accordance with the State's police power. Additional commenters
proposed that we set limits on the duration of the temporary management (for example, restricting the appointment
to two weeks), the circumstances under which the manager would be appointed, and the funds that the manager could spend
in order to make the administrative appointment binding.

Other commenters proposed not only that facilities be required to accept temporary management, but that HCFA and
the State be required to impose temporary management in immediate jeopardy situations without a choice between it
and termination.



Response: 

We agree that facilities should not be offered a formal choice of whether to accept or reject temporary management
because we believe that more facilities will exercise the right to refuse if it is explicitly offered. Therefore,
once HCFA or the State has determined that temporary management is the optimal enforcement response, we will expect
the facility to accept it, and we will proceed with the appointment of the temporary manager without requesting facility
consent to do so. However, facilities will have the right to refuse to relinquish control to the temporary manager
since the administrative process precludes us from forcing providers to relinquish control. A facility's refusal
will initiate termination. While we realize that, in effect, the right of refusing to relinquish control to the temporary
manager is tantamount to the prerogative of rejecting temporary management, we believe that the new arrangement
will encourage the use of the remedy. We are amending 488.410, 488.415, and 488.456 to delete
references to a facility's choice of accepting or rejecting the remedy.

We cannot force a facility to relinquish control to a temporary manager because, ultimately, participation in the
Medicare or Medicaid program is voluntary under the Act, and we have no authority to compel a facility to stay in the
program should it, for its own reasons, choose to withdraw. We will not seek judicial action to impose temporary management
because the Act does not require that judicial intervention be a prerequisite for imposing this remedy.

We do not believe it is appropriate to rest appointment of temporary managers upon the State's police power as described
in State law. First, the Act does not suggest that this be the case. Second, this remedy is one imposed under the Act,
not State law. Ultimate authority for this remedy lies, accordingly, in the Medicare and Medicaid laws and ought not
look to State law without some indication by the Congress that it expected this to be the case.

A facility's refusal to relinquish control to the temporary manager will cause HCFA or the State to proceed with action
to terminate the facility's program participation. We share commenter concern about the protection of the health
and safety of residents when termination proceedings have been initiated. Consequently, we will allow a State monitor
to be imposed at all facilities that have failed to relinquish control to a temporary manager in cases of immediate
jeopardy, and also at those facilities for which no temporary manager could be located. The monitor will notify HCFA
or the State when the absence of temporary management subjects residents to substantial risks, and HCFA and the State
may then opt to take additional enforcement action.



