 

(4) Conform any advances of grant funds to subgrantees substantially to the 
same standards of timing and amount that apply to cash 
advances by Federal agencies. 
(b) 

All other grantees. 

All other grantees shall follow 
the provisions of this part which are applicable to awarding agencies when awarding and administering subgrants

(whether on a cost reimbursement or fixed amount basis) of 
financial assistance to local and Indian tribal governments. 
Grantees shall: 
(1) Ensure that every subgrant includes a provision for 
compliance with this part; 
(2) Ensure that every subgrant includes any clauses 
required by Federal statute and executive orders and their 
implementing regulations; and 
(3) Ensure that subgrantees are aware of requirements 
imposed upon them by Federal statutes and regulations. 
(c) 

Exceptions. 

By their own terms, certain provisions 
of this part do not apply to the award and administration of 
subgrants: 
(1) 2541.100; 
(2) 2541.110; 
(3) The letter-of-credit procedures specified in 
Treasury Regulations at 31 CFR part 205, cited in 2541.210; and 
(4) 2541.500. 


Subpart E_Reports, Records, Retention and Enforcment 


2541.400 


Monitoring and reporting program performance. 


(a) 

Monitoring by grantees. 

Grantees are responsible for 
managing the day-to-day operations of grant and subgrant supported activities. Grantees must 
monitor grant and subgrant supported activities to assure 
compliance with applicable Federal requirements and that 
performance goals are being achieved. Grantee monitoring 
must cover each program, function or activity. 
(b) 

Nonconstruction performance reports. 

The Federal 
agency may, if it decides that performance information 
available from subsequent applications contains sufficient 
information to meet its programmatic needs, require the 
grantee to submit a performance report only upon expiration or 
termination of grant support. Unless waived by the Federal 
agency this report will be due on the same date as the final 
Financial Status Report. 
(1) Grantees shall submit annual performance reports 
unless the awarding agency requires quarterly or semi-annual 
reports. However, performance reports will not be required 
more frequently than quarterly. Annual reports shall be due 
90 days after the grant year, quarterly or semi-annual 
reports shall be due 30 days after the reporting period. The final performance report 
will be due 90 days after the expiration or termination of 
grant support. If a justified request is submitted by a 
grantee, the Federal agency may extend the due date for any 
performance report. Additionally, requirements for unnecessary performance reports 
may be waived by the Federal agency. 
(2) Performance reports will contain, for each grant, 
brief information on the following: 
(i) A comparison of actual accomplishments to the 
objectives established for the period. Where the output of the project can 
be quantified, a computation of the cost per unit of output 
may be required if that information will be useful. 
(ii) The reasons for slippage if established objectives 
were not met. 
(iii) Additional pertinent information including, when appropriate, 
analysis and explanation of cost overruns or high unit 
costs. 
(3) Grantees will not be required to submit more than 
the original and two copies of performance reports. 
(4) Grantees will adhere to the standards in this section in prescribing performance 
reporting requirements for subgrantees. 
(c) 

Construction performance reports. 

For the most part, 
on-site technical inspections and certified 
percentage-of-completion data are relied on heavily by Federal agencies to monitor progress under construction
grants 
and subgrants. The Federal agency will require additional 
formal performance reports only when considered necessary, 
and never more frequently than quarterly. 
(d) 

Significant developments. 

Events may occur between the scheduled performance reporting dates 
which have significant impact upon the grant or subgrant 
supported activity. In such cases, the grantee must inform 
the Federal agency as soon as the following types of 
conditions become known: 
(1) Problems, delays, or adverse conditions which will 
materially impair the ability to meet the objective of the 
award. This disclosure must include a statement of the action 
taken, or contemplated, and any assistance needed to resolve 
the situation. 




