 

<SIGNER>
Carla M. Stern,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Attorney, Midwest Field Office, United States Department of Justice, Antitrust Division, Midwest Field Office,
Suite 600, 209 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60604, Telephone: (312) 3537530.


</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
Attorney for Plaintiff.



United States of America, Plaintiff, v. California SunCare, Inc., Defendant. Civil Action No. 945522; Final
Judgment.

Plaintiff, United States of America, having filed its complaint herein on August 12, 1994, and plaintiff and defendant,
California SunCare, Inc., having consented to the entry of this Final Judgment without trial or adjudication of any
issue of fact or law herein and without this Final Judgment constituting any evidence against or an admission by any
party with respect to any such issue;

And whereas defendant has agreed to be bound by the provisions of this Final Judgment pending its approval by the Court;

Now, Therefore, before the taking of any testimony and without trial or adjudication of any issue of fact or law herein,
and upon consent of the parties hereto, it is hereby Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed as follows:



I



Jurisdiction



This Court has jurisdiction of the subject matter of this action and of the party consenting hereto. The complaint
states a claim upon which relief may be granted against defendant under Section 1 of the Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. 1).



II



Definitions



As used in this Final Judgment:

A. ``Person'' means any individual, corporation, partnership, company, sole proprietorship, firm or other legal
entity.

B. ``Dealer'' means any person, not wholly owned by California SunCare, Inc. (``California SunCare''), who purchases
or acquires indoor tanning






products manufactured or sold by California SunCare for resale.



C. ``Indoor tanning product'' means products applied to the skin in order to enhance, promote, preserve, or accelerate
the skin tanning process or to protect the skin from adverse effects that may result from the tanning process.

D. ``Resale price'' means any price, price floor, price ceiling, price range, or any mark-up, formula or margin of
profit relating to indoor tanning products sold by dealers.



III



Applicability



A. This Final Judgment applies to defendant and to each of its officers, directors, agents, employees, subsidiaries,
successors, and assigns, and to all other persons in active concert or participation with any of them who shall have
received actual notice of this Final Judgment by personal service or otherwise.

B. Defendant shall require, as a condition of the sale of all or substantially all of its assets or stock, that the acquiring
party agree to be bound by the provisions of this Final Judgment.



IV



Prohibited Conduct



A. Defendant is hereby enjoined and restrained from directly or indirectly entering into, adhering to, maintaining,
furthering, enforcing or claiming any right under any contract, agreement, understanding, plan or program with
any dealer to fix, stabilize, or maintain the resale prices at which indoor tanning products sold or distributed by
defendant may be sold or offered for sale in the United States by any dealer.

B. Defendant is further enjoined and restrained for a period of five years from the date of entry of the final judgment
from directly or indirectly announcing to the public or to any present or potential dealer of its indoor tanning products
that defendant has or is adopting, promulgating, suggesting, announcing or establishing any resale pricing policy
for indoor tanning products that provides that: (1) defendant will sell only to a dealer that prices at or above defendant's
suggested resale price, and/or (2) defendant will terminate any dealer for pricing below defendant's suggested
resale price.

C. Defendant is further enjoined and restrained for a period of five years from the date of entry of the final judgment
from (1) threatening any dealer with termination or terminating any dealer for pricing below the defendant's suggested
resale price, and (2) discussing with any present or potential dealer any decision regarding termination of any other
dealer for any reason directly or indirectly related to the latter dealer's pricing below defendant's suggested
resale price; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the defendant during this five-year period
from terminating a dealer for using any of defendant's products to promote the sale of products manufactured by other
companies, or any other reasons other than pricing below defendant's suggested resale price. Furthermore, nothing
in this paragraph shall be deemed to prohibit the defendant from adopting suggested resale prices and communicating
such resale prices to dealers.


</SIGNER>
