 

PART 239_FORMS PRESCRIBED UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933 



8. The general authority citation for Part 239 continues to read in part as follows: 






Authority:

 15 U.S.C. 77f, 77g, 77h, 77j, 77s, 77sss, 78c, 78

l, 

78m, 78n, 78o(d), 78w(a), 78

ll

(d), 79e, 79f, 79g, 79j, 79

l, 

79m, 79n, 79q, 79t, 80a8, 80a29, 80a30, and 80a37 unless otherwise noted. 



* * * * * 



9. By revising Part II, Model B, Item 8, paragraph (d) of Form 1A (referenced in 239.90) to read as follows:







Note

._The text of Form 1A does not and the amendment will not appear in the Code of Federal Regulations. 



Form 1A._Regulation A Offering Statement Under the Securities Act of 1933 



* * * * * 



PART II_OFFERING CIRCULAR 



* * * * * 



OFFERING CIRCULAR MODEL B 



* * * * * 



Item 8. Directors, Executive Officers and Significant Employees 



* * * * * 



(d) 

Involvement in certain legal proceedings. 

(1) Describe any of the actions listed below, not subsequently reversed, suspended, vacated, annulled or otherwise
rendered of no effect, taken during the past 10 years that involved any executive officer, director or person nominated
to become a director of the issuer: 

(i) Bankruptcy or other insolvency proceedings. 

The initiation of any federal, state or foreign bankruptcy or insolvency proceeding by or against, or the appointment
of a receiver, conservator, fiscal agent or similar officer for the business or assets of any such person, any partnership
in which such person was a general partner at or within two years before the time of such initiation or appointment,
or any corporation or business association of which such person was an executive officer at or within two years before
the time of such initiation or appointment. The foregoing shall be described if material to an investment or voting
decision. 

(ii) 

Criminal proceedings.

 The conviction of such person in a federal, state or foreign criminal proceeding (including convictions entered
on a plea of nolo contendere), or the naming of any such person as the subject of a pending criminal proceeding (excluding
traffic violations and other minor offenses). 

(iii) 

Civil and administrative proceedings. 

The issuance in a federal, state or foreign civil or administrative proceeding of: 

(A) A finding, order, judgment, decree or sanction to which such person was subject, relating to an alleged violation
of: 

(

1

) Any securities or commodities law or regulation, or 

(

2

) Any law or regulation respecting financial institutions, insurance companies, or fiduciary duties owed to a partnership,
corporation, business trust or similar business entity, including, but not limited to, a temporary or permanent
injunction, order of disgorgement or restitution, civil money penalty or temporary or permanent cease-and-desist
order, or removal or prohibition order; or 

(

3

) Any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with any business entity; 

(B) An order enjoining or otherwise limiting such person from engaging in any type of business practice. 

(iv) 

Self-Regulatory Organization proceedings. 

The imposition of a sanction against such person by: 

(A) A self-regulatory organization, as defined in Section 3(a)(26) of the Exchange Act [15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(26)]; 

(B) A contract market designated pursuant to section 5 of the Commodity Exchange Act [7 U.S.C. 7]; 

(C) A futures association registered under section 17 of such Act [7 U.S.C. 21]; or 

(D) Any substantially equivalent foreign authority or organization. 

Instructions to Paragraph (d)



1. For purposes of computing the 10 year period referred to in this paragraph, the disclosure period applicable to
a final conviction, order, judgment, decree or sanction shall begin with its date of entry. The disclosure period
applicable to a preliminary order shall commence when the rights of appeal from such order have lapsed. Any conviction,
order, judgment, decree or sanction that is appealed shall continue to be disclosed until ultimately reversed, suspended,
vacated, annulled or otherwise rendered of no effect, at which time disclosure shall no longer be required. With respect
to bankruptcy and insolvency proceedings, the computation date shall be the date of filing for uncontested petitions
or the date upon which approval of a contested petition became final. In the case of receiverships and conservatorships,
the computation date shall be the date the receiver or conservator was appointed. 

2. The issuer is permitted to explain any mitigating circumstances associated with events reported pursuant to this
paragraph. 


