 



Comment:

 Some commenters agreed with the Department's proposal to allow trustee officials to base damages solely on restoration,
rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition costs when there is no acceptable methodology for calculating
compensable value at a reasonable cost. One commenter, however, urged the Department to clarify that when trustee
officials choose to base damages solely on restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition costs,
PRPs should not be allowed to challenge these costs based on their unilateral calculation of compensable values.




Response:

 The Department has decided that a trustee official should have the discretion to base damages solely on the cost of
restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition of equivalent resources not only when compensable
value cannot be calculated at a reasonable cost but whenever the trustee official deems it appropriate. The Department
has revised the language of 11.80(b) accordingly. The rule provides that it is within the trustee official's
discretion whether to base damages solely on restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition costs;
therefore, PRPs will not be able to use a unilateral calculation of compensable value to challenge a damage claim based
solely on restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition costs. 



I. Restoration, Rehabilitation, Replacement, and/or Acquisition of Equivalent Services Versus Resources 





Comment:

 Despite the Department's attempts to clarify the issue in the July 22, 1993, 

Federal Register

 notice, commenters expressed continued confusion over whether the Department intended restoration, rehabilitation,
replacement, and/or acquisition of the equivalent to focus on the resource itself, the services provided by a resource,
or both. Several commenters continued to think that the rule dealt inconsistently with this issue. 

Some commenters thought that the Department should specify that damages are based on the cost of restoring, rehabilitating,
replacing, and/or acquiring the equivalent of both the services provided by a resource and the resource itself. These
commenters objected to the Department's statements that service levels provide a means of measuring restoration,
rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition of equivalent resources. These commenters expressed concern
that using services alone as a measurement would result in less than complete restoration, rehabilitation, replacement,
and/or acquisition of equivalent resources because the loss of potential services might be left unaddressed. 

A few commenters offered an example of a groundwater drinking supply that previously contained hazardous substances
at concentrations significantly better than required by drinking water standards. The commenters noted that if
service levels are used to measure restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition of equivalent
resources, then treating the groundwater to the point at which it meets drinking water standards might be deemed full
restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition but would fail to make the public whole. These commenters
further stated that failure to account for potential services when measuring restoration, rehabilitation, replacement,
and/or acquisition of equivalent resources would violate 

Ohio

 v. 

Interior,

 which stated that ``a trustee is not prohibited from recovering costs of restoring or replacing a natural resource
even when that resource has no documented `committed use.''' 880 F.2d at 462. 

Other commenters stated that service levels should not be viewed simply as a yardstick for, but rather as the very focus
of, restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition. These commenters thought that unless reestablishment
of baseline service levels were used as the standard for restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition,
PRPs would be required to pay to replicate the exact natural resources that were injured, contrary to congressional
intent. These commenters requested that the Department state explicitly that the actual injury need not be corrected
if services can be restored through other means. Some commenters offered an example of contaminated sediment that
destroys vegetation. These commenters stated that dredging should not be required if the vegetation can be restored
through reseeding or fertilization. 




