 



Informed consent

 means the agreement by a patient to a treatment, examination or procedure after the patient receives the material
facts regarding the nature, consequences, risks and alternatives concerning the proposed treatment, examination
and procedure. 


Inmate

 means any person considered an adult within that jurisdiction, whether pretrial, unsentenced, or sentenced, who
is confined in a detention or holding facility. 


Inmate fund account

 means any money which is held in trust for specific inmates, including funds in their possession at the time of booking,
funds brought for the use of specific inmates during the period of custody, and funds, such as commissary or canteen
funds, which are developed as a result of sales or fees to inmates. 


Juvenile 

means a person who has not attained his or her eighteenth birthday or, for purposes of juvenile court proceeding, a
child less than twenty-one years of age who became the subject of a juvenile court proceeding before the child's eighteenth
birthday. 


Juvenile community residential program

 means a program to provide positive role models and an environment conducive to positive behavior in the community
for adjudicated juveniles which is housed in a structure that does not have security fences, security hardware or
other major restraining construction typically associated with detention facilities. 


Juvenile community residential worker

 means a community residential staff person whose sole responsibility is the supervision of juveniles in a community
residential facility. 


Juvenile detention

 means the temporary care of a youth alleged to be delinquent, who requires secure custody in a physically restricting
facility. 


Juvenile detention facility

 means a local confinement facility for the temporary care of juvenile offenders and juveniles alleged to be delinquent
who require secure custody in a physically restricting facility for more than 24 hours. 


Juvenile intake

 means the process of determining whether the interests of the public or the juvenile require the filing of a petition
with the juvenile court. It includes receiving, reviewing, and processing complaints, recommending detention
or release, and providing services for juveniles and their families, including diversion and referral to other community
agencies. 


Library service

 means a service that provides and circulates reading materials; reading materials include books and periodicals
as well as education and recreational audiovisual materials. 


Light, natural

 means light available from a source within 20 feet of the room or cell with an opening or window that has a view to the outside.



Mail inspection

 means the examination of incoming and outgoing mail for contraband, cash, checks and money orders. 


Major infraction

 means a rule infraction involving a grievous loss and requiring imposition of disciplinary procedures. Major infractions
include: 
(1) Violations that may result in disciplinary detention or administrative segregation; 
(2) Violations that may result in a forfeiture, such as a loss of good time; and 
(3) Violations that may be referred for criminal prosecution. 


Medical/mental health restraints

 means either chemical restraints, such as sedatives, or physical agents, such as straight jackets, utilized only
for medical or psychiatric purposes. 


Medical/mental health segregation 

means a form of separation from the general population for detainees who are seriously ill or injured or whose presence
in the general population would be likely to spread contagious disease. 


Memorandum of agreement (MOA)

 means a written memorandum between two or more agencies which identifies the roles and responsibilities of each regarding
a specific item. 


Mentally retarded 

means an individual who functions at a subaverage general intellectual level and is deficient in adaptive behavior.



Minor infraction

 means a violation of the facility's rules of conduct that does not require due process and can be resolved without the
imposition of serious penalties. Minor infractions do not violate any federal or tribal statutes and may be resolved
informally by reporting staff. 


Multiple occupancy cell or room

 means an area, room or cell housing more than two and less than fifty persons. 


New construction

 means any new construction over 2000 square feet in gross square foot area. 


N.F.P.A. 

means the National Fire Protection Association. 


Non-contact visiting

 means a type of visiting that restricts inmates from having physical contact with visitors. Physical barriers usually
separate the offender from the visitors with screens and/or glass. Voice communication between the parties is typically
accomplished with phones or speakers. Offenders that present a serious escape threat, are a threat to others or require
protection are often designated for non-contact visits. 


Orientation

 means the period immediately following booking which includes interviews, testing and other booking-related activities,
including distribution of information about programs, services, rules and regulations. 


Perimeter security

 means a system that controls ingress and egress to the interior of a facility or institution. The system may include
electronic devices, walls, fences, patrols and/or towers. 


Planning of new institutions (PONI) program

 means the BIA process for the development of law enforcement facilities. The process includes application, validation,
pre-architectural programming, design, transition and construction. 


Post 

means a duty station related to either place or function which is necessary for the operation of the facility. 


Pretrial release

 means a procedure whereby an accused individual who had been taken into custody is allowed to be released before and
during his or her trial. 


Privileged information

 means information about detainees or residents which is not considered public information under the provisions
of the Freedom of Information Act of 1973 as amended (5 U.S.C. 552). It typically includes information protected as
a medical record, classification interviews, and the results of internal disciplinary hearings. 


Protective holding cell

 means a specialized cell or room that is utilized to detain or isolate an incapacitated or combative individual(s)
for a short period of time. It may be equipped with specialized security and/or medical equipment to control and manage
individuals detained in these areas in a safe, secure, and humane environment. 


Qualified health and safety inspector

 means a full-time safety officer at either the BIA Area or Agency level. 


Qualified health staff

 means licensed, registered or certified physicians and dentists as well as other professional and technical workers
who, by law, engage in activities that support, complement or supplement the functions of physicians and/or dentists.




