 

RSPA understands that where no commercially available technology exists to inspect a particular pipe size by smart
pigs, the pipeline operator would lack sufficient technical information to establish the design and construction
criteria, e.g. minimum internal pipe diameter and minimum pipe bend radius, essential for passage of smart pigs.
Therefore, the final rule has been written to apply only to pipeline diameters for which there is a commercially available
smart pig at the time the new or replacement pipeline is designed. At the time of preparation of this document, RSPA
finds that 4 inches is the minimum nominal pipe size for which smart pigs are commercially available. 


Gas Transmission Lines Operated in Conjunction With Distribution Systems 


Twelve commenters recommended that the rule except lines classified as transmission lines because their hoop stress
is 20 percent or more of SMYS, that operate in conjunction with gas distribution systems. They reasoned that, typically,
these lines have components and configurations that impede passage of instrumented internal inspection devices.

Some commenters reasoned that many of these transmission lines are the sole gas supply to large gas distribution systems.
So, inspection of these lines by instrumented internal inspection devices could, if problems develop while running
the inspection device, disrupt customer service. 
RSPA does not agree that the rule should provide an exception for gas transmission lines that are operated in conjunction
with distribution systems (except as discussed under the heading ``Gas transmission lines in crowded underground
locations''). First, although such lines may have configurations or components that impede inspection by smart
pigs, the commenters did not provide information to substantiate the contention that these conditions are impracticable
to avoid on new or replacement lines. RSPA believes it is practicable to design and construct new and replacement transmission
lines operated in conjunction with distribution systems to accommodate passage of smart pigs. Second, potential
service disruption (from stuck smart pigs) on single feed transmission lines will not be a factor on lines that are
properly designed, constructed and maintained to accommodate smart pigs. Also, to further reduce the possibility
of the smart pig becoming stuck, prior runs can be scheduled, with cleaning and caliper pigs, during periods of minimal
load requirements. Third, the use of smart pigs to monitor the integrity of single feed transmission lines can detect
problems before they can affect the reliability of the gas supply to the customers. 


Gas Transmission Lines in Crowded Underground Locations 


Twelve commenters recommended that RSPA except gas transmission lines located in certain urban areas. Most of them
pointed out that utility locations underneath city streets in downtown urban areas are typically overcrowded. Physical
constraints from other utilities and the structural boundary of available space make the design and construction
of replacement pipelines to accommodate smart pigs impracticable. For example, many underground utility locations
lack sufficient clearance between existing utilities to allow the replacement of existing short radius elbows with
longer radius elbows (which consume more space) to permit passage of smart pigs. Nonetheless, a commenter from a state
with few large cities suggested that internal inspection devices should only be required for pipelines located in
Class 3 or 4 locations and in environmentally sensitive areas. 
While gas transmission lines operated in conjunction with distribution systems are generally covered under this
rule, RSPA agrees that the rule should provide an exception whenever gas transmission lines operated in conjunction
with distribution systems are located in certain congested urban areas. RSPA believes it is impracticable to design
and construct these particular transmission lines, considering the arguments presented above, to accommodate
passage of smart pigs when there exist physical constraints, not associated with the pipe itself, which are beyond
an operator's control. Furthermore, RSPA understands that underground utility areas in Class 4 locations are typically
overcrowded and unable to accommodate the pipeline configurations needed for the accommodation of smart pigs. So,
in the final rule, 192.150(b)(6) excepts gas transmission lines that are: Operated in conjunction with a gas
distribution system and installed in Class 4 locations. However, gas transmission lines, not operated in conjunction
with a gas distribution system are not excepted because these lines generally pose greater risks, typically transporting
gas at higher pressures. 



