 

On January 6, 1993, FDA published final rules (58 FR 2079) requiring use of 
the PDCAAS method as the method for determining protein quality for food 
intended for children over 1 year of age and adults. While this method is 
recommended for all children above 1 year of age, it is not recommended for 
infants, and therefore FDA's final rule (58 FR 2079 at 2102) retained the PER 
method for assessing protein quality and retained casein as the standard in 
expressing the percentage of the Reference Daily Intake (RDI) for protein in 
foods represented and purported to be for use by infants. This rule became 
effective on May 8, 1994. In recognition of these scientific advances and the 
adoption by FDA of PDCAAS as the only method for determining protein quality 
for children above one year of age, this rule amends the NSLP regulations at 
appendix A of Part 210 to require PDCAAS as the only method for determining 
protein quality for enriched macaroni. However, in order to provide affected 
parties an implementation period, the amended paragraph 2 further provides 
that for 30 days after publication of the rule either the PER or the PDCAAS 
may be used. 
Finally, a new paragraph 1(c) is added to Appendix A to make clear that 
enriched macaroni may not be used for infants under 1 year of age in the NSLP. 
Accordingly, FNS will no longer approve enriched macaroni products purported 
for use by infants regardless of what method their protein quality has been 
tested. It was never the Department's intention that enriched macaroni 
products be served to infants and this amendment is meant to make clear that 
policy. 
Manufacturers of enriched macaroni with fortified protein, currently approved 
by FNS, will not be affected by the change to an alternate method unless the 
nutritional composition of their approved product changes. Should the 
nutritional composition of an approved product previously tested under PER 
method change after the 30 day implementation period, data obtained by the 
PDCAAS method will be required for re-approval. 
The FDA Standard of Identity (21 CFR 139.117), referenced and quoted in 
Appendix A and upon which the FNS final regulation was based, was stayed on 
March 21, 1978, pending a determination of whether a public hearing was 
necessary to resolve issues raised by objections (43 FR 11695). At that time, 
FDA stated that ``during the period of the stay, the (enriched macaroni 
products with fortified protein) may be introduced into interstate commerce 
with appropriate labeling as a nonstandardized food.'' (43 FR 11695). 
Therefore, this rule deletes all references to that Standard in Appendix A. 
However, the requirements for processing and labeling of enriched macaroni 
products with fortified protein prescribed by FDA in the stayed Standard of 
Identity were previously incorporated in the FNS final rule and will remain 
the same, with some technical changes. 
In addition, this final rule amends the current regulation to correct a 
statement which has caused confusion and which was recently brought to our 
attention by analytical laboratories. The current regulation states that the 
protein quality is to be determined on the cooked food. However, determining 
protein quality on the cooked food is not feasible in practice, because when 
utilizing the PER method the moisture content prevents laboratory rodents from 
eating test foods in sufficient quantities to accurately determine protein 
quality. Likewise, the moisture content in the cooked food may affect the 
test results under the PDCAAS method. Therefore, FAO/WHO suggests a moisture 
content in the cooked food of less than ten percent for viable testing. 
Determinations made on a dry basis has been the procedure commonly employed by 
commercial laboratories in the past. Thus, this rule requires determination 
of protein quality on a dry basis. 
This final rule makes a typographical correction and, in accordance with the 
Metric Conversion Act of 1975, adds, side by side, the metric equivalent for 
all weights and measurements contained in the rule. 
This final rule also includes a clarification that all manufacturers, 
including those with currently accepted macaroni products, must notify FNS if 
there is a change in the protein portion of their product since the original 
data submission and product approval. FNS will assume the protein content 
remains the same unless otherwise notified. 


