 

&bull;For hospitals located in rural areas, the market basket percentage increase plus the amount necessary to make
the rural standardized amount equal the standardized amount for other urban areas. 

The percentage change in the market basket reflects the average change in the price of goods and services purchased
by hospitals to furnish inpatient care. The most recent forecasted hospital market basket increase for FY 1995 is
3.6 percent. For FY 1995, this yields an update to the urban average standardized amounts of 1.1 percent (3.6 percent
minus 2.5 percent). To satisfy the requirement of section 1886(b)(3)(i)(X) of the Act that the update for hospitals
located in a rural area be equal to that for hospitals located in an other urban area beginning in FY 1995, we estimate
that an overall update of the market basket rate of increase (that is, 3.6 percent) plus approximately 4.8 percentage
points will be necessary. Thus, we are proposing an update to the other urban and rural average standardized amounts
for FY 1995 of 8.4 percent. However, as explained below, we are currently estimating that the overall increase in the
rural standardized amount will be approximately 4.6 percent, as a result of two adjustments that must be made to the
updated standardized amounts. These adjustments were previously applied differentially to the urban and rural
standardized amounts. 

First, we are adjusting the FY 1994 standardized amounts to remove the effects of the FY 1994 geographic reclassifications
and outlier payments before applying the FY 1995 updates. That is, we are increasing the standardized amounts to restore
the reductions that were made for the effects of geographic reclassification and outliers. As these reductions were
larger for urban than rural hospitals, restoring the reductions results in a larger increase in the urban standardized
amounts than the rural standardized amounts. After applying an update of 1.1 percent to the adjusted urban standardized
amount, we estimate that an overall update of 7.3 percent is required to equate the rural and other urban standardized
amounts. 

However, the estimated actual increase in the standardized amounts for rural hospitals will be less because we also
have to reduce the standardized amounts for the effects of geographic reclassification and outliers. For FY 1995,
there will be a single reduction to the standardized amounts for each of these factors, rather than separate adjustments
to the urban and rural standardized amounts based on the effect of geographic reclassification and outliers in each
respective area. For instance, in FY 1994, we reduced the urban standardized amounts by 5.4 percent and the rural standardized
amounts by 2.3 percent to account for outliers in each respective area. For FY 1995, we will apply one adjustment for
the effect of outliers_a single reduction in the standardized amounts of 5.1 percent. Similarly, there were separate
reductions to the standardized amounts in FY 1994 for the effects of geographic reclassification of 0.7 percent for
urban hospitals and 0.1 percent for rural hospitals. Our proposed standardized amounts reflect a single reduction
for this factor of 0.6 percent. After including offsets to the standardized amounts for outliers and geographic reclassification,
we estimate that there will be an actual increase of 4.6 percent to the rural standardized amounts and 1.5 percent to
the urban standardized amounts. A more detailed explanation of the impact of the single standardized amount for other
urban and rural hospitals and single adjustments for the effects of outliers and geographic reclassification is
included in Appendix A of this proposed rule. 

With the phase-out of the rural payment amount, rural hospitals and other urban hospitals will be paid based on the
same standardized amount. Since Congress has mandated the elimination of separate payment rates based on whether
a hospital is located in an urban or rural area, we believe it is appropriate to revise the national average standardized
amounts based on national average labor/nonlabor shares. Therefore, we propose to adjust the labor and nonlabor
proportions of the standardized amount to reflect the national average. (We are revising the Puerto Rico standardized
amounts by the average labor share in Puerto Rico of 82.7 percent.) Currently, the rural labor share represents 75.6
percent of the standardized amount while the urban labor share represents 70.8 percent. This differential is the
result of standardization of labor-related costs by the area wage index. Because rural hospitals generally have
lower wage index values than urban hospitals, the standardization process resulted in a higher labor share for rural
hospitals. We are therefore proposing to adjust the labor/nonlabor proportions of the standardized amounts that
will be applicable to both rural and urban hospitals based on the national average. As a result, the national average
labor share (as reflected in the hospital market basket) will equal 71.4 percent of the standardized payment amounts.


Although the update factor for FY 1995 is set by law, we were required by section 1886(e)(3)(B) of the Act to report to
Congress no later than March 1, 1994 on our initial recommendation of update factors for FY 1995 for both prospective
payment hospitals and hospitals excluded from the prospective payment system. For general information purposes,
we have included the report to Congress as Appendix C to this proposed rule. Our proposed recommendation on the update
factors (which is required by sections 1886(e)(4)(A) and (e)(5)(A) of the Act), as well as our responses to ProPAC's
recommendation concerning the update factor, is set forth as Appendix D to this proposed rule. 



