 

Feral pigs (

Sus scrofa

) have been in the Waianae Mountains for about 150 years and are known to be one of the major current modifiers of forest
habitats (Stone 1985). Pigs damage the native vegetation by rooting and trampling the forest floor and encourage
the expansion of alien plants that are better able to exploit the newly tilled soils than are native taxa (Stone 1985).
Pigs also disseminate alien plant taxa through their feces and on their bodies, accelerating the spread of alien plant
taxa within the native forest. Present throughout the Waianae Mountains in low numbers, feral pigs pose a potential
threat as some pig trails and rooting have been seen in the general areas of all three plant taxa included in this rule.
The rooting was localized and no direct damage to any of the three plant taxa was noted. However, this situation could
change very quickly (HHP 1992a2, 1992b2, 1992b3, 1992c5). 

B. 

Overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes.

 Illegal collecting for scientific or horticultural purposes or excessive visits by individuals interested in seeing
rare plants could result from increased publicity. This is a potential threat to all of the taxa included in this final
rule, but especially to 

Cyanea grimesiana

 ssp. 

obatae,

 which is known from only a single population of five plants, and 

Gouania vitifolia,

 which is known from only one population of two probable clones. Collection of whole plants or reproductive parts of
these taxa could cause an adverse impact on the gene pool and threaten the survival of the taxa. Disturbance to the area
by human trampling also could promote erosion and greater ingress by competing alien taxa. 

C. 

Disease or predation.

 Introduced slugs have been observed to feed on ripe fruits and seeds of 

Cyanea grimesiana

 ssp. 

obatae.

 This predation could seriously affect the reproduction of this taxon (L. Mehrhoff, pers. comm., 1993). In addition,
rats (

Rattus

 spp.) and feral goats (

Capra hircus

), as well as feral pigs, are known from the area and damage to fruits, seeds, and plants from their foraging on other
plant taxa has been observed. 

D. 

The inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms.

 Of the three taxa in this final rule, two have populations located on private land, one on State land, and one on Federal
land. 

Diellia unisora

 is known only from Federal and private lands; 

Gouania vitifolia

 is known only from State land; 

Cyanea grimesiana

 ssp. 

obatae

 is known only from private lands. Federal listing automatically results in listing under Hawaii State law, which
prohibits taking of endangered plants in the State and encourages conservation by State agencies. State regulations
prohibit the removal, destruction, or damage of plants found on State lands. However, the regulations are difficult
to enforce because of limited personnel. Hawaii's Endangered Species Act (HRS, Sect. 195D4(a)) states, ``Any
species of aquatic life, wildlife, or wild plant that has been determined to be an endangered species pursuant to the
[Federal] Endangered Species Act shall be deemed to be an endangered species under the provisions of this chapter
***'' Further, the State may enter into agreements with Federal agencies to administer and manage
any area required for the conservation, management, enhancement, or protection of endangered species (HRS, sect.
195D5(c)). Funds for these activities could be made available under section 6 of the Federal Act (State Cooperative
Agreements). Listing of these three plant taxa, therefore, reinforces and supplements the protection available
to the taxa under State law. The Federal Act also offers additional protection to these three taxa because it is a violation
of the Act for any person to remove, cut, dig up, damage, or destroy any such plant in an area not under Federal jurisdiction
in knowing violation of State law or regulation or in the course of any violation of a State criminal trespass law. 

E. 

Other natural or manmade factors affecting its continued existence.

 The small number of populations and individuals of all of these taxa increases the potential for extinction from stochastic
events. The limited gene pool may depress reproductive vigor, or a single human-caused or natural environmental
disturbance could destroy a significant percentage of the individuals or the only known extant population. All three
taxa in this rule are known from three or fewer populations. 

The Service has carefully assessed the best scientific and commercial information available regarding the past,
present, and future threats faced by these taxa in determining to issue this final rule. Based on this evaluation,
the preferred action is to list these three plant taxa as endangered. These taxa are known from fewer than five populations.
The three taxa are threatened by one or more of the following: Habitat degradation and competition from alien plants;
habitat degradation and potential predation by feral animals, particularly pigs; and lack of legal protection or
difficulty in enforcing laws which are already in effect. Small population size and limited distribution make these
taxa particularly vulnerable to extinction and/or reduced reproductive vigor from stochastic events. Because
these three taxa are in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of their ranges, they fit the definition
of endangered as defined in the Act. 


