 



Response: 

We will not require that States catalogue complaints made against temporary managers, but will allow them to process
complaint information in the way that they determine is most effective. Neither will we require the States to compile,
update, and release a list of those qualified to be temporary managers. Because we have no authority to require the
release of individuals' qualifications or other assignments, a list of temporary managers would contain no criteria
by which facilities would be able to evaluate the candidates, and would be of little value. Moreover, HCFA and the State
are not obligated to seek facility approval of temporary managers. It is neither the facility's responsibility nor
right to select a temporary manager. (See additional response below.) 



Comment: 

A few commenters recommended that we allow a State or a team of people to qualify as a temporary manager. They believed
that nursing guidance and expertise would be needed in addition to administrative supervision in order to remedy
serious deficiencies. 



Response: 

Because a temporary manager has the authority to hire additional staff, it is possible for him or her to assemble what
would be in essence a temporary management team. When the temporary manager determines that successful correction
of a facility's deficiencies requires knowledge and skills in addition to his or her own, he or she may engage the specialists
necessary. 


We have no statutory authority to require State survey agencies to make their staff available to function as temporary
managers. Their role involves survey, certification, and monitoring, rather than the management (albeit temporary)
of nursing homes. 



Comment: 

Several commenters asked that facilities be able to participate in the selection of the temporary manager. One recommended
that the governing board of the facility be responsible for placing the temporary manager at the facility, and others
requested that facilities be able to object to a particular temporary manager once selected by HCFA or the State. 



Response: 

The choice of a temporary manager will be made either by the State or by HCFA and will be based on the recommendation of
the State survey agency. The State survey agency's geographic proximity to the providers it surveys and its knowledge
of available and competent managers in the area place it in the best position to recommend a temporary manager. Because
facilities have the right to refuse to relinquish control to the temporary manager, no facility will be forced to submit
to a temporary manager that it objects to, and it may decide to subject itself to the possibility of termination instead.




Comment: 

Certain commenters were concerned that the qualifications for a temporary manager will be hard to meet. A few commenters
suggested that HCFA and the State be given latitude to appoint as temporary manager any qualified person, such as a
registered nurse with nursing home experience, instead of having to appoint a licensed nursing home administrator.




Response: 

We agree that a nursing home administrator's license is not the only valid indicator of an individual's fitness to
serve as temporary manager. Certain combinations of educational and vocational achievement may also signify administrative
competency. We are, therefore, amending paragraph (b)(1) and deleting paragraph (b)(2) of 488.215 as they
appeared in the proposed rule to allow an individual who does not hold a nursing home administrator's license to serve
as temporary manager if the State determines that he or she is qualified to oversee correction of deficiencies on the
basis of experience and education. Because this change should expand the pool of qualified temporary manager candidates,
it should reduce the number of terminations caused by inability to locate a temporary manager, a clear benefit to both
providers and residents. 



Comment: 

One commenter believed that the State should be required to conduct an orientation session for people on the list of
qualified temporary managers. That session would cover topics such as situations warranting the appointment of
a temporary manager, and the responsibilities and authority of a temporary manager. 




