 

1726.301 

Use of printed forms.



If a REA contract form is required by this part, the borrower shall use the form in the format available from REA or GPO
(photocopying or other exact reproduction is acceptable.) The contract forms are not to be retyped, changed, modified
or altered in any manner not specifically authorized in this part or approved by REA in writing. Any modifications
approved by REA must be clearly shown so to indicate that such are different from the standard form.



1726.302 

REA approved forms of contract.



If a specific REA contract form is required by a particular section of this part, the borrower shall use that form without
changes or modifications or alterations unless, prior to issuing the bid package to bidders, REA has specifically
approved any such changes to that form for that borrower. Any proposed changes shall not relieve the contractor or
the borrower of the basic responsibilities required by the standard REA contract form, and, shall not alter any terms
and conditions required by law. Changes permitted or required by subpart H of this part or by part 1788, REA Fidelity
and Insurance Requirements for Electric and Telephone Borrowers, of this chapter are approved by REA under the circumstances
indicated.



1726.303 

Interest on overdue accounts.



Certain REA contract forms contain a provision concerning payment of interest on overdue accounts. Prior to issuing
the invitation to bidders, the borrower must insert an interest rate equal to the lowest ``Prime Rate'' listed in the
``Money Rates'' section of the Wall Street Journal on the date such invitation to bid is issued. If no prime rate is published
on that date, the last such rate published prior to that date must be used. The rate must not, however, exceed the maximum
rate allowed by any applicable state law.



1726.304_1726.309 

[Reserved]



1726.310 

Contractor's bond, REA Form 168b.



The bond form in this section shall be used when a Contractor's Bond is required by REA Forms 200, 201, 203, 257, 764,
786, 790, 792, 830, or 831 unless the contractor's surety has accepted a Small Business Administration guarantee
and the contract is for one million dollars or less.



Contractor's Bond



1. Know all men that we, 

XXXX

, as Principal, and 

XXXX

, as Surety, are held and firmly bound unto 

XXXX

 (hereinafter called the ``Owner'') and unto the United States of America (hereinafter called the ``Government'')
and unto all persons, firms and corporations who or which may furnish materials for or perform labor on a Rural Electrification
Administration Project known as Project 

XXXX

 and to their successors and assigns, in the penal sum of 

XXXX

 dollars ($

XXXX

), as hereinafter set forth and for the payment of which sum well and truly to be made we bind ourselves, our executors,
administrators, successors and assigns jointly and severally by these presents. Said Project is described in a certain
construction contract (hereinafter called the ``Construction Contract'') between the Owner and the Principal,
dated 

XXXX

, 19

XX

, pursuant and subject to a certain loan contract (hereinafter called the ``Loan Contract'') between the Owner and
the Government, acting through the Administrator of the Rural Electrification Administration (hereinafter called
the ``Administrator'').

2. The condition of this obligation is such that if the Principal shall well and truly perform and fulfill all the undertakings,
covenants, terms, conditions and agreements of the Construction Contract and any amendments thereto, whether such
amendments are for additions, decreases, or changes in materials, their quantity, kind or price, labor costs, mileage,
routing or any other purpose whatsoever, and whether such amendments are made with or without notice to the Surety,
and shall fully indemnify and save harmless the Owner and the Government from all costs and damages which they, or either
of them, shall suffer or incur by reason of any failure so to do, and shall fully reimburse and repay the Owner and the
Government for all outlay and expense which they, or either of them shall incur in making good any such failure of performance
on the part of the Principal, and shall promptly make payment to all persons working on or supplying labor or materials
for use in the construction of the Project contemplated in the Construction Contract and any amendments thereto,
in respect of such labor or materials furnished and used therein, to the full extent thereof, and in respect of such
labor or materials furnished but not so used, to the extent of the quantities estimated in the Construction Contract
and any amendments thereto to be required for the construction of the Project, and shall well and truly reimburse the
Owner and the Government, as their respective interests may appear, for any excess in cost of construction of said
Project over the cost of such construction as provided in the Construction Contract and any amendments thereto, occasioned
by any default of the Principal under the Construction Contract and any amendments thereto, then this obligation
shall be null and void, but otherwise shall remain in full force and effect.

3. It is expressly agreed that this bond shall be deemed amended automatically and immediately, without formal and
separate amendments hereto, upon any amendment to the Construction Contract, so as to bind the Principal and the Surety
to the full and faithful performance of the Construction Contract as so amended, provided only that the total amount
of all increases in the cost of construction shall not exceed 20 percent of the amount of the maximum price set forth
in the Construction Contract. The term ``Amendment,'' wherever used in this bond, and whether referring to this bond,
the Construction Contract or the Loan Contract shall include any alteration, addition, extension, modification,
amendment, rescission, waiver, release or annulment, of any character whatsoever.

4. It is expressly agreed that any amendment which may be made by agreement or otherwise between the Principal and the
Owner in the terms, provisions, covenants and conditions of the Construction Contract, or in the terms, provisions,
covenants and conditions of the Loan Contract (including, without limitation, the granting by the Administrator
to the Owner of any extension of time for the performance of the obligations of the Owner under the Loan Contract or the
granting by the Administrator or the Owner to the Principal of any extension of time for the performance of the obligations
of the Principal under the Construction Contract, or the failure or refusal of the Administrator or the Owner to take
any action, proceeding or step to enforce any remedy or exercise any right under either the Construction Contract
or the Loan Contract, or the taking of any action, proceeding or step by the Administrator or the Owner, acting in good
faith upon the belief that the same is permitted by the provisions of the Construction Contract or the Loan Contract)
shall not in any way release the Principal and the Surety, or either of them or their respective executors, administrators,
successors or assigns, from liability hereunder. The Surety hereby acknowledges receipt of notice of any amendment,
indulgence or forbearance, made, granted or permitted.

5. This bond is made for the benefit of all persons, firms and corporations who or which may furnish any materials or
perform any labor for or on account of the construction to be performed under the Construction Contract and any amendments
thereto, and they, and each of them, are hereby made obligees hereunder with the same force and effect as if their names
were written herein as such, and they and each of them may sue hereon.

In witness whereof, the undersigned have caused this instrument to be executed and their respective corporate seals
to be affixed and attested by their duly authorized representatives this 

XXXX

 day of 

XXXX

, 19

XX

.



