 





EPA's 7.8 RVP summertime standard under the federal Phase II volatility control program, which began in 1992, is the
same as California's Phase I reformulated gasoline, which also began in 1992. The detergent requirement is also essentially
equivalent to a CAA requirement affecting all gasoline which is required to begin in 1995, see section 211(l) of the
CAA.

Toxic emissions, overall, are expected to decrease during the high ozone season due to Phase II RVP control. Reductions
in non-exhaust VOC emissions will account for most of this decrease.



b. California Reformulated Gasoline (Phase II).

 The California Phase I reformulated gasoline program began in 1992 and applies to all gasoline sold in the state. It
primarily requires that gasoline meet a 7.8 RVP standard and contain detergents which prevent deposits from accumulating
in fuel injectors and intake valves.

In November 1991 CARB approved regulations for the Phase II reformulated gasoline program that begins on April 1,
1996. The California Phase II reformulated gasoline regulation established standards for eight gasoline characteristics,
briefly summarized below. The 1.8 percent by weight oxygen content refers to wintertime only.




<TABLE>






California Phase II Reformulated Gasoline Specifications


1Specification

1Flat limit

1Average limit

1Absolute cap





RVP, psi

7.0



7.0

Sulfur, ppmw

40

30

80

Aromatics, vol%

25

22

30

Benzene, vol%

1.0

0.8

1.2

Olefins, vol%

6.0

4.0

10.0

Oxygen, wt%

1.82.2




i0(1)

90% distillation temperature, 
&cir;F

300

290

330

50% distillation temperature, 
&cir;F

210

200

220


12.7 maximum 1.8 minimum.



</TABLE>




Refineries may choose whether to conform to the flat limits which apply to all batches of gasoline when it is initially
sold from the product facility, or to the average limits which apply to the average of all fuel produced by a given refinery.
In the case of a refiner choosing averaging, the absolute cap or absolute limit also must be met. California is also
allowing the sale of alternative fuel formulations which meet the emission reduction potential of a fuel meeting
the average limits. However, even these alternative gasolines must still meet the cap limits described above. Gasoline
meeting the average limits will reduce VOC and NO

X

 emissions by 1718 and 1314 percent (relative to pre-1995), respectively, according to EPA's complex
model as revised in November 1993. Thus, California Phase II gasoline should provide at least as much VOC and NO

X

 emission reductions as the federal Phase II standards.

In its recent rule, EPA determined that fuel meeting California's Phase II standards will produce greater emission
benefits than federal Phase I reformulated gasoline and it was therefore appropriate to exempt California gasoline
from the enforcement procedures for the federal Phase I standards. Thus, there would be no attainment benefit to requiring
federal Phase I reformulated gasoline to be sold in Sacramento, although emissions reductions would be achieved
during the summer of 1995. At this time it appears from the available data that California's fuel achieves as much reduction
as federal Phase II reformulated gasoline and therefore EPA is not proposing any changes to California's gasoline
program today. If later EPA determines that further reductions can be achieved through use of either federal Phase
II reformulated gasoline or some new formulation, EPA will propose appropriate changes to the fuel program in California
as a FIP revision if such reductions are needed.



c. California Reformulated Diesel Fuel.

 On August 21, 1990, EPA finalized its low-sulfur diesel rulemaking. CARB adopted their clean diesel fuel regulations
in November 1988 and on December 26, 1991, enacted their clean diesel fuel program. Both the federal and CARB programs
became effective on October 1, 1993. The two programs are similar, and are designed to substantially reduce sulfate
particulate and NO

X

 emissions, and to allow manufacturers to comply with 1994 and newer emission standards for diesel vehicles. Important
differences exist between California and the federal program, as outlined below.

The EPA program only applies to diesel fuel for use in on-highway vehicles. Trucks, automobiles, and buses would be
affected, for example, but construction and farm equipment would not, unless they chose to use the low-sulfur diesel
fuel. The regulation sets a 0.05 percent by weight sulfur limit for all on-road diesels, and requires a minimum cetane
index of 40 or maximum 35 percent by volume aromatics percentage. The current maximum sulfur content in on-highway
diesel fuel is approximately 500 ppm. Since direct measurement of aromatics is a somewhat complicated procedure,
EPA chose to use a minimum cetane index as a surrogate for capping aromatics. Few refiners have had trouble meeting
this requirement and those who cannot can sell fuel into the nonroad market. The price differential between high-sulfur
and low-sulfur fuels is expected to be approximately 2&cent;/gallon once initial distribution blips have resolved
themselves.






