 

Each agency will develop its own letter informing the 
complainant that the agency will refer the complaint to the 
EEOC for investigation and processing, unless the agency 
receives a written request to the contrary from the 
complainant within twenty days of the date of the notice 
letter. The agency notice letter shall explain: (i) that 
agency's procedures for processing section 504 complaints; 
and (ii) the EEOC's procedures for processing complaints 
under title I. The agency notice letter shall also inform 
individuals of the potential for differing remedies under 
each statute. 
Paragraph (c)(3) describes the procedure for referral 
by designated agencies, as established by 35.171(b)(2) of 
the title II regulation. If a designated agency does not 
have section 504 jurisdiction, and determines that the EEOC 
may have title I jurisdiction, it shall promptly refer the 
complaint to the EEOC. 
Paragraph (c)(4)(i) provides that complaints referred 
to the EEOC by an agency with section 504 jurisdiction will 
be deemed to be dual filed under both section 504 and title 
I. As a consequence, the section 504 agency, although 
required to defer its processing of the complaint, will have 
an opportunity to review the EEOC's findings and take any 
further action it deems appropriate, as provided in 

XX

.10. 
Paragraph (c)(4)(ii) further provides that a complaint 
referred to the EEOC by an agency that has jurisdiction over 
the complaint under title II only (and not under section 
504) will be treated as a complaint filed under title I 
only. See 28 CFR 35.171(b)(2). 
The distinction between the treatment of these two 
types of complaints, those falling within the province of 
section 504 and those arising only under the ADA, is based 
on the ADA's statutory mandate to preserve the rights, 
remedies, and procedures of any Federal law that provides 
greater or equal protection to individuals with disabilities 
than are afforded by the ADA. Permitting section 504 
agencies to review complaints originally filed with those 
agencies preserves section 504 remedies, including an 
agency's prerogative to terminate the federal funding of the 
respondent. It is anticipated that the fact that fund 
termination is ultimately available as an administrative 
remedy will encourage respondents to resolve valid claims 
through negotiation with the EEOC rather than through 
litigation. Because 

XX

.10(c) requires the reviewing 
section 504 agency to give due weight to the EEOC's findings 
and conclusions, it is also anticipated that, in most 
instances, further action by the section 504 agency will not 
be necessary. 
Paragraph (c)(4)(iii) states that any complaint 
referred to the EEOC shall be processed pursuant to title I 
procedures. Specifically, the EEOC will notify respondents 
of its receipt of a complaint in accordance with its usual 
procedures for notification following receipt of a charge. 

Paragraph (d) of 

XX

.6 describes the circumstances 
under which an agency shall retain a complaint for 
investigation (rather than referring it to the EEOC or the 
Civil Rights Division). The general rule applicable to 
section 504 agencies, as stated in paragraph (d)(1), is that 
a section 504 agency shall retain a complaint when it 
determines that it has section 504 jurisdiction over the 
complaint and that any one or more of the following are 
true: (i) the EEOC does not have jurisdiction over the 
complaint; (ii) the EEOC has jurisdiction over the 
complaint, but the complainant requests that the complaint 
be investigated by the agency rather than being referred; 
(iii) the complaint alleges discrimination in both 
employment and in other services or practices of the 
respondent that are covered by section 504; or (iv) the 
complaint alleges a pattern or practice of discrimination in 
employment. Such complaints will not be deemed dual filed 
under title I of the ADA. 
This procedure is consistent with the approach taken in 
the title VI/title VII regulation. For reasons of 
efficiency, section 504 agencies will ordinarily process 
complaints that allege disability discrimination in both 
employment and other practices of a recipient, because the 
EEOC has no jurisdiction over the latter. Historically, 
under both section 504 and other civil rights statutes, 
agencies have also had a particular interest in the 
enforcement of pattern or practice cases of employment 
discrimination against recipients of Federal assistance, and 
agencies shall continue to investigate such complaints. It 
should be noted that the term ``pattern or practice'' of 
discrimination is intended to mean systemic or class 
complaints generally. Although the term ``pattern or 
practice'' of discrimination is sometimes used in a more 
narrow sense to refer to intentional discrimination or 
disparate treatment on a classwide level, the term was used 
in the title VI/title VII rule to refer to both adverse 
impact cases and cases of intentional discrimination 
affecting a class of protected individuals. 
The provisions described above only apply when a 
complaint is filed with a section 504 agency. The EEOC will 
always process all charges, including class charges, that 
are solely filed with the EEOC. 
Paragraph (d)(2) restates the principle established in 
the title II regulation that an agency shall retain a 
complaint for investigation when it determines that: (i) it 
has jurisdiction over the complaint as a designated agency; 
and (ii) that the EEOC does not have jurisdiction over the 
complaint under title I. See 28 CFR 35.171(b)(2). 






