 

24.423 

Amendment of applications for Narrowband Personal Communications Service (other than applications filed on FCC
Form 175).



This section applies to all applications for Narrowband Personal Communications Service other than applications
filed on FCC Form 175.

(a) 

Amendments as of right. 

A pending application may be amended as a matter of right if the application has not been designated for hearing.

(1) Amendments shall comply with 24.429, as applicable; and

(2) Amendments which resolve interference conflicts or amendments under 24.429 may be filed at any time.

(b) The Commission or the presiding officer may grant requests to amend an application designated for hearing only
if a written petition demonstrating good cause is submitted and properly served upon the parties of record.

(c) 

Major amendments, minor amendments. 

The Commission will classify all amendments as minor except in the cases listed below. An amendment shall be deemed
to be a major amendment subject to 24.427 under any of the following circumstances:

(1) Change in technical proposal. If the amendment results in a substantial change in the engineering proposal such
as (but not necessarily limited to) a change in, or an addition of, a radio frequency; or

(2) Amendment to proposed service area. If the amendment extends the reliable service area of the proposed facilities
outside its MTA, BTA, or other applicable market area as defined in 24.102; or

(3) A substantial change in ownership or control.

(d) If a petition to deny (or other formal objection) has been filed, any amendment, requests for waiver, (or other
written communications) shall be served on the petitioner, unless waiver of this requirement is granted pursuant
to paragraph (e) of this section. See also 47 CFR 1.2108.

(e) The Commission may waive the service requirements of paragraph (d) of this section and prescribe such alternative
procedures as may be appropriate under the circumstances to protect petitioners' interests and to avoid undue delay
in a proceeding, if an applicant submits a request for waiver which demonstrates that the service requirement is unreasonably
burdensome.

(f) Any amendment to an application shall be signed and shall be submitted in the same manner, and with the same number
of copies, as was the original application. Amendments may be made in letter form if they comply in all other respects
with the requirements of this chapter.

(g) An application will be considered to be a newly filed application if it is amended by a major amendment (as defined
in this section), except in the following circumstances:

(1)(2) [Reserved]

(3) The amendment reflects only a change in ownership or control found by the Commission to be in the public interest;

(4) [Reserved]

(5) The amendment corrects typographical transcription, or similar clerical errors which are clearly demonstrated
to be mistakes by reference to other parts of the application, and whose discovery does not create new or increased
frequency conflicts;

(6) The amendment does not create new or increased frequency conflicts, and is demonstrably necessitated by events
which the applicant could not have reasonably foreseen at the time of filing, such as, for example:

(i) The loss of a transmitter or receiver site by condemnation, natural causes, or loss of lease or option; or

(ii) Obstruction of a proposed transmission path caused by the erection of a new building or other structure.



24.424 

[Reserved].



24.425 

Application for temporary authorizations.



(a) In circumstances requiring immediate or temporary use of facilities, request may be made for special temporary
authority to install and/or operate new or modified equipment. Any such request may be submitted as an informal application
in the manner set forth in 24.5 and must contain full particulars as to the proposed operation including all
facts sufficient to justify the temporary authority sought and the public interest therein. No such request will
be considered unless the request is received by the Commission at least 10 days prior to the date of proposed construction
or operation or, where an extension is sought, expiration date of the existing temporary authorization. A request
received within less than 10 days may be accepted upon due showing of sufficient reasons for the delay in submitting
such request.

(b) Special temporary authorizations may be granted without regard to the 30-day public notice requirements of 24.27(b)
when:

(1) The authorization is for a period not to exceed 30 days and no application for regular application is contemplated
to be filed;


