 




<CFRNO>7 CFR Part 1094 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[DA9406] </RINDOCK>



Milk in the New Orleans-Mississippi Marketing Area; Suspension of Certain Provisions of the Order 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Suspension of rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This document suspends, for 23 months, the 45 percent delivery requirement for a plant operated by a cooperative association
that is located within the New Orleans-Mississippi marketing area. The suspension was requested by Gulf Dairy Association,
Inc., which operates a manufacturing plant at Kentwood, Louisiana. The association states that without the suspension
it will be forced to make inefficient qualifying shipments of milk merely to keep the milk of its producers qualified
for pooling under the order.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 March 3, 1994 through December 31, 1995.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Nicholas Memoli, Marketing Specialist, USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, room 2971, South Building,
P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 200906456, (202) 6901932.

 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 Prior document in this proceeding: 




Notice of Proposed Suspension: Issued January 3, 1994; published January 10, 1994 (59 FR 1307). 




The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601612) requires the Agency to examine the impact of a proposed rule
on small entities. Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Service has certified
that this action will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. This rule lessens
the regulatory impact of the order on certain milk handlers and tends to ensure that dairy farmers will continue to
have their milk priced under the order and thereby receive the benefits that accrue from such pricing. 

The Department is issuing this rule in conformance with Executive Order 12866. 

This final rule also has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. This action is not intended
to have a retroactive effect. This action does not preempt any state or local laws, regulations, or policies, unless
they present an irreconcilable conflict with this rule. 

The Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601674), provides that administrative
proceedings must be exhausted before parties may file suit in court. Under section 608c(15)(A) of the Act, any handler
subject to an order may file with the Secretary a petition stating that the order, any provision of the order, or any
obligation imposed in connection with the order is not in accordance with the law and requesting a modification of
an order or to be exempted from the order. A handler is afforded the opportunity for a hearing on the petition. After
a hearing, the Secretary would rule on the petition. The Act provides that the district court of the United States in
any district in which the handler is an inhabitant, or has its principal place of business, has jurisdiction in equity
to review the Secretary's ruling on the petition, provided a bill in equity is filed not later than 20 days after date
of the entry of the ruling. 

This order of suspension is issued pursuant to the provisions of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act and of the
order regulating the handling of milk in the New Orleans-Mississippi marketing area. 

Notice of proposed rulemaking was published in the 

Federal Register

 on January 10, 1994 (59 FR 1307), concerning a proposed suspension of certain provisions of the order. Interested
persons were afforded opportunity to file written data, views, and arguments thereon. No comments were received.


After consideration of all relevant material, including the proposal in the notice, and other available information,
it is hereby found and determined that for the period commencing with publication of this document in the 

Federal Register

 and extending through December 31, 1995, the following provisions of the order do not tend to effectuate the declared
policy of the Act: 

In 1094.7(c), the words ``45 percent or more of the''. 



Statement of Consideration 


The order will suspend through December 1995 the 45 percent delivery requirement for a cooperative association plant
that is located in the New Orleans-Mississippi marketing area. 

Gulf Dairy Association, Inc., which operates a manufacturing plant at Kentwood, Louisiana, that is regulated under
Order 94, submitted the suspension request. The cooperative stated that because of the present 45 percent delivery
requirement applicable to a cooperative association that wishes to qualify a manufacturing plant for pooling, it
has had to shift some of its producers to neighboring Greater Louisiana (Order 96) pool plants to keep its Kentwood
plant qualified as a pool plant under Order 94. It indicated that Order 96 requires that six days' production of a producer
must be received at pool plants each month in order to qualify the milk for pooling by diversion to a nonpool plant. Accordingly,
it has had to move the milk of selected producers to Order 96 pool plants six days per month. Since this milk is not actually
needed by these pool plants, the cooperative has then had to back-haul the milk to its Kentwood manufacturing plant
for processing. The problem is now particularly acute, according to the cooperative, because two Order 94 pool plants
have notified Gulf Dairy Association that they will no longer purchase milk from them after February 1, 1994. 

Gulf Dairy Association noted that the problem it is experiencing could be resolved through the proposed merger of
milk orders that is now under consideration by the Department. It urged that the proposed suspension be effective
pending the completion of that proceeding. 

The suspension is found to be necessary for the purpose of assuring that producers' milk will not have to be moved in
an uneconomic and inefficient manner to assure that producers whose milk has long been associated with the New Orleans-Mississippi
marketing area will continue to benefit from pooling and pricing under the order. 

</SUPPLEM>
