 


Single-Family Acquisitions




1. Loan-to-value LTV ratio at origination (Ref. 19)


2. Product Type (Ref. 26)


3. Seller Institutions (Ref. 31)


4. Purpose of Loan (Ref. 22)


5. Occupancy Code (Ref. 44)


6. Number of Units (Ref. 45)


7. Cooperative Unit Mortgage (Ref. 23)


8. RTC/FDIC (Ref. 28)


9. Public Subsidy Program (Ref. 37)


10. Refinancing from Own Portfolio (Ref. 24)


11. Acquisition Type (Ref. 35)


12. Community Lending Mortgage (Ref. 34)






The basis for our request derives from the major precedents interpreting the FOIA's Exemption 4. The leading case
in determining whether information provided to the government is ``privileged and confidential'' and therefore
entitled to be withheld under Exemption 4 is 

National Parks  Conservation Association 

v.

 Morton,

 498 F. 2d 765 (D.C. Cir. 1974). In 

National Parks,

 the DC Circuit Court of Appeals held that the test for confidentiality is an objective one that could be determined
by a two prong test:






To summarize, commercial or financial matter is ``confidential'' for purposes of the exemption if disclosure of
the information is likely to have either of the following effects: (1) To impair the Government's ability to obtain
necessary information in the future; or (2) to cause substantial harm to the competitive position of the person from
whom the information was obtained. 

Id.

 at 770.






The second prong of 

National Parks

 is applicable to each of the referenced items because, when combined with each other and with information on unpaid
principal balance (``UPB''), income, and precise geographic markers, disclosure would cause us substantial competitive
harm.




Single-Family Data Elements





Public disclosure of the entire Single-Family Acquisitions database would provide customers and competitors with
the elements described above at loan level detail, in combination with loan amount, race, income, gender, zip code,
and census tract. Precise details on such factors as loan-to-value ratios, when combined with other basic loan level
detail, would likely cause substantial competitive injury to Fannie Mae by providing competitors and customers
with valuable insights about our business plans, risk assessments and marketing strategies. These insights could
lead to changes in pricing or negotiating tactics detrimental to the company.




Multifamily Data Elements





The multifamily elements (contained in the Multifamily Acquisitions and Multifamily Units Files) that Fannie Mae
is classifying as proprietary and confidential are: Acquisition UPB; date of mortgage note; coop status; term at
origination; loan type (more properly, amortization); acquisition type; total number of units; average reported
rent per bedroom type; average reported rent plus utilities per bedroom type; purpose of loan, and zip code. Public
disclosure of this data would reveal key factors in our business strategies and successes to our competitors and companies
with whom we do business. This would subsidize such firms at our expense by providing them information they otherwise
could acquire only at great expense.




Conclusion





Disclosing the referenced data for both single-family and multifamily elements would harm us by subsidizing the
competitors' acquisition of valuable market information, increasing their efficiency at Fannie Mae's expense.
Such consequences are precisely the type that courts have held justify non-disclosure of information under Exemption
4. See, 

e.g., Gulf  Western Indus. 

v.

 United States,

 615 F.2d 527, 530 (D.C. Cir. 1980); 

Braintree Electric Light Dept. 

v.

 Department of Energy,

 494 F. Supp. 287, 289 (D.D.C. 1980); 

National Parks 



 Conservation Association 

v.

 Kleppe,

 547 F.2d 673, 684 (DC Cir. 1976); and 

Westinghouse Elec. Corp. 

v.

 Schlesinger

 392 F. Supp. 1246, 1249 (E.D. Va. 1974).



Specifically, case law establishes that Exemption 4 is designed to protect a ``mosaic'' of data, to shield information
that might not cause competitive harm on a stand-alone basis, but would be harmful in combination with other information
available to the requester. See 

e.g., Timken Co. 

v.

 United States Customs Serv.,

 491 F. Supp. 557, 559 (D.D.C. 1980). Under the precedents, information also must be deemed proprietary and confidential
if public disclosure would displace a submitter from a level competitive playing field_by forcing it to divulge sensitive
business information which competitors may access freely without incurring any parallel disclosure obligation
to the submitter of the information.



The courts thus will direct ``close attention'' to proposed agency disclosures that benefit competitors at the expense
of submitters, and have disfavored disclosure that affords a potential windfall to competitors by providing them
data at bargain rates rather than the considerable funds that otherwise would be expended in private research and
development. 

Worthington Compressors, Inc. 

v.

 Castle,

 662 F.2d 45, 51 (D.C. Cir. 1981), supplemental opinion sub. nom. 

Worthington Compressors, Inc. 

v.

 Gorsuch,

 668 F.2d 1371 (DC Cir. 1981). See also 

Allnet Communication Servs., Inc. 

v.

 FCC, 

800 F. Supp. 984, 98889 (D.D.C. 1992); 

SMS Data Prods. Group, Inc. 

v.

 United States Dept. of Air Force,

 1989 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 3156, 35 Cont. Cas. Fed. (CCH) P 75644 (D.D.C. 1989) (noting that release would allow competitors
access to information that they would have to spend ``considerable funds'' to develop on their own).



No competitor of Fannie Mae is subject to data disclosure requirements of the breadth and detail included in the data
elements we have submitted to HUD. The information contained in our 1993 annual report on housing goals, the accompanying
tables and the proprietary information in the database, as to which we have not requested confidential treatment,
provide an unprecedented view of our business. We have limited our request for confidential treatment to only those
parts of the database having the likelihood, if released, to cause us substantial competitive harm. As a result, our
request is limited to only approximately 21 percent of the elements in the database. Because release of the information,
for which we have asked for confidentiality, would have clearly adverse commercial consequences for us, we request
that HUD designate the referenced items as ``proprietary pursuant to 12 U.S.C. 4546 and invoke Exemption 4 to withhold
release of such information.



I hope this discussion and information is helpful to you in evaluating our confidentiality request.






Sincerely,



<SIGNER>
Anthony F. Marra,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
AFM/pab.



</SIGNJOB>
