 




<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 71</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Airspace Docket No. 93ASW52]</RINDOCK>



Establishment of Class D and Class E Airspace: Fort Sill, OK



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This action maintains the Class D airspace that was formerly a part of the Lawton, OK, Class D airspace, and establishes
Class E airspace at Fort Sill, OK. Henry Post Army Airfield, Fort Sill, OK, was previously a satellite airport within
the Lawton Class D airspace, Lawton, OK. The local aircraft operators requested and the FAA decided to divide the Lawton
Class D airspace into two individual areas of Class D airspace; one area covering the Lawton Municipal Airport, Lawton,
OK, and the other area covering Henry Post Army Airfield, Fort Sill, OK. Controlled airspace from the surface is needed
at Fort Sill on a continuous basis for instrument flight rules (IFR) operations at Henry Post Army Airfield. Therefore,
during the hours the Fort Sill airport traffic control tower (ATCT) is in operation, Class D airspace will be in effect,
and during hours the ATCT is non-operational, Class E airspace will be in effect. This action is intended to provide
for more flexibility in airspace utilization and to provide control over each individual area of airspace, particularly
during times when the towers are non-operational.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE: 

0901 UTC, December 8, 1994.



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Alvin DeVane, System Management Branch, Air Traffic Division, Southwest Region, Department of Transportation,
Federal Aviation Administration, Fort Worth, TX 761930530, telephone (817) 2225595.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

History


On November 24, 1993, a proposal to amend part 71 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 71) to split the Class
D airspace at Lawton, OK. into Lawton, OK, Class D airspace and Ft. Sill, OK, Class D airspace, and re-designate Lawton,
OK, Class E airspace as Fort Sill, OK, airspace, was published in the 

Federal Register

 (For Lawton, OK. at 58 FR 62057, for Fort Sill, OK. at 58 FR 62054). Prior to this action, Henry Post Army Airfield, Fort
Sill, OK, was a satellite airport within the Lawton Class D airspace, Lawton, OK. Local aircraft operators requested
and the FAA decided to divide the Lawton Class D airspace into two individual areas of Class D airspace; one area covering
the Lawton Municipal Airport, Lawton, OK, and the other area covering Henry Post Army Airfield, Fort Sill, OK. This
proposed action would provide for more flexibility and control of the airspace from the surface when it is needed at
Fort Sill, OK, for instrument flight rules (IFR) operations at Henry Post AAF. This action will establish Class D airspace
during hours the airport traffic control tower (ATCT) is operational and Class E airspace during hours the ATCT is
non-operational.
Interested persons were invited to participate in this rulemaking proceeding by submitting written comments on
the proposal to the FAA. No comments objecting to the proposal were received. The Notice of proposed rulemaking described
extensions to the Class D airspace 4-mile radius as ``within 1.3 miles each side of the 181
&cir; bearing from the Trail NDB extending from the 4-mile radius to 6.2 miles north of the Henry Post AAF and within
1.2 miles each side of the 003
&cir; radial of the Lawton VOR/DME extending from the 4-mile radius to 4.7 miles north of the Henry Post AAF''. If any
extension to a Class D airspace extends beyond 2 miles, all extensions for the Class D airspace area will be classified
as Class E airspace. The airspace extensions as described in the NPRM would have lead to an incorrect classification
of the airspace extensions as Class D airspace instead of Class E airspace. The proposal should not have included the
extensions within the Class D description. Therefore, the narrative description of the Class D airspace has been
corrected to exclude these extensions, and a separate Class E description has been added for this airspace. Other
than these changes, this amendment is the same as that proposed in the notice. The FAA has determined that these changes
will not increase the scope of this rule since they are relieving in nature, i.e., re-designating proposed Class D
airspace to less restrictive Class E airspace.
The coordinate for this airspace docket are based on North American Datum 83. Class D airspace designations are published
in paragraph 5000, Class E extensions to a Class D surface area are published in paragraph 6004, and Class E airspace
designated as a surface area for an airport are published in paragraph 6002 of FAA Order 7400.9B dated July 18, 1994,
and effective September 16, 1994, which is incorporated by reference in 14 CFR 71.1. The Class D and Class E airspace
designations listed in this document will be published subsequently in the Order.


The Rule


This amendment to part 71 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 71) establishes separate Class D and Class
E airspace for Henry Post Army Airfield, Fort Sill, OK.
The FAA has determined that this regulation only involves an established body of technical regulations that need
frequent and routine amendments to keep them operational current. If, therefore_(1) is not a ``significant regulatory
action'' under Executive Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures
(44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979); and (3) does not warrant preparation of a regulatory evaluation as the anticipated
impact is so minimal. Since this is a routine matter that will only affect air traffic procedures and air navigation,
it is certified that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities
under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.


List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 71


Aviation safety, Incorporation by reference, Navigation (air).


Adoption of the Amendment

</SUPPLEM>
