 

At pipeline breakout stations, Alternative IV requires that secondary seals be installed on both new and existing
external floating roof storage tanks and that fixed-roof tanks be retrofitted with internal floating roofs with
primary seals. The control level for storage tanks is the same as 40 CFR part 60, subpart Kb. It also requires that an
LDAR program equivalent to 40 CFR part 60, subpart VV be implemented for equipment leaks at new facilities. 

At new and existing bulk gasoline terminals, Alternative IV specifies a 10 mg TOC/liter emission limit for vapor processors
at loading racks, and requires the same storage tank requirements discussed above for pipeline breakout stations.
Also, new facilities must use vacuum assist vapor collection for loading of gasoline tank trucks and railcars, and
an LDAR (40 CFR part 60, subpart VV) program. Also, at existing bulk gasoline terminals, Alternative IV requires tank
trucks and railcars to undergo an annual vapor tightness test. Under this alternative, no LDAR program is required
for equipment leaks at existing bulk gasoline terminals. 

Alternatives IVQ and IVM specify controls identical to those of Alternative IV, with the addition of
a pollution prevention LDAR program for both pumps and valves at existing bulk gasoline terminals and pipeline breakout
stations. Alternative IVQ adds a quarterly LDAR program for pumps and valves at existing facilities, and Alternative
IVM adds a monthly LDAR program for pumps and valves at these same sources. LDAR programs at existing sources
achieve emission reduction at little additional annual cost to each facility, and are in use at facilities with similar
equipment. 

During the development of today's proposal, EPA considered including an emissions averaging approach but did not
identify any viable alternatives. EPA would be interested in pursuing the development of an averaging alternative
if such an alternative would be protective of the environment and, as expected, lower the cost of achieving any particular
emission reduction. A possible benefit of an averaging approach is that it may provide sources greater flexibility
in achieving emissions reductions that may also translate into cost savings for the source. EPA is interested and
requests data and comments that could be used to develop an emissions averaging alternative in the final rule. 



4. Consideration of Environmental Impacts 



For the entire gasoline distribution network, total nationwide HAP emissions are estimated to be 52,440 Mg/yr at
baseline. Of these emissions, approximately 23,750 Mg/yr (45 percent of the total) can be attributed to the two subcategories
of the network subject to today's proposed regulation; nearly 7,250 Mg/yr of HAP's are emitted by pipeline breakout
stations, while about 16,500 Mg/yr are associated with bulk gasoline terminals. 

All individual sources of emissions at facilities in these two subcategories are significant contributors to total
facility emissions, with equipment leaks at pipeline breakout stations being the smallest (12 percent of the baseline
subcategory total, due to the relatively small number of equipment components in the process piping at these facilities).
Storage tanks at pipeline breakout stations contribute the remaining 88 percent of the total for this subcategory.
At bulk gasoline terminals, HAP emissions are more evenly distributed: loading racks account for 18 percent of the
baseline subcategory total, storage tanks contribute 33 percent, fugitive leaks from cargo tanks of trucks or railcars
account for 23 percent of the subcategory total, and it is estimated that leaking pumps and valves in the process line
piping account for the remaining 26 percent. 

It is estimated that implementation of Alternative IV would reduce these HAP emissions from pipeline breakout stations
and bulk gasoline terminals by 11 percent, implementation of Alternative IVQ would reduce them by a little
less than 13 percent, and Alternative IVM by slightly more than 14 percent. All of these are significant amounts
in view of the fact that these reductions are incremental to existing programs, and that only an estimated 23 percent
of the total subcategory facilities are major sources. (The analysis estimates that 7.4 percent of pipeline breakout
stations and 27 percent of bulk gasoline terminals qualify as major sources.) If only major source pipeline breakout
stations and bulk gasoline terminals are considered at baseline, implementation of Alternative IV reduces these
emissions by 48 percent, Alternative IVQ by 55 percent, and Alternative IVM by 59 percent. 








