 

&bull;Pneumatic testing with carbon dioxide or inert gas poses a greater risk than hydrostatic testing because of
the high pressures at which supercritical carbon dioxide pipelines operate. 

&bull;The alternative of MOP reduction would dramatically reduce enhanced oil recovery rates. 

As for carbon dioxide distribution lines, the two operators said these pipelines generally are smaller than transmission
lines, and only affect isolated areas in oil production fields. The commenters said pressure testing of carbon dioxide
distribution systems would seriously disrupt oil field operations. One of these operators said that over 50 separate
tests may be needed to minimize disruption, depending on the layout of the distribution system. 

In view of these comments, RSPA has reviewed both the need to apply the proposed rules to carbon dioxide pipelines and
the burden of compliance. Carbon dioxide pipelines have not been subject to part 195 long enough for us to develop an
accident history for them. Still, because of their similarity to hazardous liquid pipelines, untested or inadequately
tested carbon dioxide pipelines can fail in service from the growth of physical defects, whatever the pipeline's
age. Although carbon dioxide is non-polluting and nonflammable, any failure that releases large quantities of carbon
dioxide would expose nearby persons to the risk of suffocation. 

This risk is less, however, for production field distribution lines that transport carbon dioxide than for transmission
lines that transport carbon dioxide. Compared to transmission lines, which move large volumes of carbon dioxide
over long distances, individual pipelines in a production field distribution system carry smaller volumes over
localized areas. Normally these areas are rural. In addition, the burden of compliance would be greater for field
distribution systems than for transmission lines. Testing field distribution systems could disrupt oil production
and require a multiplicity of tests to minimize that disruption. RSPA believes this combination of decreased risk
and increased burden of compliance justifies excluding from the final rule production field distribution lines
that are in a rural area. As defined in 195.2, the term ``rural area'' means ``outside the limits of any incorporated
or unincorporated city, town, village, or any other designated residential or commercial area such as a subdivision,
a business or shopping center, or community development.'' 

In the final rules, 195.302(b)(2)(ii) reflects our decision to exclude older carbon dioxide field distribution
lines in rural areas from the 25-percent-safety-margin requirement. Consistent with the present pressure testing
requirement, any portion of these older lines that is replaced, relocated, or otherwise changed on or after July 12,
1991, or any older line converted to carbon dioxide service under 195.5 would have to be pressure tested to at
least 1.25 times its MOP. 



Test Pressure



In the NPRM, RSPA proposed to redesignate existing 195.302(c), concerning the level and duration of test pressure,
as new 195.303. RSPA received no comments on this proposal, and has adopted it as final. However, the term ``hydrostatic
test'' is replaced by ``pressure test'' because under existing requirements, carbon dioxide pipelines may be pressure
tested either pneumatically or hydrostatically. 



Test Medium



In most cases, operators must use water as the hydrostatic test medium for hazardous liquid pipelines (195.306(a)).
However, under specified conditions, onshore pipelines may be tested with petroleum that does not vaporize rapidly
(195.306(b)). 

This exception allowing operators to use petroleum as the test medium was established when only newly constructed
pipelines were subject to hydrostatic testing under part 195. Newly constructed pipelines are less likely to rupture
during a hydrostatic test than pipelines that have been in operation for a number of years and never tested or inadequately
tested. Therefore, RSPA is concerned that if existing pipelines subject to testing under the final rule were tested
with petroleum, operators would not be able to contain all the petroleum that would spill from ruptures. To preclude
this outcome, RSPA has revised 195.306(b) to prohibit the use of petroleum as a test medium in pressure testing
pipelines to meet the final rule. 

Although RSPA's NPRM did not propose to limit the use of petroleum, the NPRM asked operators to estimate the pipeline
mileage they would test with petroleum to learn the extent to which operators might use petroleum instead of water
as the test medium. Only four operators responded, and the answers ranged from none to practically none. Based on this
information and RSPA's experience in administering the hydrostatic testing rules of part 195, disallowing the use
of petroleum as a test medium under the final rule should not significantly affect the burden of compliance with the
rule. 

Although RSPA believes this action is within the scope of the NPRM, because we did not specifically propose it, 195.306(b)
will be effective August 8, 1994, unless by July 7, 1994, RSPA receives comments that illustrate that this final rule
is not in the public interest. Upon receipt of such comments, RSPA will withdraw 195.306(b) before the effective
date by simultaneously publishing two subsequent documents. One document will withdraw this section of the final
rule. The other will announce a proposal to disallow the use of petroleum as a test medium for pressure testing required
by this rulemaking and establish a new comment period. If RSPA does not receive comments that illustrate that 195.306(b)
is not in the public interest, RSPA will publish a notice advising that 195.306(b) will be effective on August
8, 1994. 



Advisory Committee Review 



RSPA presented a draft of the NPRM to the Technical Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Standards Committee (THLPSSC)
for its consideration at a meeting in Washington, DC on September 14, 1988. THLPSSC is RSPA's statutory advisory committee
for hazardous liquid pipeline safety. It is comprised of 15 members, representing industry, government, and the
public, who are technically qualified to evaluate liquid pipeline safety. 

THLPSSC's discussion of the draft centered on cost of compliance; problems of compliance, such as waste water disposal;
and the smart-pig alternative. THLPSSC voted not to support the draft NPRM primarily because RSPA had not yet demonstrated
that the proposed rules were cost beneficial. 





