 



Comment:

 Several commenters suggested that results of complaint surveys be disclosable under this subpart. 


Response:

 The regulation implementing sections 1819(g)(5) and 1919(g)(5) of the Act provides that information must be made
available by the State or HCFA for all surveys and certifications. Therefore, information from any survey, including
a complaint survey, is disclosable under this subpart. 


Comment:

 We received four distinct comments on 488.325(b), which concerns charges associated with making information
available. First, some commenters believe that, while charges should be permitted, they should not be required,
nor should they, when imposed, exceed the amount facilities charge residents for copies of records. They proposed
that the requirement to follow 42 CFR 401.140 regarding fees and charges be reduced to a suggestion by changing the
word ``will'' to ``may.'' Second, other commenters contended that 401.140 is outdated, too restrictive,
and in conflict with some States' Freedom of Information laws. Since many States have adopted their own fee schedule,
they suggested that this provision be revised to permit States to use their own fee schedule. Third, one commenter
questioned HCFA's authority to require States to impose any charges. Lastly, some commenters proposed that the regulation
allow for waiver of fees or reduced fees so that survey information is truly accessible to all. 


Response:

 We are not accepting the suggestion that fees imposed by HCFA or the States relative to disclosure parallel those charged
by facilities to residents because we have no basis to develop a provider-specific disclosure policy relative to
fees. However, since 431.115(d) requires only that the Medicaid agency ``have a procedure for disclosing
pertinent findings obtained from surveys made by the State survey agency,'' and since we understand that most, if
not all, States have their own fee schedules, we are amending this subsection to allow, but not require, States to use
their respective fee schedules for documents which they maintain and which they have been asked to disclose. In response
to the comments that fees be permissible but not required, as well as the request for a fee exception clause, we refer
the commenters to 401.140(c), which provides for waiver or reduction of fees for Medicare. That section discusses
when a waiver of fees and charges would be appropriate and permissible; States are free to use any such waiver provisions
within their respective disclosure procedures in the same way that they are free to use or not use a fee schedule at all.






