 

(2) 

Tentative position: Finished poultry products and meat food products. 

As indicated above in the discussion of FSIS's tentative position regarding the definition and standard for MDP,
FSIS is considering that in view of the differences between MDP and poultry products produced by traditional hand-deboning
techniques and the developments since its introduction, MDP should be regulated as a distinctive ingredient with
standardized characteristics. Therefore, it is FSIS's tentative position to define such product by its own name,
e.g., ``Mechanically Separated (Kind),'' that would be declared in the ingredient statements on finished product
labels by the name specified in its definition and standard.

FSIS recognizes the importance of the identification of the calcium and cholesterol content of MDP to consumers who,
according to the comments received on the June 15, 1993, ANPR, indicated a desire to know of the presence of calcium
and cholesterol. FSIS wishes to point out that the effective date for its mandatory nutrition labeling regulations
(9 CFR 317.309, 381.409) is July 6, 1994. These rules require mandatory declaration of calcium and cholesterol content
on most processed meat and poultry products which will address this particular labeling concern. FSIS believes that
nutrition labeling is the most appropriate vehicle for conveying a product's nutrient content, which includes calcium,
cholesterol as well as other nutrient information.



Tentative Position



II. 

Boneless poultry products produced by mechanical deboning with 0.6 percent or less bone solids. 

FSIS is considering amending its current boneless poultry regulations to allow boneless poultry products produced
by mechanical deboning with 0.6 percent or less bone solids to be classified as poultry or poultry meat if produced
under the provisions of a quality control program that would require compliance with certain criteria for this product,
e.g., protein quality, bone solids (calcium), and bone particle size. FSIS is also considering having handling requirements
and limitations on use of boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids in certain products. Further,
FSIS is considering that protein and fat content requirements would not be necessary, for such products, because
protein and fat are nutrients whose declaration becomes mandatory on the labeling of most multi-ingredient meat
and poultry products when FSIS's nutrition labeling regulations become effective on July 6, 1994.



A. Tentative position: Product name and labeling. 

FSIS is contemplating amending the labeling regulations on boneless poultry products to change the allowable bone
content for products currently labeled as poultry or poultry meat. The mechanical deboning machinery used to produce
boneless poultry products has undergone significant changes since 1969. Over the years, there have been continued
refinements in certain parameters, e.g., the ability to adjust the pressure and aperture size, resulting in far less
than current allowance of no more than one percent bone solids for mechanically deboned poultry. According to an August
1993 study done by FSIS
<FOOTCITE>7</FOOTCITE>
 regarding bone content of boneless poultry products produced by mechanical deboning, the average bone solids content
was approximately 0.6 percent. The changes in mechanical deboning machinery have resulted in improved manufacturing
processes. We believe it results in products which are comparable to ``poultry'' and ``poultry meat'' derived from
hand-deboning.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
7

</FOOTNAME>
A summary report of the study is available for public inspection at the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.

</FOOTNOTE>


FSIS is considering provisions that will enable boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids to
be classified as poultry or poultry meat and labeled accordingly. It is FSIS's tentative view that these products
need not be labeled to describe their form (i.e., consistency) by terms such as ``emulsified'' and ``finely chopped.''
FSIS believes that the form of the product may not be important because these products are primarily used as ingredients
in poultry and meat products, such as poultry sausages, which are themselves categorized as finished products that
are ``emulsified,'' ``finely chopped,'' etc., in terms of texture. Therefore, FSIS wishes to receive comments on
whether there is a need to include the term used to describe the form of the boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent
or less bone solids, e.g., ``emulsified,'' ``finely ground,'' etc., in the ingredients statement of the product
in which such product is used as an ingredient and whether these terms are important to the consumer.



