 

2. When a company substantially cooperates with our requests for information and, substantially cooperates in verification,
but fails to provide the information requested in a timely manner or in the form required or was unable to substantiate
it, we used as BIA the higher of (1) the highest rate ever applicable to the firm for the same class or kind of merchandise
from either the LTFV investigation or a prior administrative review or if the firm has never before been investigated
or reviewed, the all others rate from the LTFV investigation; or (2) the highest calculated rate in this review for
the class or kind of merchandise for any firm from the same country of origin.




Chu Fong, Kuang, Transcend, and San Chien failed to respond to the Department's questionnaire. Accordingly, for
these companies we applied the first-tier BIA rate of 10.67 percent, which is the highest rate the Department found
in the original LTFV investigation.

Gourmet and Buxton provided us with responses to our questionnaires. However, the Department determined that the
data Gourmet submitted could not be reconciled to its audited financial statements. Reliance on the accounting system
used for the preparation of the audited financial statements is a key and vital part of the Department's determination
that a company's sales and constructed value data are credible. An ``in-house'' system which has not been audited
and is not used for the preparation of the financial statements or for any purpose other than internal deliberations
of the company does not assure the Department that such costs have been stated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, or that all sales and costs have been appropriately captured by the ``in-house'' system (

see Final Determination at Less Than Fair Value: Certain Hot-Rolled Carbon Steel Flat Products, Certain Cold-Rolled
Carbon Steel Flat Products and Certain Cut-To-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Korea

, 58 FR 37186 (July 9, 1993)). Because their submissions were unreconcilable to their audited financial statements,
we have determined to apply BIA to Gourmet and Buxton, (

see

 Use of BIA memo to Holly Kuga, Director, Office of Antidumping Compliance). Accordingly, we applied the second-tier
BIA rate of 6.47 percent to Gourmet and 6.93 percent to Buxton. These rates represent the highest rates ever applicable
to each firm.

Everspring responded that it never sold the subject merchandise, and we have no information to contradict this claim.
If Everspring begins to sell the subject merchandise, it entries will receive the ``all other rate'' cash deposit
rate until we conduct an administrative review upon request.



