 




<RINDOCK>[FRL50215] </RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Restatement of Policies Related to Environmental Auditing </DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 

 

</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice. 



 


</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The EPA Environmental Auditing Policy Statement (``1986 Policy'') was originally published in the 

Federal Register

 on July 9, 1986 (51 FR 25004). The 1986 Policy states that ``(c)larification of EPA's position regarding auditing
may help encourage regulated entities to establish audit programs or upgrade systems already in place.'' The goal
of this notice is to clarify EPA's current policies on and approach to auditing. This notice summarizes salient points
from the 1986 Policy, which remains in effect. In addition, this notice updates the Agency's activities with respect
to auditing and auditing policy and references pertinent language from other relevant policy documents, in anticipation
of the public meeting on auditing scheduled for July 2728, 1994. This notice does not represent a new EPA policy
or position on environmental auditing; all existing policies remain in effect. 



I. Auditing Public Meeting: Change of Location 



The response to EPA's announcement (59 FR 31914, June 20, 1994) to hold a public meeting on auditing on July 2728,
1994 has been overwhelming. Due to the expected size of the audience, therefore, the Agency has changed the location
of this event. The new location is the Stouffer Mayflower Hotel in Washington, DC, at 1127 Connecticut Avenue, NW,
Phone (202) 3473000.



II. The Auditing Policy Reassessment 



In response to a request by Administrator Carol M. Browner, the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance (OECA)
is reassessing the Agency's current policy regarding environmental auditing and self-evaluation by the regulated
community. EPA has committed to investigating the perceived problems relating to auditing, self-evaluation, and
disclosure through an empirical, information-gathering effort. The Agency must develop an adequate information

base to give serious consideration to any policy options and to ensure that any decision to either reinforce, change,
or supplement existing policy is informed by fact. 

EPA hopes to collect such relevant data through the implementation of four actions this summer. First, the Agency
will convene a public meeting on July 2728, 1994, as an opportunity to obtain a wide variety of views and to sharpen
the focus on these issues. The range of issues appropriate for discussion at the public meeting include: the implementation
of the 1986 Policy; specific suggestions for auditing policy options; State audit privilege legislation; auditing
in the context of criminal enforcement; and advances in the field of auditing since 1986. Interested parties are encouraged
to read the 

Federal Register

 notice dated June 20, 1994 (59 FR 31914) for more details on the public meeting. 

Second, EPA published in the June 21, 1994 

Federal Register

 (59 FR 32062) a notice requesting proposals for Environmental Leadership Program (ELP) pilot projects. EPA expects
that these pilot projects will generate useful data on auditing methodology and measures, and may also serve as vehicles
for experimenting with policy-driven incentives. 

Third, EPA will encourage the private sector to collect data and survey auditing practices in order to gauge the effect
of enforcement policies on self-evaluation and disclosure in the regulated community. The Agency will also seek
input on auditing and related issues from States, environmental and public interest groups, and trade and professional
associations. 

Finally, in this 

Federal Register

 notice, EPA is restating salient points from the 1986 Policy and reviewing its activities and other policies relating
to environmental auditing. The goal of this notice is to clarify EPA's current policies on and approach to auditing,
in order to ensure 
a well-informed policy debate. 



III. Review of General EPA Policy on Environmental Auditing 



A. EPA Encourages the Use of Environmental Auditing 



EPA has actively encouraged and participated in the development of environmental auditing and improved environmental
management practices since the mid-1980s. In fact, the 1986 Policy has served as the basis for defining the practice
and profession of environmental auditing. The 1986 Policy clearly states EPA support for auditing: 

 


Effective environmental auditing can lead to higher levels of overall compliance and reduced risk to human health
and the environment. EPA endorses the practice of environmental auditing and supports its accelerated use by regulated
entities to help meet the goals of Federal, state and local environmental requirements. 



* * * * * 



Auditing serves as a quality assurance check to help improve the effectiveness of basic environmental management
by verifying that management practices are in place, functioning and adequate. Environmental audits evaluate,
and are not a substitute for, direct compliance activities such 
as obtaining permits, installing controls, monitoring compliance, reporting violations, and keeping records.
Environmental auditing may verify but does not include activities required by law, regulation, or permit (e.g.,
continuous emissions monitoring, composite correction plans at wastewater treatment plants, etc.). Audits do
not in any way replace regulatory agency inspections. However, environmental audits can improve compliance by complementing
conventional Federal, state and local oversight. 



* * * * * 



Environmental auditing has developed for sound business reasons, particularly as a means of helping regulated entities
manage pollution control affirmatively over time instead of reacting to crises. Auditing can result in improved
facility environmental performance, help communicate effective 
solutions to common environmental problems, focus facility managers' attention on current and upcoming regulatory
requirements, and generate protocols and checklists which help facilities better manage themselves. Auditing
also can result in better-integrated management of environmental hazards, since auditors frequently identify
environmental liabilities which go beyond regulatory compliance. 

 


The Agency clearly supports auditing to help ensure the adequacy of internal systems to achieve, maintain, and monitor
compliance. By voluntarily implementing environmental management and auditing programs, regulated entities
can identify, resolve, and avoid environmental problems. 

 


EPA does not intend to dictate or interfere with the environmental management practices of private or public organizations.
Nor does EPA intend to mandate auditing (though in certain instances EPA may seek to include provisions for environmental
auditing as part of settlement agreements, as 
noted below). Because environmental auditing systems have been widely adopted on a voluntary basis in the past, and
because audit quality depends to a large degree upon genuine management commitment to the program and its objectives,
auditing should remain a voluntary activity. 

 


Because senior managers of regulated entities are ultimately responsible for taking all necessary steps to ensure
compliance with environmental requirements, EPA believes they have a strong incentive to use reasonable means,
such as environmental auditing, to secure reliable information 
about facility compliance status. 



B. Definition of Environmental Auditing, Elements of Effective Environmental Auditing Programs 



The 1986 Policy also defines environmental auditing, and outlines what EPA considers to be the elements of an effective
environmental auditing program. The 1986 Policy presents the following definition: 

 

</SUMMARY>
