 

The Service already has an active wolf management program in Montana because of the presence of breeding pairs of wolves.
About 65 wolves now occupy northwestern Montana, and most of these occur near the Canadian border. The Montana program
monitors wolves to determine their status, encourages research on wolves and their prey, provides accurate information
to the public, and controls wolves that attack domestic livestock. Wolf control consists of translocating wolves
that depredate on livestock to reduce livestock losses, and to foster local tolerance of non-depredating wolves
to promote and enhance the conservation of the species. The control program does not relocate wolves to accelerate
the natural expansion of wolves into unoccupied historic habitat. Wolf control includes removal of wolves that attack
livestock and, although 19 wolves have been removed from 1986 to present in northwestern Montana, the wolf population
in Montana has continued to expand at about 22 per cent per year for the past 9 years. 


4. Reintroduction Site


The Service proposes to reintroduce wolves into Federal lands managed by the USDA Forest Service. The Idaho location
was proposed as a site for this experimental population area after much deliberation by the Service and others. The
central Idaho reintroduction site is a vast area of about 53,000 km2 (20,000 mi2) of contiguous National forests,
including the Bitterroot, Boise, Challis, Clearwater, Nez Perce, Payette, Sawtooth, Salmon, and Panhandle National
Forests. In the center of this area are three wilderness areas, the Frank Church River-of-no-Return, Selway-Bitterroot,
and the Gospel-Hump Wilderness Areas that collectively comprise about 16,000 km2 (6,000 mi2) of wilderness habitat.

This vast area of Federal lands has high quality wolf habitat and good potential wolf release sites. Also, the central
Idaho area is sufficiently distant from the current southern expansion of naturally formed wolf packs in Montana
that any wolf pack documented inside the experimental area would likely result from reintroduction rather than from
natural dispersal from extant wild wolf populations in Canada or northwestern Montana. 
The Service has determined that the proposed reintroduction effort in central Idaho is necessary for the successful
recovery of the gray wolf in the conterminous United States, due to ecological and landownership considerations
(Service 1994). Reintroduction of wolves into central Idaho will enhance wolf population viability by increasing
the genetic diversity of wolves in the Rocky Mountain population, increase genetic interchange between segments
of the population, and is projected to accelerate reaching wolf population recovery goals 20 years sooner than under
the current natural recovery policy. No critical habitat would be designated; millions of acres of public lands contain
hundreds of thousands of wild ungulates (Service 1994) and currently provide more than enough habitat to support
a recovered population of wolves in central Idaho. 
Gray wolves that are reintroduced into central Idaho would be placed on Federal lands. By doing so, the Service would
accelerate the recovery of the gray wolf in the northwestern United States while reducing local concerns about excessive
government regulation of private lands, uncontrolled livestock depredations, big game predation, and the lack
of State government involvement in the program. There are only a few scattered parcels of private and State of Idaho
lands in the area in which wolves would be reintroduced (Service 1994), and no conflicts with private or State land
use is anticipated. 
Establishment of an experimental population of gray wolves in central Idaho would initiate wolf recovery in one of
the three recovery areas described as necessary for recovery of gray wolves in the northern Rocky Mountains. The only
other reintroduction site identified at this time, Yellowstone National Park, is also the subject of a proposal to
establish a nonessential experimental population published elsewhere in today's 

Federal Register

. There are no existing or anticipated Federal or State actions identified for this release site that are expected
to have major effects on this experimental population. For all these reasons, and based on the best scientific and
commercial data available, the Service finds that the release of wolves and the establishment of an experimental
population in central Idaho and southwestern Montana will further the conservation of this endangered species.

Gray wolves used for the reintroduction effort would be obtained from healthy wolf populations in Canada by permission
of the Canadian and Provincial governments. Gray wolves are common in western Canada (tens of thousands) and Alaska
(about 7,000) and they are increasing in the Great Lakes area. Thus, the removal of wolves from locations in Canada
would not significantly impact the wolf populations there. 


5. Reintroduction Protocol


This wolf reintroduction project is undertaken by the Service in cooperation with the USDA Forest Service, other
Federal agencies, potentially affected Tribes, States of Idaho and Montana, and entities of the Canadian government.
The Service would enter into agreements with the Canadian and provincial governments and/or Canadian resource management
agencies to obtain wild wolves. 
The wolf reintroduction project in the central Idaho area would require the transfer of about 45 to 75 wolves from southwestern
Canada with assistance by Canadian and Provincial governments. About 15 wild wolves would be captured annually from
several different packs over the course of 35 years by trapping, darting from helicopters, or net gunning in
the autumn and winter. Upon capture, the wolves would receive veterinary care, including examinations and vaccinations
as necessary, and they would be transported to central Idaho by truck or plane. In central Idaho, groups of wolves,
each consisting of young adults from various packs, would be fitted with radio collars, released in several areas,
and monitored by radiotelemetry. This method is referred to as a ``hard release'', i.e., the wolves would be released
upon or shortly after transport to each release site. Wolves to be released would not be held on site for acclimation,
nor would any food or care be provided after they were released. It is anticipated that the wolves will move widely,
but eventually find mates and form packs. 
All wolves would be monitored by radiotelemetry, and if wolves cause conflicts with humans, they will be recaptured
and controlled according to the procedures that have been used with other problem wolves. 
Subsequent releases would be modified depending upon information obtained during the reintroduction effort. Utilizing
information gained from the initial phase of the project, an overall assessment of the success of the reintroduction
would be made after the first year, and for every year thereafter. It is thought that the physical reintroduction phase
will be completed within 35 years. After the reintroduction of wolves has resulted in two packs raising 2 pups
each for 2 consecutive years, the wolf population will be managed to grow naturally toward recovery levels. This reintroduction
attempt is consistent with the recovery goals identified for this species by the 1987 recovery plan for the northern
Rocky Mountain Wolf. 
It is estimated that this program, in conjunction with natural recovery in northwestern Montana and a similar reintroduction
into Yellowstone National Park, would result in a viable recovered wolf population (ten breeding pairs in each of
three recovery areas for three consecutive years) by about the year 2002. 


