 


Monday



January 10, 1994







Part II



Department of Education







34 CFR Parts 462 and 472

National Workplace Literacy Program; Final Regulations and Notice









Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 6/Monday, January 10, 1994/Notices 









<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION</USDEPT>



<RINDOCK>[CFDA No. 84.198] </RINDOCK>



National Workplace Literacy Program; Inviting Applications for New Awards for Fiscal Year (FY) 1993 



Note to Applicants: This notice is a complete application package. Together with the statute authorizing the program
and applicable regulations governing the program, including the Education Department General Administrative
Regulations (EDGAR), the notice contains all of the information, application forms, and instructions needed to
apply for a grant under this competition. 

Purpose of Program: The National Workplace Literacy Program provides assistance for demonstration projects that
teach literacy skills needed in the workplace through exemplary education partnerships between business, industry,
or labor organizations and educational organizations. 

The Secretary wishes to highlight, for potential applicants, that this program can help to further National Education
Goal 5_ensuring that every adult American will be literate and will possess the knowledge and skills necessary to
compete in a global economy and exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship. The program helps by improving
approaches and methods used in meeting the literacy needs of adults in the workplace, including those with limited
English proficiency. 

Eligible Applicants: (a) Awards are provided to exemplary partnerships 
between_

(1) A business, industry, or labor organization, or private industry council; and 

(2) A State educational agency, local educational agency, institution of higher education, or school (including
an area vocational school, an employment and training agency, or a community-based organization). 

(b) A partnership must include as partners at least one entity from paragraph (a)(1) of this section and at least one
entity from paragraph (a)(2) of this section and may include more than one entity from each group. 

(c)(1) The partners shall apply jointly to the Secretary for funds. 

(2) The partners shall enter into an agreement, in the form of a single document signed by all partners, designating
one member of the partnership as the applicant and the grantee. The agreement must also detail the role each partner
plans to perform, and must bind each partner to every statement and assurance made in the application. Applications
are governed by the EDGAR provisions in 34 CFR 75.12775.129 regarding group applications. 

Deadline For Transmittal of Applications: March 11, 1994. 

Deadline for Intergovernmental Review: March 10, 1994. 

Available Funds: $18,527,425 for the first 12 months. Funding for the second and third year is subject to availability
of funds and to a grantee meeting the requirements of 34 CFR 75.253. 

Estimated Range of Awards: $105,469$1,205,234 (funding for first 12 months). 

Estimated Average Size of Awards: $370,549 (funding for first 12 months). 

Estimated Number of Awards: 50. 

 




Note: 

The Department is not bound by any estimates in this notice. 

 


Project Period: Up to 36 months (3 twelve-month budget periods). 

Applicable Regulations: (a) The Education Department General Administrative Regulations (EDGAR) in 34 CFR part
74 (Administration of Grants to Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Nonprofit Organizations), part
75 (Direct Grant Programs), part 77 (Definitions that Apply to Department Regulations), part 79 (Intergovernmental
Review of Department of Education Programs and Activities), part 80 (Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants
and Cooperative Agreements to State and Local Governments), part 81 (General Education Provisions Act_Enforcement),
part 82 (New Restrictions on Lobbying), part 85 (Governmentwide Debarment and Suspension (Nonprocurement) and
Governmentwide Requirements for Drug-Free Workplace (Grants)), and part 86 (Drug-Free Schools and Campuses);
and (b) the regulations for this program in 34 CFR parts 460 and 472, including amendments to part 472 that are found
elsewhere in this issue of the 

Federal Register

. 

Description of Program: The Secretary provides grants or cooperative agreements to projects designed to improve
the productivity of the workforce through improvement of literacy skills in the workplace by_

(a) Providing adult literacy and other basic skills, services, and activities; 

(b) Providing adult secondary education services and activities that may lead to the completion of a high school diploma
or its equivalent; 

(c) Meeting the literacy needs of adults with limited English proficiency; 

(d) Upgrading or updating basic skills of adult workers in accordance with changes in workplace requirements, technology,
products, or processes; 

(e) Improving the competency of adult workers in speaking, listening, reasoning, and problem solving; or 

(f) Providing educational counseling, transportation, and child care services for adult workers during nonworking
hours while the workers participate in the project. 

The statute authorizing this program requires that projects use Federal funds to supplement, and not supplant, funds
otherwise available for the purposes of the program. 




