 



FAA Response: 

The FAA considered all of these comments, including AOPA's section by section recommendations, during its review
of part 67. The FAA's proposed standards and policy on diabetes are discussed under the proposed rule portions of this
preamble. New ECG requirements are proposed in this notice. Assessment of risk factors such as cholesterol and blood
pressure is included and standards pertaining to alcoholism have been updated in the proposal. 

The proposed rule amends the standards for third-class medical certificates in light of recent technology and medical
knowledge. As noted in the discussion of the proposed rule, the standards for third-class medical certificates are
less stringent than those for first- and second-class certificates in recognition of the lower level of responsibility
inherent in noncommercial flight operations. 



Comments Received on AMA Report Recommendations 



Most commenters were generally opposed to any AMA recommendations that involved a perceived strengthening of the
standards for airman medical certification. Only eight commenters generally favored the AMA recommendations,
some with suggestions for improving them. 

Many of the opposing comments from pilots were based on their reading of an editorial about the AMA Report which appeared
in 

Flying

 magazine (Volume 113, November 1986, page 24) entitled ``What's Up, Doc?'' While the editorial was factually accurate,
it briefly summarized some of the recommendations and was primarily a subjective editorial opinion opposing certain
recommendations in the AMA Report. 



Cost and Safety 



The most frequent comment from those who objected to the AMA Report recommendations is that the recommended changes
will result in a substantial increase in the cost of obtaining a medical certificate and that there are no accident
data to indicate a need for increasing medical standards and thereby medical certification costs. 



FAA Response: 

The review of part 67 was necessary to ensure that the standards reflect current medical technology and evolving knowledge
about conditions that could affect a pilot's ability to perform safely. For the most part, the proposed revisions
to part 67 are not a strengthening of the standards over current regulations and policy. They represent clarification,
codification of policy, and an updating of the current standards and practices. The proposed rule would make some
standards less stringent, such as the deletion of uncorrected distant visual acuity requirements and the revised
wording of those requirements pertaining to the eye, ear, nose, pharynx, and larynx. In other instances, additions
to the medical examination requirements such as the proposed new standards for blood pressure for second- and third-class
medical certification are clearly warranted. The FAA would be remiss in its responsibility for safety if it ignored
medical findings and advances that can better identify those individuals subject to incapacitation or deterioration
of performance. The estimated costs and benefits of this proposal are addressed in a Regulatory Evaluation Summary
later in this preamble and more fully in a full regulatory evaluation which is in the public docket.



