 



Comment:

 One commenter asked if there was any 
difference between ``all new admissions'' in 488.417(a) and 
``new admissions'' in 488.417(a)(1). 



Response:

 There is no difference. We are revising the 
regulations text to conform to the section's title. 



Comment:

 Some general comments we received on the 
provisions in this section of the proposed rule were as 
follows: 

&bull;They are unjustifiably severe; 

&bull;Providers can not comply with them in all cases because 
some deficiencies take more than 90 days to correct; and 

&bull;They are unnecessary. 



Response:

 At HCFA's request, the Institute of Medicine 
(IoM), which is part of the National Academy of Sciences, 
conducted a study of the policies and regulations governing 
the certification of nursing homes participating in Medicare 
and Medicaid. Its report, issued in March 1986, cited the 
urgent need for enacting statutory provisions extending the 
remedies available to HCFA and the States in enforcing 
compliance with nursing home regulations. A General 
Accounting Office (GAO) study (``Medicare and Medicaid: 
Stronger Enforcement of Nursing Home Requirements Needed'' 
(July 1987)) also concluded that penalties short of 
decertification of nursing homes are needed to deter 
noncompliance. HCFA's operating experience also bears this 
out. Traditionally, if facilities were unable to correct 
deficiencies within 90 days of the survey date, their 
provider agreements would have been terminated by the 90th 
day. We, along with the IoM, GAO, and the Congress believe 
that these regulations are necessary, are not unduly harsh 
or severe, and that it is possible for providers to comply 
with them. Furthermore, the denial of payment for new 
admissions is not only authorized by the Act, but required 
by the Act in certain circumstances, such as when 
noncompliance remains after 3 months or when substandard 
quality of care has been cited in three consecutive standard 
surveys. 



Section 488.418Secretarial Authority to Deny All Payment 



Upon our review of comments and evaluation of the 
underlying Act, we noted that we did not include a section 
in the proposed rule explicitly stating the Secretary's 
authority to deny all payment to a facility. Under section 
1819(h)(2)(B) of the Act, if a facility has not met a 
requirement, the Secretary may deny payment for all Medicare 
residents. Under section 1819(h)(2)(E), the Secretary is 
required to deny payment for all current Medicare residents 
or for all Medicare new admissions if a SNF, on three 
consecutive standard surveys has been found to have provided 
substandard quality of care. 

