 

806.20 

Records of corrections and removals not required to be reported. 



(a) Each device manufacturer or distributor who undertakes a correction or removal of a device that is not required
to be reported to FDA under 806.10 shall keep a record of such correction or removal. 

(b) Records of corrections and removals not required to be reported to FDA under 806.10 shall contain the following
information: 

(1) The brand name, common or usual name, classification name and product code if known, and the intended use of the
device. 

(2) The model, catalog, or code number of the device and the manufacturing lot or serial number of the device or other
identification number. 

(3) A complete description of the event giving rise to the information reported and the corrective or removal action
that has been, and is expected to be taken. 

(4) Justification for not reporting the correction or removal action to FDA shall contain conclusions, any followups,
and be reviewed and evaluated by a designated person. 

(5) A copy of all communications regarding the correction or removal. 

(c) The manufacturer or distributor shall retain all records required to be retained under this section for a period
of 2 years beyond the expected life of the device, even if the manufacturer or distributor has ceased to manufacture,
import, or distribute the device. Records required to be maintained under paragraph (c) of this section must be transferred
to the new owner of the device and maintained for the required period of time. 



806.30 

FDA access to records. 



Each device manufacturer or distributor required under this part to maintain records concerning corrections or
removals and every person who is in charge or custody of such records shall, upon request of an officer or employee designated
by FDA and pursuant to section 704(e) of the act, permit such officer or employee at all reasonable times to have access
to, and to copy and verify, such records and reports. 



806.40 

Public availability of reports. 



(a) Any report submitted under this part is available for public disclosure in accordance with part 20 of this chapter.


(b) Before public disclosure of a report, FDA will delete from the report: 

(1) Any information that constitutes trade secret or confidential commercial or financial information under 20.61
of this chapter; and 

(2) Any personnel, medical, and similar information, including the serial numbers of implanted devices, which would
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy under 20.63 of this chapter; provided, that
except for the information under 20.61 of this chapter, FDA will disclose to a patient who requests a report
all of the information in the report concerning that patient. 




Dated: March 17, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946691 Filed 32294; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001P
</BILLING>

