 







<USDEPT>DEFENSE NUCLEAR FACILITIES SAFETY BOARD</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE></DOCTITLE>
Hearings



<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of public hearing.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This notice sets forth the schedule and agenda of a hearing to be held by the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board
to receive comments from members of the public in communities near the Department of Energy's Pantex Plant. The Board
will conduct a public hearing pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 2286b and invites any interested persons or groups to present any
comments, technical information, or data concerning the fifth annual report to be submitted to Congress by the Defense
Nuclear Facilities Safety Board under 42 U.S.C. 2286e (note).



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
TIME AND DATE: 

7:00 p.m., October 19, 1994.





PLACE: 

Amarillo Civic Center, 401 S. Buchanan, Amarillo, Texas (for Pantex Plant). 




STATUS: 

Open.



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:




Kenneth M. Pusateri, General Manager, Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board, 625 Indiana Avenue, NW, Suite 700,
Washington, DC 20004, (202) 2086400. This is not a toll free number.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

An independent agency within the executive branch, the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Board) provides
advice and recommendations to the President and the Secretary of Energy regarding public health and safety issues
at Department of Energy (DOE) defense nuclear facilities.





Broadly, the Board reviews operations, practices, and occurrences at DOE's defense nuclear facilities and makes
recommendations to the Secretary of Energy that are necessary to protect public health and safety. If, as a result
of its reviews, the Board determines that an imminent or severe threat to public health or safety exists, the Board
is required to transmit its recommendations directly to the President, as well as to the Secretaries of Energy and
Defense. 


The Board's enabling statute, 42 U.S.C. 2286, requires the Board to review and evaluate the content and implementation
of health and safety standards, including DOE's Orders, rules, and other safety requirements, relating to the design,
construction, operation, and decommissioning of DOE's defense nuclear facilities. The Board must then recommend
to the Secretary of Energy and specific measures, such as changes in the content and implementation of those standards,
that the Board believes should be adopted to ensure that the public health and safety are adequately protected. The
Board is also required to review the design of new defense nuclear facilities before construction begins, as well
as modifications to older facilities, and to recommend changes necessary to protect health and safety. 


The Board may conduct investigations, issue subpoenas, hold public hearings, gather information, conduct studies,
establish reporting requirements for DOE, and take other actions in furtherance of its review of health and safety
issues at defense nuclear facilities. These ancillary functions of the Board and its staff all relate to the accomplishment
of the Board's primary functions, which is to assist DOE in identifying and correcting health and safety problems
at defense nuclear facilities. 


This public hearing is being held to provide the Board with general public comments and views on topics related to the
fifth annual report to be submitted by the Board to Congress under 42 U.S.C. 2286e (note) of the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended. The Board's report must include the following: 

``(1) an assessment of the degree to which the overall administration of the Board's activities are believed to meet
the objectives of Congress in establishing the Board; 


(2) recommendations for continuation, termination, or modification of the Board's functions and programs, including
recommendations for transition to some other independent oversight arrangement if it is advisable; and 


(3) recommendations for appropriate transition requirements in the event that modifications are recommended.''





The Board seeks the public's view on these issues. 




A short introductory presentation may be made by a representative of the Board at the hearing, focusing on those Board
activities of greatest relevance to the local communities. Requests to speak at the hearing may be submitted in writing
or by telephone. We ask that commentators describe the nature and scope of the oral presentation. Those who contact
the Board prior to close of business on the day before the hearing will be scheduled for time slots, beginning at approximately
7:10 p.m. The Board will post a schedule for those speakers who have contacted the Board before the hearing. The posting
will be made at the entrance to the hearing room at the start of the hearing. 


Anyone who wishes to comment, provide technical information or data may do so in writing, either in lieu of, or in addition
to making an oral presentation. The Board members may question presenters to the extent deemed appropriate. The Board
will hold the record open until November 2, 1994, for the receipt of materials. A transcript of the hearing will be made
available by the Board for inspection by the public at the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board's Washington office
and at the DOE's public reading room at the Department of Energy Reading Room at the Lynn Library/Learning Center,
Amarillo College, 2201 S. Washington, Amarillo, Texas 79109, and at the Department of Energy Reading Room at the Carson
County Library, 401 Main Street, Panhandle, Texas 79068. 


The Board specifically reserves its right to further schedule and otherwise regulate the course of the hearing, to
recess, reconvene, postpone or adjourn the hearing, conduct further reviews, and otherwise exercise its power under
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 



</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>

Robert M. Andersen, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>

General Counsel. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9422424 Filed 9994; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 6820KDM
</BILLING>


