 

FSIS will extend the implementation requirement for the labeling of comminuted products to 60 days after publication
and the labeling of other products to July 6, 1994. The Agency believes that the high level of voluntary compliance
before these required dates will minimize the impact of extending the timeframes for implementation and eliminating
the pamphleting requirement. The Agency believes that these extended timelines will provide retailers as well as
establishments the needed time for those companies having difficulty obtaining the necessary labeling. Additionally,
it will allow some businesses to make one label change to incorporate both safe handling instructions and nutrition
labeling at a cost savings. Many retailers as well as official establishments have already voluntarily complied
with this regulation by providing safe handling labels, brochures and other point of sale information. In addition,
the Department's educational efforts to inform the public of the need to safely handle and prepare meat and poultry
as well as other food products along with publicity surrounding the rule has increased the public's awareness of the
necessity and requirements of safe food handling. A major joint voluntary effort to educate consumers began last
year. The Food Marketing Institute, the American Meat Institute and the National Livestock and Meat Board, in cooperation
with the USDA and FDA, developed ``A Consumer Guide to Safe Handling and Preparation of Ground Meat and Ground Poultry.''
The brochures are for consumers and for food service operators. Each brochure discusses proper handling, preparation
and storage methods for ground meat and ground poultry and emphasizes three key points (the three C's): keep it cold;
keep it clean; and cook it. These interim measures should minimize the impact of extending the timelines for implementation
of these labeling requirements.
Three commenters suggested that FSIS permit companies up to 18 months to exhaust supplies of labels that do not include
the safe handling instructions since it would be an economic and environmental burden to discard packaging materials.
One commenter cited the nutrition regulation which gave an 18 month implementation time and suggested a similar implementation
time. Three additional commenters requested that FSIS permit companies up to 1 year after the effective date of the
regulation to use labels with safe handling instructions required by the interim rule. They state that materials
were ordered in good faith to comply with the interim rule and it would be an economic burden to destroy such materials.
Commenters stated that due to low volume sales of certain products, they expect to have over a year's supply of labels
with the original safe handling instructions.
FSIS does not believe that 18 months or even 1 year should be given to exhaust packaging materials that do not include
the safe handling instructions. Implementation time required for the nutrition regulations cannot be compared
to the safe handling regulations since the two are very different. The safe handling regulations prescribe the exact
language required on the label and do not require time consuming laboratory analysis or interpretation of extensive
rules regarding formats, serving sizes, claims, etc. However, FSIS has been persuaded by the comments to permit safe
handling instructions provided in both the August 16, 1993, interim rule and the October 12, 1993, final rule to be
used for 1 year past the effective date of this final rule. The label required under this final rule is unchanged from
the label required in the October 12, 1993, final rule. 



Product Appropriateness and Inclusiveness


Eleven commenters suggested that we narrow the focus of the regulation making safe handling instructions mandatory
on ground meat and poultry products and voluntary on all other meat and poultry products. Many stated that the proposed
rule was overly broad and that no evidence was presented to support the requirement of safe handling instructions
on products other than ground products. They suggested the labeling effort would be more effective if ground products
were targeted so that the information would have a proper impact with consumers. In addition, they stated that to blanket
every package in the meat case with the same message would in effect make the message invisible because it would be so
repetitive.

Several commenters questioning the scope of the regulation cited information from the preamble of the August 2, 1993,
Uncured Meat Pattie regulation which stated ``The likelihood of foodborne illness is not the same in all beef products
or all hamburger-type products. Ground meat presents a different risk than whole muscle cuts such as steaks, roasts,
or chops *** the production process for ground meat assures that any present pathogens will be distributed
throughout the product, including the interior, while bacteria tend to remain on the surface of steaks, roasts, and
chops. This factor has major implications for the cooking process. Because a rare steak is thoroughly cooked at the
surface, one can presume that pathogenic bacteria present are killed.'' They proposed limiting this labeling to
ground products. One additional commenter objected to pork products in 9 CFR 318.10(a) being suddenly drawn into
the proposed regulation.


