 

<DATE>
DATES:

 Comments must be submitted on or before September 26, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled, Crystal Square 3, Suite 403, 1735 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Arlington, Virginia 222023461.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 G. John Heyer (703) 6037740. Copies of this notice will be made available on request in Wordperfect 5.1 format
on diskette. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The Committee's regulations were last substantively amended in 1991 (56 FR 48974, effective October 28, 1991). Those
amendments were the result of the first comprehensive review of the regulations since their promulgation in 1973.
The purpose of the current proposed revision to the regulations is to update them to reflect developments and changes
in procedures since 1991, and to include changes that were overlooked in the last revision. 


Among the changes to part 512 on Committee responsibilities, 
512.2(b) has been amended to make clear that the Committee authorizes and deauthorizes both central
nonprofit agencies and nonprofit agencies employing people who are blind or have other severe disabilities to accept
orders from Government agencies 
under the Committee's program. Section 512.3 is amended to indicate that the Committee publishes notices
of proposed deletions and additions to the Procurement List and to require interested persons who submit bound comments
on these proposals to also submit an unbound copy to be duplicated for staff use. 
Sections 512.4, 512.7, and 513.2 have been amended to make them consistent with the JWOD Act,
which considers a determination that a commodity or service is suitable for addition to the Procurement List and the
establishment of an initial fair market price for the commodity or service to be two legally separate actions. The
confusing term ``current or most recent contractor'' in 512.4 has been changed to ``current contractor.''
An explanation of those rare instances when ``current contractor'' means ``most recent contractor'' will be addressed
in the Committee's procedural memoranda. The Committee's position that the ``current contractor'' includes affiliated
companies and parent corporations is explicitly stated in the amended 512.4. A provision has been added
to 512.4 to express the Committee's position that its discretion to determine what commodities and
services are suitable for addition to the Procurement List is not totally constrained by the enumerated criteria
in the section. Section 512.7 has also been rewritten to reflect current Committee pricing practices. 
Section 512.5 has been amended to make clear that when the Committee decides that a proposed addition is likely
to have a severe adverse impact on a current contractor, it will decide either to reduce the portion of the Government
requirement for the commodity or service to be added to the Procurement List or will decline to add it. The Committee's
standard for reconsidering a decision to add a commodity or service to the Procurement List, which appears in an internal
memorandum, has been added to 512.6. 
Section 513.3, which deals with assignment of a commodity or service to a central nonprofit agency for possible
addition to the Procurement List, and 516.4 and 516.12, which deal with military resale
commodities and specification changes respectively, have been rewritten to clarify their language. Small editorial
changes for clarity have been made in 514.2 and 515.2. Recordkeeping provisions in 514.3
have been changed to permit acceptance of State certifications of disability to document individuals' disability
status in accordance with recent changes in Federal disability regulations. The section title ``Violations'' used
for both 514.5 and 515.8 has been changed to indicate that the former applies to violations
of Committee regulations by nonprofit agencies and the latter to violations by entities of the Government. 
Section 515.3, which sets forth the scope of the mandatory procurement source requirement of the JWOD Program,
has been 
amended to indicate that the requirement applies to items that are essentially the same as commodities identified
on the Pro curement List by a National Stock Number or other item designation. This change was made necessary by the
increasing number of commercial items in the system which are essentially the same as Procurement List commodities.
A similar change was made in 516.13 on replacement and similar commodities. A new paragraph was added
to 515.3 to set forth the Committee's longstanding policy that Procurement List additions do not affect
contracts in being before the effective date of the addition, or options exercised under those contracts. 
The minimum figure for prior Committee approval of purchase exceptions granted by central nonprofit agencies in
515.4 has been raised from $25,000 to $100,000. The $25,000 figure was set in the 1991 revision of the
Committee regulations to correspond with the Government's small purchase limitation. The new figure corresponds
with the simplified acquisition threshold which is expected to replace the small purchase limitation. Sections
515.5 and 515.6 on prices and shipping of commodities have been amended to allow for pricing and delivery
on an FOB destination basis, consistent with recent developments in Government ordering procedures, as well as the
Committee's traditional FOB origin practice. 



</SUPPLEM>
