 

(5) Amounts withheld from benefits payable under title II of the Social Security Act where the withholding is required
by law;

(6) Amounts deducted for Medicare;

(7) Health insurance premiums;

(8) Normal retirement contributions as explained in 5 CFR 581.105(e) (e.g., Civil Service Retirement deductions,
Survivor Benefit Plan or Retired Serviceman's Family Protection Plan); and 

(9) Normal life insurance premiums (e.g., Serviceman's Group Life Insurance and basic Federal Employee's Group
Life Insurance premiums) exclusive of optional life insurance premiums.



Employee 

means a current employee of OPM or other agency, including a current member of the Armed Forces or Reserve of the Armed
Forces of the United States.



FCCS 

means the Federal Claims Collection Standards jointly published by the Department of Justice and the General Accounting
Office of 4 CFR 101.1 

et seq.





Hearing official 

means an individual (including an administrative law judge) responsible for conducting any hearing with respect
to the existence or amount of a debt claimed, and rendering a decision on the basis of such hearing. A hearing official
may not be under the supervision or control of the Director of OPM when OPM is the creditor agency.



Notice of intent to offset 

or 

notice of intent 

means a written notice from a creditor agency to an employee that states the creditor agency's determination that
the employee owes a debt to the creditor agency and apprises the employee of certain administrative rights.



Notice of salary offset 

means a written notice from the paying agency to an employee after a certification has been issued by the creditor agency,
informing the employee that salary offset will begin at the next officially established pay interval.



Office 

means the central and regional offices of the Office of Personnel Management.



Paying agency 

means the agency of the Federal Government which employs the individual who owes a debt to an agency of the Federal Government.
In some cases, OPM may be both the creditor agency and the paying agency.



Payroll office 

means the payroll office in the paying agency which is primarily responsible for the payroll records and the coordination
of pay matters with the appropriate personnel office with respect to an employee. Payroll office, with respect to
OPM, means the central payroll office.



Salary offset 

means an administrative offset to collect a debt under 5 U.S.C. 5514 by deduction(s) at one or more officially established
pay intervals from the current pay account of an employee, without his or her consent.



Salary Offset Coordinator 

means an official, designated by the Director of OPM, who is responsible for coordinating debt collection activities
for OPM.



