 

Subpart B_Specific Licensing Provisions 


 11. Section 34.11 is revised to read as follows: 


34.11 


Application for a specific license. 


A person may file an application for specific license for use of sealed sources in radiography, in duplicate, on NRC
Form 313, ``Application for Material License,'' in accordance with the provisions of 30.32 of this chapter.

12. Section 34.13 is added to read as follows: 


34.13 


Specific license for radiography. 


The Commission will approve an application for a specific license for the use of licensed material in radiography
if the applicant meets the following requirements: 
(a) The applicant shall satisfy the general requirements specified in 
30.33 of this chapter for byproduct material, as appropriate, and any special requirements contained in this
part. 
(b) The applicant shall develop an adequate program for training radiographers and radiographers' assistants that
meets the requirements of 
34.43, and submit to the Commission a description of this program which specifies the_
(1) Initial training; 
(2) On-the-job training; 
(3) Annual safety reviews; and 
(4) Means the applicant will use to demonstrate the radiographer's and radiographer's assistant's knowledge and
understanding of and ability to comply with the Commission's regulations and licensing requirements and the applicant's
operating and emergency procedures. 
(c) The applicant shall establish and submit to the Commission a description of its procedures for verifying and documenting
the certification status of its radiographers and for ensuring that the certification of individuals acting as radiographers
remains valid. 
(d) The applicant shall submit to the Commission written operating and emergency procedures as described in 34.45.

(e) The applicant shall establish and submit to the Commission its program for annual inspections of the job performance
of each radiographer and radiographer's assistant as described in 34.43(d). 
(f) The applicant shall submit a description of its overall organizational structure as it applies to the radiation
safety responsibilities in radiography, including specified delegations of authority and responsibility. 
(g) The applicant shall designate and identify a Radiation Safety Officer responsible for implementing the licensee's
radiation safety program. The Radiation Safety Officer shall meet the qualifications and duties described in 34.42.

(h) If an applicant intends to perform leak testing of sealed sources, the applicant shall identify the manufacturers
and the model numbers of the leak test kits to be used. If the applicant intends to analyze its own wipe samples, the applicant
shall establish procedures to be followed and submit a description of these procedures to the Commission. The description
must include the_
(1) Instruments to be used; 
(2) Methods of performing the analysis; and 
(3) Pertinent experience of the person who will analyze the wipe samples. 
(i) The applicant shall identify the location(s) of, and describe, all field stations and permanent radiographic
installations. 
(j) From (insert effective date of final rule) to (Insert date 2 years after the final rule is published in the 

Federal Register

): 
(1) A license applicant may affirm that all individuals acting as radiographers will be certified in radiation safety
by a certifying entity before commencing duties as radiographers. This affirmation is instead of describing its
initial training program for radiographers in the subjects outlined in 34.43(f) and the means used to determine
the radiographer's knowledge and understanding of these subjects, and; 
(2) A licensee may substitute radiographer certification in place of the description of the means to determine the
radiographer's knowledge and understanding of the subjects outlined in 34.43(f). 
(3) After (Insert date 2 years after the final rule is published in the 

Federal Register

), a license applicant and licensee shall comply with the requirement of 34.43(a)(2). 
13. A new heading for subpart C, consisting of 34.2034.35, is added to read as follows: 


Subpart C_Equipment 


14. Section 34.20 is revised to read as follows: 


34.20 


Performance requirements for radiography equipment. 




