 

(b) 

Public interest.

 Disclosure of information satisfies the first test only if it furthers the specific public interest of being likely
to contribute significantly to public understanding of Government operations or activities, regardless of any
other public interest it may further. In analyzing this question, the Food and Drug Administration will consider
the following factors: 

(1) Whether the records to be disclosed pertain to the operations or activities of the Federal Government; 

(2) Whether disclosure of the records would reveal any meaningful information about Government operations or activities
that is not already public knowledge; 

(3) Whether disclosure will advance the understanding of the general public as distinguished from a narrow segment
of interested persons. Under this factor, the Food and Drug Administration may consider whether the requester is
in a position to contribute to public understanding. For example, the Food and Drug Administration may consider whether
the requester has such knowledge or expertise as may be necessary to understand the information, and whether the requester's
intended use of the information would be likely to disseminate the information to the public. An unsupported claim
to be doing research for a book or article does not demonstrate that likelihood, while such a claim by a representative
of the news media is better evidence; and 

(4) Whether the contribution to public understanding will be a significant one, i.e., will the public's understanding
of the Government's operations be substantially greater as a result of the disclosure. 

(c) 

Not primarily in the requester's commercial interest.

 If disclosure passes the test of furthering the specific public interest described in paragraph (b) of this section,
the Food and Drug Administration will determine whether disclosure also furthers the requester's commercial interest
and, if so, whether this effect outweighs the advancement of that public interest. In applying this second test, the
Food and Drug Administration will consider the following factors: 

(1) Whether disclosure would further a commercial interest of the requester, or of someone on whose behalf the requester
is acting. Commercial interests include interests relating to business, trade, and profit. Both profit and nonprofit-making
corporations have commercial interests, as well as individuals, unions, and other associations. The interest of
a representative of the news media in using the information for news dissemination purposes will not be considered
a commercial interest. 

(2) If disclosure would further a commercial interest of the requester, whether that effect outweighs the advancement
of the public interest as defined in paragraph (b) of this section. 

(d) 

Deciding between waiver and reduction.

 If the disclosure of the information requested passes both tests described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section,
the Food and Drug Administration will normally waive fees. However, in some cases the Food and Drug Administration
may decide only to reduce the fees. For example, the Food and Drug Administration may do this when disclosure of some
but not all of the requested records passes the tests. 

(e) 

Procedure for requesting a waiver or reduction.

 A requester must request a waiver or reduction of fees at the same time as the request for records. The requester should
explain why a waiver or reduction is proper under the factors set forth in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section.
Only the Associate Commissioner for Public Affairs may make the decision whether to waive or reduce the fees. If the
Food and Drug Administration does not completely grant the request for a waiver or reduction, the denial letter will
designate a review official. The requester may appeal the denial to that official. The appeal letter should address
reasons for the Associate Commissioner's decision that are set forth in the denial letter. 

5. Section 20.53 is amended by revising the last sentence to read as follows: 



20.53

Indexing trade secrets and confidential commercial 
or financial information. 



*** If the affected person fails to intervene to defend the exempt status of the records and to itemize
and index the disputed records, the Food and Drug Administration will take this failure into consideration in deciding
whether that person has waived such exemption so as to require the Food and Drug Administration to promptly make the
records available for public disclosure. 




