 

FSIS proposed that safe handling instructions may appear anywhere on the label where they would likely to be read.
The proposal also required the safe handling instructions to be set off by a border and to one color type printed on a
single color contrasting background.
FSIS proposed to exempt products intended for further processing by an inspected establishment from mandatory safe
handling labeling requirements. Since products for further processing by another Federal or State establishment
will not be available to consumers or food service institutions, FSIS did not believe that it was necessary to require
safe handling instructions on such packaging.
FSIS proposed to allow safe handling instructions to be added to labels by the manufacturer and to be approved under
the provisions of generic label approval since the regulations prescribe the exact language of the safe handling
instructions.


Discussion of Comments



The FSIS Hearing Clerk received 60 comments on the proposed rule. Commenters included consumers, representatives
of consumer and other interest groups, State meat and poultry inspection officials, representatives and associations
of retail stores, representatives and associations of official meat and poultry establishments, two U.S. Department
of Agriculture Agencies, and others.

The following discussion of comments follows the general structure of the proposed rule. General concerns are addressed
in the context of specific features of the rule. Where the concerns cannot be logically addressed in the context of
specific sections of the rule, they are presented under a ``Miscellaneous Issues'' section. Changes made in the final
rule are described so that it is apparent how they address the concerns of commenters. Where the Agency addresses the
meat regulations, conforming changes are also made in the poultry regulations. Any changes unique to either the meat
or poultry regulations are identified.


Miscellaneous Issues


One commenter suggested that the comment period should be extended and that additional information that FSIS used
in formulating and supporting the regulation should be placed on the regulatory record. We disagree with this comment
and not that FSIS had made publicly available, as part of this rulemaking proceeding, all relevant data upon which
the regulation is based, including: the August 16, 1993 interim rule and all comments received in response thereto;
the studies referenced in the interim rule; the October 12, 1993 final rule; questions and answer papers formulated
in response to questions raised by the interim rule; the November 4, 1993 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and all comments
received in response thereto; all studies referenced in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, including the Focus-Study
Research and Agricultural Outlook (June, 1993); and documentation of oral presentations made in the course of the
rulemaking proceeding.


