 

24 CFR Part 220 



Home improvement, Loan programs_housing and community development, Mortgage insurance, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Urban renewal. 



24 CFR Part 221 



Low and moderate income housing, Mortgage insurance, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 241 



Energy conservation, Home improvement, Loan programs_housing and community development, Mortgage insurance,
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Solar energy. 



24 CFR Part 243 



Aged, Grant programs_housing and community development, Individuals with disabilities, Loan programs_housing
and community development, Low and moderate income housing, Mortgage insurance, Pets, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements. 



24 CFR Part 248 



Intergovernmental relations, Loan programs_housing and community development, Low and moderate income housing,
Mortgage insurance, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 250 



Intergovernmental relations, Low and moderate income housing, Mortgage insurance. 



24 CFR Part 260 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Low and moderate income housing. 



24 CFR Part 510 



Lead poisoning, Loan programs_housing and community development, Relocation assistance, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Urban renewal, Social security. 



24 CFR Part 511 



Administrative practice and procedure, Grant programs_housing and community development, Lead poisoning, Low
and moderate income housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Technical assistance. 



24 CFR Part 570 



Administrative practice and procedure, American Samoa, Community development block grants, Grant programs_housing
and community development, Grant programs_education, Guam, Lead poisoning, Loan programs_housing and community
development, Low and moderate income housing, Northern Mariana Islands, Pacific Islands Trust Territory, Puerto
Rico, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Virgin Islands, Student aid. 



24 CFR Part 590 



Government property, Housing, Intergovernmental relations, Low and moderate income housing, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Urban renewal. 



24 CFR Part 750 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Intergovernmental relations, Loan programs_housing and community
development, Public housing, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Social security. 



24 CFR Part 760 



Certain housing assistance programs, Income verification procedures. 



24 CFR Part 791 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Intergovernmental relations, Public housing, Rent subsidies.




24 CFR Part 811 



Public housing, Securities, Taxes. 



24 CFR Part 812 



Low and moderate income housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 813 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,
Utilities. 



24 CFR Part 850 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Low and moderate income housing, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements. 



24 CFR Part 880 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




24 CFR Part 881 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




24 CFR Part 882 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Lead poisoning, Manufactured homes, Homeless, Rent subsidies,
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 883 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




24 CFR Part 884 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,
Rural areas. 



24 CFR Part 885 



Aged, Individuals with disabilities, Loan programs_housing and community development, Low and moderate income
housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 886 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Lead poisoning, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements. 



24 CFR Part 887 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




24 CFR Part 905 



Aged, Grant programs_housing and community development, Grant programs_Indians, Individuals with disabilities,
Indians, Loan programs_housing and community development, Loan programs_Indians, Low and moderate income housing,
Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 912 



Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 913 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




24 CFR Part 941 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Loan programs_housing and community development, Public housing.




24 CFR Part 942 



Aged, Individuals with disabilities, Pets, Public housing. 



24 CFR Part 960 



Aged, Grant programs_housing and community development, Individuals with disabilities, Public housing. 



24 CFR Part 961 



Drug abuse, Drug traffic control, Grant programs_housing and community development, Public housing, Reporting
and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 964 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




24 CFR Part 965 



Energy conservation, Government procurement, Grant programs_housing and community development, Lead poisoning,
Loan programs_housing and community development, Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,
Utilities. 



24 CFR Part 968 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Loan programs_housing and community development, Public housing,
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



24 CFR Part 969 



Grant programs_housing and community development, Low and moderate income housing, Public housing. 


