 

(b) R401C. R401C, which consists of HCFC22, HFC152a, and HCFC124, is acceptable
as a substitute for CFC12 in retrofitted motor vehicle air conditioners. HCFC22 and HCFC124
contribute to ozone depletion. The production of HCFC22 will be phased out according to the accelerated phaseout
schedule. The GWP of HCFC22 is somewhat higher than other alternatives for this end-use. Experimental data
indicate that HCFC22 may leak through flexible hosing in mobile air conditioners at a high rate. In order to
preserve the blend's composition and to reduce its contribution to global warming, EPA strongly recommends using
barrier hoses when hose assemblies need to be replaced during a retrofit procedure. The GWPs of the other components
are low. Although this blend does contain one flammable constituent, the blend itself is not flammable. In addition,
this blend is a near azeotrope, meaning it does not change composition during evaporation and compression. Finally,
although testing demonstrated that the vapor and liquid compositions changed during leaks, neither phase became
flammable.

(35) CFC12 Motor Vehicle Air Conditioners, New. (a) HFC134a. HFC134a is acceptable as a substitute
for CFC12 in new motor vehicle air conditioners. HFC134a does not contribute to ozone depletion. HFC134a's
GWP and atmospheric lifetime are close to those of other alternatives which have been determined to be acceptable
for this end-use. However, HFC134a's contribution to global warming could be significant in leaky end-uses
such as MVACS. EPA has determined that the use of HFC134a in these applications is acceptable because industry
continues to develop technology to limit emissions. In addition, the number of available substitutes for use in MVACS
is currently limited. HFC134a is not flammable and its toxicity is low. While HFC134a is compatible
with most existing refrigeration and air conditioning equipment parts, it is not compatible with the mineral oils
currently used in such systems. An ester-based lubricant should be used rather than mineral oils.

(b) R401C. R401C, which consists of HCFC22, HFC152a, and HCFC124, is acceptable
as a substitute for CFC12 in new motor vehicle air conditioners. HCFC22 and HCFC124 contribute
to ozone depletion. The production of HCFC22 will be phased out according to the accelerated phaseout schedule.
The GWP of HCFC22 is somewhat higher than other alternatives for this end-use. Experimental data indicate
that HCFC22 may leak through flexible hosing in mobile air conditioners at a high rate. In order to preserve
the blend's composition and to reduce its contribution to global warming, EPA strongly recommends using barrier
hoses when hose assemblies need to be replaced during a retrofit procedure. The GWPs of the other components are low.
Although this blend does contain one flammable constituent, the blend itself is not flammable. In addition, this
blend is a near azeotrope, meaning it does not change composition during evaporation and compression. Finally, although
testing demonstrated that the vapor and liquid compositions changed during leaks, neither phase became flammable.

(c) Evaporative cooling. Evaporative cooling is acceptable as an alternative technology to motor vehicle air conditioners
using CFC12. Evaporative cooling does not contribute to ozone depletion or global warming and has the potential
to be more energy efficient than current refrigeration and air conditioning systems. Evaporative cooling uses no
chemicals, but relies instead on water evaporation as a means of cooling. It is in widespread use in transit buses in
the western U.S. Recent design improvements have greatly expanded its applicability to other regions.

(d) CO

2

 cooling. CO

2

 cooling systems are acceptable as an alternative technology to motor vehicle air conditioners using CFC12.
CO

2

 systems for motor vehicle air conditioning are currently under development. EPA believes that with continued development,
such systems could be available within 5 years, and thus they are potentially available substitutes. CO

2

 was historically used in refrigeration systems. It is a well-known, nontoxic, nonflammable gas. Its GWP is defined
as 1, and all other GWPs are indexed to it. Since it is readily available as a waste gas, no additional chemical will need
to be produced. Thus, the use of CO

2

 as a refrigerant will not contribute to global warming.

(e) Stirling cycle. Stirling cycle systems are acceptable as an alternative technology to motor vehicle air conditioners
using CFC12. A full scale Stirling cycle motor vehicle air conditioning system has been built. Further development
is necessary to facilitate practical implementation. For further information see the discussion on the Stirling
cycle under new CFC11, CFC12, CFC113, CFC114, and R500 centrifugal chillers.

(36) Heat transfer. Although EPA did not originally intend to review this end-use, the Agency reconsidered after
reexamining the potential size of annual sales of substitutes. Thus, EPA is currently reviewing submissions for
the use of PFCs in heat transfer systems. EPA anticipates including its final determination in the first SNAP update.

b. Unacceptable substitutes. (1) HCFC22/HCFC142b/CFC12 blend. A HCFC22/HCFC142b/CFC12
blend is unacceptable as a substitute for CFC12 in:

&bull;Commercial comfort air conditioning;

&bull;Industrial process refrigeration systems;

&bull;Ice skating rinks;

&bull;Cold storage warehouses;

&bull;Refrigerated transport;

&bull;Retail food refrigeration;

&bull;Vending machines;

&bull;Water coolers;

&bull;Commercial ice machines; 

