 

Commenters representing environmental advocacy groups also urged OSM to incorporate standards to demonstrate
whether an outstanding violation has been corrected or is in the process of being corrected to the satisfaction of
the agency with jurisdiction over such violation. OSM believes that the regulatory authority which issued the violation
can effectively define the status of such violation with additional standards. This regulatory authority is well
positioned to determine whether the violation which it has issued has been abated or is in the process of being abated
to its satisfaction. A regulatory authority before which a permit application is pending should consult the regulatory
authority which issued the violation to ascertain the status of any violation to which an applicant has been linked
through ownership or control.

OSM has determined to adopt the proposed rule as a final rule with a small modification which is now described. In adopting
the proposal, OSM has modified the provisions of paragraph (b)(2) of section 773.23 to make the provisions of 773.25,
standards for challenging ownership or control links and the status of violations, along with those contained in
773.24, applicable when a regulatory authority makes a determination whether to approve a permit. The proposed
rule contained a reference to proposed section 773.26. This change reflects that proposed section 773.26 has been
renumbered as final 773.25. The rule is otherwise adopted as proposed.



Section 773.24_Procedures for Challenging Ownership or Control Links Shown in AVS.

 OSM proposed 773.24 to establish the procedures to be followed in the event that the AVS showed an ownership
or control link between a person and any person cited in a violation notice. The proposed section would have provided
procedures for direct appeals of such links to OSM by persons who had been so linked. The proposed section would also
have provided for challenges concerning the status of violations to which persons shown on AVS had been linked. The
proposed section would have further provided the opportunity for those persons making a challenge to have obtained
temporary relief from any adverse use of the challenged link or violation information during the pendency of such
challenge.


Paragraph (a)(1) of proposed 773.24 would have provided that an applicant or anyone else shown in AVS in an ownership
or control link to any person cited in a Federal or State violation could have challenged such a link in accordance with
the provisions of paragraphs (b) through (d) of proposed 773.24 and in accordance with the provisions of proposed
773.26, standards for challenging ownership or control links and the status of violations. Paragraph (a)(1)
of proposed 773.24 would have provided, however, that such challenge would not be available if the challenger
was bound by a prior administrative or judicial decision with respect to the link.

In substance, paragraph (a)(1) of proposed 773.24 would have provided that challenges of ownership or control
links shown on AVS be made before OSM. The theory of the proposed regulation was that, once information with respect
to particular ownership or control links has become part of the AVS and accessible to regulatory authorities across
the country, the responsibility for the maintenance of such information would be a Federal responsibility. Accordingly,
the process for challenging such information would be a Federal process.

Paragraph (a)(2) of proposed 773.24 would have provided that an applicant or anyone else shown in AVS in an ownership
or control link to a person cited in a Federal violation notice would have challenged the status of such violation in
accordance with the provisions of paragraphs (b) through (d) of proposed 773.24 and in accordance with the
provisions of proposed 773.26, standards for challenging ownership or control links and the status of violations.
The procedures applicable would have been similar to those described in paragraph (a)(1) of proposed 773.24.

Paragraph (a)(2) of proposed 773.24 would have provided, in language similar to that contained in paragraph
(a)(1) of the proposed regulation, that the opportunity to challenge the status of a violation would not be available
to any person who was bound by a prior administrative or judicial determination concerning the status of the violation.


The ``status of the violation'' would have meant whether the violation remained outstanding, had been corrected,
was in the process of being corrected, or was the subject of a good faith, direct administrative or judicial appeal
to contest the validity of the violation. See 30 CFR 773.15(b)(1)(i)-(ii). This usage was to have been carried forward
into the provisions of proposed 773.26, standards for challenging ownership or control links and the status
of violations. Further, the provisions of proposed 773.26 would have limited challenges make to the status
of violations under proposed 773.24 to prevent challenges of the existence of the violation at the time that
it was cited. Again, the process for challenging the status of a Federal violation was to have been a Federal process.
Challenges would have been made before OSM.

