 

The Service found that the following CITES-listed passerine species, which commenters requested be included in
the approved list, could not be added to the approved list of captive-bred species because they did not meet the criteria
for approval in 15.31(a) and wild-caught birds are in trade and have been imported into the United States or
have been in international trade: Strawberry finch (

Amandava amandava

), Greater Indian [Javan] hill myna (

Gracula religiosa

), St. Helena waxbill (

Estrilda astrild

), Orange-cheeked waxbill (

Estrilda melpoda

), Black-rumped waxbill (

Estrilda troglodytes

), Yellow-crowned bishop (

Euplectes afer

), Orange weaver (

Euplectes orix franciscanus

), Village Indigobird or Senegal combassou (

Vidua chalybeata

), Red-billed firefinch (

Lagonosticta senegala

), Quail finch (

Ortygospiza atricollis

), Cordon bleu [red-cheeked finch] (

Uraeginthus benegalus

), and Pin-tailed whydah (

Vidua macroura

). 


Non-CITES-Listed Passerines That Cannot Be Added to the Approved List 


The Service found that the following non-CITES-listed species, which commenters requested be included in the approved
list, could not be added to the approved list of captive-bred species because they did not meet the criteria for approval
in 15.31 (However, since they are not listed in the CITES Appendices, they are not covered by the WBCA): Hooded
pitta (

Pitta sordida

), Hartlaub's turaco (

Tauraco hartlaubi

), Blue-faced parrot-finch (

Erythrura trichroa

), Red-headed parrot-finch (

Erythrura psittacea

), Pin-tailed parrot-finch (

Erythrura prasina

), Black-cheeked waxbill (

Estrilda erythronotos

), Violet-eared waxbill (

Uraeginthus granatina

), Peters' twinspot (

Hypargos niveoguttatus

), Chestnut munia (

Lonchura malacca

), Yellow-rumped finch (

Lonchura flaviprymna

), Melba finch (

Pytilia melba

), Orange-winged Pytilia (

Pytilia afra

), Saffron finch (

Sicalis flaveola

), Purple grenadier (

Uraeginthus ianthinogaster

), White-rumped shama thrush (

Copsychus malabaricus

), Silver-eared mesa (

Leiothrix argentauris

), Pekin robin (

Leiothrix lutea

), and Asian Fairy bluebird (

Irena puella

). 

Some commenters asked that the Java sparrow (

Padda oryzivora

) be approved as a captive-bred species. The Java sparrow is listed as an injurious wildlife species, under regulations
in 50 CFR Part 16, and its importation, transportation, or acquisition is prohibited. Therefore, the Service cannot
list it as a species approved for importation. 

Several form letters were received recommending that the Northern Cardinal (

Cardinalis cardinalis

) be added to the approved list of captive-bred species. This species is native to the United States and is protected
under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (16 U.S.C. 703711) and implementing regulations in 50 CFR Subchapter B.
Therefore, the Service cannot list it as a species approved for importation. 




Comments Pertaining to Section 15.33: Species Included in the Approved List for Captive-bred Species. Inclusion
of Species in the Approved List, in Addition to Those in the Proposed Rule of March 17, 1994 



The Service found that the following species could be added to the approved list of captive-bred species because they
meet the criteria for approval in 15.31: Cherry finch (

Aidemosyne modesta

), Diamond sparrow (

Emblema guttata

), Red-browed finch (

Aegintha temporalis

), Masked lovebird (

Agapornis personata

), Jendaya conure (

Aratinga jandaya

), Yellow-fronted parakeet (

Cyanoramphus auriceps

), Red-fronted parakeet (

Cyanoramphus novaezelandiae

), Blue-winged parrot (

Neophema chrysostoma

), Elegant parrot (

Neophema elegans

), Northern rosella (

Platycercus venustus

), Western or Stanley rosella (

Platycercus icterotis

), Golden-shouldered parakeet (

Psephotus chrysopterygius

), Indian ringneck parakeet (

Psittacula krameri manillensis

), Scaly-breasted lorikeet (

Trichoglossus chlorolepidotus

), and Common buzzard (

Buteo buteo

). 

Several commenters requested that color mutations of several psittacine species be added to the approved list of
captive-bred species. The Service agrees when the color mutation is (a) rare or non-existent in the wild, and therefore
not likely to be obtained as wild-caught stock; (b) regularly produced in captivity, and (c) distinguishable from
the typical wild form and such ability to distinguish the color mutation is easy for the non-expert. Therefore, the
Service is adding the following color mutations for selected species to the approved list of captive-bred species:
Pacific parrotlet (

Forpus coelestis

) - lutino, yellow, blue and cinnamon forms; lineolated or barred parakeet (

Bolborhynchus lineola

) - blue, yellow, and white forms; and Alexandrine parakeet (

Psittacula eupatria

) - blue and lutino forms. The Service understands that newly discovered color mutations are continuously appearing
and being established in captivity, and would appreciate information as the process occurs, so that additional color
mutations could be listed on the approved list of captive-bred species. 



