 

(4) 

FSIS tentative position: Protein and fat contents.

 FSIS is considering whether there is a need to establish minimum protein and/or maximum fat content(s) for boneless
poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids. FSIS has concluded that such action is not necessary because
protein and fat are nutrients whose declaration becomes mandatory on the labeling of most multi-ingredient meat
and poultry products upon the effective date of the nutrition labeling regulations (58 FR 632). These regulations
also establish a voluntary nutrition labeling program for single-ingredient, raw products, and specify that FSIS
will evaluate significant participation of the voluntary program. If significant participation is not found, FSIS
shall initiate rulemaking to require nutrition labeling on those products under the voluntary program. Therefore,
with certain exceptions, consumers will have complete information about the nutrients in poultry products.

FSIS recognizes that not all products sold to consumers at the retail level will carry nutrition labeling. FSIS's
final regulation on nutrition labeling provided for certain exceptions including products produced by small businesses
and products in small packages of less than 1/2 ounce net weight, provided that the labels for these products bear no
nutrition claims or nutrition information. However, labeling will be required on most processed products purchased
by consumers in retail stores so that, together with the voluntary program for retail store information on single-ingredient
raw products, consumers will have information on protein and fat for most products purchased for consumption at home.
Based on these considerations, FSIS maintains that there is no need to establish minimum protein and/or maximum fat
contents for boneless poultry products produced by mechanical deboning with 0.6 percent or less bone solids.

(5) 

Tentative position: Quality control.

 FSIS believes that a quality control program is necessary to assure that establishments that manufacture boneless
poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids comply consistently with the criteria being considered. Utilization
of such a quality control program in producing the boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids would
be a prerequisite for the approval of labels for products consisting of or containing boneless poultry. The function
of a quality control program is to restrict potential variability within the limits of FSIS's tentative requirements
by controlling the factors that can affect the resulting product's characteristics.

FSIS expects to require that boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids be produced under an approved
quality control program. Also, FSIS expects to require that the quality control program provide the controls and
information necessary to assure boneless poultry with 0.6 percent or less bone solids will meet each of the requirements
under consideration and will enable establishment personnel and FSIS to monitor it for effectiveness. FSIS is focusing
on methods that will minimize inter-lot variation by maintaining the uniformity of starting materials and controlling
the handling and processing of starting materials and resulting product.

Because it appears that this goal can be achieved effectively and efficiently where a program for quality control
incorporates appropriate methods and monitoring techniques and adheres to good manufacturing practices, FSIS
plans to require that an establishment conduct only limited analyses for calcium, protein quality, and bone particles
for boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids to confirm that production is, in fact, under control.
After it has been demonstrated that the quality control program is able to yield complying product, confirmatory
analyses would be required only periodically, as long as the product is in compliance.

FSIS anticipates establishing basic parameters for the chemical analyses that must be performed to verify compliance
with the requirements, e.g., defining production lots and sampling schedules, and the accepted methodology for
performing analyses. FSIS wishes to receive comments on the parameters necessary for an adequate quality control
program.



B. Tentative position: Handling requirements.

 Current regulatory requirements, including provisions for sanitation, operating procedures, and heat processing
(9 CFR part 381, subpart H and I, and 381.150), already provide the basic controls necessary to prevent spoilage
and assure poultry product wholesomeness. However, because the mechanical deboning process presents greater opportunities
for bacterial growth than traditional poultry product processing, FSIS is considering amending the poultry products
inspection regulations to more specifically address the requirements for the various starting materials used to
manufacture boneless poultry products produced by mechanical deboning with 0.6 percent or less bone solids and the
resulting boneless poultry product.


