 

9. An effort was made to consult with other federal governmental agencies involved in mortgage loans, state and local
entities involved in HUD's mortgage insurance programs, trade organizations, attorneys in the private sector representing
mortgagees and mortgagors and HUD field counsel. Numerous changes have been made to reflect input by all the aforementioned
parties.


The guide format was probably developed shortly after enactment of the first multifamily provisions of the National
Housing Act no later than the 1940s. The format had not been amended since 1966. Numerous disputes were arising in connection
with the guide format (then designated FHA Form No. 1725) because private counsel were uncomfortable with what they
regarded as an antiquated format which did not comport with modern opinions practice. Closings were delayed at great
cost to HUD and the private sector. Efforts to revise the format were begun in the mid-1970s however no consensus was
reached after two efforts to solicit comments from HUD field counsel.


The attached Guide represents the HUD central office decisions made after the input described above. Names and telephone
numbers of those consulted can be provided. All consultation took place from December 1993 to date.


There were no major problems which could not be resolved by central office decision-makers.


Public and governmental comments received by HUD can be provided.


The section 202 and 811 programs currently have an OMB-approved Owner's Attorney's Closing Opinion, form HUD90166CA.
However, the Department has decided that it would be beneficial to participants and their counsel to have similar
formats for all loan and capital advance programs. The section 202 and 811 guide format is essentially the same as the
insured loan format except for some differences in terminology and program requirements.


10. No assurance of confidentiality was given.


11. No sensitive questions are addressed in the Guide.


12. The estimated annualized cost to the federal government of collecting and storing the opinion based upon an hourly
rate of $20.00 per hour and a total of seven hours is $240.00. The opinion is one of many documents which is collected
at each loan closing and is stored in the docket file which is maintained for the life of the project loan in the federal
records center. For capital advances, the closing opinion would be kept in Field Office Docket. There is also the cost
of review of the document by HUD field counsel. We estimate that this review should take approximately one-half hour
and based upon an hourly rate of $24.00, the total cost would be $8400.00. Neither of these figures should change substantially
from the previous total cost to the federal government under FHA Form No. 1725.


The total annualized cost to mortgagors or owners of retaining private counsel to prepare the opinion is estimated
to be $122,500.00, which is based upon a total of 700 hours at an average cost per hour of $175.00. (Although one hour
is expended completing the form, 100 to 150 hours are expended by mortgagor's or owner's counsel in representing the
mortgagor or owner and a mortgage line item covers such typical total cost of approximately $20,000.00.)


13. The above estimates are based upon an estimated total of 700 multifamily rental project and health care facility
loan closings per year, which is based upon last year's totals of approximately 500 FHA insured mortgage loan closings
and 200 section 202 elderly closings. It is anticipated that the section 202 elderly closings will decrease and the
FHA insured loan closings will increase by an off-setting amount. One legal opinion is required per closing. These
estimates are based upon HUD's program staff experience in dealing with the aforementioned mortgage line item, the
referenced loan closings and the experience of HUD personnel who have recently acted as counsel to mortgagors in the
private sector.


14. Although the guide is longer than the form it replaces, there is no substantial difference in the amount of time
which will be expended by the parties involved in the preparation, review and collection of the opinion. The use of
word processing technology and its redlining capability will make it possible to handle the increased length without
any significant increase in time expended. Further, the new guide, by providing more specific instructions, should
resolve many conflicts which had created intolerable delays in many closings. Such delays often resulted in the involvement
of central office legal staff thereby further increasing the workload upon all the involved parties to the mortgage
loan or capital advance transaction.


15. Not applicable.



.


<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 421001M
</BILLING>













<IMPORT>




E:GRAPHICSEN03MR94.000




</IMPORT>






<IMPORT>




E:GRAPHICSEN03MR94.001










</IMPORT>



<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 421001C
</BILLING>






