 

vi. 

Onboard diagnostics. 

The currently waived California onboard diagnostic I (OBD I) regulation is not comparable to the recently promulgated
federal OBD regulation ( 58 FR 9468, February 19, 1993). The recently promulgated federal OBD regulation is comparable
to the recently revised California OBD II regulation. In fact, EPA has decided that vehicles demonstrating compliance
with CARB onboard diagnostic (OBD) regulations will be deemed to satisfy federal OBD requirements through the 1998
model year. 
However, EPA cannot properly consider California's OBD II regulations under section 243(e) of the CAA because California
has not yet received a waiver of federal preemption for them. Thus, in subsequent model years after 1998, vehicle OBD
systems must comply with the federal OBD requirements. 



vii. 

Summary. 

While the basic CFV exhaust standards are identical to CARB standards, EPA is not able to find that each set of currently
waived CARB standards are as protective as the federal standards. By comparison to the federal program established
for CFVs today pursuant to section 242 and 243, the California program lacks comparable components for at least the
federal cold CO standards, recently promulgated evaporative emission standards and on-board diagnostics, as well
as mobile source control for vehicle refueling vapor recovery. Since EPA cannot at this time make the required determination
under section 243(e)(2), EPA is promulgating federal standards and requirements in this final rule that will apply
to CFVs. The CAA exhaust 
standards will apply to clean fuel vehicles, and will be administered and enforced according to CARB practices under
CAA section 244, which is discussed later under ``Administration and Enforcement''. 



Pursuant to section 242(b), federal requirements for cold CO, evaporative 
emissions, refueling emissions, OBD (onboard diagnostics), NMHC, and, with certain exceptions, THC will also apply
to CFVs. As proposed, EPA is waiving testing requirements for the cold CO standards for gaseous-fueled, diesel-fueled
and electric CFVs when manufacturers demonstrate compliance with the cold CO standard through engineering analysis
or test data.
<FOOTCITE>17</FOOTCITE>
 EPA does not expect problematic cold temperature CO emissions from gaseous-fueled CFVs since they do not generally
use fuel enrichment strategies to aid with cold starts. Because of efficient combustion in diesel-fueled vehicles
and the minimal emissions inherent with electric vehicles, EPA does not expect problematic cold CO emissions from
these vehicles either. Also as 
discussed above, EPA will not require CNG vehicles to meet the THC standard due to the conflict with provisions of part
C of the Act and other factors. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
17

</FOOTNAME>
This provision is similar to the requirements for Otto-cycle vehicles which must show compliance with a PM standard
in the Tier 1 rulemaking (56 FR 25730).



</FOOTNOTE>


In the NPRM, EPA had anticipated that the regulatory processes underway 
would allow EPA to conclude at the time of this final rule that each set of California standards is, in the aggregate,
at least as protective of public health and welfare as the otherwise applicable standards set forth in section 242
and 243. The Agency still believes that such a conclusion may be possible in the future. EPA will continue to monitor
developments on these issues and, if changing circumstances warrant, EPA intends to revisit this rule and propose
replacing the federal CFV standards with CARB 
standards under section 243(e)(2). In such a situation, the Agency will supplement the record and provide an opportunity
for comment as appropriate. 



d. 

Credit Generating Standards. 

As mentioned previously, the CAA requires EPA to establish standards for Ultra-Low Emission Vehicles (ULEVs) and
Zero Emission Vehicles (ZEVs) which are more stringent than the standards that otherwise apply to CFVs. Section 246(f)(4)
of the CAA states that, ``[t]he standards established by the Administrator under this paragraph for vehicles under
8,500 lbs. GVWR or greater shall conform as closely as 
possible to standards which are established by the State of California for ULEV and ZEV vehicles in the same class''.
As proposed, EPA is promulgating the ULEV and ZEV standards established by CARB in the California LEV program as the
federal ULEV and ZEV standards. Section 249(d)(3) specifies that these and other requirements established for purposes
of the credit program for the Clean Fuel Fleet program shall also apply for purposes of issuing credits in the Pilot
Program. 




