 







<USDEPT>TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>18 CFR Part 1310</USBUREAU>


Administrative Cost Recovery



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA).



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Proprosed rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

TVA proposes to amend its administrative cost recovery regulations by: Adding a provision requiring payment to TVA
of nonrefundable application processing fees to recover the costs of reviewing plans for the construction, operation,
or maintenance of dams, appurtenant works, or other obstructions affecting navigation, flood control, or public
lands or reservations in the Tennessee River system under Section 26a of the TVA Act; eliminating cost recovery exemptions
for agricultural licenses; firewood cutting permits; permits for the nonexclusive short-term use of TVA land; conveyance
or abandonment of TVA land or landrights to States, municipalities, and political subdivisions and agencies thereof;
and use of TVA land for utility line crossings; authorizing the responsible land manager to establish a standard charge
for each category of action rather than determining the actual administrative costs for each individual action;
increasing the range of fees for certain actions.




The implementation of these regulations would allow TVA to recover more of its administrative costs incurred in processing
certain actions from those persons who directly benefit from the actions.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments must be submitted on or before November 28, 1994. The proposed effective date is January 31, 1995.




</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Comments should be sent to David L. Pack, Manager of Reservoir Land Management, Tennessee Valley Authority, 17 Ridgeway
Road, Norris, Tennessee 37828.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



David L. Pack, Manager of Reservoir Land Management, (615) 6321602.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

In order to help ensure that TVA land management and permitting activities are self-sustaining to the full extent
possible, the agency has determined that its administrative cost recovery regulations should be expanded to include
a broader range of use, disposal, and permitting activities. This determination is consistent with the objectives
of the current administration to increase government efficiency and to recover the costs of government services
from those who most directly benefit from the services.







Persons who wish to construct dams, appurtenant works, or other obstructions in or along the Tennessee River system
are required by Section 26a of the TVA Act of 1933, as amended, to obtain TVA's approval of plans for the proposed activity
prior to construction. TVA's administrative cost recovery regulations currently provide for recovery of costs
of actions taken by TVA to approve obstructions constructed without prior approval of plans. In order to help ensure
that the agency's entire Section 26a permitting program is self-sustaining to the full extent possible, TVA now proposes
to recover the costs of processing permits for proposed obstructions as well as after-the-fact permit processing.
The proposed amendment would allow the responsible land manager to set a standard permit processing fee, which would
be payable upon submission of a permit application and would be nonrefundable, regardless of whether or not the plans
are approved by TVA. 

It is presently envisioned that the standard application processing fee for private noncommercial Section 26a permit
proposals would be $100, and the standard fee for commercial, industrial, and public Section 26a permit application
processing would be $500. These proposed fees are based in part upon a preliminary review of costs incurred by TVA in
processing these permits. In addition, TVA examined prevailing permit application fees by conducting a comparative
analysis survey of 40 other agencies and utilities. In adjusting application processing fees and in establishing
standard fees for other applicable activities, the responsible land manager will examine average costs incurred
in conducting the various activities.





TVA presently charges a $2 per applicant administrative fee for quota deer hunts and quota turkey hunts at Land Between
The Lakes. The purpose of this fee is to recover the cost of processing applications, conducting a computerized drawing,
and mailing notification of selection status. TVA proposes the application fee increase from $2 to a range of $5 to
$25. This range will allow TVA to recover increasing costs of conducting the drawings and hunts, and allow a range of
pricing for special hunts and drawings.





The proposed effective date of this action is January 31, 1995. Applications received prior to this date will be processed
under the regulations in effect at the time of receipt of the application.






List of Subjects in 18 CFR Part 1310





Government property, Hunting.







For the reasons set out in the preamble, 18 CFR Part 1310 is proposed to be revised to read as follows:







PART 1310_ADMINISTRATIVE COST RECOVERY






Sec.




1310.1Purpose.

1310.2Application.


1310.3Assessment of administrative charge.












Authority: 

16 U.S.C. 831831dd; 31 U.S.C. 9701.






1310.1

Purpose.





The purpose of the regulations in this part is to establish a schedule of fees to be charged in connection with the disposition
and uses of, and activities affecting, real property in TVA's custody or control; approval of plans under Section
26a of the Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933, as amended (16 U.S.C. 831y1); and certain other activities
in order to help ensure that such activities are self-sustaining to the full extent possible.






1310.2

Application.





(a) 

General. 

TVA will undertake the following actions only upon the condition that the applicant pay to TVA such administrative
charge as the Vice-President of Land Management or the Manager of Power Properties (hereinafter ``responsible land
manager''), as appropriate, shall assess in accordance with 1310.3; provided, however, that the responsible
land manager may waive payment where he/she determines that there is a corresponding benefit to TVA or that such waiver
is otherwise in the public interest:






(1) Conveyance and abandonment of TVA land or landrights.

(2) Licenses and other uses of TVA land not involving the disposition of TVA real property or interests in real property.

(3) Actions taken to suffer the presence of unauthorized fills and structures over, on, or across TVA land or landrights,
and including actions not involving the abandonment or disposal of TVA land or landrights.



(4) Actions taken to approve fills, structures, or other obstructions under Section 26a of the Tennessee Valley Authority
Act of 1933, as amended (16 U.S.C. 831y1), and TVA's regulations issued thereunder at part 1304 of this chapter.







(b) 

Exemption. 

An administrative charge shall not be made for the following actions:

(1) Conveyances pursuant to section 4(k)(d) of the Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933, as amended (16 U.S.C. 831c(k)(d)).

(2) Releases of unneeded mineral right options.

(3) TVA phosphate land and mineral transactions.

(4) Permits and licenses for use of TVA land by distributors of TVA power.





(c) 

Quota deer hunt and turkey hunt applications. 

Quota deer hunt and turkey hunt permit applications will be processed by TVA if accompanied by the fee prescribed in
1310.3(d).
</SUPPLEM>
