 

The Sanctuary provides an essential habitat for a wide variety 
of marine mammals and birds, and is of particular interest due to 
the presence of endangered and threatened species that live or 
migrate through the region. Twenty seven species of marine 
mammals are reported to breed, rest within, or migrate offshore 
of the Olympic Peninsula. Of particular interest is the 
migration route of the endangered California gray whale, the 
threatened northern sea lion, the occasional presence of the 
endangered right, fin, sei, blue, humpback, and sperm whales, and 
the reintroduced resident population of sea otters. 

In addition, the seabird colonies of Washington's outer coast 
are among the largest in the continental United States and 
include a number of species listed as endangered or threatened 
including the short-tailed albatross, peregrine falcon, brown 
pelican, Aleutian Canada goose, marbled murrelet, and one of the 
largest populations of bald eagles in the continental United 
States. 

The high biological productivity of the coastal and offshore 
waters in the Sanctuary support valuable fisheries that 
contribute significantly to the State and tribal economies. The 
commercially important species of fish include five species of 
salmon, groundfish, and shellfish. 

In addition to the Sanctuary's value with respect to its 
biological resources, the region encompasses significant 
historical resources including Indian village sites, ancient 
canoe runs, petroglyphs, Indian artifacts, and numerous 
shipwrecks. 

The diversity and richness of marine resources suggests that 
the marine sanctuary designations will provide exceptional 
opportunities for scientific research in the areas of species 
interactions, population dynamics, physiological ecology, 
linkages between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, and marine 
anthropology. The scientific research encouraged by the 
Sanctuary management plan will, in turn, help support an 
intensive public education and awareness program that will 
address the diverse, complex, and sensitive ecosystems in 
Washington's coastal and oceanic environments. 



Article IV. Scope of Regulations 



Section 1. Activities Subject to Regulation 



The following activities are subject to regulation, 
including prohibition, to the extent necessary and reasonable to 
ensure the protection and management of the conservation, 
ecological, recreational, research, educational, historical and 
aesthetic resources and qualities of the area: 

a. Exploring for, developing, or producing oil, gas or 
minerals (e.g., clay, stone, sand, metalliferous ores, 
gravel, non-metalliferous ores or any other solid 
material or other solid matter of commercial value) 
within the Sanctuary; 

b. Discharging or depositing from within the boundary of 
the Sanctuary, any material or other matter; 

c. Discharging or depositing, from beyond the boundary of 
the Sanctuary, any material or other matter; 

d. Taking, removing, moving, catching, collecting, 
harvesting, feeding, injuring, destroying or causing 
the loss of, or attempting to take, remove, move, 
catch, collect, harvest, feed, injure, destroy or cause 
the loss of, a marine mammal, sea turtle, seabird, 
historical resource or other Sanctuary resource; 

e. Drilling into, dredging, or otherwise altering the 
seabed of the Sanctuary; or constructing, placing, or 
abandoning any structure, material or other matter on 
the seabed of the Sanctuary; 

f. Possessing within the Sanctuary a Sanctuary resource or 
any other resource, regardless of where taken, removed, 
moved, caught, collected or harvested, that, if it had 
been found within the Sanctuary, would be a Sanctuary 
resource; 

g. Flying a motorized aircraft above the Sanctuary; 

h. Operating a vessel (i.e., watercraft of any description 
in the Sanctuary; 

i. Interfacing with, obstructing, delaying or preventing 
an investigation, search, seizure or disposition of 
seized property in connection with enforcement of the 
Act or any regulation or permit issued under the Act. 



Section 2. Emergencies 



Where necessary to prevent or minimize the destruction of, 
loss of, or injury to a Sanctuary resource or quality, or 
minimize the imminent risk of such destruction, loss or injury, 
any and all activities, including those not listed in Section 1 
of this Article, are subject to immediate temporary regulation, 
including prohibition. 



Article V. Effect on Leases, Permits, Licenses, and Rights 



Pursuant to section 304(c)(1) of the Act, 16 U.S.C. 
1434(c)(1), no valid lease, permit, license, or other 
authorization issued by any Federal, State, or local authority of 
competent jurisdiction, or any right of subsistence use of 
access, may be terminated by the Secretary of Commerce or 
designee as a result of this designation. The Secretary of 
Commerce or designee, however, may regulate the exercise 
(including, but not limited to, the imposition of terms and 
conditions) of such authorization or right consistent with the 
purposes for which the Sanctuary is designated. 

In no event may the Secretary or designee issue a permit 
authorizing, or otherwise approve: (1) Exploration for, 
development or production of oil, gas or minerals within the 
Sanctuary; (2) the discharge of primary treated sewage (except 
for regulation, pursuant to section 304(c)(2) of the Act, of the 
exercise of valid authorizations in existence on the effective 
date of Sanctuary designation and issued by other authorities of 
competent jurisdiction); (3) the disposal of dredged material 
within the Sanctuary other than in connection with beach 
nourishment projects related to harbor maintenance activities; or 
(4) bombing activities within the Sanctuary. Any purported 
authorizations issued by other authorities after the effective 
date of Sanctuary designation for any of these activities within 
the Sanctuary shall be invalid. 



Article VI. Alteration of This Designation 



The terms of designation, as defined under Section 304(a) of 
the Act, may be modified only by the same procedures by which the 
original designation is made, including public hearings 
consultation with interested Federal, State, and local agencies, 
review by the appropriate Congressional committees and the 
Governor of the State of Washington, and approval by the 
Secretary of Commerce or designee. 



