 




<RINDOCK>[Project No. 10865001] </RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Warm Creek Hydro, Inc.; Application </DOCTITLE>



March 8, 1994. 



Take notice that the following hydroelectric application has been filed with the Commission and is available for
public inspection: 

a. 

Type of Application: 

Original Major License 

b. 

Project No.: 

10865001. 

c. 

Date filed: 

September 7, 1993. 

d. 

Applicant: 

Warm Creek Hydro, Inc. 

e. 

Name of Project: 

Warm Creek Hydroelectric. 

f. 

Location: 

On Warm Creek, near the town of Deming, in Whatcom County, Washington. T38N, R6E, in Sections 24  25. 

g. 

Filed Pursuant to: 

Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. 791(a)825(r). 

h. 

Applicant Contact: 

Mr. Lon Covin, Vice President, Warm Creek Hydro, Inc., 1422130th Avenue, N.E., Bellevue, WA 98005, (206) 4550234.


i. 

FERC Contact: 

Mr. Surender M. Yepuri, P.E., (202) 2192847. 

j. 

Deadline Dates: 

(1) For interventions or protests_60 days from issuance of notice; and (2) For written comments on scoping (environmental
issues)_May 6, 1994. 

k. 

Status of Environmental Analysis: 

The application is not ready for environmental analysis at this time; therefore, the Commission is soliciting only
motions to intervene or protests_see attached paragraph E1. 

l. 

Intent To Prepare An Environmental Assessment And Conduct Public Scoping Meetings: 

The Commission staff intends to prepare an Environmental Assessment (EA) on the hydroelectric project in accordance
with the National Environmental Policy Act. The EA will objectively consider both site-specific and cumulative
environmental impacts of the project and reasonable alternatives, and will include an economic, financial and engineering
analysis. 

A draft EA will be issued and circulated for review by all interested parties. All timely filed comments on the draft
EA will be analyzed by the staff and considered in the final EA. The staff's conclusions and recommendations will then
be presented for consideration of the Commission in reaching its final licensing decision. 



Scoping Meetings: 

Two scoping meetings will be conducted on Wednesday, April 6, 1994_at 10 am and 7 pm. 



Location: 

Hampton Inn, 3985 Bennett Drive, Bellingham, WA 98225. 

Interested individuals, organizations, and agencies with environmental expertise are invited to attend either
or both meetings and assist the staff in identifying the scope of environmental issues that should be analyzed in the
EA. 

To help focus discussions at the meetings, a scoping document outlining subject areas to be addressed in the EA will
be mailed to agencies and interested individuals on the Commission mailing list. Copies of the scoping document will
also be available at the scoping meetings. 

Persons choosing not to speak at the meetings, but who have views on issues or information relevant to the issues, may
submit written statements for inclusion in the public record at the meeting. In addition, written comments may be
filed with the Secretary, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 825 North Capitol Street, NE., Washington, DC,
20426, by the deadline date shown in Item (j) above. All written correspondence should clearly show the following
caption on the first page: Warm Creek Hydro Project, FERC No. 10865. 

Intervenors_those on the Commission's service list for this proceeding (parties)_are reminded of the Commission's
Rules of Practice and Procedure, requiring parties filing documents with the Commission, to serve a copy of the document
on each person whose name appears on the official service list. Further, if a party or interceder files comments or
documents with the Commission relating to the merits of an issue that may affect the responsibilities of a particular
resource agency, they must also serve a copy of the document on that resource agency. 




