 

5. Traditionally, schools were not ``in session'' during the summer months and the regulations reflected this common
schedule by providing less-restrictive hours and time limitations during the summer vacation period between June
1 and the Labor Day holiday. School systems, however, have begun converting to non-traditional attendance schedules
and remain open year-round. For example, some public and private schools have implemented academic quarter-year,
trimester, or other alternative attendance schedules under which the schools schedule classes year-round, but
not all students are attending school at any point in time. For these schools, the traditional concept of the ``summer
vacation break'' between June 1 and Labor Day has become irrelevant. Additionally, home education programs are now
more common, not only in school jurisdictions where the public schools operate on uniform attendance calendars applicable
to all students, but also in school jurisdictions where the public schools operate year-round or on a platoon system.
Should the regulations be changed to accommodate different structures for when school is ``in session'' and what
are the particular changes that should be made to reflect the characteristics of alternative school schedules? If
the concept is based on the schedule for school attendance of individual student-employees (rather than the entire
school system), how do employers and student-employees determine when different hours restrictions are applicable
and what records would have to be maintained to ensure compliance? 

The Department is also reviewing the occupational provisions contained in Reg. 3 to determine what changes, modifications,
or clarifications, if any, are appropriate for 14- and 15-year-old employees. The Department is interested in obtaining
public comment on all aspects of these provisions, including the following matters: 

1. Section 570.34(b)(5), promulgated prior to the advent of the fast food industry, prohibits cooking by 14- and 15-year-olds
employed by retail and food establishment cooking at soda fountains, lunch counters, snack bars, or cafeteria serving
counters. This prohibition has been interpreted by the Department to allow cooking only when the activity is in ``plain
view'' of customers. Thus, the cooking prohibition applies to full service restaurants and certain fast food restaurants
where the cooking configuration does not permit customers to plainly view the cooking activity. Should cooking be
permitted in retail and food establishments, and, if so, what restrictions, if any, would be appropriate to ensure
the safety and health of young workers? Should all cooking be prohibited, and, if so, why? 

2. Section 570.33(b) prohibits the employment of 14- and 15-year-olds in any occupation which involves ``***
any power-driven machinery other than office machines.'' The operation of certain power-driven devices, equipment,
and tools in retail, food service, and gasoline service establishments is expressly permitted by 570.34.
In such industries, 14- and 15-year-olds may, for example, operate vacuum cleaners, floor waxers, dishwashers,
toasters, dumbwaiters, popcorn poppers, milk shake blenders, and coffee grinders. Fourteen- and 15-year-olds
are also permitted to operate office machines in connection with office and clerical work and cash registers in connection
with retail sales work. Should any of the machines, 

etc., 

expressly permitted in Reg. 3 be reconsidered because their use adversely affects the health and well-being of such
workers? If so, why? Are there power-driven machines, 

etc., 

in the contemporary workplace not now expressly permitted by Reg. 3 which 14- and 15-year-olds should be allowed to
operate? If so, identify the machines and explain why their use should be permitted. Also, questions periodically
arise about the meaning of ``power-driven'' and whether the term includes tools, equipment, 

etc., 

that are activated by battery power, i.e., many tools and devices are now power-activated by rechargeable battery
units. Should the term ``power-driven'' include equipment, tools, etc. powered by such sources, and why or why not?


3. In addition, consideration is being given to two clarifying modifications which would incorporate existing Departmental
enforcement policy into the regulations. Section 570.34(b)(7) prohibits 14- and 15-year-olds from working in freezers
and meat coolers. Such workers are prohibited from working as dairy stock clerks, meat clerks, deli clerks, produce
clerks, or frozen-food stock clerks where their duties would require them to enter and remain in coolers or freezers
for prolonged periods. Inventory and cleanup work involving prolonged stays in freezers and coolers also is prohibited.
On the other hand, food preparers in fast food restaurants or cashiers in grocery stores whose duties require entry
to such refrigeration equipment only momentarily to retrieve items are not considered as working in coolers and freezers
for enforcement purposes. Because this traditional interpretation of the ``cooler and freezer'' prohibition is
not specifically contained in the regulations, a regulatory clarification may be appropriate. 






