 

A few commenters were concerned that appointing representatives of certain kinds of organizations to the PIC would
represent an inherent conflict of interest. Conflict of interest rules for PIC members are discussed in Procurement
(627.420(c)(4)). 


Selection of SDA Grant Recipient and Administrative Entity 


One commenter indicated that the intent of this section was unclear. The Department believes that the lack of clarity
may pertain to the kinds of criteria that the Governor may establish that would affect the PIC's and CEO's selection
of a grant recipient and administrative entity. The Act, at section 103(b)(1)(B), specifies entities that may be
selected as grant recipient and administrative entity, which may be the PIC, a unit of local government or a non-profit
organization. While the Governor may establish criteria for the selection of grant recipients and administrative
entities, the criteria may not specifically exclude a type of entity specified in the Act from being selected. 


Job Training Plan 


Sections 628.420 through 628.430 deal with the submission, review and approval of the job training plan. There were
a few comments regarding the contents of the job training plan which are addressed in 628.420(b)(1), through
a reference to the requirements of section 104(b) of the Act. There were requests for certain specific references
in the text of the regulation. One comment requested that the requirements of the NEW Act be specifically referenced.
As previously discussed in this supplementary information section, the Department agrees and has added a reference
to the requirements of section 104(b)(7) in 628.420(b)(1). Another commenter requested that a specific reference
be made to consultation with public housing agencies. While these agencies are not specifically referenced in section
104 of the Act, they are included among those agencies with which the SDA is to develop the coordination and linkage
arrangements that would be described pursuant to section 104(b)(4) of the Act. 
A few commenters raised concerns about the requirement in paragraph (e) of 628.420 that modifications are
to be submitted jointly by the PIC and chief elected officials (CEO's) to the Governor. These commenters appear to
be confusing modifications to the SDA job training plan with contract modifications. The commenters stated that
the procurement regulations in 627.420 require that every contract change order, such as a decrease of one
participant, necessitates a contract modification. The procurement process requirements in 627.420 do
not apply to the plan and plan modification process, and 628.420(e) addresses the requirements for the modification
of the job training plan, not contract modifications. Language is added to paragraph (e) to clarify that a ``major''
modification is to be specified by the Governor. In so specifying, the Department suggests that the Governor consider
conditions which result in a variance of 20 percent from the approved plan in the budget, level of participant services,
number of participants served, participant outcomes, or other core elements. 
Further, there was an inadvertent oversight in the interim final rule in 628.420(d) and (e), concerning the
submission of local plans or plan modifications to the Governor. The interim final rule indicated that the plan or
plan modifications must be jointly submitted but omitted the statutory requirement that such plans or plan modifications
also must be jointly approved as a condition for submittal to the Governor. Paragraphs (d) and (e) of 628.420
are amended to more accurately reflect the statutory provisions of section 103(d) of the Act. 
One commenter requested that the time limit provided in 628.426(b) for chief elected officials and the PIC
to correct any deficiencies the Governor identifies in disapproving a job training plan be changed from 20 days to
30 days to allow SDA's adequate time. This change is incorporated into the final rule. 
Finally, a commenter requested that the final rule clarify that the references in the Act and regulations refer to
``working days''. In fact, this is not the case and the references, as is the practice, refer to consecutive calendar
days. No change is made in the final rule. 


Subpart E_Program Design Requirements for Programs Under Title II of the Job Training Partnership Act 


In response to a few comments, the final rule is revised in a few introductory statements to clarify that references
to title I refer to programs undertaken pursuant to sections 121 or 123. 


General Program Design Requirement 


The Act contains significant requirements in the front-end operations for most SDA's, which will cause major alterations
in the intake structure and will necessitate revisions in the appraisal of each participant's capabilities, needs,
and occupational goals. In the final regulations, the Department has provided necessary direction based on the Amendments
and has clarified and highlighted significant changes from the ``old'' statute. 


Eligibility Determination and Intake 


Two major criteria must be considered in the process of determining which applicants are eligible for title II JTPA
program services. As set forth in 628.505, the first criterion is age. The second is economic disadvantage.
The standard for determining economic disadvantage will be income as described in the annual Department of Health
and Human Services poverty guidelines. The use of these guidelines provides a standardized income determination
across federally funded programs. The Department's approach to the eligibility determination process has been
to attempt to minimize the amount of documentation necessary to establish an individual's eligibility for services,
while maintaining the necessary safeguards to prevent misuse of program funds. 


