 



Description of Respondents:

 Businesses. 



<TABLE>






Estimated Annual Reporting and Recordkeeping Burden 


1Number of respondents


1Average annual burden per respondent (hours) 


1Total burden all respondents (hours) 




4,349 
650 
2,826,850 

</TABLE>




The agency has submitted a copy of this proposed rule to OMB 
for its review of this information collection. Interested 
persons are requested to send comments regarding this burden 
estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden to FDA's Dockets 
Management Branch (address above), and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, OMB rm. 3208, New Executive

Office Bldg., Washington, DC 20503, Attn: Desk Officer for FDA. 



X. Economic Impact 



FDA has examined the impacts of the proposed rule under 
Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 
96354). Executive Order 12866 compels agencies to use 
cost-benefit analysis as a component of decisionmaking. The 
Regulatory Flexibility Act requires regulatory relief for small 
businesses where feasible. FDA finds that this proposed rule 
constitutes a major rule under both Executive Order 12866 and the 
Regulatory Flexibility Act. A summary of the preliminary 
regulatory impact analysis (PRIA), which may be obtained from 
Dockets Management Branch (address above), is presented below. 

Executive Order 12866 requires Federal agencies to justify 
the need for regulations by demonstrating that the problem that 
the regulation is designed to remedy cannot be adequately 
addressed by measures other than Federal regulation. In its 
review of such alternatives, FDA finds that the current system 
(periodic inspection plus sampling of a small proportion of 
seafood), coupled with the uncertainty in estimating the 
illnesses related to seafood, has not adequately ensured 
consumers that a minimum level of safety has been established. 
Although the tort system is not able to provide remedies for 
unsafe seafood, the price system provides some differentiation 
between products based on brands and retail reputation. However, 
the price system works in conjunction with current Federal regulation which signals consumers as to a minimum level
of seafood safety. As is argued in the preamble, countless public arguments and attempts at legislation imply that
the minimum levels that some consumers believe they are getting (those that 
do not search for higher levels) is probably higher than the 
actual levels of seafood safety. 

The tort system fails because consumers are often unable to 
trace either the source of their foodborne illness to seafood, 
and even where that is possible, it is often difficult to trace 
seafood to a specific company. 



A. Regulatory Options 



FDA has evaluated multiple options to address the compelling 
public interest in further ensuring seafood safety. These 
options include: (1) Maintaining the existing approach_``snapshot'' inspections and sampling; (2) significantly

increasing the frequency of both snapshot inspections and 
sampling under the existing approach; (3) beginning a voluntary 
HACCP program in addition to the existing approach; (4) 
beginning mandatory HACCP for high risk products only, in 
addition to the existing approach; (5) beginning mandatory HACCP 
for all seafood (the proposed approach); (6) beginning a more 
comprehensive mandatory HACCP program than that proposed, similar 
to the Model Seafood Surveillance Project (MSSP), which would 
include all CGMP's, quality factors, and economic fraud as 
critical control points; and (7) beginning a mandatory water-to-table HACCP program which would include all vessels,
carriers, 
and retail food operators. 





