 

123. Additionally we reject CTIA's request to permit 5 MHz of spectrum to be transferred after the license grant because
it would contradict our determinations in the PCS service rules docket (Gen. Docket 90314) concerning the
disaggregation of broadband PCS spectrum. In that docket, we decided that no disaggregation of spectrum should be
allowed until a broadband PCS licensee had met our five-year construction requirements.
<FOOTCITE>67</FOOTCITE>
 We also determined that in-region cellular interests should not be permitted to acquire 10 MHz of broadband PCS spectrum
until the year 2000_when they would be eligible for an additional 5 MHz of spectrum in their service areas. 

See

 47 CFR 24.404. CTIA's proposal would permit disaggregation sooner than is permissible under our PCS service rules,
and should be rejected for reasons that we have previously established.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
67

</FOOTNAME>


See Broadband PCS Reconsideration Order,

 FCC 94144 at  6970, 

further recon. Third Memorandum Opinion and Order

 in Gen. Docket 90314, FCC 94265 (released Oct. 19, 1994).
</FOOTNOTE>


124. In addition, we wish to clarify the application of our holding rule to our financial caps. As we have stated, under
certain circumstances we will allow licensees to retain their eligibility during the holding period, even if the
company has grown beyond our size limitations for the entrepreneurs' block and for small business eligibility. Thus,
we will permit entrepreneurs' block licensees to transfer their licenses in years four through five to other entrepreneurs'
block licensees even if it would result in growth beyond the permissible gross assets and total revenues caps, as long
as it otherwise complies with our control group and equity requirements. We believe this encourages designated entities
to grow, instead of penalizing them for their success, which was a concern expressed by some commenters.
125. Further, we clarify that between years four and five we will allow licensees to transfer a license to any entity
that either holds other entrepreneurs' block licenses (and thus at the time of auction satisfied the entrepreneurs'
block criteria) or that satisfies the criteria at the time of transfer. Unjust enrichment penalties apply if these
requirements are not met, or if they qualified for different provisions at the time of licensing. For purposes of determining
size eligibility for transfers or assignments that occur between the fourth and fifth years, we will use the most recently
available audited financial statements in cases where the entity to whom the license is being transferred did not
win a license in the original entrepreneurs' block auction.
126. AIDE sought clarification concerning the application of our unjust enrichment provisions to our holding period
and limited transfer rules. In response to their request, we reiterate that if a designated entity transfers or assigns
its license before year five to a company that qualifies for no bidding credit, then such a sale will entail full payment
of the bidding credit as a condition of transfer. If, however, the same transaction occurs (during the same time frame),
but the buyer is eligible for a lesser bidding credit, then the difference between the bidding credit obtained by the
seller and the bidding credit for which the buyer would qualify, must be paid to the U.S. Treasury for the transaction
to be approved by the FCC. With respect to installment payments, we confirm that we expect that when the purchaser is
not to an entity that qualifies for any installment payment plan, we will require payment of the unpaid balance in full
before the sale will be approved.


Miscellaneous


Audits


127. In the 

Fifth Report and Order,

 we expressed our intention to conduct random pre- and post-auction audits to ensure that designated entities retain


de facto

 and 

de jure

 control of their facilities and licenses and to ensure that all applicants receiving preferences are in compliance
with the eligibility requirements. On reconsideration, we clarify on our own motion that the Commission's use of
the term ``random'' in the 

Fifth Report and Order 

was generic and that the Commission does not intend to limit itself to conducting ``random'' audits. While random
selection for audit may be one, acceptable enforcement technique in some cases, it may not be the most efficient. We
expect that audits might also be undertaken on information received from third parties or on the basis of other factors.
<FOOTCITE>68</FOOTCITE>
 Since the audit process will involve the application of in-house and contract resources, we intend to pursue a course
of audits that will be efficient as well as effective. Consequently, we are amending the rules to more fully reflect
the variety of circumstances that might lead to an audit. We will also add an audit consent to the FCC short-form and
other forms where eligibility must be established. Because the Commission's audit program will cover all auction
applications, regardless of the service involved, we will promulgate conforming amendments to Subpart Q in Part
1 of the Commission's regulations in a separate order.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
68

</FOOTNAME>
While we anticipate that public scrutiny of entrepreneurs' block applications and the petition to deny process,
together with audits, will assist the Commission in uncovering potentially unqualified applicants for the entrepreneurs'
blocks, we will in no way condone the filing of frivolous complaints or petitions. We will take appropriate action
against those who abuse our processes. We also emphasize that the initiation of an investigation by the Commission
(whether pursuant to a complaint or on our own initiative) will not result in the suspension of construction or operation
of a licensee's facilities pending the outcome of such investigation.
</FOOTNOTE>


128. Audits and other enforcement vehicles are a necessary adjunct to a self-certification process to implement
the measures to assist designated entities adopted pursuant to Section 309(j) of the Communications Act. To facilitate
our audit program and to provide preliminary assurances that those applicants claiming eligibility for such preferences
are in compliance with the regulatory requirements concerning ownership and financial status, we will require that
applicants list their control group members, affiliates, attributable investors, gross revenues, total assets
and other basic ownership and eligibility information in an exhibit to their short-form applications. Additional,
more detailed information concerning eligibility will be required of winning bidders. All applicants are required
to maintain an updated file of documentary evidence supporting the information and the status claimed. Applicants
that do not win the licenses for which they applied, shall maintain such records until final grant of the license(s)
in question, or one year from the date of the filing of their short-form applications, whichever is earlier. Licensees
shall maintain such records for the term of the license.


Defaults


129. Parties have asked questions about how the Commission would resolve issues associated with an entrepreneurs'
block licensee becoming financially insolvent. In particular, there is concern about the status of the license when
the licensee cannot make the required installment payments, and in the case of when a licensee enters bankruptcy.


