 

15.32Criteria for Including Species in the Approved List for Non-Captive-Bred Species 


Pursuant to Section 106 of the WBCA, the Secretary is required to publish a list of species of exotic birds that are listed
in an Appendix to the Convention and that are not subject to a prohibition or suspension of importation otherwise applicable
under the WBCA. For non-captive-bred (i.e., wild-caught) exotic birds to be imported from other countries, in order
to be listed in an approved list, the Service is required by the WBCA to ``use the best scientific information available,
and to consider the adequacy of regulatory and enforcement mechanisms in all countries of origin for the species,
including such mechanisms for control of illegal trade.'' In developing criteria on which to base approval of sustainable
use management plans, the Service reviewed information available on the sustainable use of exotic birds subject
to international trade. Beissinger and Bucher (1992) proposed a model for sustainable use of parrot species when
biological data are incomplete (Bioscience Vol. 42, No 3, March, 1992: Can Parrots be Conserved through Sustainable
Harvesting?); the Service drew upon this model in developing the approval criteria for non-captive-bred species.


The WBCA requires the Service to ``find that the Convention is being effectively implemented with respect to that
species''. The Service believes that it is conceivable, although extremely unlikely, that a country which is not
a CITES Party might be complying with all relevant CITES requirements. However, a country that is not a CITES Party
can be considered for approval of its sustainable use management plan under this rule. The Service does not wish to
discourage the development of effective sustainable use management plans. The Service welcomes comment and input
on these qualification requirements, in order to ensure that the final rule promotes conservation objectives and
expands opportunities to implement scientifically-based management strategies. 

The WBCA requires the Service to make the finding that the Convention is being effectively implemented, by making
each of the following findings specified in section 106, paragraph (c) of the WBCA, each of which the Service has included
in 15.32(b): 

(1) That the country of origin has established a Scientific Authority. 

(2) That the requirements of Article IV of the Convention are implemented with respect to that species. 

In addition, since the WBCA requires that each country be effectively implementing the Convention, the proposed
approval criteria also require that countries demonstrate implementation of Article VIII of the Convention regarding
establishment of implementing legislation and submission to the Convention's Secretariat of required annual reports.


(3) That remedial measures recommended by the Parties to the Convention with respect to that species are implemented.
The House of Representatives Committee Report for the WBCA states that ``The Committee expects that the Secretary
will weigh heavily the willingness and commitment of an exporting country to implement remedial measures in deciding
whether to include a species on the list of approved species.'' This factor is included in the criteria for approval
of country management plans. 

(4) ``That a scientifically-based management plan has been developed for the species which provides for the conservation
of the species and its habitat and includes incentives for conservation'' (Section 106, paragraph (c)(2)(A) of the
WBCA). The proposed approval criteria incorporate this consideration in a number of ways, including requiring:
(a) Information on species conservation status and distribution; (b) habitat conservation information, including
habitat requirements, habitat distribution and protection status, and habitat status and trends; and (c) information
on population dynamics, including population assessments, reproductive success, and evidence of how the sustainable
use management plan promotes the value of the species and its habitats. In the case of habitat information, several
pieces of information are required, including management plans for habitats important to the species. They are only
required, however, if they are available or applicable. For a species that breeds in the country of export, the Service
has proposed a requirement of a description of nest sites and/or plant communities that are most frequently used for
placement of nests and, if applicable, nesting habits. Nesting habit information may include clutch size, ability
to renest, nesting season, and known nest competitors/predators. 

(5) ``That a scientifically-based management plan has been developed for the species which ensures that the use of
the species is biologically sustainable and maintained throughout the range of the species in the country to which
the plan applies at a level that is consistent with the role of the species in the ecosystem and is well above the level
at which the species might become threatened with extinction'' (Section 106, paragraph (c)(2)(B) of the WBCA). The
proposed criteria, in fulfilling this statutory requirement, require the following: (a) Information on the population
of the species; and (b) information on the species' role in its ecosystem, including nest requirements and diet. The
proposed rule requires information on any species or plant community that is dependent on the occurrence of the exotic
bird species, in order to make the required finding that the proposed capture and export are at levels that are consistent
with the role of the species in its ecosystem. The proposed rule requires recent population data of the population
of the species in the country of export, as derived from indices of relative abundance (such as catch per unit effort
or call count surveys) or population estimates (if available), along with documentation for each estimate. These
population data or estimates should be based on studies conducted for at least three separate years, or data for one
year can be provided, with a description of survey plans for future years. Population assessments should have been
conducted during the same season (breeding or non-breeding) of each year for which documentation is submitted. 


