 

(iii) Paying RN's wages at a rate higher than currently being paid to RN's similarly employed in the geographic area;


(iv) Providing adequate support services to free RN's from administrative and other non-nursing duties; 

(v) Providing reasonable opportunities for meaningful salary advancement by RN's. 

8 U.S.C. 1182(m)(2)(B) (i) through (v); see 8 U.S.C. 1182(m)(2)(A)(iv)(I). 

Items (i) through (v) above are not an exclusive list of the significant steps that may be taken to meet the requirements
of the fourth attestations element, and a facility is not required to take more than one step if the facility can demonstrate
than taking a second step is not reasonable. 8 U.S.C. 1182(m)(2)(B). 

Special rules apply to cases where an alien nurse, for whom an employer has filed an attestation, is performing services
at a worksite other than the employer's worksite or other than a worksite controlled by the employer. In cases of temporary,
emergency circumstances, with respect to information not within the knowledge of the attestor, or for other good
cause, the Secretary may waive such requirements for the attestation for the worksite as the Secretary may determine
are appropriate, in order to avoid duplicative attestations. 8 U.S.C. 1182(m)(2)(A) (as amended by section 162(f)(2)(B)(iii)
of IMMACT). 

These attestations (and visa petitions supported by them) are available for public examination in the Employment
and Training Administration (ETA) National Office in Washington, D.C. 8 U.S.C. 1182(m)(2)(E)(i). The Department
also informs the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) which attestations have been accepted. The employer
must furnish evidence to INS that the Department has accepted its attestation for filing as a prerequisite for INS
approving a petition to bring in foreign RN's under H1A visas (which visas are issued by the U.S. Department
of State (DOS)). 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)(i)(a). 

In summary, DOL's administrative functions under the INRA include, with certain limited exceptions, receiving
and accepting attestations for filing, 

i.e., 

checking that the attestation form is properly completed and that the required explanatory statements are provided.
DOL reviews elements of attestations in only four instances: (1) the facility attests to a ``non-standards'' indicator
of substantial disruption (Element I); (2) the facility takes as one of its two steps a ``non-standard'' timely and
significant step (Element IV); (3) the facility attests that taking a second timely and significant step under Element
IV would not be reasonable; and (4) the facility is not an employer of H1A nurses and is claiming a bona fide medical
emergency as the basis for requesting a waiver of one or more of the attestation elements. The Department also makes
the accepted attestations available for public inspection, and notifies INS of those attestations that DOL has on
file. These administration functions are delegated, by regulation, to ETA. 



C. Complaints, Investigations and Enforcement



The Department is also authorized to investigate allegations that a facility has failed to meet the conditions attested
to or that a facility has misrepresented a material fact in an attestation. 8 U.S.C. 1182(m)(2)(E) (ii) through (v).
If violations are found, DOL may impose administrative remedies, including civil money penalties (CMP's); shall
notify the Attorney General, who shall not approve H1A petitions for a period of at least 1 year for the facility;
shall obtain back wages; and may impose other remedies. These activities constitute the Department's enforcement
functions under the INRA. Under the regulations, the enforcement functions are delegated to the Department's Employment
Standards Administration (ESA), Wage and Hour Division.



D. Advisory Group



Finally, pursuant to the INRA, the Secretary appointed an advisory group which includes representatives of DOL,
the Department of Health and Human Services, the Attorney General, hospitals, and labor organizations representing
RN's. Pub. L. 101238 section 3(c)(2), 103 Stat. at 2103.

Under the INRA, the advisory group advises the Secretary on: 

(1) The impact of this legislation on the nursing shortage, 

(2) Programs that health care facilities may implement to recruit and retain U.S. RN's, 

(3) State recruitment and retention plans, and 

(4) The advisability of extending the law beyond the current 5-year duration of this pilot program.

The advisory group operates under the auspices of the DOL Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy.

