 




<USBUREAU>National Institutes of Health</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Consensus Development Conference on Optimal Calcium Intake </DOCTITLE>



Notice is hereby given of the NIH Consensus Development Conference on ``Optimal Calcium Intake,'' which will be held
June 68, 1994, in the Masur Auditorium of the National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892. This conference is sponsored by the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases and the NIH Office of Medical Applications of Research. The conference begins at 8:30 a.m. on June 6 and 7 and
at 9 a.m. on June 8. 

Over the past decade, both the general public and scientists have been exposed to a great deal of literature about the
value of ensuring an adequate calcium intake throughout life. A number of articles in the medical literature have
addressed the role of calcium intake in the prevention of disorders including osteoporosis and other bone diseases,
colon cancer, and high blood pressure (hypertension) including preeclampsia, a hypertensive disorder of pregnancy.
Results of one recent study indicated that high calcium intake can decrease the risk of kidney stones_a somewhat surprising
conclusion since high dietary calcium intake had been strongly suspected to increase the risk of kidney stones. 

Osteoporosis affects more than 25 million people in the United States and is the major underlying cause of bone fractures
in postmenopausal women and the elderly. Two important factors that influence whether osteoporosis occurs are the
peak bone density (or bone mass) attained in early life (by about age 30) and the rate at which bones is lost in later life.
Calcium intake is thought to help build denser, stronger bones in early life and to slow the rate of bone loss with age.


Results from several studies reported in the recent medical literature suggest that increased calcium intake is
beneficial for bone health in people in different age groups, from children to the very elderly. The results of this
research and studies on other diseases indicate that the optimal level of calcium intake may be greater than the amount
consumed by a majority of the American people. This conference will discuss and thoroughly evaluate the information
available on calcium intake and disease prevention. 

Optimal calcium intake may vary according to the disease being considered, and may also vary according to a person's
age, sex, and ethnicity. Optimal calcium intake may be achieved by diet, calcium supplements, or calcium-fortified
foods, or by various combinations of these. In addition, various cofactors play a role in achieving optimal calcium
intake. These include both factors such as vitamin D, which is needed for optimal calcium absorption, and factors
that can negatively influence calcium availability, such as certain medications or foods. The purpose of this NIH
consensus conference is to evaluate the available data on optimal calcium intake and health status. Conference participants
will include specialists in many different fields, including osteoporosis and bone health, oncology, hypertension,
human nutrition, and food fortification and labeling, as well as representatives from the public. 

After 11/2 days of presentations and audience discussion, an independent, non-Federal consensus panel will weigh
the scientific evidence and write a draft statement in response to the following key questions: 

&bull;What is the optimal amount of calcium intake? 

&bull;What are the important cofactors for achieving optimal calcium intake? 

&bull;What are the risk factors associated with different levels of calcium intake? 

&bull;What are the best ways to attain optimal calcium intake? 

&bull;What public health strategies are available and needed to implement optimal calcium intake? 

&bull;What are the recommendations for future research on calcium? 

On the final day of the meeting, the consensus panel chairman will read the draft statement to the conference audience
and invite comments and questions. 

Advance information on the conference program and conference registration materials may be obtained from: Ann Besignano,
Technical Resources, Inc., 3202 Tower Oaks Blvd., suite 200, Rockville, Maryland 20852, (301) 7703153. 

The consensus statement will be submitted for publication in professional journals and other publications. In addition,
the consensus statement will be available beginning June 8, 1994, from the NIH Consensus Program Information Service,
P.O. Box 2577, Kensington, Maryland 20891, phone 1800NIHOMAR (18006446627).



 


Dated: May 20, 1994. 




<SIGNER>
Ruth L. Kirschstein, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Director, NIH. 



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413483 Filed 6294; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 414001M 
</BILLING>




