 




<USBUREAU>Fish and Wildlife Service</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Notice of Receipt of Applications for Permit</DOCTITLE>


The following applicants have applied for a permit to conduct certain activities with endangered species. This notice
is provided pursuant to Section 10(c) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 

as amended 

(16 U.S.C. 1531, 

et seq.

):


PRT792526




Applicant: 

Hawthorn Corporation, Grayslake, IL



The applicant requests a permit to export and re-import 7 male and 8 female captive-bred tigers (

Panthera tigris

) to worldwide sites while on tour for the purpose of enhancement of the survival of the species through conservation
education.


PRT792542




Applicant: 

Larry Johnson, Yorba Linda, CA



The applicant requests a permit to export a pair of captive-born and one female wild caught (wild caught in 1971) siamang
(

Hylobates syndactylus

) to Parque Zoologico de Leon, Leon, Mexico for the purpose of enhancement of propagation of the species through conservation
education.


PRT778487




Applicant: 

Zoological Society of San Diego, San Diego, CA



The applicant requests a permit to import one wild-caught male presently held in captivity and one captive-born female
giant panda (

Ailuropoda melanoleuca

) from the People's Republic of China. This permit was originally requested for the purpose of enhancement of propagation
and survival and previously published on May 5, 1993, prior to the announcement of the suspension of review of applications
to import giant pandas. The purpose for which the permit is requested has now been modified to focus on scientific research
investigating olfactory communication and how it relates to giant panda reproductive physiology and sexual behavior
and habitat use. In addition, a female captive-born panda has now been substituted for the female wild-caught animal
identified in the initial import request.


PRT792842




Applicant: 

David William Owens, Texas AM University, College Station, TX



The applicant requests a permit to import blood and salvaged tissue samples eggs and dead hatchlings of the olive ridley
(

Lepidochelys olivacea

), green (

Chelonia mydas

), black (

Chelonia mydas 

(=

agassizi

)), leatherback (

Dermochelys coriacea

) and hawksbill (

Eretmochelys imbricata

) sea turtles from Costa Rica, Australia, Mexico, and Grand Cayman Islands for the purpose of enhancement of the survival
of the species through scientific research.


PRT790722




Applicant: 

Annamarie Jacobs, De Soto, KS



The applicant requests a permit to purchase in interstate commerce two pair of Nene geese (

Branta sandvicensis

) from Kenneth Howell, Muldrow, Oklahoma, to enhance the propagation and survival of the species through captive
propagation.


PRT791752




Applicant: 

Jerry E. Doherty, Red Lodge, MT



The applicant requests a permit to import the sport-hunted trophy of one male bontebok (

Damaliscus dorcas dorcas

) culled from the captive herd maintained by Mr. Pine Louw, ``Bankfontein'', Springfontein, Republic of South Africa,
for the purpose of enhancement of survival of the species.


PRT739682




Applicant: 

The New York Blood Center, New York, NY



The applicant requests reissuance of a permit for import of up to 3000 blood and 400 liver tissue samples taken from
chimpanzee (

Pan troglodytes

) in Liberia for the purpose of enhancement of the survival of the species through scientific research.
Written data or comments should be submitted to the Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of Management
Authority, 4401 North Fairfax Drive, Room 420(c), Arlington, Virginia 22203 and must be received by the Director
within 30 days of the date of this publication.
Documents and other information submitted with these applications are available for review, 

subject to the requirements of the Privacy Act and Freedom of Information Act, 

by any party who submits a written request for a copy of such documents to the following office within 30 days of the date
of publication of this notice: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of Management Authority, 4401 North Fairfax
Drive, Room 420(c), Arlington, Virginia 22203. Phone: (703/3582104); FAX: (703/3582281).



Dated: July 22, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Caroline Anderson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Chief, Branch of Permits, Office of Management Authority.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9418281 Filed 72694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055P
</BILLING>


