 

The quality control provisions of the marketing order are designed to provide procedures to remove inedible almonds
from human consumption channels. Under this program, handlers incur a disposition obligation of inedible almonds,
based on the inspection results. Section 981.442 specifies that the weight of inedible kernels in excess of 1 percent
of the inedible kernel weight in the lot determined by USDA constitutes the inedible disposition obligation. In order
to meet this disposition obligation, handlers normally deliver packer pickouts, kernels rejected in blanching,
pieces of kernel, meal accumulated in manufacturing, or other material to crushers, feed manufacturers, feeders
or dealers in nut wastes on record with the Board as accepted users.
In order to ensure that the inedible kernels are diverted to non-human consumption channels, the Board maintains
a list of approved accepted users, which includes feedlots and oil mills. Handlers notify the Board at least 72 hours
prior to making delivery to an accepted user so the Board, at its option, can witness the disposition.
Section 981.8 of the marketing order defines inedible kernel as meaning ``a kernel, piece, or particle of almond kernel
with any defect scored as serious damage, or damage due to mold, gum, shrivel, or brown spot, as defined in the United
States Standards for Shelled Almonds or which has embedded dirt not easily removed by washing.'' This section authorizes
modification of the definition by the Board with the approval of the Secretary. Currently, the definition under 981.408
of the regulations defines an inedible kernel as ``a kernel, piece, or particle of almond kernel with any defect scored
as serious damage, or damage due to mold, gum, shrivel, or brown spot, as defined in the United States Standards for
Shelled Almonds or which has embedded dirt or other foreign material not easily removed by washing.'' Kernels or kernel
pieces with any defect scored as serious damage are considered inedible kernels.
Section 51.2130 of the U.S. Standards for Grades of Shelled Almonds defines serious damage as ``any defect which makes
a kernel or piece of kernel unsuitable for human consumption, and includes decay, rancidity, insect injury and damage
by mold.'' Section 51.2123 of the Standards defines ``insect injury'' to mean that ``the insect, web, or frass is present
or there is definite evidence of insect feeding.''
The way the definition is currently applied, web or frass is considered serious damage by insect injury and when present
and noted on the incoming inspection, causes the almonds so affected to be classified as inedible. As stated previously,
handlers pay their growers based on the percentage of marketable almonds in the lot. Handlers do not pay growers for
almonds classified as inedible. Web and frass can be removed from the kernels or kernel pieces during normal processing,
thus making them suitable for human consumption. Because handlers pay growers based on the marketable almonds in
each lot prior to processing, growers are not compensated for any additional marketable almonds made available due
to web or frass removal after processing.
Handlers disposition obligations are based on the inedible kernel content found in the lot prior to processing. When
the web and frass are removed during processing, those kernels become marketable, thus making it difficult to generate
enough inedible almonds to meet the disposition obligation with inedible almonds. Handlers then often purchase
a mixture of inedible almonds and foreign material such as hulls, shells, etc., mixed with almond meats from a hulling
and/or shelling operation to satisfy their disposition obligation. It has been determined that the revision of the
definition of inedible kernel will make it easier for handlers to meet their inedible obligations because the disposition
obligations will more accurately reflect the inedible percentage determined by the incoming inspection. This rule
will better address the intent of the quality control program.


