 

(b) That the long distance sales force receive any list of the BOC's wireless customers on the same terms, and at the
same time, as that list is received by competing interexchange carriers. The Department anticipates that a BOC cellular
carrier will at regular intervals provide all long distance carriers with listings identifying the names, addresses
and telephone numbers of all cellular subscribers, regardless of the distribution channel through which the subscriber
was retained. It is a condition to the BOCs' direct marketing of cellular long distance that this information be made
available to all competing interexchange carriers.

(c) That the long distance sales force must advise actual or prospective subscribers of their right to presubscribe
to competing interexchange carriers.

(d) That the long distance sales force not receive any information about the identity of the BOC's wireless customers'
interexchange carrier or the wireless customer's cellular or long distance usage, unless the customer is already
a customer of the BOC's interexchange service.

(e) That the long distance sales force be a distinct group of individuals, with separate managers, from any sales force
that sells the products or services of any Bell Operating telephone company.

(2) The Department understands that the marketing restrictions applicable to ``existing customers'' (as specified
in your letter of November 12, 1993) apply not only to customers existing as of the date of any Order, but also to persons
who become customers of the BOC wireless service thereafter. When such persons become customers, marketing of long
distance service to such persons are subject to the provisions on ``marketing restrictions: new customers''; after
such persons become customers, they are subject to the provisions on ``marketing restrictions: existing customers.''
The Department conditions its support of this waiver on this understanding, and on the further condition that the
BOC personnel marketing long distance services not receive wireless customer names, addresses and telephone numbers
until that information is also available to competing interexchange carriers.

(3) The Department conditions its support for a waiver on the requirement that, if the BOC or its wireless affiliate
bills its long distance customers for that service in the same billing as for its wireless exchange service, it makes
that billing arrangement available to competing interexchange carriers on reasonable and nondiscriminatory terms.
It is the Department's understanding that most BOCs currently make such billing arrangements available to interexchange
carriers; if this relief is granted, the Department believes that the BOCs should not be permitted to terminate those
arrangements for competing carriers.


