 

Several of the uses suggested by the comments are related to 
the general category of patient preoperative skin preparation 
that was discussed by the Panel. (See the 

Federal Register

 of 
September 13, 1974, 39 FR 33103 and 33114.) One example is the 
use ``patient skin scrubbing prior to preoperative prepping.'' The 
agency believes that this use can more simply be described by the 
indication ``for preparation of the skin prior to surgery,'' which 
is being proposed in 333.460(b)(1)(i) of this tentative final 
monograph. Other uses are catheter care, ostomy hygiene, and 
intravenous site preparation. Some uses mentioned by the 
comments involve postoperative situations (surgical site cleansing after stitching) or do not even involve a surgical

procedure (treatment of skin prior to covering a fracture with a 
cast or use as a whirlpool concentrate). The agency believes 
that instead of trying to identify in the product's labeling 
every possible situation where use of the product would reduce 
the risk of skin infection, this use of the product can best be 
described by the general indication ``Helps to reduce bacteria 
that potentially can cause skin infection,'' which is being 
proposed in 333.460(b)(1)(ii). 

The agency has considered the term ``for hospital and 
professional use only'' suggested by one comment and finds it 
acceptable for professional labeling. (See section I.D., comment 
8.) Likewise, the agency has no objection to terms such as 
``germicide,'' ``germicidal,'' and ``microbicidal'' being used in 
professional labeling because health professionals understand the 
meaning of these terms. However, the agency does not believe 
there is a need to include in the monograph every one of these 
terms that might be used in the professional labeling of these 
products. These terms will be evaluated by the agency on a 
product-by-product basis, under the provision of section 502 of 
the act (21 U.S.C. 352) relating to labeling that is false or 
misleading. 



J. Comments on Quaternary Ammonium Compounds 



20. One comment requested that benzalkonium chloride be 
placed in Category I as a skin antiseptic, a patient preoperative 
skin preparation, and a skin wound protectant, in addition to its 
present Category I classification as a skin wound cleanser. In 
support of its request, the comment cited several surgery 
textbooks and other references that recommend use of benzalkonium 
chloride at concentrations ranging from 1:750 to 1:5,000 as a 
preoperative skin preparation, surgical scrub, skin antiseptic 
for venipuncture, and in urinary tract procedures, especially in 
catheterized patients (Ref. 1). The comment also submitted two 
studies on a product containing benzalkonium chloride at a 
concentration of 1:1,000: (1) An in vitro study to demonstrate 
that this product formulation acts as a physical chemical barrier 
against contamination by micro-organisms, and (2) a study on 
induced wounds on the arms of 10 healthy subjects to present 
evidence that this product is nonirritating and neither delays 
healing nor favors the growth of micro-organisms (Ref. 2). 

The agency determined in the tentative final monograph for 
OTC first aid antiseptic drug products that the safe and 
effective concentration range for using benzalkonium chloride as 
a first aid antiseptic has been established as 0.1 percent to 
0.13 percent. (See 56 FR 33644 and 33663.) Data submitted to the 
Antimicrobial I Panel and by the comment were sufficient to 
establish safety for products intended for short-term use, such 
as a first aid antiseptic drug product. The data submitted also 
support safety for use as a patient preoperative skin 
preparation, based on the short-term use of the drug for this purpose. However, the data reviewed by the Panel and 
supplemented by the comments to establish the efficacy of 
benzalkonium chloride for use as a topical antiseptic ingredient 
in patient preoperative skin preparations are not sufficient. 
The Antimicrobial I Panel placed this ingredient in Category III 
for this use. (See 39 FR 33103 and 33115.) The agency finds that 
the surgery textbooks and other references cited by the comment 
(Ref. 1) do not contain sufficient information about quantitative 
and qualitative changes in the microbial flora of the treated 
skin areas. Before benzalkonium chloride may be generally 
regarded as effective for use as a patient preoperative skin 
preparation, additional in vitro and in vivo effectiveness data 
are needed. The data should include results obtained from both 
in vitro and in vivo testing procedures as described for patient 
preoperative skin preparation drug products. (See section I.N., 
comment 28.) 

Accordingly, benzalkonium chloride remains classified in 
Category III as a topical antiseptic ingredient for use as a 
patient preoperative skin preparation. 



References



(1) Comment No. C116, Docket No. 
75N0183, Dockets Management Branch. 

(a) Review of Scientific Literature 
on the Safety and Effectiveness of 
Zephiran Chloride&eacute; as a ``Skin Antiseptic'' and ``Patient 
Preoperative Skin Preparation'' 
for the Preoperative Cleansing 
and Degerming Before Surgery 
and Use of Medical Devices. 

(2) Unpublished Clinical Wound Healing 
Studies on Medi-Quik&eacute;, Comment No. SUP13, 
Docket No. 75N0183, Dockets Management 
Branch. 

(a) Statistical Analysis of Data 
from Efficacy Study of Medi-Quik as 
a Skin Wound Protectant in Humans. 

(b) Studies on Medi-Quik as 
a Wound Protectant. 





