 

2.1.3.5. Consumer Product Safety Commission.


The CPSC is an independent Federal 
regulatory agency with jurisdiction over most consumer products. Most chemical hazards are 
regulated under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (FHSA) administered by CPSC. The 
FHSA requires appropriate cautionary labeling on all hazardous household products (hazards 
include chronic toxicity such as neurotoxicity). While the FHSA does not require premarket 
registration, a manufacturer is required to assess the hazards of a product prior to marketing 
and assure that it is labeled with all necessary cautionary information. The FHSA also bans 
children's products that are hazardous and provides the CPSC with the authority to ban other 
hazardous products. 


2.1.3.6. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.


ATSDR has a mission to 
prevent or mitigate adverse effects to both human health and the quality of life resulting from 
exposure to hazardous substances in the environment. The ATSDR publishes a National 
Priority List (NPL) of hazardous substances that are found at National Priority Waste Sites. 
The order of priority is based on an algorithm, taking into consideration frequency with 
which substances are found at NPL sites, toxicity, and potential for human exposure; this list 
is reranked on a yearly basis. So far, 129 toxicological profiles have been developed for the 
priority hazardous substances, and 92 substances have a profile with a neurological health 
effect endpoint (HAZDAT, 1992). Neurotoxicity has been selected by the ATSDR to be one 
of the seven high-priority health conditions resulting from exposure to environmental 
toxicants. 


2.2. Basic Toxicological Considerations for Neurotoxicity 


2.2.1. Basic Toxicological Principles 


A chemical must enter the body, reach the tissue target site(s), and be maintained at a 
sufficient concentration for a period of time in order for an adverse effect to occur. Not all 
chemicals have the same level of toxicity; some may be very toxic in small amounts while 
others may have little effect even at extremely high amounts. Thus, the dose-response 
relationship is a major concept in determining the toxicity of a specific substance. Other 
factors in determining toxicity include the physical and chemical properties of the substance, 
the route and level of exposure, the susceptibility of the target tissue, and the health, gender, 
and age of the exposed individual. 
Once the toxic substance has entered the body, usually through the lungs (inhalation), 
the skin (absorption), or the gastrointestinal tract (ingestion), it is partitioned into various 
body tissues where it can act on its target sites. The substance is eliminated from the 
bloodstream by the process of accumulation into the various sites in the body, with the liver 
and kidney being major sites of accumulation of toxic substances. This is thought to be 
associated with these organs' large blood capacity and major role in elimination of substances 
from the body. Lipophilic chemicals accumulate in lipid-rich areas of the body and present a 
significant potential problem for the nervous system. The nervous system is unique in its 
high percentage content of lipid (50 percent of dry weight) and may be particularly 
vulnerable to such chemicals. The site or sites of accumulation for a specific toxic substance 
may or may not be the primary sites of action. Examples include two known neurotoxicants, 
carbon monoxide in the red blood cells and lead in the bone. It must be noted that some 
substances are not distributed throughout the body, partially as a function of their 
insolubility, polarity, or molecular weight. 
The effect that a substance has will generally depend on the body burden or level in 
the tissue and duration of exposure. The time course of the levels is determined by several 
factors, including the amount at time of exposure, duration of exposure, and metabolic fate 
of the chemical. The study of such metabolic processes, pharmacokinetics, has demonstrated 
complex patterns in the absorption, distribution, possible biotransformation, and elimination 
of various substances (Klaassen, 1980). 
Many substances are removed by the kidney and excreted through the urine. The 
liver can detoxify substances like organic lead, which are excreted from the liver into the bile 
and then the small intestines, bypassing the blood and kidney. Lipophilic toxic substances 
are primarily removed from the body through feces and bile, and water-soluble metabolites 
are removed in the urine, through the skin, and through expiration into the air. 
Biotransformation is a biochemical process that converts a substance into a different chemical 
compound, allowing it to be excreted more easily. Substances are more easily removed if 
they are biotransformed into a more hydrophilic compound. Biotransformation can either aid 
in the detoxification of a substance or produce a more toxic metabolite. Therefore, the 
original substance may not be the substance that is producing the toxicity on the nervous 
system or any other system. Thus, several factors must be taken into consideration when 
evaluating the potential neurotoxicity of a chemical. They include the pharmacokinetics of 
the parent compound, the target tissue concentrations of the parent chemical or its 
bioactivated proximate toxicant, the uptake kinetics of the parent chemical or metabolite into 
the cell and/or membrane interactions, and the interaction of the chemical or metabolite with 
presumed receptor sites. 


2.2.2. Basic Neurotoxicological Principles 


Neurotoxicity can be manifest as a structural or functional adverse response of the 
nervous system to a chemical, biological, or physical agent (Tilson, 1990b). It is a function 
of both the property of the agent and a property of the nervous system itself. Neurotoxicity 
refers broadly to the adverse neural responses following exposure to chemical or physical 
agents (e.g., radiation) (Tilson, 1990b). Adverse effects include any change that diminishes 
the ability to survive, reproduce, or adapt to the environment. Neuroactive substances may 
also impair health indirectly by altering behavior in such a way that safety is decreased in the 
performance of numerous activities. Toxicity can occur at any time in the life cycle, from 
conception through senescence, and its manifestations can change with age. The range of 
responses can vary from temporary responses following acute exposures to delayed responses 
following acute or chronic exposure to persistent responses. Neurotoxicity may or may not 
be reversible following cessation of exposure. The responses may be graded from transient 
to fatal and there may be different responses to the same neurotoxicant at different dose 
levels but similar responses to exposure to different agents. Displays of a neurotoxic 
response may be progressive in nature, with small deficits occurring early in exposure and 
developing to become more severe over time. Expression of neurotoxicity can encompass 
multiple levels of organization and complexity including structural, biochemical, 
physiological, and behavioral measurements. 






