 

Comment 10 



Respondents note that at verification, the Department determined that Law 181/89 actually had three components:
(1) the creation of alternative employment opportunities; (2) the development of new industrial initiatives (``reindustrialization'');
and (3) worker retraining. Respondents state that the Department further determined that ILVA only received funds
under the reindustrialization provision of Law 181/89. 

Of the three reindustrialization projects, respondents claim that two were tied to non-subject merchandise. Therefore,
they are not countervailable pursuant to section 355.47 of the Proposed Regulations. The third reindustrialization
project was a ``retraining center.'' Respondents argue that the Proposed Regulations state that ``worker assistance''
is only countervailable to the extent that it relieves a company of an obligation that it would otherwise incur (see
section 355.44(j) of the Proposed Regulations). Since there is no obligation in Italy to retrain workers, this project
does not provide a countervailable benefit. 



DOC Position 



As a matter of clarification, we found that Law 181/89 has four components, the fourth being early retirement. However,
the early retirement component expired prior to the POI. Since early retirement is typically considered a recurring
benefit and, therefore, allocable to the year in which received, we did not establish the extent to which it had or had
not been used by ILVA. 

Regarding the reindustrialization component, we agree that two of the projects involved the further processing
of non-subject merchandise. Therefore, we have found them not countervailable. 

However, with respect to the training center, we disagree that this amounted to worker assistance within the meaning
of the Proposed Regulations. As discussed in Comment 7 above, there is a distinction between worker assistance and
funds that are being used to cover the costs that ILVA would incur to train its work force. Although not exclusively,
the training center in question is used to upgrade the technical skills of ILVA workers. 
Therefore, we have determined that the GOI payments to cover part of the cost of building a training center provide
a countervailable benefit to ILVA. 



Comment 11 



The GOI argues that the early retirement program would only be countervailable if companies had no choice but to keep
surplus workers on the payroll. However, companies can carry out large-scale lay-offs under Italian law. Thus, the
GOI contends that early retirement is an alternative to lay-offs and not an alternative to maintaining excess workers.
The GOI contends that because companies are required to contribute to the costs for early retirement, the program
is a burden, not a benefit, to them. The only beneficiaries under the early retirement program are the workers. 

Moreover, according to respondents, early retirement is available to workers in a broad range of industries. The
Department should, therefore, find that there is no selective treatment under the program. 

According to petitioners, verification confirmed that early retirement is only available to a limited group of industries.
Moreover, because use of early retirement under Article 27 is contingent upon approval from a government committee,
the GOI exercises discretion in determining which industries can use the program. Petitioners also argue that Italian
companies have an obligation to provide early retirement benefits once the workers have opted for the program. The
benefit should, therefore, be calculated as the GOI's contribution to the program because if government funds had
not been provided, ILVA would have been legally responsible for the entire cost, according to petitioners. 



DOC Position 



We agree with the GOI that, by law, companies in Italy can carry out large-scale lay-offs. Moreover, we have no evidence
that Italian companies have a legal obligation to keep workers on the payroll until they reach normal retirement age.
However, based on verification, we have found that some companies, including ILVA, belong to a category of firms that
must go through certain ``steps and procedures,'' in the form of the provisions under Law 223/91 before they actually
can reduce the workforce. In practice, therefore, large companies are obligated to use Law 223/91 to deal with surplus
workers. 

Regarding the general availability of early retirement, the structure of Law 223/91 is such that the early retirement
option is available to a smaller group of companies than the lay-off option, CIGS. Because the GOI was not able
to provide evidence showing that the steel producers did not receive a disproportionate share of the quota granted
under the early retirement option, we have used CIGS as our ``benchmark.'' Since the financial obligations
imposed on the company under early retirement are more onerous that the obligations under CIGS, we have determined
that ILVA did not receive a benefit under the early retirement program. 



Comment 12 



Petitioners argue that the shares in ILVA owned by Italsider (in liquidation) were transferred to TAS free-of-charge
in 1990. 
Respondents argue that ILVA did provide an invoice from Italsider requesting payment from TAS but that ILVA was unable
to locate the payment record during verification. Moreover, respondents argue that the Department never posed the
question of payment to TAS (in liquidation), nor did the Department verify the records of TAS (in liquidation). Therefore,
respondents argue, ILVA should not be penalized for any missing information over which it has no control. 



DOC Position 




