 

Occurrences of average protein level and other nonfat solids 
level of milk moving in opposite directions appears to be an 
exception rather than the rule. Evidence presented in ``Analysis 
of Component Levels and Somatic Cell Counts in Individual Herd 
Milk at the Farm Level, 1992, Upper Midwest Marketing Area'', 
indicates that about 60% of the variation in solids-not-fat is 
caused by variation in protein, and that higher protein levels 
are positively correlated with higher solids-not-fat levels. 
Data presented in this and other documents show that the level of 
other solids in milk tends to be relatively constant with, 
generally, small month-to-month variation. Thus, when a handler 
purchases milk with higher than average protein levels, he will 
also, generally, be purchasing milk with higher than average 
levels of solids-not-fat. 

In addition, the sum of the value of the protein and other 
solids under this recommended pricing plan equals the value of 
the total nonfat solids. The value of total nonfat solids, 
therefore, is a weighted average of the quantity and price of the 
protein and the quantity and price of the other nonfat solids 
contained in the milk. Analysis based on the average tests of 
the five markets shows that under the recommended pricing plan, 
the value of total nonfat solids would range from approximately 
$.002 per pound below the current value to approximately $.008 
per pound above the current value. 

This estimated price difference is certainly not the 
significant increase that is claimed in the briefs. In hearing 
testimony, the Galloway witness stated that an analysis of the 
effect of the CMPC proposal on the Galloway Company showed a 
nine-cent increase per hundredweight in the cost of Galloway's 
milk only when the CMPC somatic cell adjustment was included. 
Without the somatic cell adjustment, the analysis showed that the 
cost of milk to Galloway would be reduced under the CMPC multiple 
component pricing plan. 

It is appropriate to include all Class II products in the 
multiple component pricing system being proposed here. All 
Class II products derive benefit from butterfat, protein and/or 
other solids in the milk. The benefit may be in enhanced yield, 
such as protein for cottage cheese, or a combination of protein 
and other solids (i.e. the solids-not-fat in the milk) in many of 
the other Class II products. Or, the benefit may be in some 
other area. For example, the NAJ dairy chemist witness testified 
about the importance of protein in the functionality of many of 
these products, such as in ice cream, whipping cream, and yogurt. 
Some testimony even went so far as to discuss the importance of 
protein in fluid milk, in terms of the nutrient content and the 
mineral carrying content of the milk. However, since there was 
no substantial support for including Class I milk in the multiple 
component pricing system being proposed here, only Class II and 
Class III products will be priced on multiple components. 



2. Orders To Be Included



A proposal to incorporate the 
multiple component pricing plan adopted in this proceeding in the 
Nebraska-Western Iowa and Eastern South Dakota Federal milk 
orders as well as in the Chicago Regional, Iowa, and Upper 
Midwest orders should be adopted. 

The witness for Land O'Lakes (LOL), proponent of the 
proposal, listed a number of reasons for including the multiple 
component pricing plan in the Nebraska-Western Iowa and Eastern 
South Dakota orders as well as in the orders proposed by NAJ. 
The witness explained that all five orders are similar in that 
their predominant use of milk is for manufacturing Class III 
products. He testified that the primary organizations that 
supply the Nebraska-Western Iowa and Eastern South Dakota markets 
also are major participants in one or more of the Chicago 
Regional, Iowa, and Upper Midwest order marketing areas. The 
witness stated that inclusion of the Nebraska-Western Iowa and 
Eastern South Dakota orders in the multiple component pricing 
plan would allow those organizations that have producers and 
market milk in multiple orders to standardize their payrolls and 
billings, thus maintaining uniformity and reducing confusion 
among producers and handlers. 

The decision to include additional orders in this decision 
should not be made entirely on the basis of convenience to the 
parties marketing milk on the various orders. The decision is 
based on whether inclusion of the two orders would tend to 
effectuate the policy of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement 
Act. Certainly, including the Nebraska-Western Iowa and Eastern 
South Dakota orders in this decision will contribute to orderly 
marketing. 

The data supplied by the market administrators' offices 
describing the milksheds of the various orders shows a 
considerable overlap of milksheds. For example, many South 
Dakota counties have milk pooled on three of the five orders 
during the same month. In the absence of uniform pricing 
provisions between the five orders, disorderly marketing could 
occur, particularly when orders have overlapping milksheds, if 
one order were pricing milk on a skim and butterfat basis while 
another order was pricing milk on the basis of its components. 
If a producer's milk tests high for nonfat components but is 
pooled under an order that prices milk on a skim-butterfat basis, 
the producer would attempt to maximize returns by changing the 
market under which his milk is pooled to benefit from his high 
component levels. The opposite situation would occur if the milk 
of a producer testing below average for nonfat components is 
pooled under an order with MCP provisions. Such a producer would 
maximize returns by changing the order under which his milk is 
pooled to one with skim-butterfat pricing. This shuffling of 
producers in the same geographic area because of nonuniform 
pricing provisions would not constitute orderly marketing. 

Since the inclusion of the Nebraska-Western Iowa and Eastern 
South Dakota orders in the multiple component pricing decision 
would tend to reduce disorderly marketing in the region, benefit 
handlers by allowing a standardized payroll, and there was no 
opposition to their inclusion, multiple component pricing should 
be adopted for these two orders as well as the other three. 


