 

Table S21. Summary of Interpretation of Purified Protein Derivative (PPD)-Tuberculin Skin-Test Results



1. An induration of "5 mm is classified as positive in: 
&bull;Persons who have human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or risk factors for HIV infection but unknown
HIV status; 
&bull;Persons who have had recent close contact* with persons who have active tuberculosis (TB); 


<FOOTNOTE>
*Recent close contact implies either household or social contact or unprotected occupational exposure similar
in intensity and duration to household contact. 
</FOOTNOTE>


&bull;Persons who have fibrotic chest radiographs (consistent with healed TB). 
2. An induration of "10 mm is classified as positive in all persons who do not meet any of the criteria above but who have
other risk factors for TB, including: 


High-Risk Groups


&bull;Injecting-drug users known to be HIV seronegative; 
&bull;Persons who have other medical conditions that reportedly increase the risk for progressing from latent TB
infection to active TB (e.g., silicosis; gastrectomy or jejuno-ileal bypass; being "10% below ideal body weight;
chronic renal failure with renal dialysis; diabetes mellitus; high-dose corticosteroid or other immuno-suppressive
therapy; some hematologic disorders, including malignancies such as leukemias and lymphomas; and other malignancies);

&bull;Children &lt;4 years of age. 


High-prevalence Groups


&bull;Persons born in countries in Asia, Africa, the Caribbean, and Latin America that have high prevalence of TB;

&bull;Persons from medically underserved, low-income populations; 
&bull;Residents of long-term-care facilities (e.g., correctional institutions and nursing homes); 
&bull;Persons from high-risk populations in their communities, as determined by local public health authorities.

3. An induration of "15 mm is classified as positive in persons who do not meet any of the above criteria. 
4. Recent converters are defined on the basis of both size of induration and age of the person being tested: 
&bull;"10 mm increase within a 2-year period is classified as a recent conversion for persons &lt;35 years of age;

&bull;"15 mm increase within a 2-year period is classified as a recent conversion for persons "35 years of age. 
5. PPD skin-test results in health-care workers (HCWs)
&bull;In general, the recommendations in sections 1, 2, and 3 of this table should be followed when interpreting skin-test
results in HCWs. 
However, the prevalence of TB in the facility should be considered when choosing the appropriate cut-point for defining
a positive PPD reaction. In facilities where there is essentially no risk for exposure to 

Mycobacterium tuberculosis 

(i.e., minimal- or very low-risk facilities [Section II.B]), an induration "15 mm may be a suitable cut-point for
HCWs who have no other risk factors. In facilities where TB patients receive care, the cut-point for HCWs with no other
risk factors maybe "10 mm. 
&bull;A recent conversion in an HCW should be defined generally as a "10 mm increase in size of induration within a 2-year
period. For HCWs who work in facilities where exposure to TB is very unlikely (e.g., minimal-risk facilities), an
increase of "15 mm within a 2-year period may be more appropriate for defining a recent conversion because of the lower
positive-predictive value of the test in such groups. 


