 

<TABLE>





Table 

12._

Estimated Sample Firm Financial Impacts 


1Firm Type

1Baseline 

2Number of projected impacts

2Number of firms considered

1Post-compliance 

2Number of projected impacts

2Number of firms considered





Public-reporting firms
0
36
0
36

Private multi-facility firms
0
92
2
92

Private single entity firms
166
180
3
114 


1Sixty-three of these firms have an ROA of less than 2.396 percent before baseline cost adjustments were taken into
account.

</TABLE>
 


G. Impacts of NSPS and PSNS 



1. Subcategory C 



As stated above, EPA is proposing to establish NSPS as zero discharge, equivalent to the BAT requirements for existing
sources. Zero discharge represents best available and best available demonstrated technology for the pesticide
formulating, packaging and repackaging subcategory as a whole. The economic impact analysis for existing sources
shows that this regulatory approach (termed Option 3 in the discussion above) would be economically achievable for
the industry. EPA believes that new sources will be able to comply at costs that are similar to or less than the costs
for existing sources, because new sources can apply control technologies (including dedicated lines and pressurized
hoses for equipment cleaning) more efficiently than sources that need to retrofit for those technologies. EPA's
analysis concludes that a zero discharge requirement for new source direct dischargers would be economically achievable
and would not be a barrier to entry. 

EPA is proposing to set pretreatment standards for new sources (which cover indirect dischargers) equivalent to
the NSPS standards (which cover direct dischargers), i.e., at zero discharge for all PFPR waste streams. For the reasons
stated above with respect to the NSPS standards, EPA finds that the PSNS regulations would be economically achievable
and not a barrier to entry. 

Although EPA has proposed to exempt the non-interior waste streams of the small sanitizers from this zero discharge
requirement for existing pretreatment facilities (PSES), EPA is not proposing to include this same exemption for
the new source pretreatment facilities (PSNS). The rationale for finding that the exemption for those sanitizer
waste streams is appropriate for existing sources is based on EPA's findings that the impacts on existing small entities
would be significantly reduced by the exemption while the associated additional loading of toxic pollutants would
be small. With respect to new source pretreaters, EPA does not have sufficient information to conclude that the size
and economic conditions of those new sources, the impacts on those new sources, and the associated loadings of toxic
pollutants, would justify a similar exemption for the non-interior waste streams for sanitizer facilities. 

In addition, EPA has proposed to set a zero discharge requirement for NSPS, also without any exemption for sanitizers'
waste streams, based on the proposal to set BAT at zero discharge for all waste streams and the finding that NSPS should
be set at a level at least as stringent as BAT. 



2. Subcategory E 



EPA is proposing NSPS/PSNS for Subcategory E facilities equal to BAT/PSES proposed limitations for existing sources.
Compliance with BAT/PSES is projected to have zero costs for existing facilities. Likewise, new facilities are not
expected to incur additional annual costs due to the regulation. Since compliance with the proposed option has been
found to be economically achievable for existing facilities, EPA has determined that compliance with NSPS/PSNS
will also be economically achievable and not a barrier to entry for new sources. 



H. Benefits of Pollution Prevention 



Typically, the economic achievability of a regulation is evaluated by considering the impacts of projected compliance
costs on an industry, for example, the costs of installing and operating a treatment technology. However, facilities
may offset some of their compliance costs by achieving regulatory compliance through use of pollution prevention
measures. The cost analysis of the proposed PFPR regulation assumes that, where possible, facilities will use certain
pollution prevention measures to achieve zero discharge. These measures include, for example, recovery and reuse
of rinse waters and other wastewaters that contain reusable PAIs. By recovering and reusing the PAIs contained in
such wastewaters, facilities may save on the purchase cost of PAIs, water consumption costs, and sewage treatment
costs. The cost analyses described above for the proposed regulation reflect the costs of implementing such pollution
prevention measures and reflect cost savings from reduced waste management and disposal costs (about $4.7 million
on an annualized basis). The regulatory cost analyses, however, do not include certain additional offsetting cost
savings that may accrue to facilities through pollution prevention. 




