 

(iii) 

Duty of inquiry. 

The loss corporation must determine that indebtedness that the loss corporation treats as qualified indebtedness,
other than indebtedness to which paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section applies, has been owned for the requisite period
by the beneficial owner who owns the indebtedness immediately before the ownership change. The loss corporation
may rely on a statement, signed under penalties of perjury, by a beneficial owner regarding the amount of indebtedness
the beneficial owner owns and the length of time that the beneficial owner has owned the indebtedness.
(iv) 

Ordinary course indebtedness. 

For purposes of this paragraph (d)(2), indebtedness arises in the ordinary course of the loss corporation's trade
or business only if the indebtedness is incurred by the loss corporation in connection with the normal, usual, or customary
conduct of business, determined without regard to whether the indebtedness funds ordinary or capital expenditures
of the loss corporation. For example, indebtedness (other than indebtedness acquired for a principal purpose of
being exchanged for stock) arises in the ordinary course of the loss corporation's trade or business if it is trade
debt; a tax liability; a liability arising from a past or present employment relationship, a past or present business
relationship with a supplier, customer, or competitor of the loss corporation, a tort, a breach of warranty, or a breach
of statutory duty; or indebtedness incurred to pay an expense deductible under section 162 or included in the cost
of goods sold. A claim that arises upon the rejection of a burdensome contract or lease pursuant to the title 11 or similar
case is treated as arising in the ordinary course of the loss corporation's trade or business if the contract or lease
so arose.
(3) 

Treatment of certain indebtedness as continuously owned by the same owner

_(i) 

In general. 

For purposes of paragraph (d)(2) of this section, a loss corporation may treat indebtedness as always having been
owned by the beneficial owner of the indebtedness immediately before the ownership change if the beneficial owner
is not, immediately after the ownership change, either a 5-percent shareholder or an entity through which a 5-percent
shareholder owns an indirect ownership interest in the loss corporation (a 

5-percent entity

). This paragraph (d)(3)(i) does not apply to indebtedness beneficially owned by a person whose participation in
formulating a plan of reorganization makes evident to the loss corporation (whether or not the loss corporation had
previous knowledge) that the person has not owned the indebtedness for the requisite period.
(ii) 

Operating rules. 

For purposes of paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section: (A) If a loss corporation has actual knowledge of a coordinated
acquisition of its indebtedness by a group of persons, through a formal or informal understanding among themselves,
for a principal purpose of exchanging the indebtedness for stock, the indebtedness (and any stock received in exchange
therefor) is treated as owned by an entity. A principal element in determining if an understanding exists among members
of a group is whether the investment decision of each member is based upon the investment decision of one or more other
members.
(B) If the loss corporation has actual knowledge regarding stock ownership described in 1.3822T(k)(2),
the loss corporation must take that ownership into account in determining which beneficial owners of indebtedness
are, immediately after the ownership change, 5-percent shareholders or 5-percent entities. The loss corporation
is not required to take into account an ownership interest described in 1.3822T(k)(4) unless the loss
corporation has actual knowledge of the ownership interest.
(C) The term 

5-percent shareholder

 includes any person who is a 5-percent shareholder of the loss corporation within the meaning of 1.3822T(g),
without regard to the option attribution rules of section 382(l)(3)(A) or 1.3824(d) (or, if applicable,
1.3822T(h)(4)).
(D) Paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section does not apply to indebtedness if the loss corporation has actual knowledge
immediately after the ownership change that the exercise of an option to acquire or dispose of stock of the loss corporation
would cause the beneficial owner of the indebtedness immediately before the ownership change to be, after the ownership
change, either a 5-percent shareholder or a 5-percent entity. An interest that is treated as an option under 1.3824(d)(9)
(or 1.3822T(h)(4)(v) if applicable) is treated as an option for purposes of this paragraph (d)(3)(ii)(D).


