 

Separate Statement of Commissioner James H. Quello


In the Matter of Standards for Assessing Forfeitures for Violations of the Broadcast EEO Rules


The Commission today has voted an item that will prove to be a turning point in the enforcement of our EEO rules. This


Policy Statement

 sets forth guidelines for assessing forfeitures for violations of the Commission's EEO rules. 47 CFR 73.2080. As
reflected in the statement, the base amount for a forfeiture will be $12,500, an amount that can be increased or decreased
depending on the facts of a given case. These higher forfeitures are a direct result of the increases in forfeiture
amounts imposed by Congress. The guidelines are designed to ensure that these new, higher forfeitures are assessed
in a reasoned, consistent manner. For this reason, and because I strongly support vigorous enforcement of our EEO
rules, I have voted in favor of this item.
However, at the same time, I am concerned that the Commission may be entering the era of the telecommunications superhighway
wielding a club, rather than offering a hand, to broadcasters making their way down the road. At the dawn of this new
era, we are imposing fines against 22 of 24 radio stations whose EEO records were reviewed, in amounts ranging from
$18,750 to $37,500. Short term renewals are assessed against 21 of the 22 stations receiving forfeitures. Radio broadcasters
will be ``contributing'' a total of $325,000 to the Federal Treasury as a result of our actions today. I am troubled
by the amount of these forfeitures and the increased use of the short term renewal as a sanction. Yet, I recognize that,
at least with respect to the increased forfeiture amounts, Congress increased our forfeiture authority.
I would have much preferred an approach that would have served three compelling goals: (1) Ensuring compliance with
our EEO rules by imposing meaningful sanctions; (2) imposing these sanctions in such a way so as not to cripple broadcasters
in their travels along the information superhighway; and (3) directly furthering the underlying public interest
purpose of the EEO rule_the increased hiring and promotion of minorities and women in the broadcast industry. Specifically,
if we had the legal authority to do so, I would have voted for a program that would have allowed monies received as a result
of violations or alleged violations of our EEO or other rules to be placed into a fund and not into the Federal Treasury.
Funds received for EEO violations would be used for training, educating, and providing placement services for minorities
and women interested in a career in broadcast. What better use for the $325,000 in forfeitures imposed for violations
of the EEO rules today than for the very purpose underlying the rule?



<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946228 Filed 31694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 671201M
</BILLING>

