 

5. The Partnerships may provide that the general partner will have the right, but not the obligation, to acquire the
units of the limited partners upon the termination of a limited partner's employment with The Travelers Group for
any reason or upon his or her bankruptcy. In addition, the Partnerships may provide that in the event of a limited partner's
death, total physical disability or adjudication of incompetence, the limited partner or his or her representative
may request that the general partner, or its assignee or designee, terminate his or her participation and purchase
the limited partner's interest in the Partnership. The general partner, or its assignee or designee, shall have no
obligation to grant such requests. If granted, however, the general partner, or its assignee or designee, shall pay
the limited partner an amount equal to what the general partner determines in good faith to be the fair market value
of the limited partner's interest as of the semi-annual valuation date preceding the limited partner's termination
date.

6. Pending investment, Partnership funds may be invested by the general partner in short-term investments. In compliance
with section 12(d)(1)(A)(1) of the Act, no Partnership will purchase or otherwise acquire any security issued by
another investment company if the Partnership immediately after such purchase or acquisition will own in the aggregate
more than 3 percent of the total outstanding voting stock of any such investment company.

7. Management of each Partnership will be exclusively vested in its general partner, which will be, directly or indirectly,
a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Travelers. The general partner will make all investment decisions for the Partnerships
and will have all powers and rights necessary to carry out the objectives of each of the Partnerships, except that the
general partner may delegate certain of its responsibilities to a manager. No compensation will be paid to the general
partner for its services except that it may receive reimbursement of its out-of-pocket expenses. No separate management
fee will be charged by the general partner. No compensation will be paid by a Partnership to the directors or officers
of the entity controlling the general partner for their services to the general partner other than reimbursement
for reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket expenses incurred during the course of conducting the business of the
Partnership. However, expenses charged by the general partner to any Partnerships may include expenses charged
by an entity affiliated with The Travelers Group for services rendered to the Partnership, but without any additional
markup charged to the Partnership.

8. A general partner and/or manager will register as an investment adviser if required under applicable law. The determination
as to whether a general partner or manager is required to register under the Advisers Act shall be made by The Travelers
Group; no relief in respect to such determination is requested in the application.

9. Each general partner will undertake to contribute capital to the Partnership in an amount equal to at least 1 percent
of the aggregate amount of capital contributed by the limited partners. A general partner or another member of The
Travelers Group (the ``Electing Partner'') may undertake to contribute capital to a Partnership in an amount up to
ten times the aggregate amount of capital contributed by the limited partners. The limited partnership agreement
of a Partnership may provide that the Electing Partner shall not receive its 

pro rata 

allocation of profits and losses with respect to a specified portion of its capital contribution to the Partnership.
With respect to the portion of the general partner's capital contribution for which it will not receive its 

pro rata 

allocation (the ``Non-Allocable Portion''), the Electing Partner will be entitled to a cumulative return, which
will not be greater than its ``opportunity cost of funds'' with respect to such Non-Allocable Portion (the ``Return'').
The Non-Allocable Portion will be a specified percentage of the amount of cash contributed by the Electing Partner
as determined by The Travelers Group and set forth in the limited partnership agreement.

10. The ``opportunity cost of funds'' will be, at the election of the general partner made at the time the Partnership
is organized, either; the applicable interest rate, or a fixed rate of return reflecting the yield in Treasury securities
with a term of similar length as the expected average life of the Partnership. The ``applicable interest rate'' will
be, at the election of a general partner made at the time that a Partnership is organized; the prime commercial lending
rate as in effect from time to time, the ``applicable federal rate'' under section 1274(d) of the Internal Revenue
code of 1984 (or its successors) as determined in the good faith judgment of the general partner, or The Travelers Group's
``effective cost of borrowing'' defined as average effective consolidated borrowing costs for commercial paper,
bank loan and other short term borrowings, computed on a monthly basis.


