 

Subpart B_Housing Finance Agency Requirements 


266.100 

Qualified housing finance agency (HFA). 


(a) 

Qualifications. 

To participate in the program, an HFA must apply and be specifically approved for the pilot program described in this
part, in addition to being a HUD-approved mortgagee in accordance with 24 CFR 202.10 through 202.19. The HFA must maintain
eligibility by continuing to comply with the requirements set forth in the Risk-Sharing Agreement and this part.
To qualify for participation in the program described in this part, an HFA must: 
(1) Carry the designation of ``top tier'' or its equivalent as evaluated by Standard and Poor's or any other nationally
recognized rating Agency; or 
(2) Receive an overall rating of ``A'' for the HFA for its general obligation bonds from a nationally recognized rating
agency; or 
(3) Otherwise demonstrate its capacity as a sound and experienced HFA based on, but not limited to, experience in financing
multifamily housing, fund balances, administrative capabilities, investment policy, internal controls, financial
management, portfolio quality, and State or local support; and 
(4) Be a HUD-approved multifamily mortgagee in good standing; and 
(5) Have at least five years experience in multifamily underwriting; and 
(6) Certify that: 
(i) The Department of Justice has not brought a civil rights suit against the Agency, and no suit is pending; 
(ii) There has not been an adjudication of a civil rights violation in a civil action brought against the HFA by a private
individual, unless the HFA is operating in compliance with a court order, or implementing a HUD-approved compliance
agreement designed to correct the areas of noncompliance; 
(iii) There are no outstanding findings of noncompliance with civil rights statutes, Executive Orders, or regulations
as a result of formal administrative proceedings, or the Secretary has not issued a charge against the HFA under the
Fair Housing Act, unless the HFA is operating under a compliance agreement designed to correct the areas of noncompliance.

(b) 

Approval levels. 

Approval levels consist of the following: 
(1) Level I approval to originate, service, and dispose of multifamily mortgages where the HFA uses its own underwriting
standards and loan terms and conditions, and assumes 50 to 90 percent of the risk of loss (increments of 10 percent).

(2) Level II approval to originate, service, and dispose of multifamily mortgages where the HFA uses underwriting
standards and loan terms and conditions approved by HUD, and: 
(i) When the loan-to-replacement cost ratio for new construction and substantial rehabilitation projects or the
loan-to-value ratio for existing projects is greater than or equal to 75 percent, the HFA shall assume 25 percent of
the risk of loss. 
(ii) When the loan-to-replacement cost ratio for new construction and substantial rehabilitation or the loan-to-value
ratio for existing projects is less than 75 percent, the HFA shall assume 10 percent, or 25 percent at the HFA's option,
of the risk of loss. 
(3) For HFAs who plan to use Level I and Level II processing, the underwriting standards and loan terms and conditions
to be used on Level II loans must be approved by HUD. 


266.105 

Application requirements. 


(a) 

Applications for approval as a HUD-approved multifamily mortgagee.

 HFAs that are not HUD-approved mortgagees at the time of their application to participate in the pilot program must
submit, concurrently, separate applications for approval to participate in the program and for approval to operate
as a HUD-approved mortgagee. Application for approval as HUD-approved mortgagee must be submitted to HUD in accordance
with the requirements established under 24 CFR 202.10 through 202.19. 
(b) 

Applications for participation in pilot program.

 Applications from HFAs for approval to participate in the pilot program under this part must contain: 
(1) Documentation satisfactory to the Commissioner that it meets the qualification requirements set forth in 266.100(a).

(2) Evidence that the application fee of $10,000 has been wire-transferred to the U.S. Treasury in accordance with
instructions in the Notice described in 266.10(a). This fee will not be refunded once the application has been
accepted for review. 
(3) Opinion of legal counsel that the HFA has the necessary powers to participate in the pilot program. The opinion
for an HFA with an overall rating of ``A'' on its general obligation bonds must also state that the general obligation
will extend to the HFA's responsibilities under the Risk-Sharing Agreement and any debenture issued by the HFA to
the Commissioner. If the opinion of counsel does not include this statement, the HFA must comply with the provisions
of 266.110(b). 
(4) A copy of the HFA's procedures manual which describes, among other things, the manner in which the HFA will process
mortgage loans, including their underwriting standards; a description of the approval process; the HFA fee schedule;
a description of loan management, loan servicing, and property disposition activities; and the manner in which the
HFA's and mortgagor's reserves and escrows (including letters of credit) will be established and controlled. The
manual must also include a processing flow chart and an organizational chart. 
(5) A plan describing how the HFA will ensure the highest quality compliance with all HFA and HUD requirements for the
origination, processing, underwriting, insurance of advances, cost certification, loan closing, construction
and permanent loan management, servicing and disposition of all projects insured or proposed to be insured under
this part and for monitoring all work performed by contract personnel, if any. 





