 

NHTSA presumes that the certification of present materials is based on test data in the possession of material manufacturers.
It is likely that haze measurements as well as visual inspection have been performed on current materials following
exposure to weathering, but visual inspections alone should be sufficient. It is not difficult to detect 7 percent
haze visually and samples already found to endure weathering without the development of visually perceptible haze
are unlikely to have developed more than 7 percent haze. 

The proposal was supported by Trucklite, TSEI, and Peterson. They pointed out that the SAE Lighting Committee haze
task force unanimously recommended the 7 percent haze limit in part because it did not affect the use of plastic resins
currently employed for reflex reflectors. 

On balance, the agency has concluded that there is no demonstrable reason not to adopt the 7 percent haze limitation
for plastic materials used for reflex reflectors. 

The second part of the NPRM concerned a proposed cumulative haze limit of 7 percent when a plastic reflex reflector
is installed behind a plastic outer lens and not exposed directly to sunlight. This was based upon draft SAE language
and was opposed by the commenters. Subsequent to the NPRM the SAE modified its draft so that a cumulative haze limit
was an optional part of its specification. NHTSA has decided not to impose a cumulative haze limit of 7 percent, but
simply to adopt the same criterion (7 percent haze limit with direct exposure). Thus, S5.1.2(c) as amended by this
notice will apply the limit and other criteria to ``plastic materials used for reflex reflectors and for lenses used
in front of reflex reflectors.'' 

A comment from GE indicated that while uncoated ``Lexan'' would develop in excess of 30 percent haze in a Florida exposure
test, the addition of a glass covering lens would limit haze to 4 to 6 percent. GE also offered data to show that plastic
covering lenses provided similar benefits. In view of the vast reduction in ultraviolet exposure of inner reflectors
afforded by glass or plastic outer lenses, the agency concluded that acrylic and coated polycarbonate materials,
which experience less than 7 percent haze under direct exposure, would experience negligible haze when protected
by an outer lens. Therefore, it is not necessary to consider cumulative haze when material suitable for direct exposure
is used with a covering lens, also suitable for direct exposure. 





