 


II




The Practices and Events Giving Rise to the Alleged Clayton Act Violation




A. Background





Morton Plant and Mease are the two largest general acute care hospitals in North Pinellas County. Morton Plant, with
672 licensed acute care hospital beds, generated about $130 million in net inpatient revenues in fiscal year 1993.
Mease, with a total of 358 licensed acute care hospital beds on two campuses, generated about $75 million in net inpatient
revenues in fiscal year 1993.



Morton Plant and Mease, like other general acute care hospitals, receive the bulk of their revenues from the provision
of acute inpatient hospital services_

i.e.,

 services provided for the diagnosis and treatment of patients who require an overnight hospital stay. Acute inpatient
hospital services include room and board, medical and surgical services, around-the-clock monitoring and observation,
nursing care, and laboratory, x-ray and support services.



Acute inpatient hospital services are sold to a variety of purchasers, including managed care health insurance plans
such as health maintenance organizations and preferred provider organizations (colloquially known as HMOs and
PPOs). These plans contract with a select number of competing hospitals and employ financial incentives to encourage
plan enrollees to use the contracted facilities. Hospitals reduce the prices of services provided to managed care
plan enrollees in return for the plans' commitment to increase the volume of patients hospitals receive.



Managed care plans and other price-sensitive health care purchasers rely on competition among hospitals to obtain
hospital services at competitive rates. This, in turn, permits managed care plans to offer health insurance to consumers
at lower prices. Managed care plans constitute a significant, and growing, percentage of Morton Plant's and Mease's
revenues from patient care.




B. Product Market





The Verified Complaint alleges that the appropriate product market within which to assess the competitive effect
of the proposed combination of Morton Plant and Mease is the provision of acute inpatient hospital services. A relevant
product market consists of those products that are reasonably interchangeable by consumers for the same purpose.
The pivotal question in the determination is whether a small but significant increase in the price of one product would
cause enough buyers to turn to other products so as to make the price increase unprofitable.



It is well established that acute inpatient services constitute a relevant product market for analyzing a merger
of general acute care hospitals. The market for acute inpatient services is separate from the market for outpatient
services, which general acute care hospitals also provide. Patients whose treatment or condition requires an overnight
hospital stay cannot be safely or effectively treated on an outpatient basis. For this reason, health care purchasers,
including managed care plans, do not view outpatient services as substitutes for acute inpatient services. General
acute care hospitals profitably could increase the price of acute inpatient hospital services without causing a
significant number of health care purchasers to switch to outpatient services.
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>





<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>

Moreover, mergers between general acute care hospitals typically do not raise competitive concerns in the market
for outpatient services because hospitals compete with many other providers (such as clinics, ambulatory surgery
centers. and physicians' offices) in the provision of those services.

</FOOTNOTE>



C. Geographic Market





The Verified Complaint alleges that North Pinellas County, the portion of Pinellas County north of Ulmerton Road,
is the relevant geographic market.



Pinellas County is the most densely populated county in Florida. A long, narrow peninsula, surrounded on three sides
by large bodies of water, the Gulf of Mexico and Tampa Bay, Pinellas County is geographically isolated from Tampa,
the area's major city. In addition, because few major highways connect communities in the northern and southern ends
of the County, it is extremely difficult to travel between North and South Pinellas County, a problem which is much
worse during the winter months when the area's population swells with a seasonal influx of tourists and winter residents.



For these reasons, residents of North Pinellas, physicians practicing in North Pinellas, and health care purchasers
such as managed care plans with North Pinellas enrollees strongly prefer to use or contract with general acute care
hospitals in North Pinellas for acute inpatient hospital services. In 1992, over 85 percent of North Pinellas County
residents who were hospitalized were admitted to general acute care hospitals in North Pinellas. Very few physicians
who practice at hospitals in North Pinellas admit patients to hospitals in other areas. Health care purchasers such
as managed care plans do not consider hospitals in other areas to be good substitutes for North Pinellas hospitals.
Therefore, general acute care hospitals in North Pinellas County profitably could increase the price of acute inpatient
hospital services without losing a significant number of patients to hospitals in other areas.




D. Effect of the Combination





As the largest general acute care hospitals in North Pinellas County, Morton Plant and Mease control, respectively,
about 38% and 20% of all general acute care hospital beds in that area. Together, Morton Plant and Mease would dominate
the market for the provision of acute inpatient hospital services with a combined share of 58%. The market is highly
concentrated by any measure of hospital capacity or output, and market concentration would increase substantially
as a result of the proposed combination.



Health care purchasers such as managed care plans have secured competitive rates for acute inpatient hospital services
because Morton Plant and Mease have vigorously competed for their business. A full-fledged merger of Morton Plant
and Mease, in which they would market and price all of their services together, would eliminate that competitive rivalry,
significantly reduce the ability of managed care plans to bargain for competitive rates, and permit the combination
to increase prices for acute inpatient hospital services to the detriment of health care purchasers and consumers.




III





Explanation of the Proposed Final Consent Judgment





The United States, the State of Florida and Morton Plant and Mease have stipulated that the Court may enter the proposed
Final Consent Judgment at any time after compliance with the Antitrust Procedures and Penalties Act, 15 U.S.C. 16
(b)(h). The Judgment provides that its entry does not constitute any evidence or admission by any party with
respect to any issue of fact or law.



Under the provisions of Section 2(e) of the Antitrust Procedures and Penalties Act, 15 U.S.C. 16(e), the Judgment
may not be entered unless the Court finds entry is in the public interest. Section XII of the proposed Judgment sets
forth such a finding.




