 

VII. Administrative Requirements 



A. Public Hearing 



A public hearing will be held, if requested, to discuss the proposed standards in accordance with Section 307(d)(5)
of the Act. Persons wishing to make an oral presentation on the proposed standards for gasoline distribution should
contact the Agency at the address given in the 

Addresses 

section of this preamble. Oral presentations will be limited to 15 minutes each. Any member of the public may file a
written statement before, during, or within 30 days after the hearing. Written statements should be addressed to
the Air Docket section address given in the 

Addresses 

section of this preamble, and should refer to Docket No. A9238. 

A verbatim transcript of the hearing and any written statements will be available for public inspection and copying
during normal working hours at the Agency's Air Docket Section in Washington, DC (see 

Addresses 

section of this preamble). 



B. Docket 



The docket is an organized and complete file of all the information submitted to or otherwise considered by the Agency
in the development of this proposed rulemaking. The principal purposes of the docket are: (1) To allow interested
parties to readily identify and locate documents so that they can intelligently and effectively participate in the
rulemaking process, and (2) to serve as the record in case of judicial review (except for interagency review materials)
[Section 307(d)(7)(A) of the Act]. 



C. Executive Order 12866 



Under Executive Order 12866, (58 FR 51735 (October 4, 1993)) the Agency must determine whether the regulatory action
is ``significant'' and therefore subject to OMB review and the requirements of the Executive Order. The Order defines
``significant regulatory action'' as one that is likely to result in a rule that may: 

(1) Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector
of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local, or tribal
governments or communities; 

(2) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; 

(3) Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations
of recipients thereof; or 

(4) Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles
set forth in the Executive Order. 

Pursuant to the terms of Executive Order 12866, it has been determined to treat this action as a ``significant regulatory
action'' within the meaning of the Executive Order. As such, this action was submitted to OMB for review. Changes made
in response to OMB suggestions or recommendations will be documented in the docket listed at the beginning of today's
notice under 

ADDRESSES. 

The docket is available for public inspection at the Agency's Air Docket Section, which is listed in the 

Addresses 

section of this preamble. 



D. Paperwork Reduction Act 



The information collection requirements in this proposed rule have been submitted for approval to the OMB under the
Paperwork Reduction Act, 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq. An Information Collection Request (ICR) document has been prepared
by the Agency (ICR No. 1659.01) and a copy may be obtained from Ms. Sandy Farmer, Information Policy Branch, Environmental
Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., (2136), Washington, DC 20460 or by calling (202) 2602740. 

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 400 hours per respondent for
the first year after the date of promulgation of the rule, including time for reviewing instructions, searching existing
data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The cost for this additional burden per respondent is estimated to be about 14,000 dollars during the first year. 


