 

123.8 


Records. 


(a) Records required by this part that involve observations 
or measurements during processing or related activities, 
including corrective actions taken in accordance with 123.7, 
shall include the identity of the product, product code, and date 
of activity that the record reflects. Processing and other 
information shall be entered at the time that it is observed. 
Each record shall be signed by the operator or observer, except 
that corrective action records need only be signed in accordance 
with paragraph (b) of this section. 

(b) Records required by this part shall be reviewed, 
signed, and dated by an individual who has been trained in 
accordance with 123.9, before distribution of the product for 
completeness and compliance with the established critical limits. 

(c) The records required by this part shall be retained at 
the processing facility or the importer's place of business in 
the United States for at least 1 year after the date they were 
prepared in the case of refrigerated products and for at least 2 
years after the date they were prepared in the case of frozen or 
preserved products. Records that relate to the general adequacy 
of equipment or processes being used by a processor, including 
the results of scientific studies and evaluations, shall be 
retained at the processing facility for at least 2 years after 
their applicability to the product being produced at the 
facility. If the processing facility is closed between seasonal 
packs, the records may be transferred to some other reasonably 
accessible location during the period of closure. 


(d) All records required by this part, including HACCP 
plans required in 123.6 and consumer complaints that may be 
related to a critical limit deviation, shall be available for 
review and copying at reasonable times by duly authorized 
officers and employees. 



(e) Tags as defined in 123.3(t) are not subject to the 
requirements of this section. 




123.9 



Training. 




Each processor and importer shall employ at least one 
individual who has successfully completed a prescribed course of 
instruction in the application of Hazard Analysis Critical 
Control Point (HACCP) principles to fish and fishery product 
processing at a program of instruction approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration. At a minimum, this individual shall be 
responsible for developing and modifying the plan as required by 
123.6, evaluating critical limit deviations and corrective 
actions as required by 123.7, and performing record review as 
required by 123.8(b). 




123.10 



Sanitation control procedures. 



(a) Every processor and importer who takes physical 
possession of fish or fishery products and engages in the 
processing of such fish or fishery products, including storing 
such products, shall perform sanitation inspections and ensure at 
a minimum that, to the extent applicable to the operations 
conducted by the processor or importer, the following conditions 
apply: 

(1) Water that directly comes into contact with a product 
or with food contact surfaces, or is used in the manufacture of 
ice, is derived from a safe and sanitary source or is being 
treated to render it of safe and sanitary quality. 



