 

The proposed change does not involve a significant hazards 
consideration since: 
1. A significant increase in the probability or consequences of an 
accident previously evaluated will not occur. 
It is proposed that the channel calibration frequency for the 
Service Water Inlet Temperature Monitoring Instrumentation be 
changed from every 18 months (+25%) to every 24 months (+25%). 
A statistical analysis of channel uncertainty for a 30 month 
operating cycle has been performed. Based upon this analysis it 
has been concluded that sufficient margin exists between the 
existing Technical Specification and the licensing basis Safety 
Analysis to accommodate the channel statistical error resulting 
from a 30 month operating cycle. The existing margin between the 
Technical Specification and the Safety Analysis provides 
assurance that plant protective actions will occur as required. 
It is therefore concluded that changing the surveillance interval 
from 18 months (+25%) to 24 months (+25%) will not result in a 
significant increase in the probability or consequences of an 
accident previously evaluated. 
2. The possibility of a new or different kind of accident from any 
accident previously evaluated has not been created. 

The proposed change in operating cycle length due to an increased 
surveillance interval will not result in a channel statistical 
allowance which exceeds the current margin between the existing 
Technical Specification and the Safety Analysis. Plant 
equipment, which will be set at (or more conservatively than) 
Technical Specification limits, will provide protective functions 
to assure that Safety Analyses are not exceeded. This will 
prevent the possibility of a new or different kind of accident 
from any previously evaluated from occurring. 
3. A significant reduction in a margin of safety is not involved. 
The above change in surveillance interval resulting from an 
increased operating cycle will not result in a channel 
statistical allowance which exceeds the existing margin between 
the current Technical Specification and the licensing basis 
Safety Analysis. This margin, which is equivalent to the 
existing margin, is necessary to assure that the protective 
safety functions occur and that the Safety Analysis limits are 
not exceeded. 
[(11) Sampler Flow Rate Monitor:] 
1. There is no significant increase in the probability or 
consequences of an accident. 
It is proposed that the channel calibration frequency for the 
Sample Flow Rate Monitors be changed from every 18 months (+25%) 
to every 24 months (+25%). 
The flow rate monitors are used to estimate the total volume of 
air passed through filters. There is no setpoint or safety 
function served by these monitors. A high level of radioactivity 
in the discharge stream is detected by R43 and/or R44. 
Insofar as discharge via the unit vent is permissible with the 
monitors inoperable, extension of the surveillance interval will 
have no impact upon safety. 
2. The possibility of a new or different kind of accident from any 
previously analyzed has not been created. 
As the nuclear safety function is provided by other monitors in 
the event of high radioactivity levels in the discharge stream, 
extension of the surveillance interval will have no impact upon 
the creation of a new or different kind of accident. 
3. There has been no reduction in the margin of safety. 
These flow monitors are utilized to determine the total air flow 
through filters for computational purposes. As adequate measures 
(other monitors) exist to prevent the possibility of discharging 
radioactivity in excess of applicable limits, there is virtually 
no impact upon safety incurred by extending the surveillance 
interval. 
[(12) Boric Acid Makeup Flow System:] 
The proposed change does not involve a significant hazards 
consideration since: 
1. A significant increase in the probability or consequences of an 
accident previously evaluated will not occur. 
It is proposed that the channel calibration frequency for the 
Boric Acid Makeup Flow System be revised from every 18 months 
(+25%) to every 24 months (+25%). A statistical analysis of 
channel uncertainty for a 30 month operating cycle has been 
performed. Based upon this analysis it has been concluded that 
sufficient margin exists between the existing Technical 
Specification limit and the licensing basis Safety Analysis limit 
to accommodate the channel statistical error resulting from a 30 
month operating cycle. The existing margin between the Technical 
Specification limit and the Safety Analysis limit provides 
assurance that plant protective actions will occur as required. 
It is therefore concluded that changing the surveillance interval 
from 18 months (+25%) to 24 months (+25%) will not result in a 
significant increase in the probability or consequences of an 
accident previously evaluated.

