 

<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Thomas J. McIntyre (NMFS Protected Resources Management Division), 3017132319. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


At its ninth annual meeting in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, in 1990, the Commission, of which the United States is
a member, adopted detailed procedures for according protection to sites within the CEMP. This protection, extended
pursuant to site-specific management plans, is intended to prevent adverse impacts to these sites resulting from
certain forms of human activities. Once approved, management plans will be reviewed every 5 years to determine whether
they require revision and whether continued protection is necessary. Section 307 of the Antarctic Living Marine
Resources Convention Act of 1984 (the Act) states that the Secretary of Commerce, after consultation with the heads
of appropriate agencies, shall promulgate such regulations as are necessary to implement the provisions of the Act
and the Conservation Measures adopted by the Commission. This notice adds regulatory text for previously reserved
380.28 of 50 CFR part 380 to implement CEMP procedures and the Commission's approved CEMP management plans.
One part of the section requires individuals seeking permits in order to enter a CEMP site to apply either to NMFS or
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as follows: 
A. If the CEMP protected site is not also a site specially protected under the Antarctic Treaty, or the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the individual must apply to NMFS for a CEMP entry permit. 
B. If the CEMP protected site is also a site specially protected under the Antarctic Treaty or the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and, thus, a site requiring a permit under the Antarctic Conservation Act (ACA)
(and any superseding legislation), the individual must apply to NSF for a single CEMP/ACA permit. 


Classification 


The Secretary of Commerce has determined that this rule is necessary to implement the Act and to give effect to the conservation
and management measures adopted by the Commission and agreed to by the United States. 
This rule contains a collection-of-information requirement subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act. The collection
of information has been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB Approval Number 06480194). 
The annual reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per application, and
one half hour for preparation of a final report on the permitted activities. All reporting burden estimates include
the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed
and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Thomas J. McIntyre,
National Marine Fisheries Service, and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management
and Budget (see 

ADDRESSES).

 
This rule is exempt from review under E. O. 12866. 


List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 380 


Antarctic, Fish and wildlife, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 




Dated: March 6, 1994. 


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Nancy Foster, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Assistant Administrator for Fisheries, 
National Marine Fisheries Service.

 

For the reasons set out in the preamble, 50 CFR part 380 is amended as follows: 


PART 380_ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES CONVENTION ACT OF 1984 





</SIGNJOB>
