 

Final Common Rule 


This rulemaking raises some difficult issues. It involves making decisions about the safety needs of blind persons
and persons with low vision and considering their needs in light of the concerns expressed by persons with mobility
impairments and other commenters. The task is all the more complicated by the fact that blind persons and their organizations
have taken differing positions on the matter. 
After carefully reviewing the comments received on the July 9, 1993 and December 21, 1992 NPRM's and the reports of
the two recent research projects discussed above, the agencies 
believe that it is in the public interest to suspend temporarily the ADAAG requirements for detectable warnings at
curb ramps, hazardous vehicular areas, and reflecting pools while 
additional research is conducted on the need for detectable warnings at these locations and their effect on persons
with mobility impairments and other pedestrians. 
The July 9, 1993 NPRM proposed that the suspension remain in effect until January 26, 1995. This date was first proposed
by the Access Board in November 1992. At the time, the Access Board envisioned that the additional research would be
completed in fiscal year 1994 and that the agencies would have an opportunity to review the results of the research
and, if necessary, initiate further rulemaking on detectable warnings before January 26, 1995. In subsequent planning
for the research project, the Access Board has divided the project into two phases. The first phase, which is scheduled
for completion in fiscal year 1994, will focus on whether detectable warnings are needed at curb ramps and hazardous
vehicular areas and their effect on persons with mobility impairments and other pedestrians. Depending on the results
of the first phase, an optional second phase may be conducted during fiscal year 1995 to refine the scoping provisions
and technical specifications for detectable warnings at these locations. 
If the second phase of the research project is conducted, the agencies will conduct further rulemaking to amend the
scoping provisions and technical specifications based upon the recommendations of the research project. Allowing
nine months for the rulemaking process from the end of fiscal year 1995, the joint final rule provides for the suspension
to remain in effect until July 26, 1996. Of course, depending on the results of the first phase of the research project,
the agencies could decide to conduct further rulemaking earlier. The July 26, 1996 date is the outside period by which
the agencies expect to complete all rulemaking on this matter. 

Several commenters requested that the agencies provide guidance in this rulemaking on whether entities may be required
to retrofit existing curb ramps, hazardous vehicular areas, and 
reflecting pools with detectable warnings at a future date under the program accessibility requirements for State
and local governments (28 CFR 35.150) and the readily achievable barrier removal requirements for public accommodations
(28 CFR 36.304). At this time, it is 
premature to provide such guidance. The agencies will further address these questions after the research project
is completed and further rulemaking on the matter is conducted. 


Regulatory Analyses and Notices 


The agencies have independently determined that this final rule is not a significant 
regulatory action and that a regulatory assessment is not required under Executive Order 12866. It is a significant
rule under the Department of Transportation's Regulatory Policies and Procedures since it amends the agency's ADA
regulations, which are a significant rule. The Department of Transportation expects the economic impacts to be minimal
and has not prepared a full regulatory evaluation. 
The agencies hereby independently certify that this proposed rule is not expected to have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities. Accordingly, a regulatory flexibility analysis is not required.






