 
 


V 
 


Divestiture of Baroid's Diamond Bit Business 
 


A. Defendants are hereby ordered and directed to divest to a purchaser prior to July 1, 1994 all of their direct and indirect
ownership and control of Baroid's diamond bit business. The obligation to divest shall be satisfied if, by July 1,
1994, defendants enter into a binding contract for sale of Baroid's diamond bit business to a purchaser according
to terms approved by plaintiff that is contingent only upon compliance with the terms of this Final Judgment and that
specifies a prompt and reasonable closing date no later than September 1, 1994, and if sale is completed pursuant to
the contract. 
 
B. If defendants have not accomplished the required divestiture prior to July 1, 1994, plaintiff may, in its sole discretion,
extend this time period for an additional period of time not to exceed three months, if defendants request such an extension
and demonstrate to plaintiff's satisfaction that they are then engaged in negotiations with a prospective purchaser
that are likely to result in the required divestiture but that the divestiture cannot be completed prior to July 1,
1994. 
 
C. Defendants agree to take all reasonable steps to accomplish quickly said divestiture. In carrying out their obligation
to divest Baroid's diamond bit business, defendants may divest these operations alone, or may divest along with these
operations any other assets of Baroid or Dresser. 
 
D. In accomplishing the divestiture ordered by this Final Judgment, the defendants promptly shall make known in the
United States and in other major countries, by usual and customary means, the availability of Baroid's diamond bit
business, for sale as an ongoing business. The defendants shall notify any person making an inquiry regarding the
possible purchase of this operation that the sale is being made pursuant to this Final Judgment and provide such person
with a copy of the Final Judgment. The defendants shall also offer to furnish to all bona fide prospective purchasers
of Baroid's diamond bit business, subject to customary confidentiality assurances, all pertinent information
regarding Baroid's diamond bit business, except information subject to attorney-client privilege or attorney
work product privilege. Defendants shall make available such information to the plaintiff at the same time that such
information is made available to any other person. Defendants shall permit prospective purchasers of Baroid's diamond
bit business to have access to personnel at Baroid's diamond bit business and to make such inspection of physical facilities
and any and all financial, operational, or other documents and information as may be relevant to the sale of Baroid's
diamond bit business. Defendants shall not be required to permit prospective purchasers to have access to any documents
or information relevant to Dresser's diamond bit business, except to the extent included in Baroid's diamond bit
business. 
 
E. Divestiture required by section V of the Final Judgment shall be accomplished in such a way as to satisfy plaintiff,
in its sole discretion, that Baroid's diamond bit business can and will be operated by the purchaser as a viable, ongoing
business engaged in the manufacture and sale of diamond drill bits in the United States. Divestiture shall be made
to a purchaser for whom it is demonstrated to plaintiff's satisfaction that (1) the purchase is for the purpose of competing
effectively in the manufacture and sale of diamond drill bits in the United States, including the ability to conduct
research, development, and testing of diamond bits, and (2) the purchaser has the managerial, operational, and financial
capability to compete effectively in the manufacture and sale of diamond drill bits in the United States. 
 
F. The defendants shall not sell Baroid's diamond bit business to Baker Hughes, Inc., Camco International, Inc.,
Smith International, Inc., or any of their affiliates or subsidiaries during the life of this decree. The purchaser
of Baroid's diamond bit business shall not sell that business to, or combine that business with the diamond drill bit
operations of, Dresser Industries, Inc., Baker Hughes, Inc., Camco, Inc., Smith International, Inc., or any of their
affiliates or subsidiaries during the life of this decree. 
 
G. Except to the extent otherwise approved by plaintiff, Baroid's diamond bit business divested pursuant to this
Final Judgment shall be divested free and clear of all mortgages, encumbrances and liens to Baroid or Dresser. 
 
 
 

