 

Navigation channel maintenance in the Chattahoochee and Apalachicola Rivers has destroyed long stretches of benthic
habitat. In addition to the damage caused by the mechanical removal of tons of substrate, these activities increase
sedimentation in downstream areas by resuspending silt fines which smother benthic organisms. Dredging activities
may also resuspend contaminants that are bound to sediments, thus potentially exposing aquatic organisms to released
toxicants. Potential host fishes for the fat three-ridge and purple bankclimber in the Apalachicola River may also
be disrupted by channel modifications. Maintenance operations in the Apalachicola River mainstem continue to disrupt
habitat for these two species. A third mussel, the Gulf moccasinshell, has apparently been extirpated from the Apalachicola
River. 

Gravel mining operations have been observed in various portions of the Apalachicolan Region. Primary stream impacts
associated with gravel mining include stream channel modifications (alterations of habitat, flow patterns, and
sediment transport), water quality modifications, aquatic invertebrate population changes and changes in fish
populations (alteration and elimination of spawning and nursery habitats, and food web disruptions) (Kanehl and
Lyons 1992). Channel degradation caused by gravel mining has been implicated in the destruction of mussel populations
(Hartfield 1993, Grace and Buchanan 1981). In a study by Grace and Buchanan (1981), mussels were still absent from
an in-stream dredged area 15 years after mining took place. Siltation is particularly increased during the mining
of in-stream gravel and/or during the washing of gravel which rinses silt and debris back into the stream. Gravel from
the Chattahoochee River is used for various purposes including landscaping throughout the region. Jenkinson (1973)
recorded the shiny-rayed pocketbook, oval pigtoe, Gulf moccasinshell, and 10 other mussel species in Little Uchee
Creek (Chattahoochee River system) in Alabama. The creek now has active in-stream gravel mines; only a few shell fragments
were found during a recent survey by the Service. 

Municipal and industrial pollutants are widespread in Apalachicolan Region streams. Many municipal waste water
treatment plants provide only secondary treatment of waste water and three plants discharging wastes into the New
River (Suwannee River system) threaten that stream's population of the oval pigtoe. From 1955 to 1977, an estimated
950,000,000 gallons of chemical-laden solutions were discharged into the Flint River from a Department of Defense
facility in Albany, Georgia (P. Laumeyer, Service, pers. comm.). Service biologists surveyed a stretch of the Flint
River where dozens of purple bankclimbers had been killed by an unknown pollutant. Hundreds of round washboards (

Megalonaias boykiniana

) were found dead in the upper Flint River (C. Coney, Los Angeles County Museum, pers. comm.) and various beds of dead
mussels (species unknown) were observed in the Suwannee River (L. Parker, Service, pers. comm.). A battery plant
operation threatens water quality in the Chipola River system, which harbors populations of the fat three-ridge,
shiny-rayed pocketbook, oval pigtoe, and Chipola slabshell. 

Various agricultural practices conducted in the Apalachicolan Region have contributed to stream and habitat degradation.
A Soil Conservation Service (1993) study of a small agricultural watershed area in the middle Flint River system reported
an average of 35.44 metric tons per hectare per year (15.8 tons per acre per year) of sediment loading into area waters;
97% of the total sedimentation in the watershed was generated from agricultural runoff. Agricultural runoff, in
the form of organophosphate or carbamate pesticides, has been implicated in the die-off of populations of freshwater
mussels (J. Fleming, National Biological Survey, unpub. data). The poultry industry is expanding operations into
the Apalachicolan Region, particularly in the watersheds of the upper Apalachicola River system. Runoff from chicken
farms causes oxygen depletion in streams and has been implicated in fish and mussel die-offs in Alabama (U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service 1993). Feedlots are also another source of pollution in localized portions of the region's streams.
Large dairy farms located in the Suwannee River watershed also contribute to the pollution of this system's waters.


Erosion from poor land use practices causes extensive loss of topsoil and the subsequent siltation of stream bottoms.
Sources of siltation include timber clearcutting and other silvicultural activities, clearing of riparian vegetation
for agricultural purposes, and those construction and mining practices that allow exposed earth to enter streams.
Light to moderate levels of siltation are common in many of the streams in the Apalachicolan Region that still have
populations of these seven mussel species. Heavily silted streams were observed by Service biologists in numerous
tributaries of the Chattahoochee and upper Flint Rivers, particularly those draining the Piedmont Physiographic
Province, which is well known for its highly erodible soils. Stream banks devoid of riparian vegetation commonly
slough-off into stream channels. Several clear-cuts have been observed in watersheds of the middle Apalachicola
River system, some with inadequate riparian buffer strips (J. Brim-Box, Service, pers. comm.). A disregard for maintaining
riparian buffers during silvicultural activities threaten streams throughout the Apalachicolan Region. Continued
siltation and sedimentation of these streams may result in a 
depauperate fish fauna, reducing populations at many sites to those dominated by species tolerant of degraded habitats.
The negative effects of silt on benthic fishes were summarized by Burkhead and Jenkins (1991). Siltation reduces
habitat heterogeneity and increases fish egg and larval mortality, abrades organisms, and alters macrobenthic
communities. 


