 

Present 23.177(b) is deleted, as previously discussed, because it applies to two-control airplanes. 


Section 23.201Wings Level Stall


This proposal would delete both two-control airplanes and altitude loss requirements and would make clarifying
changes in 23.201.
The proposed change to 23.201(a) deletes the applicability reference for an airplane with independently
controlled roll and directional controls. The last word, ``pitches'' is replaced by ``stalls'' since stalls may
be defined by other than nose-down pitching. 
Present 23.201(b) is deleted since it applies to two-control airplanes. (See proposed change for 23.177
for discussion of two-control airplane requirements.) 
Current 23.201(c) is divided into proposed 23.201 (b) and (c). Proposed 23.201(b) covers stall
recognition and proposed 23.201(c) addresses stall recovery. Proposed 23.201(b) clarifies that
the test should start from a speed at least 10 knots above the stall speed. Proposed 23.201(b) has no change in
requirements. Section 23.201(c) is changed to specify how long the control must be held against the stop. This change
would ensure that the procedure for determining stall speed is the same procedure used to test stall characteristics.
The last sentence of current paragraph (c) on the increase of power is deleted because it would only apply to altitude
loss. 
Present 23.201(d) would be deleted, as suggested by the JAA, since the determination of altitude loss, and
its subsequent furnishing in the AFM, is not considered information useful to the pilot for safe operation of the airplane.

Proposed 23.201(d) would be based on present 23.210(e) and would be revised to clarify that the roll
and yaw limits apply during both entry and recovery.
Proposed 23.201(e) is present paragraph (f) with some revisions. During FAR/JAR harmonization meetings,
the JAA pointed out to the FAA that in high power-to-weight ratio airplanes, extreme nose-up attitudes were the principal
criteria for use of reduced power, not the presence of undesirable stall characteristics. The FAA concurs and proposes
to delete the phrase concerning stall characteristics. 


Section 23.203Turning Flight and Accelerated Turning Stalls


Proposed 23.203 would be revised by adding the word ``turning'' before ``stalls'' and after ``accelerated''
in the heading, the introductory text, and in proposed paragraphs (a)(2) and (b)(5). This proposed change clarifies
that accelerated stalls are performed in turning flight. Also, it clarifies the definition to show that accelerated
stalls are not intended to be performed in straight flight. This clarification reflects current practice. 
Proposed 23.203 (a) and (b) would reference the stall definition in 23.201(b), which is more specific
than the present general words ``when the stall has fully developed or the elevator has reached its stop.''
For clarification, current paragraph (b)(4) would be separated into proposed paragraphs (b)(4) and (b)(5) without
substantive change, and current paragraph (b)(5) would be redesignated as paragraph (b)(6).
Proposed 23.203(c)(1) would clarify the wing flap positions by changing ``each intermediate position''
to ``each intermediate normal operating position.''
The proposed change to 23.203(c)(4) would clarify the use of reduced power. (See the proposed change to 23.201(f).)

Proposed new paragraph (c)(6) has been added to be consistent with new 23.207(c)(6) configurations (Amendment
No. 2345). 


Section 23.205Critical Engine-Inoperative Stalls


This proposal would delete 23.205. The present requirement to demonstrate stalls with the critical engine
inoperative is restricted to the enroute configuration and to a level of power asymmetry with which the airplane is
controllable with wings level at the stalling speed. As a result, the power on the operating engines at the stall is
normally fairly low, and neither the configuration nor the power setting represent the conditions most likely to
accompany an inadvertent stall in service. Reduction of power of the operating engine(s) during the recovery is permitted,
and it is questionable whether such action would be taken promptly in an inadvertent stall in service. Experience
shows that stalls with significant power asymmetry can result in a spin, even on airplanes that are certificated to
the present requirement. Apparently the requirement for demonstrating one-engine-inoperative stalls is not effective
in ensuring that inadvertent stalls in service with one engine inoperative will have satisfactory characteristics
and be recoverable. Sufficient protection against the hazard of stalling with one engine inoperative is provided
by the one-engine-inoperative performance requirements and operating speed margins, coupled with the requirements
for determination of V

MC

, the addition of a directional and lateral control test under 23.147(b), and demonstration of stalling characteristics
with symmetric power. 


