 

Example 7




Situation: 

Eta, the inventor of a new flat panel display technology, lacking the capability to bring a flat panel display product
to market, grants Rho an exclusive license to make and sell a product embodying Eta's technology. Rho does not currently
sell a product that would compete with the product embodying the new technology or control rights to another display
technology. Several firms offer competing displays, the relevant markets for manufacturing and distribution of
such displays are unconcentrated, and entry into these markets is relatively easy. Demand for the new technology
is uncertain and successful market penetration will require considerable promotional effort. The license contains
an exclusive dealing restriction preventing Rho from selling products that compete with the product embodying the
licensed technology.


Discussion: 

This example illustrates both types of exclusivity in a licensing arrangement. The license is exclusive in that it
restricts the right of the licensor to grant other licenses. In addition, the license has an exclusive dealing component
in that it restricts the licensee from selling competing products.
The inventor of the display technology and its licensee are in a vertical relationship and do not compete in the manufacture
or sale of display products or in the sale of technology. Hence, the grant of an exclusive license does not affect competition
between the licensor and the licensee. The exclusive license may promote competition by encouraging Rho to develop
and promote the new product in the face of uncertain demand by rewarding Rho for its efforts if they lead to large sales.
Although the license bars the licensee from selling competing products, this exclusive dealing aspect is unlikely
in this example to harm competition by foreclosing access or facilitating anticompetitive pricing because several
firms offer competing products, the relevant manufacturing and distribution markets are unconcentrated, and entry
is easy. On these facts, the Department would be unlikely to challenge the arrangement.


4.3.3Benefits to the parties from reduction of competition. 

In some cases, the benefits of a restraint in a licensing arrangement to the licensor or its licensees may derive primarily
from reductions in competition that likely would have occurred absent the license rather than from the restraint's
relationship to efficiency-producing objectives of the arrangement. In determining whether to challenge a particular
restraint in a licensing arrangement, the Department will assess evidence indicating which of these possibilities
better describes the purpose and effect of the restraint.


4.3.4Other factors. 

Factors such as a history of rivalry and a rapid pace of innovation are also relevant to an analysis of the potential
for harm to competition. The presence of these factors may indicate that licensors and licensees are less likely successfully
to engage in coordinated behavior to raise prices or restrict output, and their absence may signal a greater likelihood
of such behavior.


4.4Efficiencies and Justifications


If the Department finds that a restraint in a licensing arrangement has an anticompetitive effect, the Department
will consider whether the restraint produces offsetting procompetitive effects, such as by facilitating the efficient
development and exploitation of intellectual property. If offsetting benefits are established, the Department
will determine whether the restraint is reasonably necessary to achieve the efficiencies. If the restraint is reasonably
necessary, and if the efficiencies outweigh the anticompetitive effect, the Department will not challenge the licensing
arrangement.
The Department's comparison of anticompetitive harms and procompetitive efficiencies is necessarily a qualitative
one. The risk of anticompetitive effects in a particular case may be insignificant compared to the expected benefits,
or vice versa. As the expected anticompetitive effects in a particular licensing arrangement increase, the Department
will look for evidence establishing with greater certainty that the arrangement achieves net benefits.
The existence of practical and significantly less restrictive alternatives is relevant to a determination of whether
a restraint is reasonably necessary. If it is clear that the parties could have achieved similar efficiencies by means
that are significantly less restrictive, then the Department will not give weight to the parties' efficiency claim.
In making this assessment, however, the Department will not engage in a search for a theoretically least restrictive
alternative that might be easier to construct in hindsight than in the practical prospective business situation
faced by the parties.
When a restraint has an anticompetitive effect, the duration of that restraint can be an important factor in determining
whether it is reasonably necessary to achieve the putative procompetitive effect. The effective duration of a restraint
may be dependent on a number of factors, including the option of the affected party to terminate the arrangement unilaterally
and the presence of contract terms (

e.g., 

unpaid balances on minimum purchase commitments) that encourage the licensee to renew a license arrangements. Consistent
with its approach to less restrictive alternative analysis generally, the Department will not attempt to draw fine
distinctions regarding duration; rather, its focus will be on situations in which the duration clearly exceeds the
period needed to achieve the procompetitive effect.


