 

V. Executive Order 12866 and Regulatory Flexibility Act 


In accordance with Executive Order 12866 MSHA prepared a preliminary impact analysis (PRIA) to estimate the potential
costs and benefits associated with the proposed revisions to the ventilation rule. Based upon the available data,
MSHA has determined in its PRIA that this rule would neither result in major cost increases nor have an effect of $100
million or more on the economy. A copy of the PRIA is available from the MSHA docket office and is summarized as follows.



Benefits 


In assessing costs and benefits of the ventilation rule, it is important to note that ventilation of underground coal
mines is the primary method of preventing the accumulation of explosive methane gas, controlling harmful respirable
dust, and assuring the quality of air miners breath. Because of the potential for a large number of fatalities resulting
from ventilation problems, MSHA has found it prudent to establish multiple safety factors and safety work practices
to better assure adequate protection for miners. It is extremely difficult to specifically quantify safety benefits
related to each safety factor. However, due to the close, confined nature of the workplace in an underground coal mine,
failure of any safety factors or protective actions related to ventilation can have disastrous effects. In 1984,
a fire starting from an over heated compressor at the Wilberg Mine resulted in 27 deaths. More recently, an explosion
at the William Station Mine in 1989 resulted in 10 deaths and exposed other miners to high concentrations of carbon
monoxide and smoke. In the restricted work environment of an underground coal mine, failure of a single safety factor
or noncompliance with a safe work practice could jeopardize the well-being of all miners underground. The total effect
of the provisions in this proposed rule in conjunction with MSHA's existing ventilation standards should decrease
the occurrence of fatalities, injuries, accidents, and illnesses in underground coal mines. 
With respect to this proposed rule, the Agency has identified nine fatalities and seven injuries which potentially
could have been prevented by compliance with these proposed provisions. In addition, the proposal contains provisions
to better assure compliance with the respirable dust control parameters specified in the mine ventilation plan.
Adherence to these parameters helps to maintain a work environment free of excessive levels of respirable dust, thereby
improving long-term health protection for miners and potentially reducing the number of miners afflicted with coal
workers' pneumoconiosis. 
Some proposed provisions clarify the intent of the current rule. Such clarifications should increase the likelihood
of compliance and thereby would help to increase the probability of preventing a fatality, injury, or non-injury
accident. For the proposed provisions which would offer an alternative compliance option, the miners would be provided
at least the same level of safety provided by an existing requirement. These provisions would facilitate compliance
by the operator, thereby increasing the potential for the rule to reduce the probability of a ventilation-related
explosion or accident. 
In conclusion, the Agency determined that these proposed provisions would increase the probability that compliance
with the ventilation rule would prevent future ventilation-related accidents and generate a safer mining environment.



Compliance Costs 


MSHA has compared the costs associated with the existing requirements with the costs of the proposed requirements.
For the purpose of estimating the incremental compliance cost increases or decreases, these proposed provisions
have been divided into three categories, each category requiring a slightly different approach in estimating the
costs of compliance. 
The first category includes those proposed provisions which retain or clarify requirements specified in the existing
rule. For this category, there would be no additional costs of compliance if these were estimated in the RIA to the May
1992 rule. 
The second category includes those proposed provisions that would provide a mine operator with an alternative compliance
option to an existing requirement (for example, allowing a miner to continuously attend an operating compressor
instead of requiring the compressor to be located in a noncombustible structure). For this category, the availability
of an alternative compliance option can affect the level of compliance, depending on the alternative selected. Thus,
the availability of an alternative compliance option could reduce the costs of compliance for some mine operators.
However, the potential compliance cost savings depend upon whether the operator selects the alternative compliance
option. MSHA believes that the operator's decision would depend on factors that may vary widely among mines, therefore,
MSHA estimated a percentage of mines likely to use a specific option and based its projected cost savings on these estimates.

The third category includes those proposed provisions that would impose new requirements (for example, requiring
an automatic shut down feature on a mobile compressor when the fire suppression system is activated). For this category,
the potential incremental compliance costs were estimated by using full compliance with the existing rule or existing
industry practices as the baseline. 
Based on the available data, MSHA estimated that compliance with the proposed rule would cost the mining industry
$3.8 million in first-year costs, or about $826,500 in annualized costs. Net annual compliance costs would be about
$7.6 million. The total of annualized plus annual costs is projected to be about $8.4 million. In addition to these
incremental costs, during the first year of compliance with the new air quality requirements under 75.321,
it is possible that two large mines may lose a block of coal, resulting in approximately $6 million in lost production
to these mines. 





