 

The selection criteria are designed to select the best qualified TA providers in each specific program area who are:

(a) skilled in providing a variety of technical assistance services which address often multi-faceted and complex
problems; (b) knowledgeable about local programs and institutions in the geographic areas they propose to serve;
and (c) willing to work with other TA providers to bring the essential programs together, so that available housing
resources, services for the homeless and community and economic development resources can more effectively address
community problems.
In some instances, HUD may select a single organization to provide TA for all CPD programs within a given geographic
area. In other instances several, including qualified consortia of technical assistance providers, may be selected.
Where appropriate, HUD may select multiple TA providers to work within a single geographic area. HUD encourages TA
providers to work together to coordinate, and to the maximum extent possible, join their activities to form a seamless
and comprehensive program of technical assistance for the geographic area they are assisting. 
All selected TA providers, with the exception of some national TA providers, will be required to work under the direction
of the local HUD Field offices which have jurisdiction over the geographic areas which the provider will serve. All
geographically-based work plans must be approved by the local HUD Field Office(s) before they are implemented, and
progress reports must be submitted to the relevant Field Office on a minimum quarterly basis. HUD headquarters shall
maintain oversight responsibilities for all awards to ensure continuity and that all areas of the country are fully
served by those organizations selected as TA providers. National TA providers conducting activities that do not
involve specific geographic areas, such as publications and national training sessions, will be managed by HUD Headquarters
or its designee. 


(B) Purpose 


The purpose of this NOFA is to: 
(1) Strengthen the abilities of State and local governments and non-profit organizations to make more effective
use of CPD grant and related programs through coordinated neighborhood and community development strategies to
revitalize communities; 
(2) Create opportunities for strategic planning and citizen participation in a comprehensive context at the local
level; 
(3) Promote methods for developing more coordinated and effective approaches to dealing with urban problems by recognizing
the inter-connections among the underlying problems and ways to address them through the over-laying of available
HUD programs; 
(4) Promote the ability of non-profit organizations, including CHDOs and community land trusts, to develop more
effective ways of assisting communities in maintaining, rehabilitating and constructing affordable housing for
low income families; develop and implement programs to assist homeless persons and prevent homelessness; create
jobs for low-income persons; and assist CDBG, HOME, and SHP grantees to apply for and maximize the use of available
program funds; and 
(5) Recognize and make better use of the expertise that each component (supportive housing, affordable housing,
community development, economic development) and the organizations (States, local governments, non-profit and
for-profit providers) can contribute when developing the consolidated plan. 


(C) Authorities 


(1) The HOME Investment Partnerships Act (42 U.S.C. 1270112840) 24 CFR part 92 authorizes the Department to
set aside $25 million of the total HOME Program appropriation for FY 1994 for community housing partnership activities
and $22 million for support for State and local housing strategies. 
(2) The Community Development Block Grant Technical Assistance Program, authorized under Title I of the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, (42 U.S.C. 53015320; Sec. 7(d), Department of Housing and Urban Development
(42 U.S.C. 3535(d); 24 CFR 570.402.), has several purposes and encompasses several programs. 
(3) The Supportive Housing Program is authorized under 42 U.S.C. 11389; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d); 24 CFR 583.140. 




