 


Wednesday


April 6, 1994





Part XIII


Department of Education





National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research; Notice









Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 66/Wednesday, April 6, 1994/Notices 




<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION </USDEPT>



National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Department of Education. 

 
</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of Proposed Funding Priorities for Fiscal Years 19941995 for the Knowledge Dissemination and Utilization
Program. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Secretary proposes funding priorities for the Knowledge Dissemination and Utilization (DU) Program under
the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) for fiscal years 19941995. The
Secretary takes this action to ensure that rehabilitation knowledge generated from projects and centers funded
by NIDRR and others is utilized fully to improve the lives of individuals with disabilities and their families. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Comments must be received on or before May 6, 1994. 



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 All comments concerning these proposed priorities should be addressed to David Esquith, U.S. Department of Education,
400 Maryland Avenue, SW., Switzer Building, room 3424, Washington, DC 202022601.

 
</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 David Esquith. Telephone: (202) 2058801. Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf (TDD)
may call the TDD number at (202) 2055516. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 This notice contains six proposed priorities under the DU program. These proposed priorities would train persons
with rights and duties under the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). The six proposed priority areas are:



(1) Independent living centers;

(2) Family organizations; 
(3) School districts; 
(4) State and local ADA coordinators and policymakers;

(5) Hispanics with rights and duties under the ADA whose proficiency in English is limited; and

(6) Standards for accessible design. 
Authority for the DU program is contained in sections 202(b)(2) and 204(a) and 204(b)(6) of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. 760762). Under this program the Secretary makes awards to public and private
organizations, including institutions of higher education and Indian tribes or tribal organizations. Under the
regulations for this program (see 34 CFR 355.32), the Secretary may establish priorities by reserving funds to support
particular activities. 
These proposed priorities support the National Education Goals. National Education Goal 5 calls for all Americans
to possess the knowledge and skills necessary to compete in a global economy and exercise the rights and responsibilities
of citizenship. 
The Secretary will announce the final funding priorities in a notice in the 

Federal Register

. The final priorities will be determined by responses to this notice, available funds, and other considerations
of the Department. Funding of particular projects depends on the final priorities, the availability of funds, and
the quality of the applications received. The publication of these proposed priorities does not preclude the Secretary
from proposing additional priorities, nor does it limit the Secretary to funding only these priorities, subject
to meeting applicable rulemaking requirements. 






Note: 

This notice of proposed priorities does not solicit applications. A notice inviting applications under these competitions
will be published in the 

Federal Register

 concurrent with or following publication of the notice of final priorities. 


General 


Unless indicated otherwise in the proposed priority, the Secretary proposes that the following requirements apply
to the training projects: 
Applicants for the training projects must identify the target groups and organizations that will be selected for
training as specified in each of the priorities and describe in detail how the project will schedule and provide training
during national, regional, State, or local conferences and meetings of the selected organizations. Applicants
must demonstrate knowledge of the extent to which the target groups and organizations have received prior training
on the ADA. 
Applicants for training projects must describe how the project will utilize a variety of training methods and deliver
training in formats and styles that are accessible to individuals with a range of sensory, communication, cognitive,
and learning disabilities. 
Applicants for training projects must describe the training materials that the project will develop as well as identify
existing training materials that the project will use. 





</SUPPLEM>

