 

No cost data or reference to price shall be included in the technical proposal. In order to assist applicants in preparing
their proposals and to facilitate the expeditious evaluation by the review panel, proposals should be organized
and presented in the same sequential order as the Evaluation Criteria in Part IV of this announcement.



C. Hand-Delivered Proposals



Proposals should be mailed at least five (5) days prior to the closing date. However, if proposals are hand-delivered,
they shall be received at the designated place by 2 p.m., Eastern Time by May 20, 1994. All overnight mail will be considered
to be hand-delivered and must be received at the designated place by the specified closing date. Telegraphed and/or
faxed proposals will not be honored. Failure to adhere to the above instructions will be a basis for a determination
of nonresponsiveness.



D. Late Proposals



Any proposal received at the office designated in the solicitation after the exact time specified for receipt will
not be considered unless it is received before award is made and it_

(1) Was sent by U.S. Postal Service registered or certified mail not later than the fifth calendar day before the date
specified for receipt of application (e.g., an offer submitted in response to a solicitation requiring receipt of
applications by the 20th of the month must have been mailed by the 15th); or

(2) Was sent by U.S. Postal Service Express Mail Next Day Service_Post Office of Addresses, not later than 5 p.m. at
the place of mailing two working day prior to the date specified for receipt of proposals. The term ``working days''
excludes weekends and U.S. Federal holidays.

The only acceptable evidence to establish the date of mailing of a late proposal sent either by U.S. Postal Service
registered or certified mail is the U.S. postmark both on the envelope or wrapper and on the original receipt from the
U.S. Postal Service. Both postmarks must show a legible date or the proposal, shall be processed as if mailed late.
``Postmark'' means a printed, stamped, or otherwise placed impression (exclusive of a postage meter machine impression
that is readily identifiable without further action as having been supplied and affixed by employees of the U.S. Postal
Service on the date of mailing. Therefore, applicants should request the postal clerk to place a legible hand cancellation
``bull's eye'' postmark on both the receipt and the envelope or wrapper.

The only acceptable evidence to establish the date of mailing of a late proposal sent by ``Express Mail Next Day Service_Post
Office to Addressee'' is the date entered by the post office receiving clerk on the ``Express Mail Next Day Service_Post
Office to Addressee'' label and the postmark on both the envelope or wrapper and on the original receipt from the U.S.
Postal Service. ``Postmark'' has the same meaning as defined above. Therefore, applicants should request the postal
clerk to place a legible hand cancellation ``bull's eye'' postmark on both the receipt and the envelope or wrapper.



E. Withdrawal of Proposals



Proposals may be withdrawn by written notice or telegram (including mailgram) received at any time before award.
Proposals may be withdrawn in person by an applicant or an authorized representative thereof, if the representative's
identity is made known and the representative signs a receipt for the proposal before award.


