 

Nonforeign Area Cost-of-Living Allowances 
Price Survey Data Collection Procedures 



Survey Description 


The following information will be provided to the participants verbally or in writing. Participants who are familiar
with the program and the survey may be provided with less information as appropriate. 


Purpose


The Federal Government pays Cost-Of-Living-Allowances (COLA) in Alaska, Hawaii, and certain U.S. territories
and possessions. Living cost differences are determined by comparing costs of goods, services, housing, transportation,
and other items in the allowance area with the cost of the same or similar items and services in the Washington DC area.
The U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) is responsible for the operation of the COLA program. 


Data Collection


OPM, or its representatives, conducts annual Price Surveys to determine living cost differences. Local governments,
retail outlets, realty firms, and businesses providing professional and other services to be surveyed are identified
through the use of full-scale Background Surveys, conducted approximately once every five years. Participation
in the Price Surveys is voluntary. Data are collected by telephone and/or personal interview. 
Wherever practical and appropriate, the price of each good or service is obtained from at least three outlets in each
allowance area and at least six outlets in the reference area (i.e., the Washington, DC, area). Realty data may be obtained
from one or multiple sources, as appropriate. 


Release of Information


The price data collected from participating firms may be made available to Congress or to the general public upon request.
This includes the name of the company and prices of items or services surveyed. The names of proprietors, managers,
or other individuals who provide price information generally will not be made public. However, the Government may
release the names of individuals who, on the basis of their expertise, provide opinions or estimates. 


Public Burden Information


Public burden reporting for this collection of information is estimated to vary from 1 to 20 minutes per response.
Send comments regarding the burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestion
for reducing this burden to Reports and Forms Management Officer, U.S. Office of Personnel Management, 1900 E Street,
N.W., Room 6410, Washington, DC, 20415; and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (32060199),
Washington, DC, 20503.


