 

II. Provisions of This Proposed Notice 



OHTA concluded that there are insufficient data to determine the clinical utility of electrostimulation, to evaluate
its long-term clinical effectiveness, and to identify xerostomia patients who would benefit from this procedure
and that electrostimulation is not widely accepted as an effective treatment for xerostomia. Based on these conclusions,
we have determined that electrostimulation of salivary glands and the electrostimulation device, the Salitron
System, do not meet our criteria for effectiveness. Therefore, we propose to publish a final notice announcing a national
coverage decision that Medicare does not cover electrostimulation of salivary glands for treating xerostomia secondary
to Sjogren's syndrome. 

The provisions of this notice would not affect any existing Medicare regulations. However, they would be incorporated
in the Medicare Coverage Issues Manual (HCFA Pub. 6). 



III. Response to Comments 



Because of the large number of items of correspondence we normally receive on proposed notices, we are not able to acknowledge
or respond to them individually. We will consider all comments that we receive by the date and time specified in the


DATES

 section of this preamble, and if we proceed with a subsequent document, we will respond to the comments in the preamble
to that document. 



IV. Collection of Information Requirements



This document does not impose information collection and recordkeeping requirements. Consequently, it need not
be reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget under the authority of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C.
3501 

et seq.

). 



V. Regulatory Impact Statement 



A. Introduction 



Currently, Medicare does not have a national policy for covering electrostimulation of salivary production for
treating xerostomia secondary to Sjogren's syndrome. Medicare carriers have authority to make coverage decisions
within the parameters set by the statute, regulations, and program instructions. Because this service is not ordered
often and because of the low total allowed charges by Medicare Part B for this service, less than $26,000 in calendar
year (CY) 1991, and no reported payments in CY 1992, we believe this proposed notice would result in negligible savings
during calendar years 1994 through 1998. 



B. Regulatory Flexibility Act 



We generally prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis that is consistent with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)
(5 U.S.C. 601 through 612) unless the Secretary certifies that a notice would not have a significant economic impact
on a substantial number of small entities. For purposes of the RFA, all physicians prescribing and suppliers distributing
a device to stimulate salivary production from existing glandular tissue are considered to be small entities. 

In addition, section 1102(b) of the Act requires the Secretary to prepare a regulatory impact analysis if a notice
may have a significant impact on the operations of a substantial number of small rural hospitals. This analysis must
conform to the provisions of section 603 of the RFA. For purposes of section 1102(b) of the Act, we define a small rural
hospital as a hospital that is located outside of a Metropolitan Statistical Area and has fewer than 50 beds. 

The Medicare program paid for 41 electrostimulation devices during CY 1991 totaling an estimated $26,000 at an average
cost of approximately $630 each. It appears that carriers are no longer paying for this electrostimulation device,
thereby explaining why no invoices for this device were processed in CY 1992. In the absence of this notice, it is possible
that the number of devices prescribed by physicians would increase and carriers would resume payment. Physicians
have at least two alternate methods for treating xerostomia. One method is to rely on the use of artificial saliva in
conjunction with the sipping of liquids for moisture. The second alternative is the use of gums and candies to induce
saliva. Since there are alternative treatment methods, we believe this proposed notice would affect physicians
and beneficiaries minimally. 

Therefore, we are not preparing analyses for either the RFA or section 1102(b) of the Act since we have determined,
and the Secretary certifies, that this proposed notice would not result in a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities and would not have a significant impact on the operations of a substantial number of small
rural hospitals. 





