 

1.14115 

Anti-abuse rules.



(a) 

Authority of Commissioner to reflect substance of transactions. 

If an issuer enters into a transaction or series of transactions with respect to one or more issues with a principal
purpose of transferring to nongovernmental persons (other than as members of the general public) significant benefits
of tax-exempt financing in a manner that is inconsistent with the purposes of section 141, the Commissioner may take
any action to reflect the substance of the transaction or series of transactions, including_

(1) Treating separate issues as a single issue for purposes of the private activity bond test;

(2) Reallocating proceeds to expenditures, use, or bonds; and

(3) Reallocating payments to use or proceeds.

(b) 

Examples. 

The provisions of this section are illustrated by the following examples:







Example 1. 

City D enters into a development agreement with Corporation T to induce T to locate its headquarters within the D city
limits. Pursuant to the development agreement, in 1995 D will issue $20 million of its general obligation bonds (the
1995 bonds) to purchase land that it will grant to T. The development agreement also provides that, in 1996, D will issue
$20 million of its tax increment bonds (the 1996 bonds), secured solely by the increase in property taxes in a special
taxing district made under the improvements resulting from the development agreement. Substantially all of the
property within the special taxing district is owned by T or D. T will separately enter into an agreement to guarantee
the payment of tax increment to D in an amount sufficient to retire the 1996 bonds. The proceeds of the 1996 bonds will
be used to finance governmentally owned and operated improvements within the special taxing district that will not
give rise to private business use. Treated separately, the 1995 issue meets the private business use test, but not
the private security or payment test; the 1996 issue meets the private security or payment test, but not the private
business use test. Because the two issues are a part of a plan to provide the benefits of tax-exempt financing to T for
its headquarters, however, the 1995 issue and the 1996 issue may be treated by the Commissioner as a single issue for
purposes of applying the private activity bond tests. Accordingly, the bonds of both the 1995 issue and the 1996 issue
may be treated as private activity bonds.



Example 2. 

City E acquires an electric generating facility with a useful economic life of more than 35 years and enters into a 25-year
take or pay contract to sell 30 percent of the available output to investor-owned utility M. E plans to use the remaining
70 percent of available output for its own governmental purposes. To finance the entire cost of the facility, E issues
$30 million of its series A taxable bonds at taxable interest rates and $70 million series B bonds, which purport to
be tax-exempt bonds, at tax-exempt interest rates. E allocates all of M's private business use to the proceeds of the
series A bonds and all of its own government use to the proceeds of the series B bonds. The series A bonds have a weighted
average maturity of 15 years, while the series B bonds have a weighted average maturity of 26 years. M's payments under
the take or pay contract are equal to 30 percent of M's total costs (that is, the sum of the debt service required to be
paid on both the series A and the series B bonds and all other operating costs). The allocation of all of M's private business
use to the series A bonds does not reflect economic substance because the series of transactions transfers to M significant
benefits of the tax-exempt interest rates paid on the series B bonds. Because of this actual transfer of benefits,
M's private business use must be allocated on a pro rata basis to both the series B bonds as well as the series A bonds.
Accordingly, both the series A bonds and the series B bonds are private activity bonds.



Example 3. 

The facts are the same as in 

Example 2, 

except that the debt service component of M's payments under the take or pay contract is based exclusively on the amounts
necessary to pay the debt service on the series A bonds. E's allocation of all of M's private business use to the series
A bonds is respected because the series of transactions does not actually transfer benefits of tax-exempt interest
rates to M. Accordingly, the series B bonds are not private activity bonds. The result would be the same if the series
A bonds and the series B bonds had substantially equivalent weighted average maturities and E and M had entered into
a customary contract providing for payments based on a ratable share of total debt service.



1.14116 

Effective dates.



(a) 

Scope. 

The effective dates in this section apply for purposes of 1.1411, through 1.14116, 1.1451,
1.1501(a)(3), and 1.13941 (the 

private activity bond regulations

).


