 

During the halogen tinning process, rinse waters from the chemical treatment washer are sent to the chemical treat
sump and further pumped to the chromium HDS treatment system. This is the only wastewater entering the chromium HDS
wastewater treatment system from the Halogen Tinning Lines. 
The waste streams from the TFSCT plating (chromium sump) and Halogen Tinning (chemical treat sump) lines are combined
in a 50,000-gallon storage tank. From the storage tank the wastewater is pumped to a 10,000-gallon reduction reactor
where the pH of the wastewater is adjusted by the addition of sulfuric acid. In addition, liquid sulfur dioxide (SO

2

) is added to reduce hexavalent chromium to trivalent chromium. The reduced chromium wastewater is next transferred
to a 7,000-gallon neutralization tank and mixed with lime and previously-precipitated solids. The wastewater then
flows by gravity to a 1,200-gallon flocculator tank where a polymer is added to promote flocculation of the metal hydroxides.
The neutralized wastewater, containing approximately 25 percent solids, is then sent through a 50-foot diameter
gravity thickener, where thickened sludge is removed and subsequently dewatered by a rotary drum vacuum filter to
3555 percent solids. The thickener effluent is filtered and the filtrate is discharged to the Tin Mill Canal
for further wastewater treatment prior to discharge to a receiving surface water body. The filtrate from the vacuum
filter and the filter backwash are returned to the flocculator tank. The dewatered filter cake is discharged to a collection
hopper and currently shipped to/treated at a permitted hazardous waste treatment facility (Envirite Corporation,
York, Pennsylvania) before disposal. 
In its petition, BSC proposed to stabilize the dewatered filter cake using lime kiln dust and powerplant fly ash. This
process is based on the pozzolanic reaction that adsorbs and/or encapsulates the heavy metals present in the chromium
filter cake into a calcium-alumino-silicate matrix. Based on bench-scale studies of its proposed stabilization
process, BSC proposed using 3 parts lime kiln dust, 2 parts powerplant fly ash to 5 parts dewatered filter cake (by weight)
and 2 parts water to form the stabilized filter cake. Once delisted, BSC plans to dispose of the stabilized filter cake
at an on-site to-be-constructed Subtitle D landfill. 
BSC initially collected a total of four composite samples of its dewatered filter cake during a four-week period between
April 1, 1988 and April 28, 1988. The samples were collected using a scoop as sludge was discharged from the end of the
vacuum filter press. Each composite sample was comprised of grab samples collected over a period of approximately
five days. Portions of the composite samples were then stabilized using lime kiln dust and powerplant fly ash in a bench-scale
process. Specifically, 1,000 grams of dewatered filter cake were mixed with 600 grams of lime kiln dust, 400 grams
of powerplant fly ash, and water and allowed to cure until air-dried. 
BSC provided analysis results for samples of dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake, filter cake samples that had
just been stabilized, and filter cake samples that were allowed to cure for 15 days. Four composite samples of dewatered
(unstabilized) filter cake and four composite samples of stabilized filter cake samples were analyzed for the total
concentrations (

i.e.,

 mass of a particular constituent per mass of waste) of the eight TC metals, nickel, cyanide, zinc, sulfide, and total
oil and grease content. Composite samples of dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake, uncured stabilized filter cake,
and cured stabilized filter cake were also analyzed for EP Toxicity and TCLP leachate concentrations (

i.e.,

 mass of a particular constituent per unit volume of extract) of the eight TC metals (except for barium and selenium)
and nickel. 
On March 18, 1992, BSC submitted additional information which included results from the analysis of four composite
samples of dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake. These samples were collected over a period of four weeks from January
15, 1992 to February 10, 1992. Using a stainless steel scoop, BSC collected grab samples from the middle and both ends
of the filter drum to ensure a representative sample. Each daily composite sample was comprised of 5 grab samples.
After the last grab sample was taken each day, the samples of filter cake were thoroughly mixed to form the daily composite.
All four dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake composite samples were analyzed for total chromium, hexavalent chromium,
and TCLP leachate concentrations of the TC volatile and semivolatile organic compounds. 




