 

Background



Introduction



Poultry products produced by mechanical deboning are characteristically finely comminuted (i.e., finely ground)
in form and result from the mechanical separation and removal of most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle and
other tissue of poultry carcasses and parts of carcasses. The products are prepared from various materials, including
necks, backs, and whole carcasses. These starting materials may be raw or cooked, may contain varying amounts of muscle
and/or skin, and may contain kidneys, except when product is made from mature chickens or mature turkeys. Kidneys
of mature chickens or turkeys may not be used as human food (9 CFR 381.65(d)).

The technology to mechanically separate and remove most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle and other tissue
of poultry carcasses and parts of carcasses began in the late 1950's or early 1960's. The Department's initial reaction
was to consider the resulting product adulterated because of the amount of bone present and the physical size of the
bone particles. By the mid-1960's, the industry had modified and improved the equipment used to produce poultry product
by mechanical deboning such that product contained less than 11/2 percent bone solids with an extremely small bone
particle size. This prompted the Department to reevaluate its position. Widespread commercial production of products
containing mechanically deboned poultry began in the early 1970's. By 1975, poultry product produced by mechanical
deboning was being used as an ingredient in poultry and meat food products such as franks, bologna, salami, and rolls.

Today, poultry products produced by mechanical deboning are used in a wide variety of poultry products, including
cooked poultry sausages (such as chicken frankfurters, turkey salami, and turkey bologna), poultry patties and
nuggets (such as chicken patties and nuggets), and poultry baby foods. The level at which it is used has depended in
part on technological capabilities and has reached 100 percent of the poultry product portion of a number of cooked
poultry sausage products. Poultry product produced by mechanical means is also used at up to 49 percent of the formulations
of certain meat food products, e.g., beef and turkey chili, provided that it is identified in the product name as ``turkey,''
``chicken,'' etc., and used in meat food products including cooked sausages, such as frankfurters and bologna, at
a level of up to 15 percent of the total ingredients, excluding water (9 CFR 319.180).

Over the years, the poultry and meat food industries have also referred to poultry products produced by mechanical
means as ``comminuted (i.e., ground) poultry.'' Terminology such as ``finely comminuted,'' ``finely ground,''
and ``mechanically deboned'' have been used on poultry product labels to describe the form of the product according
to 9 CFR 381.117(d).

Poultry products produced by mechanical means are subject to 9 CFR 381.117(d) relating to boneless poultry products.
This regulation requires boneless poultry products to be labeled in a manner that accurately describes their actual
form and composition. The product name must indicate the form of the product, e.g., emulsified or finely chopped,
and the kind name of the poultry from which it is derived. If the product does not consist of natural proportions of skin
and fat, as they occur in the whole carcass, the product name must also include terminology that describes the actual
composition. If the product is cooked, it must be so labeled. Section 381.117(d) also limits the bone solids content
of boneless poultry products to one percent.

Poultry products produced by mechanical deboning also are subject to 9 CFR 381.47(e). This regulation requires that
rooms or compartments containing mechanical deboning equipment must be maintained at 50
&cir; F or less during the mechanical deboning of raw poultry.

Existing regulations do not distinguish between boneless poultry products produced by mechanical deboning and
poultry products produced by traditional methods, e.g., hand-deboning using high-speed knives. Poultry product
produced by mechanical deboning is declared in the ingredients statement of a product in which it is used, along with
any other boneless chicken product used, as ``chicken'' where skin and fat are included but not in excess of their natural
proportions, or as ``chicken meat'' when such components are not included.



Report on Health and Safety of Mechanically Deboned Poultry



In 1976, the Department initiated an analytical program to obtain data on a number of nutrients and substances of potential
health concern in poultry products produced by mechanical deboning. Data were also gathered from scientific literature,
industry, other government agencies, and university scientists. Details of the analytical program and a resulting
evaluation were published in a June 1979 report entitled ``Health and Safety Aspects of the Use of Mechanically Deboned
Poultry'' (hereafter referred to as the 1979 health and safety report). An errata supplement correcting certain
items in the report was prepared and published on August 14, 1979 (44 FR 47576). (The June 1979 report and the errata
supplement are available for public inspection in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.) On June 29, 1979, the Department
announced the availability of this report and encouraged interested members of the public to comment on its content.
The Department also notified the public that it was particularly interested in receiving comments regarding the
proper labeling of products containing poultry product produced by mechanical deboning and what means, if any, should
be taken to implement the labeling recommendations in the report (44 FR 37965).


