 

(a) 

Waste handling practice standards. 

(1) The owner or operator of a waste source or receiving facility shall load and offload municipal and commercial waste
to assure that any deposit of waste into coastal waters is minimized. Waste sources and receiving facilities shall
employ containment or diversionary structures and appropriate equipment (such as dip nets and oily water separating
equipment). 


(2) The methods adopted by the owner or operator to meet these waste handling practice standards shall be identified
in the Operation and Maintenance manual. 


(b) 

Fixed lighting. 

The owner or operator of a waste source or receiving facility shall use fixed lighting when conducting loading and
offloading operations between sunset and sunrise that adequately illuminates the loading and offloading point
and the surrounding area. 


(c) 

Waste deposit cleanup. 

The owner or operator of a waste source or receiving facility shall remove all municipal or commercial waste that may
have been deposited into coastal waters from waste loading, or unloading operations of a waste source or receiving
facility. Such removal shall be completed prior to the first high tide following the completion of any loading or offloading
operation in which the deposit occurs and before the waste disperses beyond containment ability. The methods for
cleanup of the waste shall be identified in the waste source and receiving facility's Operation and Maintenance manual.



(1) The methods used may include sweeper boats to sweep up solid wastes deposited, manned boats with nets to remove
waste, booms or other equipment to recover waste deposited near shore, and/or shoreline cleanup crews, as long as
they meet the requirements of 237.4(a)(1). 


(2) Cleanup resources shall be in continuous operation or on standby at the waste source and receiving facility for
loading and offloading operations which take place during an ebb tide. 


(3) The owner or operator of the waste source or receiving facility shall have a placard located at the facility where
it will be readily visible to persons involved in waste handling indicating the individual responsible for notifying
the United States Coast Guard (USCG) National Response Center in the event of a deposit of waste into coastal waters
that is not completely cleaned up. 

(i) The telephone number for the individual responsible for notification shall be visibly and legibly displayed
on the placard. 

(ii) The telephone number for the individual responsible for notification shall be designated by the owner or operator
of the waste source or receiving facility. 


(iii) The individual responsible for notification must be a supervisory employee responsible for waste handling
activities or an officer of the company owning or operating the waste source, vessel or receiving facility, who is
responsible for some aspect of waste handling activities (e.g. vice president in charge of operations). 


(4) If the owner or operator is unable to meet the cleanup requirements of these regulations after implementing cleanup
procedures specified in the Operation and Maintenance manual, the responsible individual shall notify the appropriate
USCG office. The USCG shall be notified prior to the first high tide following the completion of any loading or unloading
operation in which the deposit occurs, and before the waste disperses beyond containment ability. Such verbal notification
shall be followed by written notification to the USCG within five days. 


(d) 

Waste deposit records. 

(1) The owner or operator of a waste source or receiving facility shall maintain a record of municipal or commercial
waste deposited by the waste source or receiving facility into coastal waters. These records shall include: 

(i) Date of deposit of municipal or commercial waste into coastal waters; 

(ii) Time of day the municipal or commercial waste was deposited into coastal waters; 


(iii) Estimated amount and type of waste deposited and amount and type of waste recovered; 

(iv) Estimated amount and type of waste not recovered; 

(v) Name of the vessel being loaded/offloaded; and
(vi) Name of the waste source or receiving facility. 


(2) The owner or operator shall retain these records for no less than three years and must submit these records to the
Administrator or the Secretary within five working days of a request by the Administrator or the Secretary for these
records. 


(3) The owner or operator shall keep a record of its compliance with the notification required by 237.4(c)(4).



(e) 

Operation and Maintenance Manual. 

(1) The owner or operator of each existing waste source and receiving facility shall develop, adopt, and comply with
an Operation and Maintenance manual within 180 days after [the date the final rule becomes effective]. The owner or
operator of a new waste source or receiving facility shall develop, adopt, and comply with an Operation and Maintenance
manual within 180 days of initiating operations. The manual shall: 


(i) Include record keeping procedures; 

(ii) Contain a description of the basic operation and maintenance standards adopted by the waste source or receiving
facility to implement the requirements of 237.4(a); 


(iii) Identify and provide telephone numbers for the individual responsible for notifying the USCG National Response
Center, and the EPA Regional Office contact for the EPA region in which the waste source or receiving facility operates
(see Appendix B of this part); 




