 



Shipping Agent

_Any person engaged by a Cooperating Sponsor to arrange for transportation services.


Section 416(b) program

_The donation of agricultural commodities under the authority of section 416(b) of the Agricultural Act of 1949.


USDA

_The United States Department of Agriculture.


1499.2

General purpose and scope.


This part contains the general terms governing agreements between CCC and Cooperating Sponsors providing for the
donation of agricultural commodities to carry out programs of assistance outside the United States under the authority
of section 416(b) of the Agricultural Act of 1949, or support of developing countries and countries that have made
commitments to introduce or expand free enterprise elements in their agricultural economies under the authority
of the Food for Progress Act of 1985. Program Agreements may contain other provisions when CCC determines that such
provisions are necessary to effectively carry out a particular Program Agreement. Except as otherwise specified
herein, these regulations apply to only donations to Cooperating Sponsors under both the section 416(b) and Food
for Progress programs. However, these regulations do not apply to donations to intergovernmental agencies (such
as the World Food Program) or organizations unless CCC and such intergovernmental agency or organization enters
into a Program Agreement incorporating this part.


1499.3

Eligibility requirements for Cooperating Sponsor.



All entities registered with the Agency for International Development under 22 CFR part 203, are eligible to be Cooperating
Sponsors. Other entities may be requested to furnish CCC evidence sufficient to demonstrate their capabilities
to implement proposed activities prior to entering into a Program Agreement.


1499.4

Availability of commodities from CCC inventory.


CCC will, to the extent practicable, announce prior to the beginning of each fiscal year the types and quantities of
agricultural commodities available for donation from CCC inventory. The quality of agricultural commodities donated
by CCC and packaging will be in accordance with the specifications set forth in the Program Agreements.


1499.5

Program Agreements.


(a) 

Agreements

. The Cooperating Sponsor must enter into a written Program Agreement with CCC which will incorporate by reference
the terms and conditions set forth in this Part.
(b) 

Section 416(b) Plan of Operation

. Prior to entering into a section 416(b) Program Agreement, each Cooperating Sponsor shall submit to the Agricultural
Counselor or Attache, and to the Director, PDD, a Plan of Operation describing the activities it proposes to undertake.
When approved by CCC, the Plan of Operation will be incorporated into the section 416(b) Program Agreement as Attachment
A. In case of a conflict between the approved Plan of Operation and other terms of the Program Agreement, such other
terms in the Program Agreement will prevail. The Plan of Operation must follow the format and provide the information
as follows:


Appendix I to 1499.5_Section 416(b) Program Plan of Operation (Attachment A)


1. Name and Address of Applicant:
2. Country:
3. Kind and Quantity of Commodities Requested:
4. Delivery Schedule:
5. Program Description:
a. Program objectives and expected outcomes, including a description of opportunities and constraints to achieving
program objectives and criteria for measuring progress toward these objectives.
b. Program recipients or participants and how they were chosen.





