 

Under article 9 of COB Regulation No. 90.04, transactions made by a company in its own shares and, during a distribution
period, transactions made by financial intermediaries for their own account or on behalf of the underwriting syndicate,
for the purpose of ensuring the proper execution of the distribution are presumed to be legitimate when complying
with the following requirements: (i) the transactions are performed contrary to the trend of the last quoted price,
(ii) the transactions represent a maximum volume of 25% of the total daily transactions recorded over a reference
period
<FOOTCITE>16</FOOTCITE>
 preceding the transactions, (iii) they are performed only by one intermediary per stock exchange session except
during a public offering.




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
16

</FOOTNAME>
Under article 2174 of the Companies Act, the reference period consist of five business days for the securities
on the monthly settlements market and of 30 business days for securities listed on the immediate settlement market.


</FOOTNOTE>


The distribution period begins with the announcement of the distribution and ends one month after the listing of the
newly issued shares.



II. The French Securities Market



A. The Equity Market



Securities may be listed on one of France's seven stock exchanges: Paris, Bordeaux, Lille, Lyon, Marseille, Nancy
and Nantes which together constitute a single exchange system headed by the same authorities and subject to the same
listing requirements. All securities are traded through a single electronic system, CAC.



Trading on the Paris Bourse



Trading on the Paris Bourse begins at 10 a.m. and ends at 5 p.m. (Paris time) each business day.

Securities may be traded on the cash market (march&eacute; au comptant) or on the monthly settlement market (r&egrave;glement
mensuel RM). Cash transactions comprise the least actively traded French and foreign equity securities on the official
list, all debt securities on the official list and all equity stocks on the second market and hors cote.

The most actively traded French and foreign equity securities on the official list are traded on a monthly settlement
basis. All the securities comprising the CAC 40 Index are traded on the monthly settlement market.

Securities on the monthly settlement market are traded in round lots of 5, 10, 25, 50 and 100, set by the Paris Bourse
to reflect their limit price. While transactions are firm both in prices and quantity once they have been concluded,
the actual cash settlement and delivery of the shares do not take place until the end of the trading month. Investors
on the monthly settlement market must meet an initial margin requirement which may be adjusted as necessary.

When investors place orders on the monthly settlement market they may request immediate settlement provided that
they have the related cash (for a purchase) or securities (for a sale). Trades on odd lots are settled immediately.



Electronic Trading With CAC



