 

ii. 

Effect of APH(3
&rsquo;)II in fresh tomatoes on the therapeutic efficacy of orally administered antibiotics. 

Calgene performed several experiments intended to address whether APH(3
&rsquo;)II consumed as a component of fresh tomatoes could render orally-administered kanamycin ineffective.
These experiments were performed under simulated gastric and intestinal conditions (i.e., appropriate pH, reagent
concentrations, temperature, and reaction times) chosen to reflect conditions expected in vivo. In some studies
both tomato extract and nonfat milk were added to determine whether the presence of additional food-source proteins
in the simulated gastric and intestinal fluids might slow the proteolytic degradation of APH(3
&rsquo;)II by competition. After evaluating the loss of immunologically detectable APH(3
&rsquo;)II, Calgene concluded that, under normal gastric and intestinal conditions, APH(3
&rsquo;)II would be effectively degraded before the enzyme could inactivate kanamycin or neomycin and therefore,
APH(3
&rsquo;)II would not interfere with orally administered kanamycin or neomycin therapy. The results of Calgene's
experiments were the same whether done in the presence or the absence of tomato extract and nonfat milk. 

In addition, Calgene presented the results of in vitro degradation studies performed under simulated abnormal gastric
conditions, such as may exist in patients treated with drugs that reduce stomach acidity. Calgene stated that these
studies demonstrated that APH(3
&rsquo;)II is not degraded in neutralized (pH 7.0) simulated gastric fluid and thus, APH(3
&rsquo;)II may remain active in such abnormal gastric conditions. However, Calgene pointed out that, even under
those conditions, APH(3
&rsquo;)II would not be expected to inactivate orally administered kanamycin or neomycin because the concentration
of ATP, which the enzyme requires to inactivate kanamycin and neomycin, would be limiting. In support of this contention,
Calgene presented data from the published literature on ATP levels in fresh fruits and vegetables. Calgene then estimated
ATP intake and calculated the fraction of neomycin that would be phosphorylated assuming that all of the available
ATP reacted with the antibiotic. Under the worst-case situation (high intake of ATP-containing food, low dose of
antibiotic) Calgene's calculations showed that only a small fraction (no more than 1.5 percent) of the antibiotic
would be inactivated. Moreover, Calgene presented data that showed that no significant inactivation of kanamycin
was observed during in vitro studies conducted with tomato extract containing APH(3
&rsquo;)II and kanamycin over a 4-hour incubation period. 

iii. 

Agency conclusions. 

The agency has evaluated the data and other information presented by Calgene (Refs. 18 through 21 and 24). FDA agrees
that Calgene's in vitro digestion studies show that, as is the case for dietary protein in general, the biological
activity of APH(3
&rsquo;)II is destroyed during gastric and intestinal phases of digestion. Further, the agency has determined that
any active APH(3
&rsquo;)II that might remain would not significantly inactivate kanamycin or neomycin in the gut because the small
amount of ATP in fruits and vegetables would limit the amount of antibiotic that could be phosphorylated. ATP is an
extremely labile molecule that is susceptible to inactivation both by heat (e.g., cooking) and by enzymes, such as
alkaline phosphatases (Ref. 25), that are found in the intestine. Because the ATP in meat, poultry, fish, and cooked
vegetables would be broken down by cooking, the primary source of ATP in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract of patients
would be uncooked fruits and vegetables. However, the amount of ATP in a variety of fruits and vegetables would provide
enough ATP to inactivate only a small percentage of kanamycin or neomycin, even if one makes the conservative assumption
that all of the ATP in these fruits and vegetables would survive the alkaline phosphatases in the intestines and would
be available for catalytic phosphorylation of kanamycin or neomycin. 

In addition, the agency has considered the patient population likely to be exposed to aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Oral aminoglycosides are most commonly administered to either pre-operative patients (prior to bowel surgery)
or patients with hepatic encephalopathy. Neither patient population would be expected to be ingesting tomatoes
or any other fresh fruits and vegetables; therefore there is little or no risk of inactivating the oral antibiotic
in these patients (Refs. 24 and 26). For these reasons, FDA concludes that the presence of APH(3
&rsquo;)II in food will not compromise the therapeutic use of orally administered kanamycin or neomycin.


