 



Forbearance based on income-to-debt ratio

_The Department initially interpreted section 428(b)(1)(V)(ii) of the HEA to provide that the mandatory forbearance
for borrowers with a debt burden under Title IV of the Act that equals or exceeds 20 percent of the borrower's gross income
applied only to medical and dental interns. Attendees at the regional meeting in Kansas City disagreed with this view
and recommended that the Department's regulations permit all borrowers who meet the debt burden criteria to receive
the forbearance. Participants at the meeting in New York agreed with the Department's interpretation but recommended
that lenders be given the discretion to apply the debt burden standard to all borrowers. Participants at all of the
regional meetings recommended that the regulations permit lenders to base a decision regarding forbearance on income
and debt information certified by the borrower. The attendees at the Atlanta meeting specifically recommended that
the regulations permit the decision on forbearance to be based on the borrower's anticipated income for the next 12
months rather than relying on past income records. 



Forbearance_General Requirements

_Public Law 102325 amended section 428(c)(3) of the HEA to make changes in the requirements for forbearance
in the FFEL Program. Participants at all of the regional meetings agreed that the Department should allow the lender
discretion as to when to approve changes in an existing forbearance arrangement and recommended that borrower-certified
information should be sufficient to support the granting of a forbearance. In addition, attendees at the regional
meetings agreed that the period of forbearance should not be counted against the borrower's limited repayment period.


However, there was disagreement among the meeting participants on other issues. Participants at the Kansas City
regional meeting recommended the use of a single national forbearance application form, while attendees at the Atlanta
meeting recommended the use of ``local'' forms and the attendees at the San Francisco meeting recommended the continuation
of current procedures. There was also disagreement as to whether a forbearance should be available to take a loan out
of default_attendees at the Kansas City and Atlanta meetings agreed that forbearance should be available for this
purpose while attendees at the New York meeting recommended that a forbearance be available only until a default claim
is submitted on the loan. 

Finally, participants at all of the regional meetings identified a number of situations in which the regulations
could require a lender to provide administrative forbearance. Participants at all of the meetings, except Atlanta,
recommended that notice to the borrower of administrative forbearance be required, but participants at all the meetings
also recommended that the regulations not require the borrower to agree to the forbearance. 



Negotiated Rulemaking 



After completion of the regional meetings, the Department prepared draft proposed regulations to implement the
provisions of Public Law 102325 relating to the FFEL Program. In accordance with the requirements of section
492(b) of the HEA, those regulations were submitted to a negotiated rulemaking process. During the weeks of January
48 and February 15, 1993, the Department met with negotiators selected from among individuals nominated
by attendees at the regional meetings. 

The discussion below of the proposed regulations reflects those areas where the negotiators reached a consensus
and the proposed regulations reflect that agreement. The discussion below also indicates where consensus was not
reached during the negotiations. However, the negotiators did not choose to discuss every part of these proposed
regulations. Accordingly, the discussion below of those issues not discussed during the negotiations reflects
only the views of the Secretary. 



Proposed Regulatory Changes 



Section 682.209Repayment of a Loan 



The proposed regulations implement the provisions of section 428(b)(1)(E)(i) of the HEA in requiring lenders to
offer income-sensitive or graduated repayment schedules to borrowers. In developing criteria to be used by lenders
when establishing income-sensitive repayment schedules, the Secretary believes that borrowers should be required
to provide documentation of income. The Secretary therefore proposes that lenders request at least a copy of the borrower's
most recent Federal income tax return if one had been filed within eight months prior to the date it is requested by the
lender, and evidence showing the amount of the borrower's most recent monthly disposable income, including, if applicable,
pay statements from employers and documentation of any income received by the borrower from other parties. 

In addition, the Secretary does not believe it would be helpful to the borrower or in the interests of the taxpayer if
the borrower's monthly payment amount is not changed whenever there is a significant increase in the borrower's income.
Therefore, the proposed regulations require an adjustment in the monthly payment amount if the borrower's disposable
income, for each of three consecutive months, exceeds twice the income upon which the payment amount is based. Similarly,
if the borrower experiences a comparable decrease in disposable income, the Secretary strongly encourages a lender
to grant a forbearance to a borrower who asks the lender for assistance, but who is ineligible for a deferment. In a notice
of proposed rulemaking published in the 

Federal Register

 on March 16, 1994 (59 FR 12484), the Secretary also proposes to define ``disposable income'' in 682.200(b)
as that part of a borrower's compensation from an employer or other income from any source that remains after the deduction
of any amounts required by law to be withheld. 




