 

70. 

Comment

: Some commenters objected to the requirement that a guaranty agency must sue an employer who fails to comply with a
garnishment order. The commenters note that section 488A(a)(6) of the HEA provides an option by stating that a guaranty
agency ``*** may sue the employer.'' Other commenters recommended that the regulations permit a
guaranty agency to decline to sue an employer who fails to comply with the wage garnishment order if the agency can demonstrate
that the expected cost and probability of success of the litigation did not justify a lawsuit. 



Discussion

: The statutory language provides the authority for a guaranty agency to sue the employer. A guaranty agency is not
required to garnish the wages of borrowers who owe defaulted loans, but if an agency chooses to do so, it must follow
the garnishment procedures prescribed in these regulations. In order to protect the interests of borrowers and taxpayers,
the Secretary believes a guaranty agency should make use of the full extent of the statutory authority available to
it under the HEA to compel an employer to comply with a wage garnishment order. The Secretary cannot envision any realistic
probability that an agency would be unsuccessful in its suit against an employer that was in clear violation of the
garnishment order. Given the expectation of such success, the Secretary believes the agency's litigation efforts
and costs would be minimal. Accordingly, this would be part of the agency's normal performance of its role of ensuring
the maximum collection of defaulted loans, and the Secretary may refuse to make reinsurance payments, or may recover
reinsurance payments already made to an agency that fails to sue an employer that was in clear violation of the garnishment
order.



Change

: None. 

71. 

Comment

: Some commenters did not believe that a self-employed borrower should be considered an ``employer'' for wage garnishment
purposes. The commenters believed that garnishment should be considered a proceeding to seize the wages of a debtor
paid by another party. 



Discussion

: The Secretary agrees with the commenters. 



Change

: The reference to a self-employed borrower in 682.410(b)(10)(i)(F) has been deleted from the final regulations.




Section 682.410(b)(10)(i)(G) 



72. 

Comment

: Some commenters were opposed to the qualified prohibition in the regulations that prevents a guaranty agency from
garnishing the wages of a borrower whom it knows has been involuntarily separated from employment until the borrower
has been reemployed continuously for at least 12 months. The commenters believed that the proposed regulations appear
to condone garnishment as long as the guarantor is not aware that the borrower has been involuntarily separated from
employment and has not been reemployed continuously for at least 12 months. They believed that the HEA does not permit
garnishment under any circumstances until a borrower who has been involuntarily separated from employment has been
reemployed continuously for at least 12 months.

 

Discussion

: The borrower will be informed of his or her rights with respect to wage garnishment in the notice sent to the borrower
at least 30 days before the initiation of garnishment proceedings. That notice will include information about the
exception provided for a borrower who has been involuntarily separated from employment.






Note:

 All garnishments initiated by guaranty agencies on or after March 1, 1994 must comply with the standardized administrative
wage garnishment procedures approved by the Secretary on February 1, 1994. As part of those standardized procedures,
a guaranty agency must send a notice to the borrower prior to initiating garnishment. The standardized notice fully
explains the exception for involuntarily separated borrowers and includes a simple form for the borrower to fill
out to request this exception.

 


If a borrower who meets the conditions necessary for this exception wishes to take advantage of it, the borrower will
be able to do so quite easily, either before the garnishment proceedings are initiated, or during the hearing available
to the borrower. If the borrower chooses not to divulge information concerning an involuntary separation, and there
is no reasonable expectation that the guaranty agency should have known about the borrower's undisclosed involuntary
separation, the Secretary believes that a resulting garnishment of the borrower's wages should not be invalidated
if the borrower later contests the garnishment on those grounds or if the agency later learns that the borrower would
have been eligible for the exception.



Change:

 None. 



Section 682.410(b)(10)(i)(I) 



73. 

Comment

: Some commenters believed the withholding notice sent to a borrower's employer should inform the employer that the
HEA prohibits wage garnishment if the borrower has not been reemployed continuously for at least 12 months. 



Discussion

: All information relating to the borrower's rights will be disclosed to the borrower. The borrower's employer needs
to know only that information necessary for the employer to comply with the withholding order. 



Change

: None. 



Section 682.410(b)(10)(i)(J) 



74. 

Comment

: Some commenters believed that, to avoid a misunderstanding, the regulations should state that the location of a
borrower's wage garnishment hearing is established by the guaranty agency. 



Discussion:

 The Secretary agrees with the commenters. 



Change:

 The final regulations have been revised to incorporate this clarification. 

75. 

Comment:

 Some commenters believed that a wage garnishment hearing held by a guaranty agency should be a taped hearing held in
a location accessible to the borrower. The commenters also believed that the borrower should be given the right to
appeal any adverse decision of the guaranty agency to the Secretary, and the borrower should be informed of that right.








