 

(

4

) The claim does not attribute any degree of reduction in risk of osteoporosis to maintaining an adequate calcium intake
throughout life; and 

(

5

) The claim states that a total dietary intake greater than 200 percent of the Recommended Daily Intake (2,000 mg of
calcium) has no further known benefit to bone health. This requirement does not apply to meat or meat food products
that contain less than 40 percent of the Recommended Daily Intake of 1,000 mg of calcium per day or 400 mg of calcium per
reference amount customarily consumed as defined in 317.312(b), except the basis for meal-type products
as defined in 317.313(l) shall be per labeled serving size. 

(B) 

Nature of the food. 

(

1

) The product shall meet or exceed the requirements for a ``high'' level of calcium as defined in 317.354, except
the basis for meal-type products as defined in 317.313(l) shall be per labeled serving size; 

(

2

) The product shall not contain more phosphorus than calcium on a weight-per-weight basis; and 

(

3

) The product may meet the cholesterol criterion for ``extra lean'' as defined in 317.362. 

(4) 

Optional information. 

(i) The claim may include information from paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of this section, which summarizes the relationship
between calcium and osteoporosis and the significance of the relationship. 

(ii) The claim may include information on the number of people in the United States who have osteoporosis. The source
of this information must be identified, and it must be current information from the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. 

(5) 

Model health claims. 

The following model health claims may be used in food labeling to describe the relationship between calcium and osteoporosis:


(i) Regular exercise and a healthy diet with enough calcium helps teens and young adult white and Asian women maintain
good bone health and may reduce their high risk of osteoporosis later in life. 

(ii) [FOR FOODS EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH IN CALCIUM] Regular exercise and a healthy diet with enough calcium helps teens
and young adult white and Asian women maintain good bone health and may reduce their high risk of osteoporosis later
in life. Adequate calcium intake is important, but daily intakes above about 2,000 mg are not likely to provide any
additional benefit. 

(b) 

Dietary lipids and cancer_

(1) 

Relationship between lipids and cancer. 

(i) Cancer is a constellation of more than 100 different diseases, each characterized by the uncontrolled growth
and spread of abnormal cells. Cancer has many causes and stages in its development. Both genetic and environmental
risk factors may affect the risk of cancer. Risk factors include a family history of a specific type of cancer, cigarette
smoking, alcohol consumption, overweight and obesity, ultraviolet or ionizing radiation, exposure to cancer-causing
chemicals, and dietary factors. 

(ii) Among dietary factors, the strongest positive association has been found between total fat intake and risk of
some types of cancer. Based on the totality of the publicly available scientific evidence, there is significant scientific
agreement among experts, qualified by training and experience to evaluate such evidence, that diets high in total
fat are associated with an increased cancer risk. Research to date, although not conclusive, demonstrates that the
total amount of fats, rather than any specific type of fat, is positively associated with cancer risk. The mechanism
by which total fat affects cancer has not yet been established. 

(iii) A question that has been the subject of considerable research is whether the effect of fat on cancer is site-specific.
Neither human nor animal studies are consistent in the association of fat intake with specific cancer sites. 

(iv) Another question that has been raised is whether the association of total fat intake to cancer risk is independently
associated with energy intakes, or whether the association of fat with cancer risk is the result of the higher energy
(caloric) intake normally associated with high fat intake. FSIS has concluded that evidence from both animal and
human studies indicates that total fat intake alone, independent of energy intake, is associated with cancer risk.


(2) 

Significance of the relationship between fat intake and risk of cancer. 

(i) Cancer is ranked as a leading cause of death in the United States. The overall economic costs of cancer, including
direct health care costs and losses due to morbidity and mortality, are very high. 

(ii) U.S. diets tend to be high in fat and high in calories. The average U.S. diet is estimated to contain 36 to 37 percent
of calories from total fat. Current dietary guidelines from the Federal Government and nationally recognized health
professional organizations recommend that dietary fat intake be reduced to a level of 30 percent or less of energy
(calories) from total fat. In order to reduce intake of total fat, individuals should choose diets which are high in
vegetables, fruits, and grain products (particularly whole grain products), choose lean cuts of meats, fish, and
poultry, substitute low-fat dairy products for higher fat products, and use fats and oils sparingly. 

(3) 

Requirements. 

(i) All requirements set forth in 
317.314 shall be met. 

(ii) Specific requirements. (A) 

Nature of the claim. 

A health claim associating diets low in fat with reduced risk of cancer may be made on the label or labeling of a meat or
meat food product described in paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(B) of this section; 

Provided

, That: 

(

1

) The claim states that diets low in fat ``may'' or ``might'' reduce the risk of some cancers; 

(

2

) In specifying the disease, the claim uses the terms ``some types of cancer'' or ``some cancers''; 

(

3

) In specifying the nutrient, the claim uses the terms ``total fat'' or ``fat''; 

(

4

) The claim does not specify types of fat or fatty acids that may be related to the risk of cancer; 

(

5

) The claim does not attribute any degree of cancer risk reduction to diets low in fat; and 



