 

Site Treatment Plan




The Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS will also be coordinated with the development of the Savannah River Site
Treatment Plan that DOE is preparing in compliance with the Federal Facility Compliance Act of 1992. The Conceptual
Site Treatment Plan issued in October 1993 identifies waste treatment needs, capabilities, and options for Savannah
River Site mixed waste. The Draft Site Treatment Plan scheduled to be issued in August 1994 will identify DOE's preferred
options for treating the Savannah River Site mixed wastes and proposed schedules for constructing treatment capacity.
The preferred options will correspond to the proposed action in the Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS.



Waste Types To Be Addressed in the Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS




Solid low-level radioactive waste forms include operating and laboratory wastes (for example protective clothing,
plastic sheeting, gloves, analytical wastes, decontamination residues), contaminated equipment, reactor and
reactor fuel hardware, spent lithium-aluminum targets from which tritium has been extracted, and spent deionizer
resin from reactor areas. The Analytical Laboratories, Reactor Materials, Reactors, Separations, Savannah River
Technology Center, Tritium facilities, and waste management and environmental restoration activities generate
the Savannah River Site low-level radioactive waste.


High-level radioactive waste includes the highly radioactive material resulting from the reprocessing of spent
nuclear fuel, including the liquid waste that contains fission products in sufficient concentrations. In the production
of nuclear materials, DOE used the F- and H-Area chemical separations plants to separate and purify plutonium-238
and -239 produced in Savannah River Site reactors and to reclaim fissionable material (uranium-235) from onsite
and offsite sources (e.g., research reactor fuel and material from disassembled retired weapons) for recycling.
These processes dissolved target elements in nitric acid and separated them into (1) a solution of plutonium, uranium,
and neptunium, and (2) liquid high-level radioactive waste. Further processing separated and purified the metals
in solution, and converted the plutonium to solid form for shipment and the other materials for storage or reuse. The
liquid high-level radioactive waste is stored in steel tanks in the F- and H-Area Tank Farms.


Hazardous waste and mixed waste include materials such as lead, solvents, paints, tritiated mercury, tritiated
oil contaminated with mercury, other mercury-contaminated materials and equipment from the tritium facilities
in H-Area, filter paper takeup rolls from the Liquid Effluent Treatment Facility, cadmium-plated high-efficiency
particulate air filters, and contaminated soils. The Analytical Laboratories, Reactor materials, Reactors, and
Separations facilities and waste management and environmental restoration activities generate the Savannah River
Site hazardous and mixed waste.


Transuranic wastes include job control wastes (e.g., paper, wipes, cloth, rags, tools, instruments), sludges,
resins, filters, and various other miscellaneous wastes. Transuranic waste contains radioactive isotopes with
atomic numbers greater than 92 and half-lives longer than 20 years at concentrations exceeding 100 nanocuries per
gram. Savannah River Site also manages low-level radioactive waste with transuranic radionuclides at concentration
of 10 to 100 nanocuries per gram in a manner similar to transuranic waste. The Savannah River Technology Center, F-Area
laboratories, and F- and H-Area separations facilities generate the Savannah River Site transuranic waste.



Preliminary Description of Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS Alternatives



(1) The ``No-Action'' Alternative




DOE will analyze a no-action alternative that would assume continued waste generation and current waste management
practices. DOE would continue ongoing activities and implement planned actions, including high-level radioactive
waste management, for which National Environmental Policy Act review has been completed and decisions made. Further,
decisions reached through ongoing National Environmental Policy Act reviews that are completed before the issuance
of a Record of Decision for this EIS will be incorporated into the no-action alternative. Although the no-action alternative
may not be a reasonable alternative in all respects, its analysis will establish a baseline for comparison of the environment
impacts of the proposed action and its alternatives.


DOE would continue waste management practices that are now in effect, including packaging and disposal of low-level
radioactive waste in the Solid Waste Disposal Facility, storage of liquid high-level radioactive waste in the F-
and H-Area Tank Farm, disposal of salt solution at the Saltstone Facility, preparation for vitrification in the Defense
Waste Processing Facility, storage of liquid high-level radioactive waste in the F- and H-Area Tank Farm, disposal
of salt solution at the Saltstone Facility, preparation for vitrification in the Defense Waste Processing Facility,
storage of hazardous waste in hazardous waste storage buildings and the solid waste storage pads, and continued storage
of mixed waste. Drums of transuranic waste on mounded pads would be retrieved, overpacked, and stored with existing
transuranic waste drums on concrete pads; DOE would leave undisturbed the transuranic waste that is in stored in below-grade
culverts or in culverts on mounded pads.


Also included as part of the no-action alternative are operation of the already-constructed Solid Waste Disposal
Facility Expansion Vaults for disposal of low-level radioactive waste (E-Area) and continued construction, but
not operation, of the Consolidated Incineration Facility.



(2) The Proposed Action Alternative




The proposed action is comprised of the no-action alternative activities plus programmatic and project-level actions
to enhance waste management operations over the next 10 years, comply with regulatory requirements, protect human
health and the environment, and support Savannah River Site missions. Project specific National Environmental
Policy Act review that supplements this EIS might be required to reach final decisions on some of these activities.


DOE will consider various combinations of pollution prevention, waste minimization, treatment, storage and disposal
technologies, with pollution prevention and waste minimization as the highest priority. For each waste type, DOE
will identify the optimal mix of technologies for the protection of human health and the environment, cost-effectiveness,
and waste minimization. DOE will identify the preferred strategy for each waste type that will contain the optimum
approaches developed for specific individual waste streams at the Savannah River Site. Any potential shipments
to or from the Savannah River Site of DOE weapons complex waste and establishment of onsite waste treatment capabilities
would be examined in a manner that is consistent with the Site Treatment Plan for mixed waste and the two DOE-wide Programmatic
EISs.


Programmatic considerations regarding the Site Treatment Plan, land use planning, technology development, and
pollution prevention would be included in the proposed action alternative. DOE will ensure that these strategies
are consistent with those identified in the Environmental Restoration and Waste Management Programmatic EIS. Although
specific environmental restoration and decontamination and decommissioning activities would be subject to separate
National Environmental Policy Act review, as appropriate, DOE will provide its best current estimate of waste streams
anticipated from the environmental restoration of existing waste sites and the decontamination and decommissioning
of surplus facilities. Similarly, DOE will base the proposed action on this best current estimate of waste streams
that might be received from offsite under decisions resulting from the Environmental Restoration and Waste Management
and Reconfiguration Programmatic EISs and the Federal Facility Compliance Act/Site Treatment Plan process.


