 

Biotechnology and biological control activities within APHIS' oversight authority are conducted pursuant to permits
or other authorizations that may include conditions to protect the environment, the granting of exemption from regulation,
or a notification procedure. These activities normally will be examined in the context of EA's crafted to the permitting
processes:
&bull;Approval and issuance of permits for the release into the environment of genetically engineered organisms
and products, and the release into the environment of exotic organisms.
There is one final category of action that fits within the classification of normally requiring an EA-research and
testing. Not all research and testing, however, need be subjected to the EA process. Only where research or testing
either creates a likelihood of harm to the quality of the human environment or represents an irretrievable commitment
to the resulting technology will EA's normally be required:
&bull;Research or testing that will be conducted outside of a laboratory or other containment area_field trials,
for example_or that reaches a stage of development (e.g., formulation of pre-marketing strategies) that forecasts
an irretrievable commitment to new products or technology.


3. Categorically Excluded Actions


The CEQ implementing regulations define the term ``categorical exclusion'' as ``a category of actions which do not
individually or cumulatively have a significant effect on the human environment and which have been found to have
no such effect in procedures adopted by a Federal agency in implementation of these regulations ***.''
(40 CFR 1508.4). Environmental documents are not prepared for categorically excluded actions unless exceptional
circumstances, as provided in subsection 4 below, are present. Indeed, CEQ ``strongly discourages procedures that
would require the preparation of additional paperwork to document that an activity has been categorically excluded''
(CEQ Guidance Regarding NEPA Regulations, 48 FR 34265, July 28, 1983).
The Department has promulgated categorical exclusions of actions that are applicable to all departmental agencies
whose procedures do not provide otherwise. Those categorical exclusions, codified at 7 CFR 1b.3a), are appropriate
for APHIS. Other APHIS actions that qualify for categorical exclusion from the NEPA process are identified herein.
Consistent with CEQ's directive, ``broadly defined criteria'' have been employed to ``characterize types of actions
that, based on APHIS' experience, do not cause significant environmental effects'' (49 FR 34265, July 28, 1983).
Insofar as safeguarding environmental quality is concerned, the proper use of chemicals, pesticides, and other
potentially hazardous or harmful substances, materials, and devices in the development and delivery of program
goods and services is of the utmost concern to APHIS. But not every proposed use of potentially hazardous or harmful
substances, materials, or devices will require application of the NEPA process. Experience suggests that the following
category of actions, individually or cumulatively, will not have a significant effect on the human environment:
&bull;Routine measures employed by the agency to pursue its mission and functions, such as identifications, inspections,
surveys, sampling, testing, seizures, quarantines, removals, sanitizing, inoculations, and monitoring, including
the use_according to any label instructions or other lawful requirements and consistent with standard, published
program practices and precautions_of chemicals, pesticides, or other potentially hazardous or harmful substances,
materials, and target-specific devices or remedies, provided that such use (1) is localized in nonurban areas to
individual parcels such as farms, ranches, or nurseries, or contained (and not aerially applied or administered)
in urbanized areas to discrete sites that do not cater to the general public, and is limited in terms of quantity, i.e.,
low- or ultra-low volume or individualized dosages and remedies; (2) will not cause contaminants to enter water bodies,
including wetlands; (3) does not adversely affect any federally protected species or critical habitat; and (4) is
not persistent in the environment and does not cause bioaccumulation. All circumstances delineated above (insofar
as they may pertain to a particular action) must be present for any such use to be categorically excluded from the NEPA
process.
Examples of actions covered by this categorical exclusion include inoculation of discrete herds of livestock, or
wildlife treatment strategies undertaken in contained areas (such as a zoo, an exhibition, or an aviary); pesticide
treatments applied to infested plants on a homesite; and isolated (for example, along a highway) weed control efforts.
Research and small-scale testing activities represent another category of actions that will require application
of the NEPA process only in very limited contexts_essentially those described in ``Actions normally requiring EA's,
Research and Testing.'' Other statutory requirements (those contained in the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticide Act, for example) may be applicable to some research and testing activities regardless of how they
may be classified for NEPA purposes in these procedures. Nevertheless, categorical exclusion from the NEPA process
is appropriate for the following described actions:
&bull;Activities that are carried out in laboratories, facilities, or other areas designed to eliminate the potential
for harmful environmental effects (internal or external) and to provide for lawful waste disposal.
Examples of actions covered by this categorical exclusion include: The development and/or production (including
formulation, repackaging, movement, and distribution) of approved and/or licensed program material, devices,
reagents, and biologics; research, testing, and development of animal repellents; and development and production
of sterile insects.
The following additional categories of actions also qualify for categorical exclusion from the NEPA process:
&bull;Routine precautionary measures, including identifications, inspections, surveys, testing, inoculating,
and monitoring, of a limited scope and intensity that are designed to assure the proper care, protection, and treatment
of animals.
&bull;Rehabilitation of existing laboratories and other APHIS facilities, functional replacement of parts and
equipment, and minor additions to such existing APHIS facilities.
&bull;Agency actions including the issuance of permits, authorization to ship, or licensing involving a category
of veterinary biological product which has been previously licensed, unless the product has been subsequently shown
to be unsafe, or will be used at substantially higher dosage levels or for substantially different applications or
circumstances than in the use for which the product was previously approved. Also, the issuance of a license, permit,
or authorization to ship for field testing products that had not been previously licensed that do not contain live
microorganisms or that are used only for in vitro diagnostic testing.


