 

(b) at any time after the conclusion of oral argument and before the panel has issued its decision, 
(i) an authority that was reported subsequent to the conclusion of oral argument, or 
(ii) with the leave of the panel, an authority that is relevant to the panel review and that came to the attention of counsel
of record after the conclusion of oral argument, by filing with the responsible Secretariat a written request, setting
out the citation of the decision or judgment, the page reference of the brief of the participant to which the decision
or judgment relates and a concise statement, of no more than one page in length, of the relevance of the decision or judgment.

(2) A request referred to in subrule (1) shall be filed as soon as possible after the issuance of the decision or judgment
by the court. 
(3) Where a request referred to in subrule (1) is filed with the responsible Secretariat, any other participant may,
within five days after the date on which the request was filed, file a concise statement, of no more than one page in length,
in response. 


Oral Proceedings in Camera 


71. During that part of oral proceedings in which proprietary information or privileged information is presented,
a panel shall not permit any person other than the following persons to be present: 
(a) the person presenting the proprietary information or privileged information; 
(b) a person who has been granted access to the proprietary information or privileged information under a Disclosure
Order, Protective Order or an order of the panel; 
(c) in the case of privileged information, a person as to whom the confidentiality of the privileged information has
been waived; and 
(d) officials of, and counsel for, the investigating authority. 


PART VII_Decisions and Completions of Panel Reviews 


Orders, Decisions and Terminations 


72. The responsible Secretary shall cause notice of every decision of a panel issued pursuant to rule 74 to be published
in the 

Canada Gazette

 and the 

Federal Register

. 
73. (1) Where a Notice of Motion requesting dismissal of a panel review is filed by a participant, the panel may issue
an order dismissing the panel review. 
(2) Where a Notice of Motion requesting termination of a panel review is filed by a participant and is consented to by
all the participants, and an affidavit to that effect is filed, or where all participants file Notices of Motion requesting
termination, the panel review is terminated and, if a panel has been appointed, the panelists are discharged.

74. A panel shall issue a written decision with reasons, together with any dissenting or concurring opinions of the
panelists, in accordance with Article 1904.8 of the Agreement. The decision will normally be released by noon on the
date of issuance. 


Panel Review of Action on Remand 


75. (1) An investigating authority shall give notice of the action taken pursuant to a remand of the panel by filing
with the responsible Secretariat a Determination on Remand within the time specified by the panel. 
(2) If, on remand, the investigating authority has supplemented the administrative record, 
(a) the investigating authority shall file with the responsible Secretariat an Index listing each item in the supplementary
remand record, and a copy of each non-privileged item listed in that Index, within five days after the date on which
the investigating authority filed the Determination on Remand with the panel; 
(b) any participant who intends to challenge the Determination on Remand shall file a written submission with respect
to the Determination on Remand within 20 days after the date on which the investigating authority filed the Index and
supplementary remand record; and 
(c) any response to the written submissions referred to in subrule (b) shall be filed by the investigating authority,
and by any participant supporting the investigating authority, within 20 days after the last day on which written
submissions in opposition to the Determination on Remand may be filed. 
(3) If, on remand, the investigating authority has not supplemented the record, 
(a) any participant who intends to challenge the Determination on Remand shall file a written submission within 20
days after the date on which the investigating authority filed the Determination on Remand with the panel; and 
(b) any response to the written submissions referred to in subrule (a) shall be filed by the investigating authority,
and by any participant filing in support of the investigating authority, within 20 days after the last day on which
such written submissions may be filed. 
(4) If no written submissions are filed under subrule (2)(b) or (3)(a) within the time periods established by these
rules, and if no motion pursuant to rule 20 is pending, the panel shall, within 10 days after the later of the due date
for such written submissions and the date of the denial of a motion pursuant to rule 20, issue an order affirming the
investigating authority's Determination on Remand. 
(5) Where a Determination on Remand is challenged, the panel shall issue a written decision pursuant to rule 74, either
affirming the Determination on Remand or remanding it to the investigating authority, no later than 90 days after
the Determination on Remand is filed. 


