 



Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 1270112839. 




2. In 92.2, the definition for 

``Administrative costs''

 is removed, and the definitions for 

``Commit to a specific local project

 or 

commitment''

, paragraph (4) of 

``Community housing development organization''

, 

``Housing''

, 

``Reconstruction''

, and 

``Single room occupancy (SRO)''

, are revised to read as follows: 



92.2 

Definitions. 



* * * * * 





Commitment

 means: 

(1) The participating jurisdiction has entered into a legally binding agreement with a state recipient, a subrecipient,
or a contractor to use a specific amount of HOME funds to produce affordable housing or provide tenant-based rental
assistance or has entered into a written agreement reserving a specific amount of funds to a CHDO, or 

commit to a specific local project

, as defined in paragraph (2) of this definition. 

(2) 

Commit to a specific local project

, which means: 

(i) For a project which is privately owned when the commitment is made: 

(A) If the project is for rehabilitation or new construction, a written legally binding agreement between the participating
jurisdiction and the project owner under which the participating jurisdiction (or other entity receiving HOME funds
directly from HUD, state recipient, or subrecipient) agrees to provide HOME assistance to the owner for an identifiable
project as defined in this part that can reasonably be expected to start construction within twelve months of the agreement
and in which the owner agrees to start construction within that period. 

(B) If funds are used for tenant-based rental assistance, the participating jurisdiction (or other entity receiving
HOME funds directly from HUD, state recipient, or subrecipient) has entered into a rental assistance contract with
the owner or the tenant in accordance with the provisions of 92.211. 

(C) If the project is for acquisition, a written legally binding agreement, i.e., contract for sale, between the participating
jurisdiction (or other entity receiving HOME funds directly from HUD, state recipient, or subrecipient) and the
project owner under which the participating jurisdiction (or other entity receiving HOME funds directly from HUD,
state recipient, or subrecipient) agrees to provide HOME assistance to the owner for purchase of the project that
can reasonably be expected to be accomplished within six months of the agreement and in which the owner agrees to transfer
title within that period. 

(ii) For a project that is publicly owned when the commitment is made, the Project Set-Up Report submitted under the
Cash and Management Information System which identifies a specific project that will start construction within
twelve months of receipt of the Project Set-Up Report. 

(iii) Under both paragraphs (2)(i) and (ii) of this definition, the date HUD enters into the Cash and Management Information
System (92.502) an acceptable Project Set-Up Report for a project is deemed to be the date of project commitment.




Community housing development organization

 means a private nonprofit organization that 



* * * * * 



(4) Has a tax exempt ruling from the Internal Revenue Service under section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986; 



* * * * * 





Housing

 includes manufactured housing and manufactured housing lots. Housing also includes elder cottage housing opportunity
(ECHO) units that are small, free-standing, barrier-free, energy-efficient, removable, and designed to be installed
adjacent to existing single-family dwellings. Housing does not include emergency shelters. 



* * * * * 





Reconstruction

 means the rebuilding, on the same lot, of housing standing on a site at the time of project commitment. The number of
housing units on the lot may not be decreased or increased as part of a reconstruction project, but the number of rooms
per unit may be increased or decreased. The reconstructed housing must be substantially similar (i.e., single- or
multi-family housing) to the original housing. Reconstruction also includes replacing an existing substandard
unit of manufactured housing with a new or standard unit of manufactured housing. Reconstruction is rehabilitation
for purposes of this part. 





