 

The proposal should demonstrate an understanding of the needs of youth. If a national organization is applying for
a multi-site pilot project, the applicant should demonstrate intimate understanding of how the proposed model operates
and what the key elements are that need to be replicated in the pilot sites. 

Applicants should discuss how their model addresses the multiple problems of youth, such as involvement in crime,
drugs, and alcohol; poor educational backgrounds; teenage pregnancy; lack of access to college; and lack of employment
opportunities. Note that one mode is not necessarily expected to address all of these needs. 



4. Target Population for Both Single and Multi-Site Grants 



Economically disadvantaged, out-of-school youth ages 1421 are the focus for the single site and multi-site
grants. Out-of-school youth can include both high school dropouts and high school graduates. 



5. Project Design for Both Single and Multi-Site Grants 



The projects can focus on any number of solutions to problems facing out-of-school, economically disadvantaged
youth. This solicitation is seeking both new ideas and ideas that have already been developed with a history of success.


The ideas must have measurable outcomes and services must be provided in an organized and high-quality manner. The
services can be provide through the school system, through a recreation center in the community, or through a community
center. It must, however, be able to attract the youth to be served and it must be easily assessable. Applicants are
asked to: 

a. Describe the program and its measurable goals/outcomes and strategy, including services to be provided to accomplish
the goals; 

b. Identify the key elements of the model that distinguish it and that would need to be part of any replication effort.


c. Identify how pilot sites will be selected; 

d. Provide a description of the steps to be taken to recruit participants to encourage and promote maximum participation
by at-risk youth who are currently under-served by education and training programs, and to determine customer need
and customer satisfaction. 

e. Describe design and implementation of the project, giving special attention to the feasibility of operating the
project in a new locations. 

f. Provide assurances that grant funds will be used to start a new service or to replicate an existing project in new
location, not to fund an already existing site and/or existing services. 


