 

While the Board initiated an employee recruitment effort for individuals with formal training and experience in
weapons related disciplines, it also recognized a need for technical assistance from outside experts who have direct
relevant experience in this area. The Board identified Mr. Duane C. Sewell as an individual with the requisite knowledge
and experience needed to provide the Board with immediate assistance in the weapons area. Specifically, Mr. Sewell
can and will provide the Board with expertise in strategic safety issues associated with defense nuclear facilities
involved in the assembly, disassembly, and testing of nuclear weapons, as well as assistance in the planning and performance
of the Board's oversight functions at such facilities. The scope of work will be limited to those operations associated
with production, dismantlement/disposition, safe handling, testing, and storage of nuclear weapons, nuclear
explosive devices, and nuclear weapons components, and the nuclear and hazardous materials used in these items.
A major portion of Mr. Sewell's effort will be directed toward assisting the Board in understanding the existing and
needed involvement of the DOE weapons design laboratories in these activities, and evaluating the sufficiency of
current and proposed efforts. He is not expected to become involved, however, in detailed technical reviews of operations
at defense nuclear facilities. 

During a routine preaward review, Mr. Sewell informed the Board of a potential conflict of interest situation arising
from his current and past association with DOE and its weapons program. Mr. Sewell's involvement with this nation's
nuclear weapons development activities dates back to 1941, when he joined the Manhattan Project. He has been associated
with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL or the Laboratory) since it was established in 1952 and has held
positions of increasing authority and responsibility, including Deputy Director. Although he retired from LLNL
in July 1993, the Regents of the University of California (the operator of LLNL) awarded Mr. Sewell the title of Deputy
Director Emeritus and provided him with an office and secretary at the Laboratory. Since that time, he has been using
the office of LLNL approximately twice a week. While the time spent at LLNL is his own, and without pay, he occasionally
provides advice to individuals who are currently directly involved in Laboratory activities at Pantex regarding
the disassembly of nuclear weapons designed by LLNL. Additionally, for the year prior to his retirement, Mr. Sewell
was directly involved with Laboratory activities regarding Pantex, and he attended meetings in May 1993 with the
management and operating contractor of that facility to discuss weapons disassembly procedures. 

Consequently, the Board had concerns regarding actual or potential conflicts of interest based primarily on two
issues. First, would Mr. Sewell's continuing relationship with LLNL as Deputy Director Emeritus affect his ability
to provide impartial assistance or advice to the Board. Second, would Mr. Sewell be placed in a situation as a consultant
to the Board where he would be reviewing his own work on weapons-related matters conducted within a few years of his
retirement. 

The Board reviewed this situation and concluded that, even if the circumstances could give rise to a potential conflict
of interest situation, it is nonetheless in the best interests of the Government to have Mr. Sewell provide this support
for the reasons described below. Mr. Sewell's comprehensive knowledge of weapons development and assembly procedures,
gained through approximately fifty years of direct experience, is invaluable to the Board in its health and safety
reviews of weapons disassembly and related activities and thus is vital to the Board program. His experience includes
the initial organization of the LLNL weapon testing operations in the early 1950's, and serving as Chairman of the
Nevada Test Site Planning Board, Deputy Director of LLNL in 1973, and Assistant Secretary for Defense Programs of
DOE from 1978 to 1981. In the last position, he was responsible for DOE defense programs, which included: Research,
development, testing, production, and maintenance of all nuclear warheads; defense nuclear materials production,
safeguard and security of all DOE materials and operations; and international security affairs related to nuclear
matters. Furthermore, the Board recognized that it is unlikely that the work to be performed by Mr. Sewell could be
satisfactorily performed by anyone whose experience and affiliations would not give rise to a conflict-of-interest
question. That is because the individuals who have the requisite expertise in this area could only have obtained such
expertise through previous or current employment or consulting relationship with one or more of the weapons designs
laboratories. The pertinent experience of other qualified individuals would therefore likely raise similar conflicts
questions. 

The Board also examined Mr. Sewell's current relationship with LLNL and the University of California. As noted above,
LLNL provides him with an office and clerical support, but the value of those services is unlikely to be large enough
to affect his objectivity in his work for the Board. Also, although Mr. Sewell does not receive any compensation from
LLNL currently, he does participate in the University of California Retirement Plan and a related savings plan and
defined-contribution plan maintained by the University of California. However, he has informed the Board that the
pension from the University of California is vested, and the amount paid calculated according to fixed formulas,
and that his payments from the other plans depend on the levels of prior contributions and ongoing investment returns
rather than on the financial condition of the University of California. The possibility that he could use his work
for the Board in the weapons complex to affect the ability of the University of California to make the vested pension
payments to him is remote. Accordingly, the Board concluded that Mr. Sewell's financial interest in the University
of California and his current LLNL privileges are not so substantial as to be likely to affect the integrity of his services
in advising the Board on DNFSB matters, including, without limitation, any matters affecting LLNL, Los Alamos National
Laboratory, or NTS. 

Finally, as the Board is required under its OCI Regulations, where reasonably possible, to initiate measures which
attempt to mitigate an OCI, Mr. Sewell and the Board agreed to the following restrictions during contract performance.
The Board will not task Mr. Sewell to review issues which would involve the direct assessment of LLNL program activities
at LLNL, Pantex, or elsewhere in the complex. In fact, as noted above, since Mr. Sewell will assist the Board on strategic
safety issues, he is not expected to be involved in any assessments of specific program activities. Also, the efforts
of Mr. Sewell will be overseen by experienced technical staff of the Board to ensure that all of his resultant work products
are impartial and contain full support for any findings and recommendations issued thereunder. Further, Mr. Sewell
will not use the clerical support made available to him by LLNL in his work for the Board and he will avoid any discussions
with LLNL employees regarding the work of the Board. Mr. Sewell has agreed to all of these restrictions. 

Accordingly, on the basis of the determination described above and pursuant to the applicable provisions of 10 CFR
part 1706, the Chairman of the Board granted a waiver of any conflicts of interests (and the pertinent provisions of
the OCI Regulations) with the Board's contract with Mr. Duane C. Sewell that might arise out of his previous or existing
relationship with LLNL. 

 


Dated: May 31, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Kenneth M. Pusateri, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
General Manager. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413745 Filed 6694; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 6802KDM
</BILLING>



