 




<RINDOCK>[OPPTS00148; FRL47581]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Grants To Develop and Carry Out Authorized State Accreditation and Certification Programs for Lead-Based Paint
Professionals </DOCTITLE>





<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 




</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of funds availability; solicitation of applications for financial assistance. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This notice announces EPA's intent to enter into cooperative agreements with states and territories which provide
financial assistance for purposes of developing and carrying out authorized accreditation and certification programs
for professionals engaged in lead-based paint activities pursuant to the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), as
amended by Title IV of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992. EPA also intends to enter into
cooperative agreements with federally-recognized Indian governing bodies to provide financial assistance for
the development of similar accreditation and certification programs. The notice describes eligible activities,
application procedures and requirements, and funding criteria. EPA anticipates that a minimum of $11,200,000 will
be available during federal fiscal year 1994 (FY94) for awards to eligible recipients. There are no matching share
requirements for this assistance. Subject to future budget limitations, EPA plans to provide this support on a continuing
multi-year or program basis. All cooperative agreements will be administered by the appropriate EPA regional office.
The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance number assigned to this new program is 66.707.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 In order to be considered for funding during the FY94 award cycle, all applications must be received by the appropriate
EPA regional office on or before May 1, 1994. EPA will make its award decisions and execute its FY94 cooperative agreements
by September 30, 1994. 



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 For general information, contact: Susan B. Hazen, Director, Environmental Assistance Division (7408), Office
of Pollution Prevention and Toxics, Environmental Protection Agency, Rm E543B, 401 M St., SW., Washington,
DC 20460, (202) 5541404, TDD: (202) 5540551. For technical information, contact the appropriate Regional
Primary Lead Contact person listed in Unit VI of this notice. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 TSCA section 404(g) authorizes EPA to award non-matching grants to states and territories to develop and carry out
authorized programs for the accreditation of training programs for individuals engaged in lead-based paint activities,
and the certification of contractors engaged in lead-based paint activities. To achieve authorization under Title
IV of TSCA, programs must: (1) Be as protective of human health and the environment as the federal program established
under TSCA section 402 or 406, or both, and (2) provide adequate enforcement. For states and territories that fail
to obtain authorization within 2 years following promulgation of TSCA section 402 or 406 regulations, EPA must, by
such date, administer and enforce a program for TSCA section 402 or 406. 


Pursuant to Title IV of TSCA, EPA encourages states and territories to develop accreditation and certification programs
for lead-based paint activities. EPA therefore recommends that eligible parties seek funding through the TSCA section
404(g) assistance program, which is now being implemented to help achieve these ends. EPA further recommends that
eligible parties plan to utilize this grant support in a way that complements any related financial assistance they
may receive from other federal sources, most notably funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD). EPA will, however, seek to ensure that all federally-funded lead activities are undertaken in a coordinated
fashion.
It is anticipated that forthcoming regulations mandated under sections 402 and 404 of TSCA will address the eligibility
of federally-recognized Indian governing bodies to receive assistance under TSCA section 404(g). Until such time
as these regulations are published, EPA intends to enter into cooperative agreements with Indian governing bodies
pursuant to section 10(a) of TSCA for the development of programs similar to those funded under TSCA section 404(g).
As a result, unless otherwise indicated, when used in this notice the term ``states'' includes Indian governing bodies.

EPA will work with prospective applicants to develop cooperative agreements which promote a variety of objectives
deemed critical to the success of its national lead program. These include: (1) Permitting flexible approaches to
reducing lead hazards, (2) developing a nationwide pool of qualified lead abatement professionals, (3) encouraging
pollution prevention in lead-based paint activities, (4) promoting environmental justice in the reduction of lead
exposures and the prevention of lead poisoning, (5) fostering the establishment of comprehensive and integrated
lead management programs by states, territories and Indian governing bodies, and (6) promoting reciprocity among
authorized programs in the training and certification of lead abatement professionals. 


I. Eligibility 


All states are eligible to apply for and receive assistance under section 404(g) of TSCA. The term ``state,'' for purposes
of eligibility, refers broadly to any state of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the Canal Zone, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory
or possession of the United States. Federally-recognized Indian governing bodies are eligible to apply for and receive
assistance under section 10(a) of TSCA. 


II. Authority 


The ``TSCA Title IV State Lead Grants Program'' is a financial assistance program administered by EPA under authority
of TSCA section 404(g). EPA plans to award all funds to Indian governing bodies under authority of TSCA section 10(a)
during the first-year award cycle (FY94). Each of EPA's 10 regional administrators will be delegated the authority
to enter into cooperative agreements with eligible states and Indian governing bodies. 


III. Activities to be Funded Under Cooperative Agreements 


EPA recognizes that when TSCA Title IV was enacted on October 28, 1992, states had widely varying capabilities for
addressing lead hazards. Individual states will eventually fall within one of three broad categories of program
development: (1) States without lead programs, (2) states with programs that are likely to qualify for authorization
under TSCA section 402 that may need assistance in carrying out these programs, and (3) states with lead programs that
will require modification before qualifying for authorization. Each state's need for assistance will vary, in part,
according to the level of lead program development the state has attained. The type of program activity a given state
seeks to pursue may also vary in a corresponding manner. 
Although EPA generally supports all state activities aimed at developing or carrying out authorized state lead programs,
the Agency does recognize certain priorities. Because few states currently have programs which parallel the forthcoming
TSCA sections 402 and 406 standards, EPA's highest priority will be to support the development of new state programs.
A second priority will be to support the continued implementation of existing state programs which are working toward
timely authorization. 
Although these priorities do not constitute the Agency's criteria for award determinations, EPA will consider these
items in its cooperative agreement negotiations with applicants. 
EPA has established three general funding categories that reflect the different status, or levels, of state lead
program development. These are: (1) Level One - Develop New State Programs, (2) Level Two - Carry Out Authorized State
Programs, and (3) Level Three - Carry Out Existing State Programs Which Do Not Yet Qualify For Authorization Under
Title IV. Because the regulations required under TSCA sections 402 and 404 which would define the criteria for obtaining
program authorization have not yet been promulgated, however, activities in only two of the three funding categories,
Level One and Level Three, will be eligible for funding consideration during the FY94 award cycle. Activities in Level
Two can only be considered after the TSCA sections 402/404 regulations have taken effect. Numerous examples of activities
considered to be eligible for funding are described in a separate EPA publication entitled ``Fiscal 1994 TSCA Title
IV Cooperative Agreement Guidance'' (January 1994) (the ``grant guidance''). Copies of the grant guidance may be
obtained through any of EPA's 10 regional offices at the addresses listed under Unit VI of this notice. It is important
to note, however, that the examples presented in the guidance are not exhaustive, and applicants are not limited in
their proposals to the listed tasks. Individual state program innovations are eligible and encouraged, so long as
the proposed tasks relate to the purposes set forth in TSCA section 404(g) and fit within the Level One or Three funding
category. These two funding categories are not mutually exclusive, and it is permissible for a state's work plan to
combine elements from each. 


IV. Selection Criteria 


During the FY94 award cycle, EPA expects a minimum of $11,200,000 to be available for distribution to eligible applicants.
The Agency will use a two-tiered system to allocate these funds. This system is aimed at achieving the broadest possible
state participation, while at the same time, targeting areas with the greatest potential lead hazard and risk. It
accomplishes this by providing for a tier-one distribution of ``base funding,'' followed by a tier-two distribution
of ``formula funding,'' where additional funds are distributed based upon the relative lead burden estimated to
exist within a state. 
Each state (excluding territories and federally-recognized Indian governing bodies) that submits a qualifying
proposal will be entitled to a base funding allotment of $100,000. In addition, base funding of up to $50,000 will be
reserved for each of the five ``territories'' (used generically in this context) that have been administratively
assigned to an EPA regional office and that have historically participated in EPA toxics cooperative agreement programs.
These ``base'' territories include the U.S. Virgin Islands (Region 2), the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (Region 2),
the District of Columbia (Region 3), Guam (Region 9) and American Samoa (Region 9). The two remaining ``non-base''
territories, the Canal Zone and the Northern Mariana Islands, are also eligible to apply for funding up to $50,000
apiece, but are not considered in determining the base funding allotments. Base allotments are primarily intended
to ensure that those states and base territories wishing to pursue authorization under TSCA section 404 will be guaranteed
a minimum level of funding for this purpose. The maximum amount of base funding set-aside in FY94 will be $5,250,000.
Any unsubscribed base funding will be added to the formula funds pool. 
Once base funding allotments have been reserved for all eligible applicants, remaining funds will be treated as ``formula
funds.'' Before applying the lead burden formula, however, EPA will subtract from the formula account an amount not
to exceed $50,000 for each Indian governing body and non-base territory not otherwise factored into the base funding
apportionment. EPA cannot reliably predict the level of participation from Indian governing bodies and non-base
territories; therefore, where these eligible parties do apply for funds, they will be assigned to an appropriate
regional office for administrative oversight, and that regional office will become responsible for determining
the appropriate level of funding. These parties, however, will not receive a formula ranking, and will not be eligible
to compete for additional formula allocations based upon lead burden calculations. 
As a third step, states and base territories with funding requirements exceeding their base allotments will then
be apportioned additional sums based upon their relative lead burden. In calculating lead burden for the formula
rankings, EPA used readily available data derived from the 1990 Census of Population and Housing, together with other
data from HUD. The formula uses four factors to generate an estimate of the potential lead problem, or ``lead burden,''
in each state. Two of these factors, the number of housing units with lead-based paint and the number of children under
age 7, express the potential magnitude of the lead problem. The remaining two factors, the fraction of young children
in poverty and the fraction of low-income housing units with lead-based paint, express the potential severity of
the problem. 
In determining formula rankings, each state and base territory is scored independently for each factor, and the four
individual factor scores for the state or base territory are then summed to obtain an overall score for that state or
base territory (a combined factor score). The combined factor scores of all states and base territories applying
for formula funds (or amounts in excess of their base allotment) are then summed, and the percentage of the total sum
represented by the individual state's or base territory's score is then identified. When the total formula funding
available is then multiplied by the percentage score of an individual state or territory, the state's or base territory's
ceiling formula allotment can be obtained. For example, assume that: (1) All 50 states but none of the base territories
apply for formula allotments, (2) state X has a percentage score of 2 percent, and (3) a total of $4,000,000 in formula
funding is available. In determining how much money to allot to state X, EPA would multiply $4,000,000 by .02. The product,
$80,000, represents the maximum additional funding that could be awarded to state X to supplement its base allocation.
State X would then qualify for up to $180,000 in total funding for the fiscal year ($100,000 in base funding + $80,000
in formula funding). 
In general, the maximum, or ceiling, formula allotments will fluctuate inversely with the number of applicants.
The greater the number of applicants, the lower the ceiling will tend to be, and vice versa. Formula allotments will
be determined only after the annual application deadline has passed and EPA has full knowledge of the total amount
of funds requested. If one or more states or base territories request formula fund amounts below their ceiling allotments,
residual formula funds will be available. Where this situation develops, if there are still other states or base territories
with unfunded needs, the formula will be run again. This procedure can be repeated until all formula funds have been
fully allotted. The FY94 combined factor scores for each state and base territory, derived from the census data, are
presented in the grant guidance along with a technical appendix (Appendix A) which explains the formula methodology
in greater detail. 


V. Submission Requirements 


To be considered for funding, each application must include, at a minimum, the following forms and certifications
which are contained in EPA's ``Application Kit for Assistance'': (1) Standard Form 424 (Application for Federal
Assistance), (2) EPA Form 570048 (Procurement Certification), (3) Drug-Free Workplace Certification,
(4) Debarment and Suspension Certification, (5) Disclosure of Lobbying Activities, and (6) a return mailing address.
In addition to these standard forms, each application must also include a work program, a detailed line-item budget
with sufficient information to clearly justify costs, a list of work products or deliverables, and a schedule for
their completion. Work programs are to be negotiated between applicants and their EPA regional offices to ensure
that both EPA and state priorities can be addressed. In addition, every application from a state, territory or Indian
governing body must clearly demonstrate how the proposed activities will lead to that state's pursuit of authorization.
Finally, any applicant proposing the collection of environmentally related measurements or data generation must
adequately address the requirements of 40 CFR 31.45 relating to quality assurance/quality control. These requirements
are more specifically outlined in the ``Guidance Document for the Preparation of Quality Assurance Project Plans''
(May 1993) published by EPA's Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics. This document, as well as the application
kits referred to above, may be obtained from EPA's regional offices. 


VI. Application Procedures and Schedule 


Applications must be submitted to the appropriate EPA regional office in duplicate; one copy to the regional lead
program branch and the other to the regional grants management branch. Early consultations are recommended between
prospective applicants and their EPA regional offices. Because TSCA Title IV cooperative agreements will be administered
at the regional level, these consultations can be critical to the ultimate success of a state's project or program.

For more information about this financial assistance program, or for technical assistance in preparing an application
for funding, interested parties should contact the Regional Primary Lead Contact person in the appropriate EPA regional
office. The mailing addresses and contact telephone numbers for these offices are listed below. 






Region I:

 (Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont), JFK Federal Building, One Congress
St., Boston, MA 02203. Telephone: (617) 5653836 (Jim Bryson) 



Region II:

 (New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands), Building 5, SDPTSB, 2890 Woodbridge Ave., Edison, NJ 088373679.
Telephone: (908) 3216671 (Lou Bevilacqua) 



Region III:

 (Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, District of Columbia), 841 Chestnut Bldg., Philadelphia,
PA 19107. Telephone: (215) 5978322 (Fran Dougherty) 



Region IV:

 (Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee), 345 Courtland
St., NE, Atlanta, GA 30365. Telephone: (404) 3471033 (Connie Landers) 



Region V:

 (Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, Wisconsin), SP14J, 77 W. Jackson St., Chicago, IL 60604.
Telephone: (312) 8867836 (David Turpin) 



Region VI:

 (Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas), 12th Floor, Suite 2000, 1445 Ross Ave., Dallas, TX 75202. Telephone:
(214) 6557577 (Jeff Robinson) 



Region VII:

 (Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska), TOPE/TSC, 726 Minnesota Ave., Kansas City, KS 66101. Telephone: (913) 5517393
(Doug Elders) 



Region VIII:

 (Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, Wyoming), 999 18th St., Suite 500, Denver, CO 80202. Telephone:
(303) 2931442 (David Combs) 



Region IX:

 (Arizona, California, Hawaii, Nevada, American Samoa, Guam), 75 Hawthorne St., San Francisco, CA 94105. Telephone:
(415) 7441128 (Jo Ann Semones) 



Region X:

 (Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, Washington), Toxics Section, 1200 Sixth Ave., Seattle, WA 98101. Telephone: (206) 5531985
(Barbara Ross) 


The deadline for EPA's receipt of final FY94 applications is May 1, 1994. Once the application deadline has passed,
EPA will process the formula funding calculations and determine the initial formula ceiling allocations. Final
negotiations for the award of cooperative agreements can then proceed, but all FY94 agreements must be executed no
later than September 30, 1994. 


List of Subjects


Environmental protection, Grants, Lead, Training and Accreditation. 




Dated: February 24, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Lynn R. Goldman,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Administrator for Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 944893 Filed 3294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>

