 

5.2.9Vehicle Insurance 


Runzheimer measured the cost of auto insurance in each location. To determine the type of coverage to price, Runzheimer
contacted insurance agents in each area to obtain information on the typical policy. Listed below are the most common
coverages, limits, and deductibles for the surveyed living-cost areas. 



Bodily Injury_$100,000/$300,000 
Property Damage_$50,000 
Medical_$5,000 
Uninsured Motorist_$100,000/$300,000 
Comprehensive_$100 Deductible 
Collision_$250 Deductible 



In all areas, Runzheimer attempted to identify the most ``popular'' automobile insurance companies by analyzing
market-share reports compiled by an industry rating bureau. The policy described above was then priced again this
year for each location. Two or three price quotes were obtained for each area and averaged together to produce the final
number for this component in each allowance area. 



5.3Public Transportation Methodology 


As was done last year, Runzheimer surveyed the cost of air fares as they relate to recreational travel. Runzheimer
priced the lowest available round-trip air fare from each allowance area and the Washington, D.C., area to Los Angeles,
California. Los Angeles was selected because it is a common point approximately equidistant from most of the allowance
areas and the Washington, D.C., area. The cost of the trip from each allowance area to Los Angeles was compared with
the cost of the trip from the Washington, D.C., area to Los Angeles to compute the public transportation category indexes.
(See Appendix 11.) 



5.4Transportation Survey Results 


Runzheimer measured the costs for fuel, maintenance and oil, tires, licensing, taxes, depreciation, finance, and
insurance for three types of automobiles in each allowance area and in the Washington, D.C., area to determine typical
private transportation costs. Appendix 10 shows the cost of each of these items in each area. 
Runzheimer also measured the cost of recreational air travel from each allowance area and from the Washington, D.C.,
area to a common point within the contiguous 48 states. Appendix 11 shows the cost of these air fares and their relationship
to the cost for the Washington, D.C., area. 

Appendix 11 compares the total cost of the private transportation items for each vehicle in each allowance area with
the total cost of the same items in the Washington, D.C., area. Appendix 11 also shows how the private and public transportation
indexes were combined using expenditure weights derived from the CES data to produce final transportation indexes.

The final transportation indexes are used in Appendix 14 to derive the total overall index. (Refer to section 2.2 for
a discussion of the general formulae and how the component indexes are combined.) 



