 

VI. Public Comment Procedures



a. Participation in rulemaking

b. Written comment procedures

c. Public hearing



I. Introduction



a. Authority



Part B of Title III of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act, Pub. L. 94163, as amended by the National Energy
Conservation Policy Act, Pub. L. 95619, the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act, Pub. L. 10012,
and the National Appliance Energy Conservation Amendments of 1988, Pub. L. 100357,

1

 created the Energy Conservation Program for Consumer Products other than Automobiles (Program). The consumer products
subject to the Program (often referred to hereafter as ``covered products'') are: Refrigerators, refrigerator-freezers,
and freezers; dishwashers; clothes washers; clothes dryers; water heaters; central air conditioners and central
air-conditioning heat pumps; furnaces; direct heating equipment; television sets; kitchen ranges and ovens; room
air conditioners; fluorescent lamp ballasts; and pool heaters; as well as any other consumer products classified
by the Secretary of Energy (Secretary) (section 322). To date, the Secretary has not so classified any additional
products.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
Part B of Title III of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act, as amended by the National Energy Conservation Policy
Act, the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act, and the National Appliance Energy Conservation Amendments
of 1988, is referred to in this Supplemental Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking as the ``Act.'' Part B of Title III
is codified at 42 U.S.C. 6291 et seq. Part B of Title III of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act, as amended by the National
Energy Conservation Policy Act only, is referred to as the National Energy Conservation Policy Act.

</FOOTNOTE>


Under the Act, the Program consists essentially of three parts: testing, labeling, and mandatory energy conservation
standards. DOE, in consultation with the National Institute of Standards and Technology, is required to amend or
establish new test procedures as appropriate for each of the covered products (section 323). The purpose of the test
procedures is to provide for test results that reflect the energy efficiency, energy use, or estimated annual operating
costs of each of the covered products (section 323(b)(3)).

The Federal Trade Commission is required by the Act to prescribe rules governing the labeling of covered products
for which test procedures have been prescribed by DOE (section 324(a)). These rules require that each particular
model of a covered product bear a label that indicates its annual operating cost and the range of estimated annual operating
costs for other models of that product class (section 324(c)(1)). At the present time, there are Federal Trade Commission
rules requiring labels for the following products: room air conditioners, furnaces, clothes washers, dishwashers,
water heaters, freezers, refrigerators and refrigerator-freezers, central air conditioners and central air-conditioning
heat pumps, and fluorescent lamp ballasts. 44 FR 66475, November 19, 1979; 52 FR 46888, December 10, 1987; and 54 FR
28031, July 5, 1989.

For each of 12 of the covered products, the Act prescribes an initial Federal energy conservation standard (section
325(b)-(h)). The Act establishes effective dates for the standards in 1988, 1990, 1992 or 1993, depending on the product,
and specifies that the standards are to be reviewed by DOE within three to ten years, also depending on the product (Ibid.).
After the specified three- to ten-year period, DOE may promulgate new standards for each product; however, the Secretary
may not prescribe any amended standard that increases the maximum allowable energy use or decreases the minimum required
energy efficiency of a covered product (section 325(l)(1)).

With regard to television sets, the Act allows DOE to prescribe an applicable standard. (section 325(i)(3)).

Three products (central air conditioners and central air-conditioning heat pumps; furnaces; and refrigerators,
refrigerator-freezers and freezers) are the subject of this rulemaking proceeding. For central air conditioners
and central air-conditioning heat pumps, the Act directs DOE to review each legislated standard for possible amendment
and to issue final rules as follows: for the seasonal energy efficiency ratio, no later than January 1, 1994, for units
manufactured after January 1, 1999; and for the heating seasonal performance factor, no later than January 1, 1994,
for units manufactured after January 1, 2002. For furnaces, the Act directs DOE to review the previously established
standard for small gas furnaces (54 FR 47916, November 17, 1989), the pending standard for mobile home furnaces, and
the legislated standards for all other covered furnaces for possible amendment and to issue final rules no later than
January 1, 1994, for units manufactured after January 1, 2002. For refrigerators, refrigerator-freezers, and freezers,
the Act directs DOE to review the previous final rule, published November 17, 1989, for possible amendment and to issue
final rules no later than November 17, 1994, for units manufactured after January 1, 1998.

Any new or amended standard is required to be designed so as to achieve the maximum improvement in energy efficiency
that is technologically feasible and economically justified (section 325(l)(2)(A)).

Section 325(l)(2)(B)(i) provides that before DOE determines whether an energy conservation standard is economically
justified, it must first solicit comments on the proposed standard. After reviewing comments on the proposal, DOE
must then determine that the benefits of the standard exceed its burdens based, to the greatest extent practicable,
on a weighing of the following seven factors:

(1) The economic impact of the standard on the manufacturers and on the consumers of the products subject to such standard;

(2) The savings in operating costs throughout the estimated average life of the covered product in the type (or class)
compared to any increase in the price, initial charges, or maintenance expenses for the covered products that are
likely to result directly from the imposition of the standard;

(3) The total projected amount of energy savings likely to result directly from the imposition of the standard;




