 

7. PSC Limits Relevant to Fully Utilized Species 



Under 672.20(b)(1), if NMFS determines, after consultation with the Council, that the TAC for any species
or species group will be fully utilized in the DAP fishery, a groundfish PSC limit applicable to the JVP fisheries may
be specified for that species or species group. 

The Council recommended that DAP equal TAC for each species category. Zero amounts of JVP are available. NMFS concurs
with the Council's recommendation, and has not established any JVP amounts; therefore, no groundfish PSC limits
under 672.20(b)(1) are necessary. 



8. Closures to Directed Fishing



The ``proposed 1994 Initial Specifications of Groundfish and Associated Management Measures'' for the GOA (58 FR
60575, November 17, 1993) contained several closures to directed fishing for groundfish during 1994. The closures
for the final specifications are listed in Table 5. 

Under 672.20(c)(2)(ii), the Regional Director determined that the entire TACs or allocations of TAC of some
groundfish species and species groups will be needed as incidental catch to support other anticipated groundfish
fisheries during 1994. The Regional Director is establishing directed fishing allowances of zero mt and prohibiting
directed fishing for the remainder of the year for the fisheries listed in Table 5. Directed fishing standards for
the aforementioned closures may be found at 672.20(g). 



<TABLE>




Table 

5._

Closures to Directed Fishing for Total Allowable Catches Implemented by This Action

1



[Offshore = The Offshore Component; TRW = Trawl; ALL = All Gears; WG = Western Regulatory Area; CG = Central Regulatory
Area; EG = Eastern Regulatory Area; GOA = Entire Gulf of Alaska]


1Fishery

1Component

1Gear

1Closed areas





Atka mackerel



ALL

GOA 

Northern rockfish



ALL

EG 

Other rockfish2



ALL

WG,EG 

Pacific cod

Offshore

ALL

WG,CG,EG 

Pacific ocean perch



ALL

WG,CG,EG 

Rex sole



ALL

WG 

Sablefish



TRW

WG,CG 

Shortraker/rougheye rockfish



ALL

WG,CG,EG 

Thornyhead rockfish



ALL

GOA 



1These closures to directed fishing are in addition to closures and prohibitions found in regulations at 50 CFR Part
672. 


2Other rockfish includes slope and demersal shelf rockfish in the WG and CG. 


</TABLE>



9. Halibut Prohibited Species Catch (PSC) Mortality Limits



Under 672.20(f)(2), annual Pacific halibut PSC limits are established and apportioned to trawl and hook-and-line
gear and are established for pot gear. At its December 1993 meeting, the Council recommended that NMFS reestablish
1993 halibut PSC limits of 2,000 mt for trawl gear and 750 mt for hook-and-line gear for 1994. The hook-and-line halibut
PSC limit is further apportioned between the DSR fishery (10 mt halibut mortality) and all other hook-and-line fisheries
(740 mt). 

As in the proposed specifications, the Council recommended that pot gear be exempt from Pacific halibut PSC limits
for the 1994 fishing year. The Council proposed this exemption after considering that the groundfish catch and associated
halibut bycatch and mortality rates for pot gear are low (5 percent). 

At the September 1993 meeting, the Council recommended that NMFS prepare a rule for Secretarial approval that, if
approved, would authorize separate apportionments of the trawl halibut bycatch mortality limit between trawl fisheries
for the deep-water species complex (deep-water flatfish, rockfish, sablefish and arrowtooth flounder) and for
the shallow-water species complex (pollock, Pacific cod, shallow-water flatfish, flathead sole, Atka mackerel,
and ``other species''). At its December 1993 meeting, the Council further recommended that this action be implemented
under emergency rulemaking so that it could be effective early in 1994. An emergency rule was prepared by NMFS and implemented
February 7, 1994 (59 FR 6222, February 10, 1994). The emergency rule specifies trawl fishery apportionments of the
1994 GOA trawl halibut bycatch mortality limit and seasonal apportionments thereof. The emergency rule specifications
supersede those set forth in this notice during the effective period of the emergency rule. 

NMFS concurs with the Council's recommendations listed above. The following types of information as presented in,
and summarized from, the 1993 SAFE report, or as otherwise available from NMFS, Alaska Department of Fish and Game,
the International Pacific Halibut Commission (IPHC) or public testimony were considered: 



(A) 

Estimated Halibut Bycatch in Prior Years 





