 




Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 2/Tuesday, January 4, 1994/Proposed Rules 











<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>


21 CFR Part 101



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 90N0134]</RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN 0905AD08</RINDOCK>


Food Labeling: Reference Daily Intakes 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Proposed rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing to amend its regulations to establish Reference Daily Intakes
(RDI's) for vitamin K, selenium, chloride, manganese, fluoride, chromium, and molybdenum for use in declaring the
nutrient content of a food on its label or labeling; change the units of measure for biotin, folate, calcium, and phosphorus;
and make consideration of selenium, molybdenum, fluoride, and chromium optional when determining nutritional
inferiority. The agency is taking this action to assist consumers in understanding the nutritional significance
of the levels of these nutrients in the context of the total daily diet and in recognition of the fact that the National
Academy of Sciences (NAS) has established Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA's) or Estimated Safe and Adequate
Daily Dietary Intakes (ESADDI's) for these nutrients.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Submit written comments by March 7, 1994. The agency is proposing that any final rule that may issue based on this proposal
become effective 30 days after date of publication of that final rule. 


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Camille E. Brewer, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS165), Food and Drug Administration, 200
C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022055483.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:


I. Background


In the 

Federal Register

 of July 19, 1990 (55 FR 29476), in a document entitled ``Food Labeling; Reference Daily Intakes and Daily Reference
Values'' (hereinafter referred to as the July 1990 proposal), FDA proposed to amend its food labeling regulations
by revising and expanding the list of label reference values for nutrients in foods that it had established. This list
was known as the ``U.S. Recommended Daily Allowances'' (U.S. RDA's) (101.9(c)(7)(iv) (21 CFR 101.9(c)(7)(iv)).
The agency proposed to replace the U.S. RDA's with RDI's for protein and 26 vitamins and minerals for which RDA's or
ESADDI's were provided in the 9th and 10th Editions of NAS' ``Recommended Dietary Allowances'' (proposed 101.9(c)(11)(iv)
(56 FR 60366 at 60390)). FDA proposed to establish RDI's for vitamins and minerals for five groups: Adults and children
4 or more years of age, children less than 4 years of age, infants, pregnant women, and lactating women. It also proposed
to establish Daily Reference Values (DRV's) for eight nutrients and food components (i.e., total fat, saturated
fat, unsaturated fat, cholesterol, total carbohydrate, dietary fiber, sodium, and potassium) for adults and children
4 or more years of age.
During the comment period on this proposal, Congress passed, and the President signed into law, the Nutrition Labeling
and Education Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101535) (hereinafter known as ``the 1990 amendments''). In response to this
new law, in the 

Federal Register

 of November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60366, and corrected at 57 FR 8178, March 6, 1992), FDA issued a document entitled ``Food
Labeling: Reference Daily Intakes and Daily Reference Values; Mandatory Status of Nutrition Labeling and Nutrient
Content Revision'' (hereinafter referred to as ``the supplementary proposal''). In that document, FDA republished
and supplemented the July 1990 proposal and a proposal on nutrition labeling that FDA had also published in July of
1990 to make clear that in the agency's view, with some modifications, these proposals addressed the requirements
of the 1990 amendments. 
FDA received approximately 800 responses to the July 1990 proposal, and approximately 700 responses to that part
of the supplementary proposal that addressed the RDI's and DRV's, from trade and retail associations, government
organizations, retailers, consumer groups, State groups, private organizations, professional societies, and
universities. Each of the responses contained one or more comments. FDA summarized and reviewed these comments in
the final rule entitled ``Food Labeling; Reference Daily Intakes and Daily Reference Values'' that it published
in the 

Federal Register

 of January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2206, and corrected at 58 FR 17104, April 1, 1993) (hereinafter referred to as ``the RDI/DRV
final rule'').
However, on October 6, 1992, before FDA issued a final rule in response to the July 1990 and the supplemental proposals,
Congress passed the Dietary Supplement Act of 1992 (Pub. L. 102571) (hereinafter referred to as the ``DS act'').
Section 202(a)(1) of the DS act established a moratorium on the implementation of the 1990 amendments with respect
to dietary supplements of vitamins, minerals, herbs, or other similar nutritional substances (hereinafter referred
to as ``dietary supplements'') until December 15, 1993. Section 203 of the DS act prohibited FDA from promulgating
before November 8, 1993, regulations that require the use of, or that are based upon, recommended daily allowances
of vitamins or minerals, other than regulations establishing the United States recommended daily allowances specified
in 101.9(c)(7)(iv) as in effect on October 6, 1992. The label values in 101.9(c)(7)(iv) were based,
to a large extent, on the 1968 RDA's and thus were almost 25 years old. Nonetheless, with its discretion constrained
by section 203 of the DS act but faced with a need to establish a labeling scheme that manufacturers could implement
as quickly as possible, FDA simply adopted the values in 101.9(c)(7)(iv) as in effect in 1992 in its new regulations
(see the RDI/DRV final rule).
However, this solution created a new set of problems. Section 101.9(c)(7)(iv) as in effect in 1992, and the 1968 RDA's
that it was based on (Ref. 1), did not contain reference values for a number of nutrients that were included in the 1989
RDA's (Ref. 2). Thus, there is no provision in the RDI's for a number of nutrients whose importance for good nutrition
has been generally accepted. To remedy this situation, FDA is proposing to establish RDI's for these nutrients. 
FDA is not proposing to change the RDI levels for those nutrients for which it has already established RDI's. FDA recognizes
that there is active debate within the scientific community as to the basis on which such levels should be established,
and therefore, the agency considers it premature to modify its current levels. However, FDA believes that at least
the list of nutrients for which it has RDI's, if not the RDI levels themselves, should reflect scientific consensus.
Therefore, FDA is proposing to establish RDI's for seven additional nutrients.


II. Authority for Additional Label Reference Values


Section (2)(b)(1)(A) of the 1990 amendments states that nutrition label information shall be conveyed in a manner
that, among other things, enables the public to understand its relative significance in the context of a total daily
diet. In the legislative history of this provision, Congress stated that this provision requires the Secretary to
specify requirements that would permit the consumer to understand the nutrition information pertaining to a particular
food in relation to recommended dietary information (H. Rept. 101538, 101st Cong., 2d sess. 18 (1990)). Thus,
FDA has required that a presentation of the percent of the daily value of the nutrients listed in the nutrition label
be a fundamental part of the nutrition label format (see 58 FR 2079 at 2123 through 2135). Given the approach that FDA
has taken, it is clear that the more nutrients for which RDI's or DRV's are clearly established, the easier it will be
for consumers to understand information about that nutrient in the context of the total daily diet.
In the RDI/DRV final rule, FDA stated that over the last 20 years, there have been significant advances in scientific
knowledge with respect to essential nutrient requirements (58 FR 2206). In 1980, NAS established ESADDI values for
vitamin K, biotin, pantothenic acid, copper, manganese, fluoride, chromium, selenium, molybdenum, sodium, potassium,
and chloride for the first time (Ref. 3). These suggested intake values were based on less complete scientific data
than the RDA values and were regarded as more tentative and evolutionary (Ref. 3). In 1989, NAS updated the values for
vitamin K and selenium, making them RDA's rather than EASDDI's (Ref. 2). At that time, NAS continued to provide ESADDI
values for manganese, fluoride, chromium, and molybdenum but dropped the suggested values for sodium, potassium,
and chloride, giving instead estimated minimum requirements for healthy persons at various ages. 
 Thus, given the usefulness of RDI values in conveying the information that Congress has said should be conveyed by
nutrition labeling, and given the fact that NAS has developed the basis for RDI's that are not included on the current
list, FDA tentatively concludes that it is appropriate to establish reference values for these seven nutrients.


III. The Need for Change


Under 101.9(c)(8) that becomes effective May 8, 1994, only those vitamins and minerals for which FDA has established
label reference values may be listed in the nutrition labels of food in conventional food form. FDA proposed to take
a similar position with respect to nutrition labeling of dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals (58 FR 33715,
June 18, 1993). Several comments on the dietary supplement proposal argued, however, that because RDA's or ESADDI's
have been established by NAS for vitamin K, selenium, manganese, fluoride, chromium, molybdenum, and chloride,
manufacturers of dietary supplements of vitamins or minerals should be allowed to declare these nutrients in products'
nutrition labels with an asterisk in the ``Percent Daily Value'' column. The comments suggested that the asterisk
refer to a footnote stating ``No Daily Value has been established.'' 
Based on its consideration of these comments and because the format that FDA proposed for dietary supplements of vitamins
and minerals provides for the listing of quantitative amounts for vitamins and minerals (in contrast to the format
for the nutrition labeling of foods in conventional food form, which provides for only a listing of the percent of the
daily value for each vitamin and mineral provided by the food), FDA provided for the listing of these nutrients in the
manner that was suggested by these comments in the final rule entitled ``Food Labeling; Requirement for Nutrient
Content Claims for Dietary Supplements of Vitamins, Minerals, Herbs, and Other Similar Nutritional Substances,''
published elsewhere in this issue of the 

Federal Register

. However, as an ultimate matter, FDA considers this solution to be deficient in two respects. First, even on dietary
supplements of vitamins and minerals, this solution provides no basis for a declaration of the percent of the daily
value for these nutrients, information that is, as stated above, important for consumers in putting the information
presented in the nutrition label in the context of the total daily diet. Second, the agency's action with respect to
dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals does nothing to provide information on the levels of these nutrients
in foods whose labeling is subject to 101.9.
Moreover, the comments on the proposed rule on nutrient content claims for dietary supplements (58 FR 33715 at 33731)
pointed to a third type of problem created by the lack of reference values for the nutrients in question. Several of
those comments requested that nutrient content claims be allowed for all vitamins or minerals for which NAS has established
RDA's or ESADDI's. These comments could not be readily accommodated, however, because, as explained in the final
rule on nutrient content claims for dietary supplements published elsewhere in this issue of the 

Federal Register

, FDA's regulations define terms such as ``high'' and ``good source'' based on the RDI or DRV for the nutrient that is
the subject of the claim. This approach has the advantage of linking nutrient content claims to established reference
values that provide a consistent, quantitative basis for the claims. However, because the agency's current list
of RDI's and DRV's does not reflect the entire list of nutrients for which dietary recommendations have been established,
no claims can be made about nutrients whose essentiality is generally recognized unless the list of nutrients with
RDI's is updated as quickly as possible.
Thus, FDA is proposing to establish RDI's for vitamin K, selenium, chloride, manganese, fluoride, chromium, and
molybdenum for three reasons. First, it will permit the declaration of these nutrients in the nutrition labeling
of all foods. Second, it will permit consumers of dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals, as well as other foods
that contain these nutrients in significant amounts, to understand the amount of these nutrients present in these
products in the context of the total daily diet. Third, it will permit nutrient content claims to be made for these nutrients
on all foods.


IV. The Proposed Rule


A. Basis for RDI's for Vitamin K, Selenium, Chloride, Manganese, Fluoride, Chromium, and Molybdenum


FDA has determined that NAS RDA's are an appropriate basis for label reference values. Strong and uniform support
was provided for the use of NAS RDA's during the initial development of label reference values in 1972 as well as in response
to the July 1990 proposal and the supplementary proposal. The agency continues to believe that these established
nutrient allowances are the most widely accepted and respected source of information on human nutrient requirements
and recommended intakes. 
In proposing RDI's for these seven nutrients, the agency recognizes that if it adopts this proposal, some label reference
values will be based on the 1968 NAS RDA's, while others will be based on the 1980 and 1989 NAS RDA's. The agency believes,
however, that providing label information regarding the seven additional nutrients covered by the proposal would
be useful to consumers in making healthy dietary choices. As discussed in the previous section, without RDI's, there
can be no percent Daily Values expressed for these nutrients on the nutrition label, and nutrient content claims cannot
be made for them. Therefore, FDA tentatively concludes that the advantages of having a reference value for all nutrients
that NAS has found to be essential outweighs any disadvantages that derive from the fact that some of these values are
more reflective of current scientific thinking than others. 
As stated above, NAS is in the process of reevaluating the basis on which RDA's are determined. NAS is considering whether
values should be selected to prevent deficiencies or to promote optimal wellness. The agency believes that any action
to establish a set of RDI's with consistent derivation should await completion of the NAS process. FDA is committed
to working with NAS to help resolve this issue. 


B. Determination of Reference Amounts for Vitamin K, Selenium, Chloride, Manganese, Fluoride, Chromium, and Molybdenum


Based on its consideration of comments on the 1990 proposal and on the supplementary proposal, FDA determined in the
RDI/DRV final rule that there is considerable support for the general approach of establishing label reference values
for vitamins and minerals by selecting the highest NAS RDA value from among those for persons 4 or more years of age (excluding
pregnant and lactating females) (58 FR 2206 at 2211). The comments stated that vulnerable or at-risk groups would
be sufficiently covered by selecting the highest value. Therefore, in the RDI/DRV final rule, FDA tentatively determined
that in establishing label reference values from NAS' RDA values, it would be appropriate to select the highest value
from among those for adults and children 4 or more years of age, excluding values for pregnant females and lactating
females (58 FR 2206 at 2211). FDA referred to this approach as the ``population coverage approach.'' 
FDA is proposing to use this approach in adopting RDI's for vitamin K, selenium, chloride, manganese, fluoride, chromium,
and molybdenum. In doing so, the agency is setting forth a quantitative amount as well as a unit of measure for each nutrient.

In regard to vitamin K, a review of the 1989 RDA values shows a range of recommended levels from 20 micrograms (&mu;g)
for children 4 to 6 years of age to 80 &mu;g for adult males from 25 to 51+ years of age (Ref. 2). Accordingly, using the
population coverage approach, FDA is proposing to adopt 80 &mu;g as the RDI for vitamin K.
A review of the 1989 RDA values for selenium shows a range of recommended levels from 20 &mu;g for children 4 to 6 years
of age to 70 &mu;g for adult males from 19 to 51+ years of age (Ref. 2). Using the population coverage approach, FDA is
proposing to adopt 70 &mu;g as the RDI for selenium.
A review of the 1980 ESADDI values for chloride shows a range from 700 to 2,100 milligrams (mg) for children 4 to 6 years
of age to 1,700 to 5,100 mg for adults (Ref. 3). To be consistent with the population coverage approach being used for
vitamins and minerals with RDA's, FDA said in the RDI/DRV final rule that when nutrients had ESADDI values, it would
select the highest ESADDI within the specified age groups to serve as the label reference value. When the ESADDI value
is presented as a range, FDA said it would use the midpoint of that range as the RDI. No comments were received that objected
to this approach (58 FR 2206 at 2212). Therefore, in accordance with this procedure, FDA is proposing to adopt 3,400
mg (the midpoint between 1,700 to 5,100 mg) as the RDI for chloride.
A review of the 1989 ESADDI values for manganese shows a range from 1.5 to 2.0 mg for children 4 to 6 years of age to 2.0 to
5.0 mg for adults (Ref. 2). Consistent with the procedure discussed above, FDA is proposing to adopt 3.5 mg (the midpoint
between 2.0 to 5.0 mg) as the RDI for manganese.
For fluoride, a review of the 1989 ESADDI values shows a range from 1.0 to 2.5 mg for children 4 to 6 years of age to 1.5 to
4.0 mg for adults. Consistent with the procedure discussed above, FDA is proposing to adopt 3.0 mg (rounding the midpoint
between 1.5 to 4.0 mg, 2.75 mg, to 3.0 mg) as the RDI for fluoride.
For chromium, a review of the 1989 ESADDI values shows a range from 30 to 120 &mu;g for children 4 to 6 years of age to 50
to 200 &mu;g for adults and children 7 or more years of age. In accordance with the population coverage approach, FDA
is proposing to adopt 130 &mu;g (rounding the midpoint between 50 to 200 &mu;g, 125 &mu;g, to 130 &mu;g) as the RDI for
chromium.
Lastly, a review of the 1989 ESADDI values for molybdenum shows a range from 30 to 75 &mu;g for children 4 to 6 years of
age to 75 to 250 &mu;g for adults and children 11 or more years of age. In accordance with the population coverage approach,
FDA is proposing to adopt 160 &mu;g (rounding the midpoint between 75 to 250 &mu;g, 162.5 &mu;g, to 160 &mu;g) as the
RDI for molybdenum.
In summary, FDA is proposing to amend 101.9(c)(8)(iv) to include the following values:


Vitamin K, 80 micrograms
Selenium, 70 micrograms
Chloride, 3,400 milligrams
Manganese, 3.5 milligrams
Fluoride, 3.0 milligrams
Chromium, 130 micrograms
Molybdenum, 160 micrograms


One comment to the proposal on nutrition labeling for dietary supplements recommended that biotin and folate be declared
in terms of micrograms, not milligrams, and that calcium and phosphorus be declared in terms of milligrams instead
of grams. The comment stated that consumers are more familiar with these nutrients being expressed in this manner.

FDA proposed in 1990 (56 FR 29476) to use the units suggested by this comment. However, section 203 of the DS act limited
the values that FDA could use in establishing RDI's to those contained in 101.9(c)(7)(iv) until after November
8, 1993. Accordingly, as stated above, FDA adopted the current U.S. RDA values as the RDI's, with biotin and folate
expressed in terms of milligrams, and calcium and phosphorus expressed in terms of grams. Public health guidelines
and nutrition education efforts typically use the same units of measure as those found in the 10th Edition of NAS' RDA
and repeated in the 1990 proposal. Therefore, the agency agrees with the comment that changing the current units of
measure of biotin, folate, calcium, and phosphorus to those units specified in the 1990 proposal will facilitate
consumer comprehension of quantitative nutrient information.
Therefore, FDA is proposing to amend 101.9(c)(8)(iv) by changing the units of measure for biotin, folate,
calcium, and phosphorus to the following:


biotin-micrograms
folate-micrograms
calcium-milligrams
phosphorus-milligrams


FDA points out that in following the provisions of the DS act and retaining the label reference values in current 101.9(c)(7)(iv),
it did not adopt label reference values in the RDI/DRV final rule for use on foods purported to be or represented for
use by infants, children under 4 years of age, or pregnant or lactating women. Given the continuing questions about
how to arrive at such values, FDA is deferring action on this issue with respect to the issue of updating the RDI's. FDA
intends to propose RDI's for all nutrients, including vitamin K, selenium, chloride, manganese, fluoride, chromium,
and molybdenum, for infants, children under 4 years of age, and pregnant and lactating women in a future rulemaking.

As a result of the lack of reference values for infants, children under 4 years of age, and pregnant and lactating women,
labels of dietary supplements of vitamins or minerals that are intended for these specific groups and that are regulated
under 101.36 (21 CFR 101.36) may continue to specify the milligram or microgram amounts of these nutrients
with an asterisk in the percent Daily Value column. The asterisk would refer to a footnote stating ``Daily Value not
established.'' However, since milligram and microgram amounts are not listed for vitamins and minerals on labels
of foods in conventional food form, until such time as RDA's are established for infants, children less than 4 years
of age, and pregnant and lactating women, and barring a significant change in agency position in the final rule in this
proceeding, the seven subject nutrients may not be declared on labels of foods in conventional food form that are represented
or purported to be for use by these groups. FDA requests comment on whether or not this position is appropriate.
One possible alternative would be to allow foods in conventional food form that are represented or purported to be
for use by infants, children less than 4 years of age, or pregnant and lactating women to list vitamin K, selenium, chloride,
manganese, fluoride, chromium, and molybdenum when they are present in the food in more than insignificant amounts
but without milligram or microgram amounts, only an asterisk that refers to a footnote stating that a Daily Value has
not been established. This alternative would alert consumers to the presence of these nutrients in the food, although
it would not give any indication of the amount present. FDA solicits comment on this and other alternative approaches.



C. Issues Concerning Specific Nutrients


1. GRAS Status of Selenium, Fluoride, and Chromium


In the RDI/DRV final rule, FDA reviewed several comments expressing concern about the GRAS status of selenium, fluoride,
and chromium (58 FR 2206 at 2215). These comments centered primarily around issues of their use in supplements.
As the agency stated in the final rule on mandatory nutrition labeling (58 FR 2079 at 2170), decisions with regard to
whether the use of sources of these nutrients is GRAS are outside the scope of this rulemaking. Any direct addition
of these trace minerals to a food is based on the manufacturer's judgment that use of the nutrient sources is GRAS.


2. Alternative Products


The RDI/DRV final rule also addressed the effect of the label reference values on alternative products (e.g., reduced
fat foods). One comment suggested that with a larger number of vitamins and minerals listed in 101.9(c)(8),
selected vitamins and minerals should be removed from the list of nutrients that, under 101.3(e)(4)(ii) (21
CFR 101.3(e)(4)(ii)), must be present at the same level in a substitute food if that food is to be considered not nutritionally
inferior to the food for which it substitutes and resembles (58 FR 2206 at 2225). The agency acknowledged that an increase
in the number of nutrients for which label reference values (RDI's) are established would mean that efforts to obtain
nutritional equivalency may require the addition of nutrients to substitute foods (58 FR 2206 at 2225).
In considering this comment, FDA acknowledged that there were no FDA-approved sources of selenium, fluoride, chromium
or molybdenum for direct addition to foods (58 FR 2206 at 2225). Since there are no listed sources for these four nutrients,
the agency stated in the RDI/DRV final rule that if RDI's had been established for these nutrients, FDA would have amended
101.3(e)(4)(ii) to state that these nutrients are not required for nutritional equivalency (58 FR 2206 at
2225).
Having received no objections to this statement, FDA is proposing to amend 101.3(e)(4)(ii) to state that selenium,
molybdenum, fluoride, and chromium need not be considered in determining nutritional inferiority. If adopted,
this amendment will mean that a product that substitutes for another food that contains at least 2 percent more of the
RDI for selenium, molybdenum, fluoride, or chromium will not have to be fortified with these nutrients to avoid being
an ``imitation.'' 
The agency feels compelled, however, to point out that there are circumstances in which adequate amounts of selenium,
chromium, and molybdenum need to be supplied by particular foods because those foods may well be the sole item of the
diet. These foods include infant formulas, medical foods, or total diet replacement formulas. The agency notes that
selenium, molybdenum, and chromium have been used for several years in some infant formulas, medical foods, and total
diet replacement product without apparent problems. Although the agency has not determined whether the use of certain
compounds used by manufacturers of such products as sources of these nutrients is GRAS, FDA has not objected to these
additions at levels that result in daily intakes that do not exceed the upper limits of the NAS' ESADDI's.


V. Conforming Amendments


The proposed revision of the nutrition labeling regulations in 101.9 to provide RDI's for vitamin K, selenium,
chloride, manganese, fluoride, chromium, and molybdenum necessitates that FDA revise 101.36(b)(3), (b)(4),
and (b)(4)(vi) as finalized in the document entitled ``Food Labeling; General Requirements for Nutrition Labeling
for Dietary Supplements of Vitamins, Minerals, Herbs, or Other Similar Nutritional Substances'' published elsewhere
in this issue of the 

Federal Register

. Section 101.36(b)(3) specifically provides for vitamin K, chloride, chromium, fluoride, manganese, molybdenum,
and selenium to be listed in the nutrition label of dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals when present and for
quantitative amounts of the nutrients to be declared. Section 101.36(b)(4) states that no percent of Daily Value
shall be given for these seven nutrients in the nutrition label, and 101.36(b)(4)(vi) states that when no percent
is given, an asterisk shall be placed in the ``Percent Daily Value'' column in the nutrition label that refers to another
asterisk that is placed at the bottom of the nutrition label that is followed by the statement ``Daily Value not established.''
FDA is proposing to amend 101.36(b)(3) to remove all references to vitamin K, chloride, chromium, fluoride,
manganese, molybdenum, and selenium. Because these nutrients are proposed to be included in 101.9(c)(8)(iv),
they will be permitted to be listed in nutrition labeling without specific provision. 
With regard to 101.36(b)(4) and (b)(4)(vi), once RDI's are established for vitamin K, chloride, chromium,
fluoride, manganese, molybdenum, and selenium for adults and children 4 or more years of age, the percent Daily Value
of these nutrients will be able to be calculated for this group. However, because RDI's are not being proposed for infants,
children less than 4 years of age, and for pregnant or lactating women (as discussed in section IV.C.1. of this document),
labels of products represented or purported to be for use by those groups will not be able to declare the percent Daily
Value for these nutrients. Therefore, FDA is proposing to amend 101.36(b)(4) and (b)(4)(vi) to provide for
the use of an asterisk that will refer to the statement ``Daily Value not established'' for the seven subject nutrients
on products represented or purported to be for use by infants, children less than 4 years of age, and pregnant or lactating
women.


VI. Comments


Interested persons may, on or before July 7, 1994, submit to the Dockets Management Branch (address above) written
comments regarding this proposal. Two copies of any comments are to be submitted, except that individuals may submit
one copy. Comments are to be identified with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document. Received
comments may be seen in the office above between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


VII. Environmental Impact


The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24(a)(11) that this action is of a type that does not individually or cumulatively
have a significant effect on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessment nor an environmental
impact statement is required.


VIII. Economic Impact


FDA has examined the economic implications of the proposed rule amending 21 CFR as required by Executive Order 12866
and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96354). Executive Order 12866 directs agencies to assess all costs
and benefits of available regulatory alternatives and, when regulation is necessary, to select regulatory approaches
which maximize net benefits (including potential economic, environmental, public health and safety effects; distributive
impacts; and equity). The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires that agencies analyze options for regulatory relief
for small businesses. FDA finds that this proposed rule is not a significant rule as defined by Executive Order 12866.
In accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the agency certifies that the proposed rule will not have a significant
impact on a substantial number of small businesses.
This proposed regulation allows manufacturers of foods in conventional food form and dietary supplements to declare
certain nutrients within the nutrition panel and to make content claims about those nutrients. The proposal provides
flexibility for those manufacturers who wish to disclose information about these seven nutrients without imposing
requirements on those firms producing products without these nutrients. Manufacturers of food in conventional
food form must change food labels if any of the nutrients are added to the product or if any claims are made. FDA is unsure
of the extent to which this will occur. FDA believes that the costs of this regulation are minimal. This regulation
will create benefits to the extent that the additional information allowed in nutrition labeling will help consumers
make healthy dietary choices.


IX. References


The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


1. Food and Nutrition Board, Division of Biology and Agriculture, National Research Council, ``Recommended Dietary
Allowances, 7th ed., 1968,'' Publication 1694, Printing and Publishing Office, NAS, Washington, DC, 1968.
2. Subcommittee on the 10th Edition of the RDA's, Food and Nutrition Board, Commission on Life Sciences, National
Research Council, ``Recommended Dietary Allowances, 10th Edition,'' Washington, DC, National Academy Press,
1989.
3. Committee on Dietary Allowances, Food and Nutrition Board, Assembly of Life Sciences, National Research Council,
``Recommended Dietary Allowances, 9th Revised ed., 1980,'' Washington, DC, National Academy Press, 1980.


List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 101


Food labeling, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, it is proposed that 21 CFR part 101 be amended as follows:



PART 101_FOOD LABELING


1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 101 continues to read as follows: 





Authority: 

Secs. 4, 5, 6 of the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (15 U.S.C. 1453, 1454, 1455); secs. 201, 301, 402, 403, 409, 701 of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 331, 342, 343, 348, 371). 



2. Section 101.3, effective May 8, 1994, is amended by revising paragraph (e)(4)(ii) to read as follows:


101.3 

Identity labeling of food in packaged form.


* * * * *


(e) * * *
(4) * * *
(ii) For the purpose of this section, a measurable amount of an essential nutrient in a food shall be considered to be
2 percent or more of the Daily Reference Value (DRV) of protein listed under 101.9(c)(7)(iii), of potassium
listed under 101.9(c)(9), and of the Reference Daily Intake (RDI) of any vitamin or mineral listed under 101.9(c)(8)(iv),
except that selenium, molybdenum, fluoride, and chromium need not be considered.


* * * * * 



3. Section 101.9, effective May 8, 1994, is amended by revising paragraph (c)(8)(iv) to read as follows:


101.9 

Nutrition Labeling of foods.


* * * * *


(c) * * * 
(8) * * *
(iv) The following RDI's and nomenclature are established for the following vitamins and minerals which are essential
in human nutrition:


Vitamin A, 5,000 International Units.
Vitamin C, 60 milligrams.
Calcium, 1000 milligrams.
Iron, 18 milligrams.
Vitamin D, 400 International Units.
Vitamin E, 30 International Units. 
Vitamin K, 80 micrograms.
Thiamin, 1.5 milligrams.
Riboflavin, 1.7 milligrams.
Niacin, 20 milligrams.
Vitamin B6, 2.0 milligrams.
Folate, 400 micrograms.
Vitamin B12, 6 micrograms.
Biotin, 300 micrograms.
Pantothenic Acid, 10 milligrams.
Phosphorus, 1000 milligrams.
Iodine, 150 micrograms.
Magnesium, 400 milligrams.
Zinc, 15 milligrams.
Selenium, 70 micrograms.
Copper, 2.0 milligrams.
Manganese, 3.5 milligrams. 
Fluoride, 3.0 milligrams.
Chromium, 130 micrograms.
Molybdenum, 160 micrograms.
Chloride, 3,400 milligrams.


* * * * *



4. Section 101.36 is amended by revising paragraph (b)(3), (b)(4) introductory text, and (b)(4)(vi) to read as follows:



101.36 

Nutrition labeling of dietary supplements of vitamins or minerals.


* * * * *


(b) * * * 
(3) A listing of all nutrients required in 101.9(c) that are present in the dietary supplement in quantitative
amounts by weight that exceed the amount that can be declared as zero in 101.9(c). Those nutrients that are not
present, or that are present in amounts that would be declared as zero, shall not be declared. In addition, potassium
shall be declared except when present in quantitative amounts by weight that allow a declaration of zero. The name
of each nutrient listed shall be immediately followed by the quantitative amount by weight of the nutrient. Nutrient
names and quantitative amounts shall be presented in a column under the heading ``Amount Per Serving'' and aligned
on the left side of the nutrition label. The heading ``Amount Per Serving'' shall be separated from other information
on the label by a bar above and beneath it, except that when calories are listed, the bar shall be placed beneath the calorie
declaration. When the serving size of the product is one unit (e.g., 1 tablet), a heading consistent with the declaration
of serving size, such as ``Amount per Tablet'' or ``Each Tablet Contains,'' may be used in place of the heading ``Amount
per Serving.'' Other appropriate terms, such as capsule, packet, or teaspoonful, may be used in place of the term ``Serving.''
(4) A listing of the percent of the Daily Value (i.e., the percent of the RDI as established in 101.9(c)(8)(iv)
or DRV as established in 101.9(c)(9)), where appropriate, of all nutrients listed in the nutrition label,
except that the percent for protein may be omitted as provided in 101.9(c)(7), no percent shall be given for
sugars, and, for labels of dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals that are represented or purported to be for
use by infants, children less than 4 years of age, or pregnant or lactating women, no percent shall be given for vitamin
K, chloride, chromium, fluoride, manganese, molybdenum, or selenium. This information shall be presented in one
column aligned under the heading of ``% Daily Value'' and to the right of the column of nutrient names and amounts. The
headings ``% Daily Value (DV),'' ``% DV,'' ``Percent Daily Value,'' or ``Percent DV'' may be substituted for ``% Daily
Value.'' The heading ``% Daily Value'' shall be placed on the same line as the heading ``Amount Per Serving'' or placed
beneath this heading and the bar underneath it, except that ``% Daily Value'' shall be placed beneath this bar when
calorie information is required to be declared. Calorie information shall be placed beneath ``Amount Per Serving''
and above the bar.


* * * * *


(vi) When no percent is given for sugars, or, on labels of dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals that are represented
or purported to be for use by infants, children less than 4 years of age, or pregnant or lactating women, when no percent
is given for vitamin K, chloride, chromium, fluoride, manganese, molybdenum, or selenium, an asterisk shall be placed
in the ``% Daily Value'' column that shall refer to another asterisk that is placed at the bottom of the nutrition label
and followed by the statement ``Daily Value not established.''


* * * * *



Dated: December 23, 1993.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
David A. Kessler,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Commissioner of Food and Drugs.

</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
Donna E. Shalala,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of Health and Human Services.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9331816 Filed 122993; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>


