 

To reflect these changes, the Agency is proposing to amend the Regulations Governing the Grading of Shell Eggs and
the U.S. Standards, Grades, and Weight Classes for Shell Eggs in 7 CFR part 56. 



Proposed Changes



The proposal would redefine ``quality assurance inspector'' to exclude from this designation a plant owner, manager,
foreman, or supervisor and to clarify that the quality assurance inspector is authorized to examine product. The
revision is necessary to eliminate the possibility that someone with a financial interest in the product or having
managerial responsibilities would be designated as a quality assurance inspector. The revision also would clarify
that examining or sampling product is a primary responsibility required of a quality assurance inspector. 

The proposal would also define the term ``washed ungraded eggs'' to mean shell eggs which have been washed but not subject
to any grading or segregation for quality. This addition is necessary to facilitate the trading, certification,
and identification of shell eggs from processing facilities where shell eggs move continuously from laying house
to processing facilities without being graded. Such shell eggs cannot be classified as nest run eggs because they
have been washed and are not intended for consumer sales because they have not been graded. 

The proposal would update the regulations to comply with current statutory requirements regarding providing grading
services and licensing graders without discrimination due to age or disability. 

The facilities and equipment which the applicant furnishes the grader would be revised to include other facilities
and equipment as may otherwise be required. As new equipment has been developed and installed in official plants,
additional items have been required to perform normal grading activities. The proposal would specifically require
the applicant to provide any adequate facilities and equipment necessary to perform grading activities as changes
in technology and production practices dictate. 

The proposal would revise the regulations to comply with the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990, which requires
nutrition labeling on most foods that are regulated by the Food and Drug Administration. 

The proposal would revise the existing method of identifying cartons to require that each officially identified
carton of shell eggs be lot numbered on either the carton or the consumer package. The current regulations specify
that the cartons shall be lot numbered on the carton or the tape used to seal the carton. The shell egg industry does not
use tape to seal cartons in their current production practices. This revision would update the regulations to reflect
current production practices and in addition provide flexibility to accommodate future changes that the industry
may devise for officially identifying shell eggs. 

In addition, the proposal would revise the minimum facility and operating requirements for shell egg grading and
packing plants by updating grading room requirements. The current regulations describe hand-candling operations
which are out-of date because almost all shell egg processing is done mechanically. Regulations are needed which
define the grading room requirements of a mechanized shell egg processing operation. The proposed revision will
specifically define the requirements of a mechanized shell egg operation while providing the flexibility to approve
the acceptability of all grading rooms. 

Shell egg cleaning operations also would be revised to require that the temperature of the water used to spray rinse
shell eggs be at least as warm as the water used to wash the shell eggs. The current regulations require that washed shell
eggs be spray rinsed with warm water. This revision would specify that ``warm'' means at least the temperature of the
water used to wash the shell eggs and would also bring the regulations in line with current washing and sanitizing practices
which help reduce bacterial contamination of shell eggs. If shell eggs are subjected to a sanitizing spray rinse which
is colder than the water used to wash them, the probability of bacterial contamination increases because the cold
water causes the shell contents to contract which allows contaminants to be drawn through the shell of the egg. Additionally,
the revisions would specifically authorize the National Supervisor to approve methods of sanitizing shell eggs
other than the normal spray rinse method. This revision will provide the flexibility to accommodate future changes
in the technology of sanitizing shell eggs and to adapt to new waste management requirements. 

The Agency is proposing to delete U.S. Wholesale Grades and Weight Classes for Shell Eggs. This is necessary because
wholesale grades are difficult to understand and are virtually unused. Almost all shell eggs moving in commerce today
are sold on the basis of the U.S. Consumer Grades, U.S. Nest-Run Grades, company approved specifications, or sold
without certification. 

The Agency is proposing to revise the existing standards for B quality in U.S. Nest-Run Grades for shell eggs by allowing
shell eggs with pronounced ridges and thin spots to be included in the maximum percentage tolerance permitted for
B quality. The standard for B quality currently defines abnormal in part as exhibiting pronounced ridges and thin
spots. The proposed revision would provide uniformity between the B quality description for U.S. Nest-Run Grades
and the standards for B quality. 





