 

(2) Have the necessary administrative and supervisory 
controls in place to assure an agreed upon contracting 
organization has the proven ability to perform responsibly in 
the field of economic, business management, or other needed 
research area; 
(c) Legally obligate itself to administer cooperative 
agreement funds, provide adequate accounting of the 
expenditure of such funds, and comply with the cooperative 
agreement; 
(d) Provide at least 50 percent of the funds necessary to 
conduct the research from non-federal funds; and 
(e) Agree to conduct proposed research related to 
cooperatives and agricultural marketing. 


4285.25 

Authorized use of cooperative agreement funds. 


Funds received for research under cooperative agreements 
in this program shall only be used for: 
(a) Payment of salaries and necessary employee benefits 
of personnel as agreed upon in the Cooperative Agreement. 
Included are salaries and benefits of State employees assigned 
full-time to one or more projects, or the percent of the 
salaries and benefits related to project work for State 
employees assigned part-time to research on one or more 
projects. Salaries and benefits include basic salary, other 
compensation such as holiday pay, sick or annual leave, and 
personnel benefits (quarters allowance, payments to other 
funds such as employees' life insurance, health benefits, 
retirement, Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA), 
accident compensation, and similar payments). For any of the 
benefit items when the State usually pays the employer share, 
Federal funds may be used to pay the proportionate share of 
such employer contributions. 
(b) Payment of necessary and reasonable office expenses 
such as office rental, office utilities, and office equipment 
rental. The purchase of office equipment is permissible when 
the cooperator determines it to be more economical than 
renting. However, as a general rule, these types of expenses 
would be classified as indirect costs in multiple funded 
organizations and would not be an allowable expense. Planned 
purchases of equipment costing more than $200 per unit must be 
approved by RDA. Equipment purchased becomes State property 
pursuant to the cooperative agreement. 
(c) Payment of necessary and reasonable costs of printing 
publications of research project results. However, all such 
publications should show the RDA as cooperator in the project 
and bear the following statement: ``State funds for this 
project (publication) were matched with Federal funds under 
the Federal-State Research on Cooperatives Program of the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Rural Development Administration, 
Cooperative Services, as provided by the Agricultural 
Marketing Act of 1946 and (appropriate) fiscal year 
appropriations.'' 
(d) Purchase of office supplies (such as paper, pens, 
pencils, and trade magazines) and postage needed for project 
activities. 
(e) Payment of necessary and reasonable travel expenses. 


4285.264285.45 

[Reserved] 


4285.46 

Prohibited use of cooperative agreement funds. 


(a) The Agricultural Marketing Act prohibits the use of 
Federal funds to pay for newspaper or periodical space and 
radio and television time, either directly to the media or 
indirectly though an advertising agency or other firm. County 
and State fair exhibits, as well as commodity months and 
weeks, are also excluded as the research on cooperatives 
program activities. 
(b) Federal funds cannot be used to purchase products or 
samples of products to give away to the public. 
(c) Federal program funds cannot be used to purchase: 
(1) Promotional pieces such as point-of-sale materials, 
promotional kits, billboard space and signs, streamers, 
automobile stickers, table tents, and placemats; or 
(2) Promotion items of a personal gift nature. 
(d) Cooperative agreement funds cannot be used to conduct 
general publicity or information programs designed to build 
the image of the State's agriculture or of a particular State 
Department of Agriculture or Agricultural Experiment Station. 
(e) Project funds cannot be used to pay for the salary 
and travel of employees of cooperatives, trade associations, 
commodity groups, and other industry organizations, or of 
State personnel while engaged in managing market orders, 
cooperatives, or other group endeavors. 
(f) Commissioners, Directors, and Secretaries of State 
Departments of Agriculture, Agricultural Experiment Stations, 
and other State agencies cannot charge their salaries and 
travel to project funds, with the exception of travel to 
workshops or conferences devoted to the Federal-State Research 
On Cooperatives Program. 
(g) Funds made available for this program shall not be 
subject to reduction for indirect costs or for tuition 
remission. 


4285.47 

Limitations. 


The amount of funds available for the cooperative 
agreements under this program is limited to the amount 
appropriated for the fiscal year. 


4285.484285.57 

[Reserved] 


4285.58 

How to apply for cooperative agreement funds. 


(a) A program solicitation will be prepared and announced 
through publications such as the 

Federal Register

, 
professional trade journals, agency or program handbooks, 
and/or any other appropriate means, as early as practicable 
each fiscal year in which funds are appropriated for the 
program. 
(b) The annual program solicitation will contain 
information sufficient to enable all eligible applicants to 
prepare proposals including: 
(1) Desired research topics. The FY94 solicitation will 
encourage studies: 
(i) To improve the efficiency and effectiveness of 
marketing of agricultural cooperatives; 
(ii) To measure the impact of rural cooperatives on the 
local economies; 
(iii) That help identify opportunities to develop 
cooperatives for new or alternative market uses of 
agricultural products; 
(iv) That help identify ways to develop agricultural 
marketing cooperatives; and
(v) Addressing other cooperative marketing objectives; 
(2) Explanation of eligibility requirements as outlined 
in 4285.24 of this subpart; 
(3) The notice of availability of application forms and 
instructions for submission of applications; 
(4) The notice of deadline dates for postmarking proposal 
packages. 
(c) 

Format for proposals.

 Unless otherwise indicated by 
the Department in the annual program solicitation, the 
following information must be submitted for the preparation of 
proposals under this program: 

