 

The second condition requires that there be no reasonable alternative for disposal outside the unit boundaries.

The third condition also is directly derived from the statute which says ``*** so long as such site
will not degrade any of the natural and cultural resources of such park unit.'' The fourth and fifth conditions ensure
consistency and compliance with other Federal, State, and local regulatory programs. 
The sixth condition, that hazardous wastes may not be stored, handled, or disposed at solid waste disposal sites within
National Park System units, recognizes the unique resource values protected in the National Park System and the fundamental
incompatibility of the placement of hazardous wastes with protecting those resources. The final rule adds tires
to the list of wastes that may not be disposed of at a solid waste disposal site within the boundaries of a National Park
System unit. 
Note that the EPA's definition of hazardous waste at 40 CFR part 261 excludes wastes generated by households (including
single and multiple residences, hotels and motels). Thus, the sixth condition does not restrict disposal of household
wastes in NPS operated or other solid waste disposal sites in National Park System units, as long as the waste results
from National Park Service activities, such as garbage collection from park/concessionaire employees' residences.

The seventh condition, that such sites be located wholly on nonfederal lands, implements the policy of the National
Park Service articulated in its 

Management Policies

 (1988), page 9:6. As a consequence, no such sites may be established or expanded onto Federal lands in a unit, except
that the NPS may establish a new solid waste disposal site on Federal lands in a park where nonfederal lands do not exist,
or are otherwise unavailable or unsuitable. 
The eighth condition implements Executive Orders 11988 and 11990. The ninth and tenth conditions seek to clearly
specify precise categories of facilities and lands where solid waste disposal sites would be incompatible with NPS
management and visitor enjoyment. The eleventh condition limits the size of such sites and the twelfth condition
seeks to ensure that such sites will not degrade park resources and visitor enjoyment at a future date. 
The request for a permit forms the basis for the Regional Director's evaluation of whether the conditions for approval
listed above may be met. The Act states that its general purpose is to ``protect the air, land, water, natural and cultural
values of the National Park System and the property of the United States therein.'' Section 6.4(b) of the rule specifies
the minimum amount of information necessary, in the professional judgment of the NPS, to evaluate whether the air,
land, water, and cultural and natural resources of the National Park System can be protected if a proposed operation
is permitted. 
Finally, 6.4(c) requires that the Regional Director reject the request if the conditions for approval detailed
in paragraph (a) are not met. This section also requires that the Regional Director notify the requester of the rejection
and the reasons for the rejection. 


Section 6.5Solid Waste Disposal Sites in Operation on September 1, 1984 


The NPS believes that solid waste disposal sites are not an appropriate use of lands within National Park System unit
boundaries. The long-term intent of the National Park Service is to eliminate, to the extent possible, such sites
from within unit boundaries. In the interim, the requirements of 6.5 are designed to ensure that any solid waste
disposal sites in operation on September 1, 1984, in units of the National Park System and continuously operated since
that time meet minimum standards for operation and do not degrade park resources and values. 
The term ``continuous operation'' requires clarification. The Service determines that a solid waste disposal site
existing on September 1, 1984, qualifies under 6.5, if that site has accepted solid waste for disposal at least
for some portion of each year after 1984. To be in ``continuous operation'' does not require that the site receive waste
on a daily, weekly, or even monthly basis. Often seasonal factors, such as weather, access, and fluctuations in waste
loads require that some existing sites may be used intermittently. 

