 

However, EPA does not believe that today's rule will have a significant adverse impact on the natural gas, methanol,
and MTBE industries for several reasons. First, EPA always has expected ethanol and its derivatives to play a role
in the RFG program even in the absence of today's rule. Second, the advent of the Phase II RFG standards in 2000 will create
powerful incentives to reduce the RVP of summer reformulated gasoline to very low levels. As a result, EPA had expected
that ETBE and ETAE would be used beginning in 2000 even without the promulgation of today's rule. EPA considers it unlikely
that MTBE, methanol, and natural gas producers would install expensive capital equipment to satisfy demand only
for Phase I of the program; instead, EPA has expected these industries to build capacity to satisfy the long-term demand
for their product. Since such long-term demand would be limited by the growth in ETBE and ETAE demand for Phase II RFG,
it is not clear to EPA that today's rule will reduce the growth of the methanol, MTBE, and natural gas industries below
what it otherwise would have been. 
Third, even with today's rule, methanol and MTBE production is projected to grow quite rapidly. If MTBE captures 70
percent of the RFG oxygenate market, annual MTBE demand will grow from 2.3 billion gallons in 1993 to 4.1 billion gallons
in 1995 and to 4.8 billion gallons by 1997 (when the Phase II California RFG program takes full effect), an increase
of approximately 110 percent. As a result, annual methanol production is projected to grow by 600 million gallons
in 1995 and 1996 and an additional 200 million gallons by 1997. The demand for natural gas will grow even more dramatically
in absolute terms, since natural gas is an economically attractive source of the isobutylene used to produce ETBE
and is also used as an energy source in ethanol production, according to USDA. 


5. Impact on Highway Trust Fund and General Fund 


Renewable fuels blended directly into gasoline qualify either for income tax credit or reduced excise tax rates.
The reduced excise tax rate is the form of the tax subsidy used most frequently and effectively reduces the flow of revenue
into the Federal Highway Trust Fund. The income tax credits reduce the General Fund. At present, renewable ethanol
and methanol derived from sources other than oil, natural gas, coal, and peat qualify for the reduced excise tax rates
if they are blended into finished gasoline. Renewable ethers may also qualify for the reduced excise tax rates, although
the mechanism by which the tax reduction is received makes it difficult and often uneconomical to obtain for potential
blenders. 
To the extent that today's rule increases ethanol use in non-VOC-controlled RFG, it will reduce highway trust fund
revenues. As discussed above, the amount of new ethanol capacity planned or under construction prior to the December
proposal, combined with the ethanol currently blended in the winter months in RFG areas, would have enabled ethanol
to be used in up to 15 percent of the RFG oxygenate market without displacing ethanol from existing markets. Based on
this information, EPA estimates that today's rule is likely to increase ethanol's share of the total oxygenate market
by approximately 15 percentage points, which amounts to 335 million gallons of ethanol. With a $0.54 per gallon tax
subsidy for ethanol, EPA has concluded that today's rule will result in a loss of highway trust fund revenues of approximately
$181 million annually once the program is fully implemented. In addition, up to 176 million gallons of the currently-planned
additions to ethanol capacity will be eligible for an additional tax credit of $0.10/gallon under the small ethanol
producer credit, which could reduce General Fund revenues by as much as $17.6 million. Finally, if ethanol is blended
at 10 volume percent to meet the requirements of the renewable oxygenate program (which is especially possible in
the early years of the program, as discussed elsewhere in this Preamble), then an additional $0.06 per gallon of ethanol
would be diverted from the highway trust fund to to the General Fund. Hence the total loss in annual tax revenues resulting
from the renewable oxygenate program would be as large as $199 million, while the loss in annual highway trust fund
revenues is expected to range from $181 million to $201 million. These values could change as the level of ETBE use changes;
depending on the extent to which the renewable oxygenate requirement is met via ETBE use, today's rule may have less
of an impact on highway trust fund revenues. Beginning in 2000, EPA expects the Phase II RFG requirements to stimulate
expanded use of ETBE in VOC-controlled gasoline to take advantage of its RVP-lowering properties. EPA believes this
would have happened to some extent regardless of the renewable oxygenate requirement. Hence, EPA anticipates that
beginning in 2000, the reduction in highway trust fund revenues resulting from the renewable oxygenate requirement
itself could decrease significantly below the estimates cited above. A more detailed discussion of the highway trust
fund impact of today's rule can be found in the RIA. 


6. Impact on Farm Support Payments 


EPA received comments from farm interests and USDA claiming that the renewable oxygenate program would reduce government
expenditures on farm income and farm price support payments. To the extent that this program increases crop prices,
it should reduce farm program payments. As discussed in section VI.C.3, USDA projects that farm deficiency payments
will decrease by $220369 million per year. 





