 

Following completion of construction, approximately 70 of the total 200 acres would be allowed to revert to preconstruction
conditions. 

Avoca proposes to use a 100-foot-wide construction right-of-way for its gas, water, and brine pipelines. Avoca's
permanent rights-of-way for the pipelines outside the site property would vary from 25 to 50 feet wide, depending
on the number of pipelines in the easement: 25 feet wide for single pipelines and 50 feet wide for multiple pipelines.




The EA Process 



The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requires the Commission to take into account the environmental impacts
that could result from an action whenever it considers the issuance of a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity.
NEPA also requires us to discover and address concerns the public may have about proposals. We call this ``scoping''.
The main goal of the scoping process is to focus the analysis in the EA on the important environmental issues. By this
Notice of Intent, the Commission requests public comments on the scope of the issues it will address in the EA. All comments
received are taken into account during the preparation of the EA. 

The EA will discuss impacts that could occur as a result of the construction and operation of the proposed project under
these general headings: 

&bull;Geology and soils; 

&bull;Water resources, fisheries, and wetlands; 

&bull;Vegetation and wildlife; 

&bull;Endangered and threatened species; 

&bull;Land use; 

&bull;Cultural resources; 

&bull;Air quality and noise; 

&bull;Hazardous waste. 

We will also evaluate possible alternatives to the proposed project or portions of the project, and make recommendations
on how to lessen or avoid impacts on the various resource areas. 

Our independent analysis of the issues will be in the EA. Depending on the comments received during the scoping process,
the EA may be published and mailed to Federal, state, and local agencies, public interest groups, interested individuals,
affected landowners, newspapers, libraries, and the Commission's official service list for this proceeding. A
comment period will be allotted for review if the EA is published. We will consider all comments on the EA before we recommend
that the Commission approve or not approve the project. 



Currently Identified Environmental Issues 



We have already identified several environmental issues that we think deserve attention based on a preliminary review
of the proposed facilities and the information provided by Avoca. Keep in mind that this is a preliminary list. The
list of issues will be added to, subtracted from, or changed based on your comments and our analysis. 

The list of environmental issues: 

&bull;Avoca would drill a total of 19 new wells in Steuben County, New York: 10 solution-mined cavern, 3 water source,
and 6 brine disposal wells. These facilities have a potential for groundwater and surface impact. 

&bull;Whether the structural geology of the area is sufficient to contain solution-mined caverns. 

&bull;Avoca proposes to use 2,000,000 gallons of water per day for the solution-mining process during the first 2
years of operation at the Avoca Gas Storage Field. This may have an impact on groundwater availability. Testing of
wells in the local aquifers indicate that the water supply recharges up to 14,600,000 gallons of water per day. 

&bull;Avoca's pipelines would cross two perennial streams: Neils Creek and Cotton Creek. Both of these creeks are
high-quality trout streams, classified as trout-spawning grounds by New York. 

&bull;Avoca's brine disposal pipelines would cross 16 wetlands. 

&bull;Avoca would construct a new compressor station and pumping facility. The nearest noise-sensitive area to
Avoca's new compressor station and pumping facility is 2,400 feet to the northeast. There is the potential for air
and noise quality impacts. 

&bull;Possible impact on federally listed threatened or endangered species. 

&bull;Possible impact on cultural resources. 



Public Participation 



You can make a difference by sending a letter addressing your specific comments or concerns about the project. You
should focus on the potential environmental effects of the proposal, alternatives to the proposal (including alternative
routes), and measures to avoid or lessen environmental impact. The more specific your comments, the more useful they
will be. 

Please follow the instructions below to ensure that your comments are received and properly recorded: 





