 

The FAA would approve a recurrent training program under proposed 121.427 that included CRM recurrent practice
and feedback and continuing reinforcement training components, and a refresher curriculum segment in the principles
of CRM. Ideally, for flight crewmembers continuing reinforcement may be accomplished, as authorized in proposed
121.427(b)(4), during an approved simulator line operational flight training (LOFT) session. This could
include use of special purpose operational training (SPOT) which is a type of line operational simulation (LOS) that
may be used to train coordinated crew performance in specific subjects such as windshear training, use of special
navigation equipment, etc. CRM reinforcement may be incorporated into existing SPOT scenarios. It may also be incorporated
into LOS-like scenarios that do not use simulators. Advisory Circular (AC) 12035B, Line Operational Simulators:
Line Oriented Flight Training, Special Purpose Operational Training, Line Operational Evaluation, provides suggested
guidelines for the design and implementation of LOS. Recurrent CRM training will be provided to all crewmembers and
aircraft dispatchers. 

The FAA estimates that the proposed CRM training requirement will increase the present minimum programmed hours
of instruction for initial and recurrent training. For initial training for pilots and flight engineers, the FAA
estimates that CRM training will add 12 hours to present requirements. For initial training for flight attendants
and aircraft dispatchers, the increase is estimated to be 8 hours. For recurrent training, the estimated increase
is 4 hours for pilots and flight engineers and 2 hours for flight attendants and aircraft dispatchers. To reflect these
estimated increases in programmed hours of training, changes are proposed to 121.419(b) (1) and (2),
121.421(c) (1) and (2), 1212.422(c) (1) and (2) and 121.427(c). The FAA invites comments on these estimates and, if
adequate justification is received, will consider reducing the increases in minimum required hours in the final
rule. In this regard, the FAA points out that under existing regulations (i.e., 121.405(d)) individual certificate
holders may be granted reductions in programmed hours when justified under that paragraph. When the Administrator
approves a request to reduce programmed hours of training, a copy of the Administrator's statement is included in
the training program curriculum pursuant to 121.403(b)(6). 



Editorial Change 



A proposed change to 121.135(b)(15) would make it clear that the certificate holder's manual must include
the entire training program curriculum required under 121.403, not just the program affecting airmen. 



Effective Date and Compliance Dates 



The FAA is proposing an effective date of 90 days after these proposals are published as a final rule. By that date certificate
holders operating under part 135 who are required to comply with applicable part 121 training and qualification requirements,
would have to submit the transition plan required under proposed 135.321(b). The proposed compliance date
in 135.10 for training and qualifying under part 121 rules is 1 year after the effective date of the final rule.



For initial CRM training, the FAA proposes a compliance date 2 years after the effective date of the final rule for flight
crewmembers, and 3 years after the effective date of the final rule for flight attendants and aircraft dispatchers.
After the applicable date, a certificate holder would be prohibited from using a crewmember or dispatcher unless
that person has completed approved crew or dispatcher resource management initial training. Since a large number
of certificate holder employees are required to have this training, the delayed compliance date will allow sufficient
time to train instructors conducting CRM training, and then, in turn, provide this training to all crewmembers and
dispatchers. 

The FAA requests comments on the appropriateness of the proposed effective and compliance dates. 



Regulatory Evaluation Summary 



Proposed changes to Federal regulations must undergo several economic analyses. First, Executive Order 12866 directs
that each Federal agency shall propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits
of the intended regulation justify its costs. Second, the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 requires agencies to
analyze the economic effect of regulatory changes on small entities. Third, the Office of Management and Budget directs
agencies to assess the effect of regulatory changes on international trade. In conducting these analyses, the FAA
has determined that this proposed rule would generate benefits that justify its costs and does not meet the criteria
of ``a significant regulatory action'' as defined in the Executive Order but is significant under the Department
of Transportation Regulatory Policies and Procedures. The proposal would not have a significant impact on a substantial
number of small entities. And, the proposal would not constitute a barrier to international trade. These analyses,
available in the docket, are summarized below. 



Costs 



This section discusses costs of the new requirements that this NPRM would impose on parts 121 and 135 operators. The
regulatory evaluation assumes a 7 percent discount rate as mandated by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
The analysis also uses a 6 percent growth rate for commuters and a 4 percent growth rate for air carriers for the next
decade. 

The new hire rate affects the amount of initial training required. This rate varies widely within the industry depending
on economic cycles, birth and death of airline companies, and long-term industry growth. The FAA has developed two
cost estimates. The first uses a 10 percent and the second a 20 percent new hire rate. Costs for a single year refer to
those using a 20 percent new hire rate (the higher of the two costs), while for the total 10 year costs the analysis shows
a range representing the difference between the 10 percent and 20 percent new hire rates. 

Each operator will incur a small administrative effort related to establishing these new requirements within its
existing training program. The FAA estimates that operators on average will incur a one time burden of about 8 hours
of administrative time. This relatively small burden is subsumed in the non-wage training costs. 



Part 121Training for Part 135 Crews 



The proposed rule would require part 121 training standards for part 135 crewmembers of airplanes either certificated
for two pilots or having 10 or more passenger seats. The amendment exempts currently employed part 135 pilots and flight
attendants from initial and transitional part 121 training. However, it imposes a recurrent training requirement
on currently employed crewmembers to meet part 121 qualifying standards during their first recurrent training.
New crewmembers under part 135 would receive initial part 121 training. 

