 

(b) Claims settlement procedures. Per DODD 5515.3, the DOD has directed that where a single Service has been assigned
a country or area claims responsibility, that Service will settle claims cognizable under 10 U.S.C. 2733 in accordance
with the departmental regulations of that Service.


536.66 

Attorney fees.


In the settlement of any claim pursuant to 10 U.S.C. 2733 and this subpart, attorney fees will not exceed 20 percent
of the final cost to the United States of the award. On structured settlements, the cash payment due immediately upon
final approval must be sufficient to allow payment of attorneys fees equal to 20% of the total cost of the settlement.


536.67 

Payment of costs, settlements, and judgments related to certain medical malpractice claims.


(a) General. Costs, settlements, judgments cognizable under 10 U.S.C. 1089(f) for personal injury or death caused
by any physician, dentist, nurse, pharmacist, paramedical, or other supporting personnel (including medical and
dental technicians, nurse assistant, therapists, and Red Cross volunteers meeting the criteria in AR 403,
paragraph 242) of DA will be paid provided_
(1) The alleged negligent or wrongful actions or omissions arose in performance of medical, dental or related health
care functions (including clinical studies and investigations) within the scope of employment;
(2) Such personnel furnish prompt notification and delivery of all process served or received, and other documents,
information, and assistance as requested; and cooperate in the defense of the action on its merits.
(b) Requests for indemnification. All requests for indemnification under this section should be forwarded to the
Commander, USARCS, for action using procedures contained in this subpart. (See DODD 6000.6.)


536.68 

Payment of costs, settlements, and judgments related to certain legal malpractice claims.


(a) General. Costs, settlements, and judgments cognizable under 10 U.S.C. 1054(f) for damages for injury or loss
of property caused by any attorney, paralegal, or other member of a legal staff within DA will be paid provided that_
(1) The alleged negligent or wrongful actions or omissions arose in connection with providing legal services while
acting within the scope of duties or employment,
(2) Such personnel furnish prompt notification and delivery of all process served or received, and other documents,
information, and assistance as requested; and cooperate in the defense of the action on its merits.
(b) Requests for indemnification. All requests for indemnification under this section should be forwarded to the
Commander, USARCS, for action utilizing the procedures contained in this subpart.


Subpart D_Claims Cognizable Under the Federal Tort Claims Act


536.69 

Authority.


The statutory authority for this subpart is the FTCA (60 Stat. 842), (28 U.S.C. 26712680), as amended by the
Act of 18 July 1966 (Pub. L. 89506; 80 Stat. 306), Pub. L. 93253, 16 March 1974 (88 Stat. 50), and Pub. L.
97124, 29 December 1981, and as implemented by the Attorney General's Regulations (28 CFR 14.114.11).


536.70 

Scope.


(a) This subpart prescribes the substantive bases and special procedural requirements for the administrative settlement
of claims against the United States under the FTCA and the implementing Attorney General's Regulations (DA Pam 27162,
appendix H) based on death, personal injury, or damage to or loss of property that accrues on or after 18 January 1967.
If a conflict exists between this subpart and the Attorney General's Regulations, the latter governs.
(b) Citations to cases interpreting and applying the FTCA are contained in the Federal Tort Claims Handbook provided
by USARCS. That handbook should be used in conjunction with this subpart.


536.71 

Claims payable.


(a) Unless otherwise prescribed, claims for death, personal injury, or damage to or loss of property (real or personal)
are payable under this subpart if the injury or damage is caused by negligent or wrongful acts or omissions of military
personnel or civilian employees of the DA or DOD while acting within the scope of their employment under circumstances
in which the United States, if a private person, would be liable to the claimant in accordance with the law of the place
where the act or omission occurred. The FTCA is a limited consent to liability without which the United States is immune.
Similarly, there is no Federal cause of action created by the Constitution that would permit a damage recovery because
of the Fifth Amendment or any other constitutional provision. Immunity must be expressly waived, as by the FTCA.
(b) An ``employee of the Government'' (28 U.S.C. 2671) includes the following categories of tortfeasors for which
the Army is responsible:
(1) Military personnel (members of the Army), including but not limited to_
(i) Members on full-time active duty in a pay status, including members_
(A) Assigned to units performing active service.
(B) Serving as ROTC instructors. (Excludes Junior ROTC instructor unless on active duty.)
(C) Serving as NG instructors or advisors.
(D) On duty or training with other Federal agencies, for example, National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
DOD, State, Navy, or Air Force.
(E) Assigned as students or ordered into training at a nonFederal civilian educational institution, hospital, factory,
or other industry. (This does not include members on excess leave.)


