 

20. Non-commercial Samples of Skins 



No document has been received from the CITES Secretariat yet; no position 
is possible at this time. 



21. Marking of Crocodilian Specimens 



No document has been received from the CITES Secretariat yet. 

At COP8, the United States advocated adoption of a resolution that it 
submitted jointly with Australia, to require the skins of all crocodilian 
species to be tagged before being allowed to be traded by CITES Parties 
(whether or not a reservation has been entered by a Party). 

Resolution Conf. 8.14, submitted by both the United States and Australia, 
established the framework for a system of universal marking for all 
crocodilian skins in trade, as a response to serious problems of illegal 
trade in crocodilian skins, parts, and products. The Animals Committee was 
charged with setting up the system for the Parties. The Animals Committee 
has prepared a revision of Resolution Conf. 8.14 on this topic, due to 
problems with implementation of portions of the resolution. The draft 
resolution of the Animals Committee has not yet been received from the 
CITES Secretariat. 



22. Transport of Live Specimens 



Support the adoption by the COP of the report of the Chair of the Working 
Group on the Transport of Live Specimens (TWG). The United States will 
remain an active participant in the TWG, and with all aspects of the 
transport of live wild animals. 

Dr. Susan Lieberman of the Service's Office of Management Authority has 
served as Chair of the TWG since COP8. Copies of all reports of the Chair 
of the TWG to the Standing Committee are available on request, including 
the Terms of Reference of the TWG. The Chair submitted a report to the 
Standing Committee Chair and to the Secretariat, for transmission to the 
Parties and discussion at COP9. That report makes recommendations for the 
future of the TWG. The Service fully supports the report, and recommends 
its adoption, with the exception of reserving its position on adoption of 
budgetary and personal recommendations of the Chair contained therein. 
Those budgetary recommendations would facilitate increased training efforts 
and greater involvement of exporting Parties in TWG activities and 
deliberations, which the Service supports. The Service also supports the 
provision of time near the beginning of the first week of COP9 for those 
interested in the TWG to meet and discuss transport issues, prior to full 
discussion in Committee II. Several past participants in TWG activities 
have inquired as to whether such a meeting of the TWG would be possible; 
the Service believes that it would be in the best interest of CITES 
implementation and of the transport of live animals. 

The humane transport of live wild animals remains a significant concern of 
the United States. The TWG's Terms of Reference with the Standing 
Committee include working to improve implementation of the Convention and 
relevant resolutions, training, improvement of international standards, 
coordination with the International Air Transport Association Live Animals 
Board, and the transport of live wild birds. 



23. Implementation of Article XIV, Paragraphs 4 and 5 



Support adoption of the resolution submitted by the United States, which 
deals with the implementation of Article XIV, paragraphs 4 and 5 of the 
Convention. The U.S. goal in submitting this resolution is to clarify how 
an Appendix II listing could be implemented expeditiously for a marine 
species whose management is under the competency of a pre-existing treaty. 

The provisions of CITES apply to all species of wild fauna and flora, 
including marine species. The management of many marine species comes 
under the jurisdiction or competence of another international treaty, 
convention, or agreement. International trade in any species of marine 
fauna or flora is also within the purview and competence of CITES. 
Therefore, even if a marine species is subject to management under another 
international treaty, convention, or agreement, if it is listed in any 
CITES Appendix, international trade and introduction from the sea in the 
species is regulated by CITES. 

CITES made preparation for such situations when the treaty was written. 
Article XIV, paragraph 4, of the Convention provides that a State party to 
CITES, which is also a party to any other treaty, convention, or 
international agreement which was in force at the time of the coming into 
force of CITES and under the provisions of which protection is afforded to 
marine species included in Appendix II, is relieved of the obligations 
imposed on it under CITES with respect to trade in specimens included in 
Appendix II that are taken by ships registered in that State and in 
accordance with the provisions of such other treaty, convention, or 
international agreement. 

This relief from CITES obligations does not apply to specimens of species 
included in Appendix I. For example, several whale species are managed 
under the competence of the International Convention for the Regulation of 
Whaling, but all those species are listed in Appendix I. 

Currently no marine species whose management is under the competence of 
another treaty, convention, or agreement is listed in Appendix II. 
Therefore, this provision of the Convention in Article XIV has never been 
used, and standards for its implementation have not been developed. The 
United States has determined that it would be wise to plan for the need to 
implement Article XIV, by specifying requirements for certificates issued 
pursuant to Article XIV, paragraph 5, of the Convention, even if its use is 
not necessary at this time. The Service notes that Appendix II allows for 
international commercial trade. The resolution provides for the 
utilization as a valid certificate under Article XIV, paragraph 5, of a 
certificate of origin or statistical document issued on the authority of 
the other treaty, convention, or international agreement, with certain 
stipulations of minimum information and validation as required by CITES. 



