 

8. Responsibilities



a. Heads of Agencies



Agency head (or their designees should ensure that:

(1) Requirements for servicers are clearly defined and appropriate performance standards are developed so that
contractor performance meets contract terms and conditions.

(2) Service contracts are awarded and administered in such a manner that will provide the customer is goods and services
of significant quality, on time and within budget.

(3) Specific procedures are in place when contracting for services to assure compliance with OFPP Policy Letters
921, Inherently Governmental Functions (57 FR 45096 (1992), 912, Service Contracting (56 FR 15110
(1991), and 891, Conflicts of Interest Policies Applicable to Consultants, 54 FR 51805 (1989).

(4) Implementation strategies are developed and necessary staff training is initiated to assure effective implementation
of these policies.



b. Contracting Officials



Contracting officials should ensure that ``best practice'' techniques, such as those set forth below, are used when
contracting for services:

(1) The corporate experience section of an offeror's proposal should be reviewed to detect conflicts of interest.
Usually, the corporate experience section contains the contractor's prior business clients.

(2) Monthly progress reports should be reviewed to detect whether the contractor may be performing inherently governmental
functions.

Contracting officials should also seek other best practices techniques in contract management and administration
that may be used within their own contracting activities or other agencies that will help to achieve excellence in
contractor performance.

OFPP will also be working to develop governmentwide ``best practices'' models in contract administration which
will be issued as separate guidance.



c. Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council



Pursuant to sections 6(a) and 25(f) of the OFPP Act, as amended, 41 U.S.C. 401 

et seq.

, the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council shall ensure that the policies established herein are incorporated
in the FAR within 210 days from the date this Policy Letter is published in the 

Federal Register

. The 210 day period is considered a ``timely manner'' as prescribed in 41 U.S.C. 405(b).



d. Inspectors General



The Inspectors General are encouraged to conduct vulnerability assessments of service contracting and, where warranted,
include in their annual plans a review of service contracts to ensure compliance with this Policy Letter.

The guidance in section 7 which refers to the questions in appendix A, or any resulting ``best practices'' models developed
by OFPP should not be viewed as mandatory regulatory guidance for audit purposes.



9. Judicial Review



This Policy letter is not intended to provide a constitutional or statutory interpretation of any kind and it is not
intended, and should be construed, to create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law
by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person. It is intended only to provide policy
guidance to agencies in the exercise of their discretion concerning Federal contracting. Thus, this Policy Letter
is not intended, and should not be construed, to create any substantive or procedural basis on which to challenge any
agency action or inaction on the ground that such action or inaction was not in accordance with this Policy Letter.



10. Information Contract



For information regarding this Policy Letter contact Linda G. Williams, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office
of Federal Procurement Policy, 725 17th Street, NW., Washington, DC, 20503. Telephone (202) 3953302.



11. Effective Date



This Policy Letter is effective 30 days after the date of issuance. While these policies must be implemented in the
FAR, it is expected that agencies will take all appropriate actions in the interim to develop implementation strategies
and initiate staff training, consistent with section 8a(4), to ensure effective implementation of these policies.



<SIGNER>
Steven Kelman,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrator.


</SIGNJOB>
