 

(v) Organizational conflicts of interest; 
(vi) Specifying only a ``brand name'' product instead of 
allowing ``an equal'' product to be offered and describing the 
performance of other relevant requirements of the 
procurement; and 
(vii) Any arbitrary action in the procurement process. 
(2) Grantees and subgrantees will conduct procurements 
in a manner that prohibits the use of statutory or 
administratively imposed in-State or local geographical 
preferences in the evaluation of bids or proposals, except in those cases where applicable Federal statutes 
expressly mandate or encourage geographic preference. Nothing 
in this section preempts State licensing laws. When 
contracting for architectural and engineering (A/E) services, 
geographic location may be a selection criteria provided its application leaves 
an appropriate number of qualified firms, given the nature 
and size of the project, to compete for the contract. 
(3) Grantees will have written selection procedures for 
procurement transactions. These procedures will ensure that all solicitations: 
(i) Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the 
technical requirements for the material, product, or service 
to be procured. Such description shall not, in competitive 
procurements, contain features which unduly restrict competition. The description may 
include a statement of the qualitative nature of the 
material, product or service to be procured, and when 
necessary, shall set forth those minimum essential 
characteristics and standards to which it must conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. 
Detailed product specifications should be avoided if at all 
possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to make a 
clear and accurate description of the technical requirements, 
a ``brand name or equal'' description may be used as a means to define the 
performance or other salient requirements of a procurement. 
The specific features of the named brand which must be met by 
offerors shall be clearly stated; and 
(ii) Identify all requirements which the offerors must fulfill and all other factors to be used in 
evaluating bids or proposals. 
(4) Grantees and subgrantees will ensure that all 
prequalified lists of persons, firms, or products which are 
used in acquiring goods and services are current and include enough qualified sources to ensure maximum open and free

competition. Also, grantees and subgrantees will not 
preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the 
solicitation period. 
(d) 

Methods of procurement to be followed

_(1) 


Procurement by small purchase procedures. 

Small purchase procedures are those 
relatively simple and informal procurement methods for 
securing services, supplies, or other property that do not 
cost more than $25,000 in the aggregate. If small purchase 
procurements are used, price or rate quotations will be obtained from an adequate 
number of qualified sources. 
(2) 

Procurement by sealed bids (formal advertising). 


Bids are publicly solicited and a firm-fixed-price contract 
(lump sum or unit price) is awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid, conforming with all the material terms 
and conditions of the invitation for bids, is the lowest in 
price. The sealed bid method is the preferred method for 
procuring construction, if the conditions in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of 
this section apply. 
(i) In order for sealed bidding to be feasible, the following 
conditions should be present: 
(A) A complete, adequate, and realistic specification or 
purchase description is available; 
(B) Two or more responsible bidders are willing and able 
to compete effectively for the business; and 
(C) The procurement lends itself to a firm fixed price 
contract and the selection of the successful bidder can be 
made principally on the basis of price. 
(ii) If sealed bids are used, the following requirements 
apply: 
(A) The invitation for bids will be publicly advertised and bids 
shall be solicited from an adequate number of known 
suppliers, providing them sufficient time prior to the date 
set for opening the bids; 
(B) The invitation for bids, which will include any specifications and pertinent attachments, shall define the items

or services in order for the bidder to properly respond; 
(C) All bids will be publicly opened at the time and 
place prescribed in the invitation for bids; 
(D) A firm fixed-price contract award will be made in writing to the lowest responsive and 
responsible bidder. Where specified in bidding documents, 
factors such as discounts, transportation cost, and life 
cycle costs shall be considered in determining which bid is 
lowest. Payment discounts will only be used to determine the low bid when prior 
experience indicates that such discounts are usually taken 
advantage of; and 
(E) Any or all bids may be rejected if there is a sound 
documented reason. 
(3) 

Procurement by competitive proposals. 

The technique of competitive proposals is normally conducted with 
more than one source submitting an offer, and either a 
fixed-price or cost-reimbursement type contract is awarded. 
It is generally used when conditions are not appropriate for 
the use of sealed bids. If this method is used, the following requirements 
apply: 
(i) Requests for proposals will be publicized and 
identify all evaluation factors and their relative 
importance. Any response to publicized requests for proposals 
shall be honored to the maximum extent practical; 
(ii) Proposals will be solicited from an adequate number 
of qualified sources; 
(iii) Grantees and subgrantees will have a method for 
conducting technical evaluations of the proposals received 
and for selecting awardees; 
(iv) Awards will be made to the responsible firm whose proposal is most 
advantageous to the program, with price and other factors 
considered; and 
(v) Grantees and subgrantees may use competitive 
proposal procedures for qualifications-based procurement of 
architectural/engineering (A/E) professional services whereby competitors' 
qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified 
competitor is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and 
reasonable compensation. The method, where price is not used 
as a selection factor, can only be used in procurement of A/E professional 
services. It cannot be used to purchase other types of 
services though A/E firms are a potential source to perform 
the proposed effort. 
(4) 

Procurement by noncompetitive proposals. 

This 
procurement is through solicitation of a proposal from only one source, or 
after solicitation of a number of sources, competition is 
determined inadequate. 





