 

Major risk factors for testicular cancer are undescended testis and other factors, such as genetic abnormalities,
infections, etc., which produce atrophy and dysfunction. In general, occupational studies (Ronco et al., 1992;
Wiklund, 1983) have shown no association between herbicide exposure and testicular cancer. Occupational and environmental
studies have found either no association or increased risk which was not significant. Studies concerning Vietnam
veterans were inconsistent, and in those that found increased risk, that risk was generally not significant. Accordingly,
the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association between testicular cancer and herbicide
exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an association, and he has determined that a positive association
does not exist.
Potential evidence for an association between herbicide exposure and leukemia comes primarily from studies of farmers
(Ronco et al., 1992; Wigle D.T., Semenciw R.B., Wilkins K., Riedel D., Ritter L., Morrison H.I., Mao Y., 1990. Mortality
study of Canadian male farm operators: non-Hodgkin's lymphoma mortality and agricultural practices in Saskatchewan.
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 82:575582) and residents of Seveso, Italy (Bertazzi P.A., Zocchetti
C., Pesatori A.C., Guercilena S., Sanarico M., Radice L., 1989b. Ten-year mortality study of the population involved
in the Seveso incident in 1976. American Journal of Epidemiology 129:11871200; Bertazzi P.A., Zocchetti
C., Pesatori A.C., Guercilena S., Consonni D., Tironi A., Landi M.T., 1992. Mortality of a young population after
accidental exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin. International Journal of Epidemiology 21:118123).
The studies of farmers did not control for other confounding exposures (Brownson R.C., Reif J.S., Chang J.C., Davis
J.R., 1989. Cancer risk among Missouri farmers. Cancer 64:23812385.; Brown L.M., Blair A., Gibson R., Everett
G.D., Cantor K.P., Schuman L.M., Burmeister L.F., Van Lier S.F., Dick F. 1990. Pesticide exposures and other agricultural
risk factors for leukemia among men in Iowa and Minnesota. Cancer Research 50:65856591). When farmers were
stratified by suspected herbicide exposure, the incidence of leukemia was generally not elevated. Any elevation
appeared to be due to factors other than herbicide exposure, e.g., risk was higher among chicken farmers than wheat
farmers (Alavanja M.C., Blair A, Merkle S., Teske J. Eaton B., 1988. Mortality among agricultural extension agents.
American Journal of Industrial Medicine 14:167176). The suggestive evidence of increased risk concerning
Seveso, Italy was not significant because of the small number of actual cases in which leukemia was found. Since none
of the studies demonstrated a dose-response for any subtype of leukemia, it is not possible to attribute leukemia
to herbicide exposure. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association between
leukemia and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an association, and he has determined that
a positive association does not exist.
The common parameters used to evaluate toxic effects to sperm are number, motility, structure, and morphology. Many
chemicals have been implicated in interfering with motility and sperm structure (Wyrobek A.J., Gordon L.A., Burkhart
J.G., Francis M.W., Kapp R.W., Letz G., Malling H.V., Topham J.C., Whorton M.D., 1983. An evaluation of human sperm
as indicators of chemically induced alterations of spermatogenic function. A report of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Gene-Tox Program. Mutation Research 115:73148). One occupational study (Lerda D., Rizzi R., 1991.
Study of reproductive function in persons occupationally exposed to 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4D).
Mutation Research 262:4750) and one study of Vietnam veterans (Air Force Health Study (AFHS), 1992. An Epidemiologic
Investigation of Health Effects in Air Force Personnel Following Exposure to Herbicides. Reproductive Outcomes.
Brooks AFB: USAF School of Aerospace Medicine. ALTR9920900 602 pp.) found no association with
decreased sperm count. Another study of Vietnam veterans (Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 1989. Comparison of
Serum Levels of 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin with Indirect Estimates of Agent Orange Exposure Among Vietnam
Veterans: Final Report. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services) found lower sperm concentration
and reduced sperm motility, but suggested these outcomes may be associated with the Vietnam experience rather than
exposure to herbicides. Infertility usually incorporates two concepts: the inability to conceive and the inability
to produce live children. Most studies do not take into account the desire for children, contraceptive practices,
and other factors influencing fertility. NAS found no occupational or environmental studies examining herbicide
exposure and infertility, and veteran studies (Field B., Kerr C., 1988. Reproductive behavior and consistent patterns
of abnormality in offspring of Vietnam veterans. Journal of Medical Genetics 25:819826; AFHS, 1992; Centers
for Disease Control (CDC), 1988. Health status of Vietnam veterans. III. Reproductive outcomes and child health.
Journal of the American Medical Association 259:27152717) do not support an association between herbicide
exposure and infertility. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association
between abnormal sperm parameters and infertility and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such
an association, and he has determined that a positive association does not exist.


