 

(g) 

Residency-based preferences. 

For occupied units, a preference shall be given to the existing residents of each of the dwellings to be sold. For vacant
units (including units which are voluntarily vacated), a preference shall be given to residents of other low-income
housing units owned or leased by the seller IHA (over any other residency-based categories that may be established
by a homeownership plan for Section 8 residents or for nonresident applicants). 

(h) 

Other eligibility or preference standards. 

If consistent with the other provisions of this section, a homeownership plan may include any other standards for
eligibility or preference, or both, at the discretion of the IHA, that are not contrary to law.




(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 25770201). 



905.1009 

Counseling, training, and technical assistance



Appropriate counseling shall be provided to prospective and actual purchasers, as necessary for each stage of implementation
of the homeownership plan. Particular attention must be given to the terms of purchase and financing, along with the
other financial and maintenance responsibilities of homeownership. In addition, where applicable, appropriate
training and technical assistance shall be provided to any entity (such as an RMC, other resident organization, or
a cooperative or condominium entity) that has responsibilities for carrying out the plan. 



905.1010 

Nonpurchasing residents



(a) 

Nonpurchasing resident's options.

 If an existing resident of a dwelling authorized for sale under a homeownership plan is ineligible for purchase, or
declines to purchase, the resident shall be given the choice of either relocation to other suitable and affordable
housing or continued occupancy of the present dwelling on a rental basis, at a rent no higher than that permitted by
the Act. Displacement (permanent, involuntary move), in order to make a dwelling available for sale, is prohibited.
In addition to applicable program sanctions, a violation of the displacement prohibition may trigger a requirement
to provide relocation assistance in accordance with the Uniform Relocation and Real Property Acquisition Act of
1970 and implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24. Where continued rental occupancy by a nonpurchasing resident
is contemplated after conveyance of the property, the homeownership plan must include provision for any rental subsidy
required (

e.g.

, Section 8 assistance, if available and authorized by the Section 8 regulations). As soon as feasible after they can
be identified, all nonpurchasing residents shall be given written notice of their options under this section. 

(b) 

Relocation assistance. 

A nonpurchasing resident who chooses to relocate pursuant to this section shall be offered the following relocation
assistance: 






