 

6. Sensitivity Analysis 


This section presents the results of EPA's analysis of the effects of varying selected major parameters in the cost
analysis (where the Agency used considerable judgment in arriving at the parameter's value) on the estimated savings
incurred under the proposed conditional exclusion and the proposed Universal Waste Rule. The following assumptions
were analyzed in the sensitivity analysis for EPA's analysis of spent lamp management costs: 


(1) Percentage of Lamps Generated at Small and Large Quantity Generators.

 In the sensitivity analysis, EPA set its lower bound estimates of the percentage of lamps generated at SQGs and LQGs
at fifty percent of total spent lamp generation and its upper bound estimates at ninety percent. (Seventy-five percent
was used in the initial cost analysis).


(2) Cost to Transport Subtitle C Waste.

 In the sensitivity analysis, EPA increased the upper bound estimates of the costs of transporting spent lamps as Subtitle
C by a factor of three, based on price quotes from commercial transporters, over original estimates. 


(3) Cost to Dispose of Subtitle C Waste.

 Based on price quotes from commercial hazardous waste disposal facilities, EPA increased the upper bound estimates
of the Subtitle C disposal costs by a factor of four over original estimates. 


(4) Cost of Employee Training.

 To reflect uncertainty over whether a professional trainer would be required and over how many employees would need
to be trained, EPA increased and decreased the cost of employee training required by 50 percent. 
The costs associated with the high-end scenario were estimated using the upper bound estimates for each cost element
included in the sensitivity analysis. The costs associated with the low-end scenario combined the lower bound estimates
for each cost element. The results from these two analyses suggest that the range of total annual savings from the proposed
condition exclusion for spent lamps could be $65 million to $289 million, and the range of total annual savings from
the proposed Universal Waste RCRA requirements for generators of spent lamps could be $15 million to $39 million.
The range in cost savings is mainly the result of uncertainty over Subtitle C transportation and disposal costs for
lamps. Although EPA has received price quotes for management of lamps as Subtitle C waste that are considerably higher
than the average cost of managing hazardous waste in Subtitle C landfills, it is not appropriate to directly compare
price quotes to engineering costs because the price quotes reflect a constrained market place which tends to inflate
prices well above costs. However, a three-fold difference between the price quotes for spent lamps and standard Subtitle
C management cost may also be due to other factors beyond the inflated prices of the constrained market, including
the low density of lamps (i.e. a ton of lamps has a greater volume than a ton of hazardous waste sludge), or difficulty
in handling lamps. EPA requests comment on the true costs, as well as the reasoning behind these costs, of managing
spent lamps as Subtitle C waste. 


B. Proposed Rule Impacts 


1. Impacts on Generators of Mercury-Containing Waste Lamps 


As indicated above, option 1, the exclusion, is estimated to result in average annual savings per small and large quantity
spent lamp generator ranging from $2,000 to $2,250. Option 2, special collection, is estimated to result in an average
annual per generator savings of approximately $300. 


2. Secondary Effects 


While total incremental savings from the proposed exclusion (option 1) and from the proposed special collection
system (option 2) over a Subtitle C management approach appear to be high, the Agency does not expect significant immediate
shifts in demand or price for the lamps or for products manufactured or sold by firms which consume these lamps due to
the proposed options. Because the impacts to lamp generators are positive (i.e. net savings), the Agency does not
expect the rule to result in adverse impacts to businesses, or to affect employment or international trade to any appreciable
degree. 
EPA believes that, with the exception of lamps generated in States with existing lamp disposal requirements, most
small and large quantity generators of mercury containing lamps will choose to dispose of their waste lamps in municipal
solid waste landfills under option 1, the proposed exclusion from Subtitle C. This is because Subtitle D disposal
is significantly less expensive per bulb than recycling or Subtitle C disposal.
<FOOTCITE>4</FOOTCITE>
 Subsequently, most waste lamps currently being handled according to Subtitle C standards by permitted hazardous
waste haulers, disposal sites and spent lamp processing facilities, would be handled by Subtitle D haulers and disposal
facilities. Thus Subtitle C waste haulers, disposal and spent lamp processing facilities would be affected negatively
while Subtitle D haulers and disposal facilities would be affected positively under option 1. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
4

</FOOTNAME>
EPA estimates that the average cost per ton for Subtitle D disposal is $35 as compared to $400 per ton for Subtitle C disposal
and $1,375 per ton for recycling. 

</FOOTNOTE>

