 

As a general response to the comments on bone solids content and labeling, FSIS first reiterates its reasons for having
considered in the March 1994 ANPR the defining of a product standard for poultry products produced by mechanical separation
based, in part, on percent bone solids content. In 1969, the Agency promulgated rules on deboned poultry products
specifying that no more than 1 percent bone solids content would be allowed for this product. As indicated previously,
this decision was based on the Agency's careful appraisal of the operating results in a series of poultry establishments
that used mechanical deboning equipment. Analyses were made of 485 samples of raw, mechanically deboned products
from nine commercial operations, representing three makes of machines most often used in this process. The analyses
demonstrated that it is practical and acceptable to limit the bone ``residue'' in mechanically deboned poultry and
that the equipment for manufacturing such product can be operated under commercial conditions to produce poultry
product that contains no more than 1 percent of bone. This provision of the 1969 amendments was promulgated to assure
that deboned poultry products are wholesome in accordance with the Poultry Products Inspection Act. 
Also, it is important to note that at the time of the 1969 regulation, the mechanical separation process was new and
FSIS had limited information concerning the consequences of it. FSIS conducted extensive studies on mechanically
deboned poultry products during the 1970's and monitored the technology improvements during the 1980's. The results
of these studies and the information considered during rulemakings, or other documents considering the need for
rulemaking, regarding poultry and livestock products produced by mechanical separation over the past 2 decades
have shown that there are differences between the mechanically deboned product and traditionally deboned products
(i.e., hand-deboned). The principal characteristics that distinguish mechanically separated poultry product
and boneless poultry produced by traditional methods are bone solids content, and its physical form and consistency.
Informing consumers of such differences via the distinct labeling of the presence of poultry product produced by
mechanical means is supported by the statutory responsibility of FSIS to assure that all labels on poultry and meat
food products are not false or misleading. FSIS received comments that expressed this sentiment in response to its
solicitations for public input in the June 1993 ANPR and the March 1994 ANPR. 
In the March 1994 ANPR, FSIS suggested that, because of the differences in percent bone solids content among mechanically
separated poultry products, which were shown in the data presented in the FSIS report ``Determination of Acceptable
Limits of Percent Bone Solids in Ground Poultry Products,'' the Agency would regulate poultry products produced
by mechanical separation so that producers of a product with a low percent bone solids content that met the established
limitation would be able to label such products without a reference to the mechanical means of processing. 
In review of the tentative approach presented in the March 1994 ANPR and the comments received in response to this ANPR
and the prior June 15, 1993, ANPR, FSIS now believes that the continuation of the present labeling policy, even for
those finished products with mechanically separated poultry that has a low bone solids contents, does not inform
the consumer that these products contain mechanically separated poultry as an ingredient and that this may result
in misleading labeling. The statutes under which FSIS operates provide the authority to protect the public and prevent
the distribution in commerce of products that are misbranded and are not properly marked, labeled, or packaged. FSIS
believes that the labeling of poultry and meat food products containing poultry product produced by mechanical separation
as an ingredient must inform the consumer of its contents, unless it is clearly demonstrated that any omitted information
would not mislead the consumer or otherwise render the product misbranded. This labeling position must be adhered
to consistently across all types of poultry and meat food products containing mechanically separated poultry as
an ingredient. 


