 

The final regulations modify the proposed rules regarding subsequent adjustments that are required when a contingency
occurs (or does not occur) contrary to the assumption initially made. This modification treats both the acceleration
and deferral of payments as a deemed reissuance for purposes of OID accruals. In addition, the subsequent adjustment
rules are coordinated with the new pro rata prepayment rule described below in connection with the description of
1.12752. 

Finally, in response to a comment, an example describing the consequences of a pay-in-kind debt instrument issued
at par has been included in the final regulations. 



Section 1.12722Treatment of Debt Instruments Purchased at a Premium
 



The final regulations retain the rules in the proposed regulations for debt instruments purchased at a premium. Thus,
the holder's basis in a debt instrument that is acquired in exchange for property and that otherwise would take a substituted
basis generally will not exceed the fair market value of the property immediately after the exchange. This rule corresponds
to a similar rule in section 171(b)(4) of the Code. The final regulations clarify the application of the rule to a situation
in which a debt instrument is received in a distribution from a partnership. 



Section 1.12723Election by a Holder to Treat all Interest on a Debt Instrument as OID 



The proposed regulations permit accrual method holders to treat all interest on a debt instrument as OID. In response
to comments, the final regulations extend this election to holders that use the cash receipts and disbursements method
of accounting. 



Section 1.12731Definition of OID 



The final regulations retain the definition of qualified stated interest, but clarify that a conversion feature
is ignored for purposes of determining whether stated interest is unconditionally payable. In response to a comment,
the final regulations provide that if a debt instrument has payment intervals that are equal in length throughout
the term of the instrument, except for the first or final payment interval (or both intervals), the interest payment
for that interval (or intervals) is considered to be made at a fixed rate if the value of the rate on which the payment
is based is adjusted in any reasonable manner to take into account the length of the interval. The final regulations
also clarify the determination of qualified stated interest for a debt instrument that provides for an alternative
payment schedule (or schedules) upon the occurrence of one or more contingencies. In the case of these debt instruments,
each alternative payment schedule (including the stated payment schedule) is treated as if it were the debt instrument's
sole payment schedule. Based on this analysis, the debt instrument provides for qualified stated interest to the
extent of the lowest fixed rate at which qualified stated interest would be payable under any payment schedule. 

The final regulations also provide rules for a subsequent holder's treatment of a debt instrument issued with de minimis
OID. Under these rules, if a subsequent holder purchases the debt instrument at a premium, the subsequent holder does
not include any de minimis OID in income. Because the debt instrument is treated as having zero OID under section 1273(a)(3),
if a subsequent holder purchases the debt instrument at a discount, the subsequent holder reports the discount under
the market discount rules of sections 1276 through 1278 of the Code, rather than under the rules for de minimis OID.


Finally, the final regulations retain the rule of the proposed regulations that de minimis OID is includible in the
income of the holder as principal payments are made. Commentators objected to the fact that this rule is written as
applying on a loan-by-loan basis because it could preclude a financial institution from using the loan liquidation
method. Although the rule is stated in terms of a single loan, the IRS and Treasury recognize that it may be appropriate
to permit financial institutions to account for de minimis OID on an aggregate basis. The IRS is reviewing its published
position with respect to the loan liquidation method and plans to issue updated guidance that permits financial institutions
to use some form of aggregate accounting. 



Section 1.12732Determination of Issue Price and Issue Date 



If an issue of debt instruments sold for money is publicly offered, the proposed regulations provide that the issue
price of each debt instrument in the issue is the first price at which a substantial amount of the debt instruments in
the issue is sold to the public. However, if the issue is not publicly offered, the issue price of each debt instrument
in the issue is the price paid by the first buyer of a debt instrument that is part of the issue. Commentators suggested
that the issue price rules should be the same for publicly offered and non-publicly offered issues. In addition, commentators
suggested that all debt instruments in an issue should be fungible with other debt instruments in the issue. 


