 

227.505Contracts for special works.

227.506Contracts for architect-engineer services.

227.507Contractor data repositories.



227.5

Rights in computer software or computer software documentation.



227.500

Scope of subpart.



This subpart_

(a) Prescribes policies and procedures for the acquisition of computer software and computer software documentation,
and the rights to use, modify, reproduce, release, perform, display, or disclosure such software or documentation.
It implements requirements in the following laws and Executive Order:




10 U.S.C. 2302(4)

10 U.S.C. 2305 (subsection (d)(4))

10 U.S.C. 2320

10 U.S.C. 2321

10 U.S.C. 2325

Executive Order 12591 (subsection 1(b)(6))




(b) Does not apply to computer software or computer software documentation acquired under GSA schedule contracts.



227.501

Definitions.



(a) As used in this subpart, unless otherwise specifically indicated, the terms 

offeror

 and 

contractor

 include an offeror's or contractor's subcontractors, suppliers, or potential subcontractors or suppliers at any
tier.

(b) Other terms used in this subpart are defined in the clause at 252.2277014, ``Rights in Computer Software
and Computer Software Documentation.''



227.502

Commercial computer software and commercial computer software documentation.



227.5021

Policy.



(a) Commercial computer software or commercial computer software documentation shall be acquired under the licenses
customarily provided to the public unless such licenses are inconsistent with Federal procurement law or do not otherwise
satisfy user needs.

(b) Commercial computer software and commercial computer software documentation shall be obtained competitively,
to the maximum extent practicable, using firm fixed price contracts or firm fixed priced orders under available pricing
schedules.

(c) Offerors and contractors shall not be required to_

(1) Furnish technical information related to commercial computer software or commercial computer software documentation
that is not customarily provided to the public except for information documenting the specific modifications made
to such software or documentation to meet the requirements of a DoD solicitation;

(2) Relinquish to, or otherwise provide, the Government rights to use, modify, reproduce, release or disclose commercial
computer software or commercial computer software documentation except for a transfer of rights mutually agreed
upon.



227.5022

Obtaining commercial computer software or commercial computer software documentation.



Commercial computer software or commercial computer software documentation shall be acquired, to the maximum extent
practicable, using the procedures at 211.70.



227.5023

Rights in commercial computer software or commercial computer software documentation.



(a) The Government shall have only the rights specified in the license under which the commercial computer software
or commercial computer software documentation was obtained.

(b) If the Government has a need for rights not conveyed under the license customarily provided to the public, the Government
must negotiate with the contractor to determine if there are acceptable terms for transferring such rights. The specific
rights granted to the Government shall be enumerated in the contract license agreement or an addendum thereto.



227.5024

Contract clause.



A specific contract clause governing the Government's rights in commercial computer software or commercial computer
software documentation is not prescribed. As required by 227.5023, the Governments rights to use, modify,
reproduce, release, perform, display, or disclose computer software or computer software documentation shall
be identified in a license agreement.



227.503

Noncommercial computer software and noncommercial computer software documentation.



227.5031

Policy



(a) DoD policy is to acquire only the computer software and computer software documentation, and the rights in such
software or documentation, necessary to satisfy agency needs.

(b) Solicitations and contracts shall_

(1) Specify the computer software or computer software documentation to be delivered under a contract and the delivery
schedules for the software or documentation;

(2) Establish or reference procedures for determining the acceptability of computer software or computer software
documentation;

(3) Establish separate contract line items, to the extent practicable, for the computer software or computer software
documentation to be delivered under a contract and require offerors and contractors to price separately each deliverable
data item;

(4) Require offerors to identify, to the extent practicable, computer software or computer software documentation
to be furnished with restrictions on the Government's rights and require contractor's to identify computer software
or computer software documentation to be delivered with such restrictions prior to delivery.

