 

Community-Based Alternatives_Continuation Programs


Serious, Violent, and Chronic Juvenile Offender Treatment Program_$1,500,000


In fiscal year 1993, under a competitive announcement, OJJDP awarded funds to enable two jurisdictions (Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania and Washington, D.C.) to develop a plan for systematic graduated sanctions for juvenile offenders.
The plan combines accountability and sanctions with increasingly intensive community-based intervention, treatment,
and rehabilitation services as the seriousness of a juvenile's offenses increases or a particular offense warrants.
The plan's basic elements are to (1) assess the existing continuum of secure and nonsecure intervention, treatment,
and rehabilitation services in each jurisdiction, (2) define the juvenile offender population, (3) develop and
implement a program strategy, (4) develop and implement an evaluation, (5) integrate private nonprofit, community-based
organizations into juvenile offender services, (6) incorporate an aftercare program as a formal component of all
residential placements, (7) develop a resource plan to enlist the financial and technical support of other Federal,
State, and local agencies, private foundations, or other funding sources, and (8) develop a victim assistance component
using local organizations. 
In fiscal year 1994, these jurisdictions each qualified for $500,000 implementation grants. Two additional jurisdictions
are being selected under a fiscal year 1994 competitive program, for combined planning and implementation awards
of $500,000 each. 
In fiscal year 1995, each of the original jurdisctions will receive continuation awards of $500,000 for second year
implementation. Also in fiscal year 1995, up to $100,000 will be available to each of the five Safe Futures program
sites to develop action plans for graduated sanctions systems in the target areas. BJA will transfer $1,500,000 to
OJJDP to implement this program in fiscal year 1995. No additional applications will be solicited in fiscal year 1995.



OJJDP Technical Assistance Support Contract: Juvenile Resource Center_$650,000


This contract provides technical assistance and support to OJJDP, OJJDP grantees, and the Coordinating Council
on Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention in the areas of program development, evaluation, training, and research.
Support of this program will be supplemented in fiscal year 1995. 


Native American Alternative Community-Based Program_$600,000


This program is designed as a collaborative effort between OJJDP and other public and private organizations concerned
about juvenile delinquency among Native Americans. Its purpose is to develop community-based alternative programs
for Native American youth who are adjudicated delinquent and to develop a re-entry program for Native American delinquents
returning from institutional placements. A multicomponent design has been developed in the four project sites.
Fiscal year 1995 funding will support continued implementation of these projects. Training and technical assistance
will also be provided to integrate the critical elements of OJJDP's intensive supervision and community-based aftercare
programs with cultural elements traditionally used by Native Americans to control and rehabilitate offending youths.

The Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians, the Navajo Nation, the Gila River Indian Community, and the Pueblo of Jemez are
the project sites initially funded in fiscal year 1992. The National Indian Justice Center provides the sites with
training and technical assistance. No additional applications will be solicited in fiscal year 1995. 


National School Safety Center_$250,000


The purposes of this collaborative program between OJJDP and the Department of Education are: (1) To provide training
and technical assistance regarding school safety for elementary and secondary schools and, (2) to identify methods
for diminishing crime, violence, and illegal drug use in schools and on campuses, with special emphasis on gang-related
crime. The National School Safety Center maintains a library and clearinghouse with specialized information, does
research on school safety issues, and develops publications and training programs. The program focuses on preventing
drug abuse and violence in schools and providing State personnel trained in school safety to give technical assistance
to localities. 
The Department of Education contributed $1 million to the program in fiscal year 1994. The program will be implemented
by the current grantee, the National School Safety Center at Pepperdine University. No additional applications
will be solicited in fiscal year 1995. 


