 

Thus, because of the futility of affording individuals 
affected by a State-initiated mass change the opportunity to 
appeal the effects of that mass change in cases involving no 
disputed facts but only a claim, for example, regarding the 
propriety or legality of the mass change itself, we believe 
that it is appropriate for us to amend our regulations so as 
to limit the opportunity to appeal, and the corresponding 
right to continue to receive benefits pending a decision on 
the initial appeal, as set forth in 416.1336(b), only to 
those cases involving disputed facts. We, therefore, are 
revising our regulations at 416.1401 to define a ``mass 
change'' as a State initiated change in the level(s) of 
federally administered State supplementary payments 
applicable to all recipients of such payments, or to 
categories of such recipients, due, for example, to State 
legislative or executive action. In addition, we are 
revising our regulations at 416.1402 by adding a paragraph 
(n) to state that only our calculation of the amount of 
change in an individual's State supplementary payment amount 
which results from a mass change is an initial determination, 
subject to administrative and judicial review, and 
continuation of benefits pursuant to 416.1336(b). 
We also are revising our regulations at 416.1403(a) to 
provide that a determination to reduce, suspend, or terminate 
federally administered State supplementary payments due to a 
State-initiated mass change in the level of such payments is 
not an initial determination, except as is provided in 
416.1402(n), i.e., only our calculation of the amount of 
the change in the State supplementary payment is an initial 
determination. In addition, we are revising 416.1403(a) to 
clarify that the termination of Federal administration of 
State supplementary payments is not an initial determination. 
The termination of Federal administration of these payments 
means only that the State has assumed the responsibility for 
the issuance of its supplementary payments. The amount of 
State supplementary payments an individual receives will not 
change because of the termination of Federal administration. 
The only change will be that the State will be making the 
payments. There will be no adverse impact to the recipients 
solely due to the change. Further, we are revising 
416.1403(b) to explain that we will provide to these 
recipients a notice of the termination of Federal 
administration, although the determination will not be 
subject to administrative or judicial review. 
Early in the SSI program, which became effective 
January 1, 1974, several States terminated Federal 
administration of their State supplementary payments. 
Although there have been no recent terminations, we are 
revising 416.1403 to clearly state our policy on the effect 
of terminations. 


Comments on Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 


On August 10, 1993, we published proposed rules in the 


Federal Register

 at 58 FR 42514 with a 60-day comment period. 
We received 3 letters with comments. Following are summaries 
of those comments and our responses to them. 


Comment: 

Claimants should not be denied the right to 
challenge a reduction in State supplementary payments below 
federally mandated levels. 


Response: 

Federal law does not mandate State 
supplementary payment levels. States are free to establish 
those levels in amounts that they alone determine are 
appropriate. In certain cases, reduction by a State of its 
payment levels below those established by section 1618 of the 
Act may result in the loss of the State's eligibility for 
payments pursuant to title XIX. In such cases, SSA has no 
authority to order the State to reinstate its State 
supplementary payment levels at or above the levels 
established by section 1618. Accordingly, no purpose would 
be served by permitting claimants to appeal a reduction in 
State supplementary payment levels below those established by 
section 1618. 


Comment: 

The regulations should require SSA to afford 
each affected recipient with written notice and the 
opportunity for a hearing, consistent with 

Goldberg 

v. 

Kelly, 


397 U.S. 254 (1970), before reducing that recipient's State 
supplementary payment. 


Response: 

Publication of these regulations will not 
affect SSA's current practice of first sending written notice 
to the recipient informing him or her of the mass change and 
of its impact on his or her benefit amount or eligibility 
before effectuating any reduction, suspension, or termination 
as a result of that mass change. Provision of such written 
notice is consistent with the requirements of 416.1402(b), 
416.1404(c), 416.1413b, and 416.1336. Such notice will also 
inform the recipient of his or her right to appeal the 
determination to reduce, suspend or terminate his or her 
payment as a result of the mass change. However, that right 
to appeal, and the corresponding right to request benefit 
continuation, will be limited only to those cases in which 
the individual contends that our calculation of the amount of 
the change in his or her State supplementary payment 
resulting from the mass change is incorrect. Individuals 
will be informed that there will be no right to appeal the 
determination on any other grounds. As explained in the 
discussion under Supplementary Information, we believe these 
procedures to be fully consistent with 

Goldberg 

v. 

Kelly, 

397 
U.S. 254 (1970). 


Comment: 

After a mass change in State supplementary 
payments, SSA must be prepared to carefully explain to 
recipients the resulting adjustment in their benefit checks 
and be prepared to handle a heavy volume of calls and 
requests for information from those recipients. 


Response: 

We will ensure that our notice language will 
clearly explain the mass change that is occurring; how it 
will affect the recipient's monthly payment; and how, and in 
what instance, the recipient may invoke his or her right to 
appeal our determination. In the event of a mass change, we 
will prepare our offices to respond to an increase in 
phone-in inquiries and will issue to those offices 
instructional materials to assist them in responding to those 
inquiries. We have initiated these actions in prior 
instances of mass change and expect to do so again as the 
need arises. 





