 




<CFRNO>21 CFR Part 872 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93N0470]</RINDOCK>


Medical Devices; Classification of Temporomandibular Joint Implants


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Reproposed rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is reproposing to classify two temporomandibular joint (TMJ) implants, the
Mandibular Condyle Prosthesis and the Glenoid Fossa Prosthesis, into class III (premarket approval). The agency
is issuing this reproposal to reflect the recommendation of the Dental Products Panel with respect to the classification
of these devices. All comments received on the original proposal remain part of the record for this proposal. These
actions are being taken under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act), as amended by the Medical Device Amendments
of 1976 (the amendments) and the Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990 (the SMDA).


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Written comments by April 15, 1994. The Commissioner of Food and Drugs proposes that the final regulation based on
this proposal become effective 30 days after the date of its publication in the 

Federal Register

.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857. 

 
</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 
Joseph M. Sheehan, 
Center for Devices and Radiological Health (HFZ84), 
Food and Drug Administration, 
2094 Gaither Rd., 
Rockville, MD 20850, 
3015944765. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 


I. Background


The act, as amended by the amendments (Pub. L. 94295) and the SMDA (Pub. L. 101629), established a comprehensive
system for the regulation of medical devices intended for human use. Section 513 of the act (21 U.S.C. 360c) established
three categories (classes) of devices, depending on the regulatory controls needed to provide reasonable assurance
of their safety and effectiveness. The three categories of devices are: Class I, general controls; class II, special
controls; and class III, premarket approval.
Devices that were in commercial distribution before May 28, 1976 (the amendments) are classified under section 513
of the act after FDA has done the following: (1) Received a recommendation from a device panel (an FDA advisory committee);
(2) published the panel's recommendation for comment, along with a proposed regulation classifying the device;
and (3) published a final regulation classifying the device. A device that is first offered in commercial distribution
after May 28, 1976, and is substantially equivalent to a device classified under this scheme, is also classified into
the same class as the device to which it is substantially equivalent.
A device that was not in commercial distribution prior to May 28, 1976, and that is not substantially equivalent to
a preamendments device, is classified by statute into class III without any FDA rulemaking proceedings. The agency
determines whether new devices are substantially equivalent to previously offered devices by means of the premarket
notification procedure in section 510(k) of the act (21 U.S.C. 360(k)) and part 807 of the regulations (21 CFR part
807). 
Based upon the recommendations of FDA's Dental Device Classification Panel, the agency published a final regulation
classifying 110 preamendments dental devices on August 12, 1987 (52 FR 30082). The TMJ prostheses were inadvertently
omitted from the dental devices considered for reclassification by the panel and the agency. Based upon the recommendations
of the Dental Products Panel, following its April 21, 1989 meeting, FDA proposed on September 18, 1992 (57 FR 43165),
to classify the Interarticular Disc Prosthesis, the Mandibular Condyle Prosthesis, the Glenoid Fossa Prosthesis,
and the Total Temporomandibular Prosthesis into class III. 
At the April 1989 meeting of the Dental Products Panel, the Panel did not make a recommendation regarding the classification
of the glenoid fossa prosthesis or the mandibular condyle prosthesis. The Panel noted, however, that an implanted
glenoid fossa should not be used with a naturally occurring mandibular condyle, and an implanted mandibular condyle
should not be used with a naturally occurring glenoid fossa. At the February 11, 1993 meeting, the Dental Products
Panel recommended that the mandibular condyle prosthesis and the glenoid fossa prosthesis be classified into class
III. Based upon these recommendations, FDA is reproposing the classification of these two devices into class III.

The effect of classifying a device into class III is to require each manufacturer of the device to submit to FDA a premarket
approval application (PMA) by a date to be set in a future regulation under section 515(b) of the act (21 U.S.C. 360e(b)).
Each application must include sufficient valid scientific evidence to provide reasonable assurance that the device
is safe and effective under the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in its proposed labeling.
PMA's for class III preamendments devices must be submitted within 30 months after final classification, or 90 days
after the agency publishes a final regulation under 21 U.S.C. 360e(b) requiring PMA's for the device, whichever is
later. 
FDA advises manufacturers of the devices being classified that, if the devices are classified into class III, the
agency intends to require PMA's to be filed for these devices at the earliest date allowed under the statute. Therefore,
PMA's (or approved investigational device exemptions) would be required for these devices on the last day of the 30th
month following final classification into class III.


II. The Dental Products Panel Recommendations


A. 

 Glenoid Fossa Prosthesis




The Dental Products Panel, an FDA advisory committee, made the following recommendation regarding the classification
of the glenoid fossa prosthesis:
1. 

 Identification:

 A glenoid fossa prosthesis is a device that is intended to be implanted in the temporomandibular joint to augment a
glenoid fossa, and provide an articulation surface for the head of a naturally occurring mandibular condyle. 
2. 

 Recommended classification: 

 Class III (premarket approval). The Dental Products Panel recommended that premarket approval of the glenoid fossa
prosthesis be high priority.
3. 

 Summary of reasons for recommendation:

 The Dental Products Panel recommended that the glenoid fossa prosthesis be classified into class III because the
Panel believed that premarket approval is necessary to provide reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness
of the device. The Panel also believed that the device presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury
to the patient and that insufficient information exists to determine that general controls, either alone or in combination
with the special controls applicable to class II devices, are sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of the safety
and effectiveness of the device. Therefore, the device should be subject to premarket approval to ensure that each
manufacturer of this device develop sufficient information to provide reasonable assurance that it is safe and effective.

4. 

 Summary of data on which the recommendation is based: 

 The Dental Products Panel based its recommendation on the Panel members' personal knowledge of, and clinical experience
with, the device and presentations by Panel members and interested parties (Ref. 1).
5. 

 Risks to health:

 The following risks are associated with the glenoid fossa prosthesis: (a) Implant loosening or displacement. The
screws used to anchor the implant may loosen, resulting in implant loosening or displacement causing changes in bite,
difficulty in chewing, limited joint function, and unpredictable wear on implant components (Refs. 2 through 5);
(b) Degenerative changes to the natural articulating surfaces. Implant breakdown may result in erosion or resorption
of the head of the mandibular condyle or the glenoid fossa. The erosion or resorption may result in intense pain, changes
in bite, difficulty in chewing, limited joint function, and perforation into the middle cranial fossa (Refs. 2 through
5); (c) Foreign body reaction. Implant deterioration and migration may result in a foreign body reaction characterized
by multinucleated giant cells (Refs. 2 through 5); (d) Infection. If the implant cannot be properly sterilized, infection
may result; (e) Loss of implant integrity. If the implant materials are unable to withstand mechanical loading, the
implant can be torn, perforated, delaminated, fragmented, fatigued, or fractured, resulting in failure of the device
to function properly (Refs. 2 through 5); (f) Corrosion. If the implant materials are subject to corrosion, toxic
elements may migrate to various parts of the body; (g) Chronic pain. Degenerative changes within the articular surfaces
and components of the temporomandibular joint due to implant breakdown may result in chronic pain (Refs. 2 through
5); (h) Changes to the contralateral joint. Unilateral placement of the implant may result in deleterious effects
to the contralateral joint; and (i) Malocclusion. Placement of the device may produce an improper occlusal relationship.
FDA agrees with the Dental Products Panel's classification recommendation and is proposing that the glenoid fossa
prosthesis be classified into class III (premarket approval). FDA believes that insufficient information exists
to identify the proper materials or design for the glenoid fossa prosthesis. Therefore, FDA is proposing that premarket
approval of the glenoid fossa prosthesis be given high priority.
The act requires the agency to classify into class III a device that presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness
or injury unless it determines that premarket approval is not necessary to provide reasonable assurance of the safety
and effectiveness of the device. FDA believes that the device presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness or
injury to the patient if there are not adequate data to ensure the safe and effective use of the device. The agency believes
that general controls, either alone or in combination with the special controls applicable to class II devices, are
insufficient to provide reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness of the device. 


B. 

 Mandibular Condyle Prosthesis

 


The Dental Products Panel, an FDA advisory committee, made the following recommendations regarding the classification
of the mandibular condyle prosthesis:
1. 

 Identification:

 A mandibular condyle prosthesis is a device that is intended to be implanted in the human jaw to replace the mandibular
condyle and to articulate within a naturally occurring glenoid fossa. 
2. 

 Recommended classification: 

 Class III (premarket approval). The Dental Products Panel recommended that premarket approval of the mandibular
condyle prosthesis be high priority.
3.

 Summary of reasons for recommendation: 

 The Dental Products Panel recommended that the mandibular condyle prosthesis be classified into class III because
the Panel believed that premarket approval is necessary to provide reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness
of the device. The Panel also believed that the device presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury
to the patient and that insufficient information exists to determine that general controls, either alone or in combination
with the special controls applicable to class II devices, are sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of the safety
and effectiveness of the device. Therefore, the device should be subject to premarket approval to ensure that each
manufacturer of this device develop sufficient information to provide reasonable assurance that it is safe and effective.

4. 

 Summary of data on which the recommendation is based: 

 The Dental Products Panel based its recommendation on the Panel members' personal knowledge of, and clinical experience
with, the device and presentations by Panel members and interested parties (Ref. 1).
5. 

 Risks to health:

 The following risks are associated with the mandibular condyle prosthesis: (a) Implant loosening or displacement.
The screws used to anchor the implant may loosen, resulting in implant loosening or displacement causing changes
in bite, difficulty in chewing, limited joint function and unpredictable wear on implant components (Refs. 2 through
5); (b) Degenerative changes to the natural articulating surfaces. Implant breakdown may result in erosion or resorption
of the head of the mandibular condyle or the glenoid fossa. The erosion or resorption may result in intense pain, changes
in bite, difficulty in chewing, limited joint function, and perforation into the middle cranial fossa (Refs. 2 through
5); (c) Foreign body reaction. Implant deterioration and migration may result in a foreign body reaction characterized
by multinucleated giant cells (Refs. 2 through 5); (d) Infection. If the implant cannot be properly sterilized, infection
may result; (e) Loss of implant integrity. If the implant materials are unable to withstand mechanical loading, the
implant can be torn, perforated, delaminated, fragmented, fatigued, or fractured, resulting in failure of the device
to function properly (Refs. 2 through 5); (f) Corrosion. If the implant materials are subject to corrosion, toxic
elements may migrate to various parts of the body; (g) Chronic pain. Degenerative changes within the articular surfaces
and components of the temporomandibular joint due to implant breakdown may result in chronic pain (Refs. 2 through
5); (h) Changes to the contralateral joint. Unilateral placement of the implant may result in deleterious effects
to the contralateral joint; and (i) Malocclusion. Placement of the device may produce an improper occlusal relationship.
FDA agrees with the Dental Products Panel's classification recommendation and is proposing that the mandibular
condyle prosthesis be classified into class III (premarket approval). FDA believes that insufficient information
exists to identify the proper materials or design for the mandibular condyle prosthesis. Therefore, FDA is proposing
that premarket approval of the mandibular condyle prosthesis be given high priority.
The act requires the agency to classify into class III a device that presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness
or injury unless it determines that premarket approval is not necessary to provide reasonable assurance of the safety
and effectiveness of the device. FDA believes that the device presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness or
injury to the patient if there are not adequate data to ensure the safe and effective use of the device. The agency believes
that general controls, either alone or in combination with the special controls applicable to class II devices, are
insufficient to provide reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness of the device. 


III. References


The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. 


1. Transcripts of the Dental Products Panel meeting, February 11, 1993.
2. Fontenot, M. G., and J. K. Kent, ``In-Vitro and In-Vivo Wear Performance of TMJ Implants,'' abstract, International
Association of Dental Research, 1991.
3. Kent, J. N., and M. S. Block, ``Comparison of FEP and UPE Glenoid Fossa Prosthesis,'' abstract, International Association
of Dental Research, 1991.
4. ``Clinical Information on the Vitek TMJ Interpositional (IPI) Implant and the Vitek-Kent (VK) and Vitek-Kent
1 (VK1) TMJ Implants'' in ``Vitek Patient Notification Program,'' FDA Publication, 1991.
5. Kent, J. N., ``VK Partial and Total Joint Reconstruction,'' Current Concepts of TMJ Total Joint Replacement, University
of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, pp. 18, March 1992.


IV. Environmental Impact


The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24(e)(2) that this action is of a type that does not individually or cumulatively
have a significant effect on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessment nor an environmental
impact statement is required. 


V. Economic Impact


FDA has examined the costs and benefits of this proposed rule to classify two TMJ implants into class III in accordance
with Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96354). The proposed rule would not
impose any new requirements. Therefore, FDA concludes that the proposed rule is not a significant rule as defined
by Executive Order 12866. In accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the agency certifies that the proposed
rule will not have a significant impact on a substantial number of small businesses. 


List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 872


Medical devices.
Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, it is proposed that 21 CFR part 872 be amended as follows:


PART 872_DENTAL DEVICES 



1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 872 continues to read as follows:





Authority:

 Secs. 501, 510, 513, 515, 520, 701 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 351, 360, 360c, 360e, 360j,
371). 


2. New 872.3950 and 872.3960 are added to subpart D to read as follows:


872.3950 

Glenoid fossa prosthesis.


(a) 

 Identification.

 A glenoid fossa prosthesis is a device that is intended to be implanted in the temporomandibular joint to augment a
glenoid fossa, and provide an articulation surface for the head of a naturally occurring mandibular condyle. 
(b) 

 Classification.

 Class III.
(c) 

 Date PMA or notice of completion of a PDP is required. 

 The effective date of the requirement for the premarket approval has not been established. See 872.3.


872.3960 

 Mandibular condyle prosthesis.


(a) 

 Identification.

 A mandibular condyle prosthesis is a device that is intended to be implanted in the human jaw to replace the mandibular
condyle and to articulate within a naturally occurring glenoid fossa. 
(b) 

 Classification.

 Class III.
(c)

 Date PMA or notice of completion of a PDP is required. 

 The effective date of the requirement for the premarket approval has not been established. See 872.3.





Dated: February 8, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 943399 Filed 21194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

