 

14. In 92.211, paragraphs (a)(2) and (f)(3) are revised, and paragraph (a)(3) is added, to read as follows:




92.211 

Tenant-based rental assistance. 


(a) * * * 
(2) The participating jurisdiction selects families in accordance with written tenant selection policies and criteria
that are consistent with the purposes of providing housing to very low- and low-income families and are reasonably
related to preference rules established under section 6(c)(4)(A) of the Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 

et. seq.

). Selection policies and criteria meet the ``reasonably related'' requirement if at least 70% of the families assisted
qualify, or would qualify in the near future without the tenant-based rental assistance, for one of the three Federal
preferences under section 6(c)(4)(A) of the Housing Act of 1937. These are families that occupy substandard housing
(including families that are homeless or living in a shelter for homeless families); families that are paying more
than 50 percent of (gross) family income for rent; or families that are involuntarily displaced. The participating
jurisdiction may select low-income families currently residing in units that are designated for rehabilitation
or acquisition under the participating jurisdiction's HOME program without requiring that the family meet the written
tenant selection policies and criteria. Families so selected may use the tenant-based assistance in the rehabilitated
or acquired unit or in other qualified housing. 
(3) A participating jurisdiction may require the family to use the tenant-based assistance within the participating
jurisdiction's boundaries or may permit the family to use the assistance outside its boundaries. 


* * * * * 


(f) * * * 
(3) The participating jurisdiction's rent standard for a unit size must based on: 
(i) Local market conditions; or 
(ii) May not be less, for each unit size, than 80 percent of the published Section 8 Existing Housing fair market rent
(in effect when the payment standard amount is adopted) nor more than the fair market rent or HUD-approved community-wide
exception rent (in effect when the participating jurisdiction adopts its rent standard amount). (Community-wide
exception rents are maximum gross rents approved by HUD for the Rental Certificate Program under 882.106(a)(3) of
this title for a designated municipality, county, or similar locality, which apply to the whole PHA jurisdiction.)
A participating jurisdiction may approve on a unit-by-unit basis a subsidy based on a rent standard that exceeds the
applicable fair market rent by up to 10 percent for 20 percent of units assisted. 


* * * * * 


15. In 92.214, paragraph (a)(8) is revised to read as follows: 



92.214 

Prohibited activities. 


(a) * * * 
(8) Pay for the acquisition of property owned by the participating jurisdiction, except for property acquired by
the participating jurisdiction with HOME funds, or property acquired in anticipation of carrying out a HOME project.



* * * * * 


16. In 92.218, paragraphs (a) introductory text and (c) are revised, and a new paragraph (e) is added, to read
as follows: 



92.218 

Amount of matching contribution. 



(a) Each participating jurisdiction must make contributions to housing that qualifies as affordable housing under
the HOME program, throughout a fiscal year. The contributions must total not less than: 



* * * * * 



(c) HOME funds used for administrative and planning costs (pursuant to 92.207), CHDO operating expenses (pursuant
to 92.208) and capacity building (pursuant to 92.300(b)) of community housing development organizations
are not required to be matched. 



* * * * * 


(e) Contributions that have been or will be counted towards satisfying a matching requirement of another Federal
grant or award may not count toward satisfying the matching contribution requirement for the HOME program. 





