 

&bull;Demonstrate potential for replication based on project outcomes through the dissemination of training materials
and protocols. 


Proposed Priority 4_Training Impartial Hearing Officers on Provisions of the Act 




Background: 

The Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1992 contain several new requirements for due process applicable to State rehabilitation
agencies that provide services under Title I of the Act. For example, agency personnel shall presume that an applicant
can benefit from vocational rehabilitation services unless they can demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence
that the applicant is incapable of benefiting from vocational rehabilitation services in terms of an employment
outcome. If an individual with a disability is dissatisfied with an eligibility determination or other decisions
affecting the nature, scope, onset, duration, or other conditions of services, the applicant or recipient is entitled
to a fair hearing before an impartial hearing officer under section 102(d) of the Act. 
An impartial hearing officer is defined in section 7(28) of the Act. Among the qualifications, the impartial hearing
officer must have is knowledge of the delivery of vocational rehabilitation services, the State plan for rehabilitation
services, and the Federal and State regulations governing the provision of services. Hearing officers are required
in section 102(d)(2)(C) of the Act to be qualified to perform their official duties. 
One problem in training hearing officers is that there is a lack of an organized and accessible information base of
hearing decisions and appeals such as is commonly found in our judicial system. Those compilations relate hearing
decisions to State administrative case law, encourage the use of precedent in hearing decisions, provide evaluative
data to State agencies on policies and practices that require revision or remediation, and provide information for
use by the Federal Government in its monitoring responsibilities. A digest of hearing decisions and appeals, if published
nationally, would also be of great benefit to multiple agencies, constituent groups, and Client Assistance Programs.

The Secretary intends to make an award with a project period of up to 36 months. The Secretary expects that the materials
developed under this project would be used by projects funded under the State Vocational Rehabilitation Unit In-Service
Training program, the Rehabilitation Continuing Education Program, and the Client Assistance Program training
projects. 


Priority


The project must_
&bull;Provide seminars and workshops for impartial hearing officers that address the many changes in due process
requirements in the Act, including_(1) The rights and remedies for people with disabilities seeking services under
Title I of the Act; and (2) The conduct of impartial hearings; 
&bull;Develop model materials and decision compilations (including, if appropriate, computer-accessed compilations)
for in-State and national dissemination of information on hearing decisions and appeals; and 
&bull;Provide training that is national in scope and training approaches and materials that, when replicated and
adapted, are suited to train State rehabilitation agency staff and Client Assistance Program staff who have significant
involvement with hearings and hearing officers. 


Applicable Program Regulations: 

34 CFR Part 390.


Program Authority: 

29 U.S.C. 774. 



Training of Interpreters for Individuals Who are Deaf and Individuals Who are Deaf-Blind





Purpose of Program: 

The purpose of this program is to assist in providing a sufficient number of skilled interpreters throughout the country
for employment in public and private agencies, schools, and other service-providing institutions to meet the communication
needs of individuals who are deaf and individuals who are deaf-blind by_(1) Training manual, tactile, oral, and cued
speech interpreters; (2) Ensuring the maintenance of the skills of interpreters; and (3) Providing opportunities
for interpreters to raise their level of competence. 


For Further Information Contact: 

Victor Galloway, U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue SW., room 3228, Switzer Building, Washington,
DC 202022736. Telephone: (202) 2059152. Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf
(TDD) may call the TDD number at (202) 2058352. 


Priorities


Proposed Priority 1_National Project With Major Emphasis on Interpreting for Individuals Who Are Deaf-Blind 




Background: 

The Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1992 expanded the purpose and scope of this program to include a requirement
that each funded project train interpreters for ``individuals who are deaf-blind'' as well as interpreters for ``individuals
who are deaf.'' Each project has the discretion to provide training for interpreters for these two disability populations
to the extent, and in the specific communication modes, appropriate to the needs of these populations in the geographical
area to be served by the project. To participate in major life activities, increased numbers of individuals who are
deaf-blind require skilled interpreting services. Interpreting for individuals who are deaf-blind is an intensive,
one-to-one exercise, requiring significant skill. Expertise in the training of interpreters for individuals who
are deaf-blind needs to be developed and made available to the field. A national project is needed that will give primary
focus to training interpreters for individuals who are deaf-blind to better enable regional projects supported
under this program to meet the communication needs of individuals who are deaf-blind. A national project is also needed
to assist in improving the training of interpreters for individuals who are deaf. 


