 

The advance notice of proposed rulemaking included provisions that would allow the authorized officer to issue final
decisions without first issuing a proposed decision in specified circumstances. This proposed rule would carry
forward the provision that the authorized officer could directly issue final decisions when decisions are necessary
to protect rangeland resources from damage in ``emergency'' situations under section 4110.33(b), and would
add that decisions to close areas to certain forms of livestock use when necessary to abate unauthorized use, as provided
in section 4150.2(d), could be issued as final decisions without first issuing proposed decisions. The provisions
are necessary to provide responsive action in these circumstances. The other circumstances specified in the advance
notice that would not have required a proposed decision were nondiscretionary decisions, decisions that were previously
part of a broader final decision that was initially issued as a proposed decision, and decisions that involve the application
of discretion within the established terms and conditions of grazing permits and leases. These categories have been
removed in this proposed rule. However, there may be circumstances where resource protection and administrative
efficiency could be enhanced by avoiding the delay of implementation that occasionally can result from the protracted
resolution of protests of proposed decisions. In all cases, the right to appeal final decisions to the Office of Hearings
and Appeals would be retained. The public is invited to comment on whether there should be additional circumstances
where the authorized officer should have the ability to issue final decisions without first issuing a proposed decision.


A new provision has been included in the proposed rule to eliminate the requirement for prolonged implementation
of necessary reductions in permitted livestock use when data, including field observations, show grazing use or
patterns of use are not consistent with standards and guidelines, are causing an unacceptable level or pattern of
utilization, or grazing use exceeds the livestock carrying capacity of the area. Under the existing regulations,
necessary reductions in livestock use of more than 10 percent have been phased in over a period of five years. Although
that provision may, in the short term, mitigate some of the adverse effects on permittees and lessees, it has inhibited
responsive action in situations where reductions in use are most needed. Under the proposed rule, the authorized
officer, after consultation with the affected permittee or lessee, the State having lands or managing resources
within the area, and the interested public, would take action to reduce grazing use either by reaching an agreement
with the involved parties or by decision. The Department anticipates that, in many cases, agreements can be reached
that would result in gradual reductions in use. However, the Department recognizes the need to provide for responsive
action where rangeland health and function is not being maintained. 

Other proposals within the category of administrative practice have been modified somewhat in response to comments
received, while attempting to retain the general substance of the proposed actions. Also, an attempt has been made
to clarify many of the explanations of proposals, and to refine the regulatory text to more accurately achieve the
objective of the initial proposal. 



Resource Management Requirements, Including Standards and Guidelines 



Public comments on the standards and guidelines included as an appendix to the advance notice of proposed rulemaking
generally expressed doubt that it is possible to develop a set of national standards and guidelines that could be universally
applied to grazing administration on public lands. Many reviewers recommended that standards and guidelines should
only be developed at a more local level. Many comments also expressed uncertainty regarding whether the standards
and guidelines would have the effect of law given they were presented as an appendix rather than proposed regulatory
text. 





