 




<USBUREAU>Public Health Service</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Agency Forms Submitted to the Office of Management and Budget for Clearance </DOCTITLE>



Each Friday the Public Health Service (PHS) publishes a list of information collection requests it has submitted
to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for clearance in compliance with the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C.
Chapter 35). The following requests have been submitted to OMB since the list was last published on Friday, September
2, 1994.

 


(Call PHS Reports Clearance Office on 2026907100 for copies of request).

 


1. 1994 and 1996 Updates of a National Survey of Prescription Drug Information Provided to Patients_09100279
(Reinstatement)_To provide information for HHS and the Food and Drug Administration policy initiatives and potential
regulations, national surveys of adults will assess the nature and extent of prescription drug information received
by patients from health professionals and other sources. These are a continuation of a tracking survey conducted
in 1982, 1984, and 1992. 

Respondents: 

Individuals or households; 

Number of Respondents: 

9,142; 

Number of Responses per Respondent: 

1; 

Average Burden per Response: 

.05 hour; 

Estimated Annual Burden: 

467 hours. 

2. A Study of Caregiving in Aging and Dementia: Honolulu Heart Program Cohort_0925-0374 (Revision)_The purpose
of the project is to describe predictors and outcomes of caregiver burden and quality of life in caregivers of elderly
men with dementia. Standard questionnaires will be used in an interview format to obtain information from caregivers
and control groups. This revision will permit continuation of the project to include additional respondents, thereby
increasing statistical power for longitudinal analyses and theoretical model testing. 

Respondent: 

Individuals or households; 

Number of Respondents: 

200; 

Number of Responses per Respondent: 

3; 

Average Burden per Response: 

.75 hour; 

Estinmated Annual Burden: 

450 hours. 

3. Screener Round, National Nursing Home Expenditure Survey: National Medical Expenditure Survey_Pretest_New_This
is the pretest of the Screener Round of the National Nursing Home Expenditure Survey (NNHES) National Medical Expenditure
Survey (NMES 3). It will test procedures for screening and recruiting facilities eligible as nursing homes. 

Respondents: 

Businesses or other for-profit; Federal agencies or employees; Small businesses or organizations; 

Number of Respondents: 

130; Number 

of Responses per Respondent: 

1.1; 

Average Burden per Response: 

.084 hour; 

Estimated Annual Burden: 

12 hours. 

4. Cancer Prevention Awareness: The Black college as a Resource; Medical and Other Health Professional Schools_0925-0402_(Extension,
no change)_This data collection will aid the National Cancer Institutes efforts to effectively utilize historically
black institutions in health promotion activities, especially focusing on cancer prevention, developing further
cancer prevention intervention research appropriate to the target population. 

Respondent: 

Individuals or households; Small businesses or organizations. 

Number of Respondents: 

18,885; 

Number of Responses per Respondent: 1

; 

Average Burden per Response: 

.1765 hour; 

Estimated Annual Burden: 

4661 hours. 



