 

Retroactive Relief 


25. ABS represents that it has engaged in transactions related to mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities based
on the assumption that retroactive relief would not be granted. However, it is possible that some transactions may
have occurred that would be prohibited. For example, because many certificates are held in street or nominee name,
it is not always possible to identify whether the percentage interest of plans in a trust is or is not ``significant''
for purposes of the Department's regulation relating to the definition of plan assets (29 CFR 2510.3101(f)).
These problems are compounded as transactions occur in the secondary market. In addition, with respect to the ``publicly-offered
security'' exception contained in that regulation (29 CFR 2510.3101(b)), it is difficult to determine whether
each purchaser of a certificate is independent of all other purchasers. 
Therefore, ABS requests relief retroactive for transactions which have occurred on or after August 12, 1994, the
date ABS originally filed its exemption application with the Department. 


Summary 


26. In summary, the applicant represents that the 
transactions for which exemptive relief is requested satisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act
due to the following: 
(a) The trusts contain ``fixed pools'' of assets. There is little discretion on the part of the trust sponsor to substitute
receivables contained in the trust once the trust has been formed; 
(b) Certificates in which plans invest will have been rated in one of the three highest rating categories by SP's,
Moody's, DP or Fitch. Credit support will be obtained to the extent necessary to attain the desired rating; 
(c) All transactions for which ABS seeks exemptive relief will be governed by the pooling and servicing agreement,
which is made available to plan fiduciaries for their review prior to the plan's investment in certificates; 
(d) Exemptive relief from sections 406(b) and 407 for 
sales to plans is substantially limited; and 
(e) ABS has made, and anticipates that it will 
continue to make, a secondary market in certificates. 










