 

(3) EPA sampling episode reports. 

(4) Industry treatability study reports, literature articles, and other data sources. 

For some active ingredients, a different treatment technology, such as resin adsorption or solvent extraction,
may have served as the basis for manufacturers' limitation because it was in use at a given facility and judged to represent
BAT performance based on monitoring data. In some cases, a PFPR facility may want to use these types of technologies,
rather than the Universal Treatment System, if the facility is only handling an active ingredient that requires that
technology. The wastewater matrix at PFPR facilities, however, may be more complex than the manufacturer's wastewater
containing the same active ingredient because of emulsifiers and surfactants, and the treatment technology identified
as Best Available Technology for the manufacturers' limitation may not be capable of achieving the removal levels
specified in the manufacturers rule without substantial pretreatment. In addition, for most PFPR facilities, the
commingled wastewater will contain multiple active ingredients, all of which will be amenable to the more common
treatment technologies comprising the Universal Treatment System. Furthermore, a treatment system relying on
a technology such as solvent extraction to remove an active ingredient would still require activated carbon polishing
to adsorb other wastewater constituents, including residual extraction solvent, before the treated wastewater
could be reused. Rather than attempting to integrate these other technologies of resin adsorption, solvent extraction
or others into a centralized wastewater treatment scheme, EPA believes that the Universal Treatment System offers
a more consistent, simplistic, and cost-effective design and thus constitutes BAT treatment at PFPR facilities
(together with recycle/reuse of the treated wastewaters, as described below). The technologies included in the
Universal Treatment System, together with pretreatment for emulsifiers/surfactants where needed, are capable
of removing all toxic pollutants that may be in PFP wastewaters to levels that will allow recycle or reuse of the wastewaters
at the facility. Thus, these BAT technologies support the zero discharge requirements proposed in today's notice.


As stated above, EPA developed a treatability dataset for the 272 active ingredients in order to ensure that the Universal
Treatment System technologies will be effective in providing treated effluent suitable for reuse. EPA evaluated
full-scale and bench-scale treatability data available for the 272 active ingredients, including those where a
different technology basis was used to support the manufacturers' limitation. The Agency also developed technical
treatability data transfer methodologies for the transfer of activated carbon adsorption and hydrolysis treatability
data between structurally-similar active ingredients. 

Transfers of treatability data are based on an analysis of properties of active ingredients and active ingredient
groups, such as chemical structure, molecular weight, aromaticity, and solubility. If, based on this analysis,
an active ingredient is considered amenable to hydrolysis or carbon adsorption but lacks treatability data, then
treatability data are transferred to this active ingredient from a structurally-similar active ingredients with
either hydrolysis or carbon adsorption treatability data. If multiple treatability data exist for structurally-similar
active ingredients, then the most conservative data are transferred. If no data exist for structurally-similar
active ingredients, and if the active ingredient is expected to be amenable to hydrolysis or carbon adsorption based
on its structure, solubility, or molecular weight, then conservative treatability data, determined from all active
ingredients with hydrolysis or carbon adsorption treatability data, are transferred to the active ingredient.


In determining the efficacy of the treatment technologies in the Universal Treatment System to the active ingredients
in PFPR facility wastewater, EPA also factored in the need for pretreatment steps. PFPR facility wastewater may contain
emulsifiers, surfactants, solids, organic constituents in addition to the active ingredients, and other pollutants
that may interfere with active ingredient removals across the treatment technologies. The Agency examined existing
PFPR facility treatment systems and vendor-supplied treatment systems designed to be applicable at all PFPR facilities.
The Agency's identification of Best Available Technology includes the Universal Treatment System treatment technologies
including emulsion breaking, oil layer removal and off-site disposal as a hazardous waste, solids separation and
removal, and removal of any remaining large particles by in-line strainers prior to activated carbon adsorption.


Final effluent from the Universal Treatment System is expected to be suitable for reuse, e.g., as general pesticide
production area cleanup water. Based on the active ingredient treatability dataset and information from PFPR facilities
that treat and reuse pesticide process wastewater, the Agency believes that the identified of Best Available Technology
is applicable to all PFPR Subcategory C facilities. 



VI. Industry Subcategorization 



A. Prior Subcategorization Scheme 



EPA divided the pesticide chemicals point source category into three subcategories in the 1978 BPT rulemaking. These
three subcategories are the organic pesticide chemicals subcategory, which applies to the manufacture of organic
pesticide active ingredients; the metallo-organic pesticide chemicals subcategory, which applies to the manufacture
of metallo-organic pesticide active ingredients; and the pesticide chemicals formulating and packaging subcategory
which applies to the formulating and packaging of all pesticide products. In addition, the regulations include Test
Methods for Pesticide Pollutants at 40 CFR part 455, subpart D (58 FR 50637, September 28, 1993). 



B. Development of Current Subcategorization Scheme 



In today's proposal EPA does not address the organic pesticide chemicals and metallo-organic pesticide chemicals
subcategories because they were the subject of the recent rulemaking covering pesticide manufacturing (58 FR 50637).
Today's notice proposes to retain the pesticide chemicals formulating and packaging subcategory (subpart C) and
to create a new subcategory: repackaging performed at refilling establishments (subpart E). 

EPA considered the factors that can most affect the decisions on subcategorization: 

&bull;product type; 

&bull;raw materials; 

&bull;type of operations performed; 

&bull;nature of waste generated; 

&bull;dominant product; 

&bull;plant size; 

&bull;plant age; 

&bull;plant location; 

&bull;non-water quality characteristics; and 

&bull;treatment costs and energy requirements. 

EPA has surveyed and visited facilities with a variety of product types and has not seen evidence of differences in
water use based on product type. Therefore, EPA does not consider this factor to be a basis on which to subcategorize.





