 

I. Coverage Under This Permit 


A. Coverage and Eligibility 


1. 

Existing Facilities: 

Existing facilities (those facilities having individual NPDES permits) are authorized under the terms and conditions
of this permit upon the submittal of a Notice of Intent (NOI) to gain coverage under this permit. Coverage will be granted
according to Permit Part E.4. 
2. 

Pending Applications: 

Upon submittal of an NOI all facilities which have submitted applications in accordance with 40 CFR 122.21(a) are
authorized under the terms and conditions of this permit. Coverage will be granted according to Permit Part E.4. 
3. 

New Facilities: 

New facilities that are determined to be new sources under the CWA will be required to have an Environmental Assessment
(EA) completed pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). A finding of no significant impact (FNSI)
by EPA is necessary prior to receiving coverage under this permit. If there will be a significant impact, the facility
will be required to submit, to EPA, an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). Facilities determined to be new dischargers
will be covered by the terms and conditions of this permit if they meet all the necessary requirements of the coverage.

4. 

Expanding Facilities: 

Facilities that contemplate expanding shall submit a new NOI that describes the new discharge. The old permit will
be terminated and a new permit issued in its place if the facility meets all the necessary requirements of the coverage.



B. Types of Placer Mine Operations Covered


1. Facilities that mine and process gold placer ores using gravity separation methods to recover the gold metal contained
in the ore. 
a. Open-cut gold placer mines except those open-cut mines that mine less than 1,500 cubic yards of placer ore per mining
season. 
b. Mechanical dredge gold placer mines (not suction dredges) except those dredges that remove less than 50,000 cubic
yards of placer ore per mining season. 
2. Suction dredges with intake hoses of greater than 4 inches. 
3. Operations utilizing hydraulic removal of overburden. 


C. Limitations on Coverage 


Many streams and stream reaches in Alaska have been designated as part of the federal wild and scenic rivers system
or as Conservation System Units (CSUs) by the federal government. Permittees should contact the district offices
of the federal agencies that administer the designated area for additional restrictions that may apply to operating
within the area. Many streams in Alaska where placer mining occurs have been designated by Alaska Department of Fish
and Game (ADFG) as needing an ADFG Habitat permit with additional restrictions. ``The Atlas to the Catalog of Waters
Important for Spawning, Rearing or Migration of Anadromous Fish'' lists the streams in the State which require a Habitat
permit. 


D. Prohibitions 


Discharges from the following beneficiation processes are not authorized under this permit: Mercury amalgamation,
cyanidation, froth floatation, heap and vat leaching. 


E. Requiring an Individual Permit 


1. The Regional Administrator may require any person authorized by this permit to apply for and obtain an individual
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit when: 
a. The single discharge or the cumulative number of discharges is/are a significant contributor of pollution; 
b. The discharger is not in compliance with the terms and conditions of the general permit; 
c. A change has occurred in the availability of demonstrated technology or practices for the control or abatement
of pollutants applicable to the point source; 
d. Effluent limitations guidelines are subsequently promulgated for the point sources covered by the general permit;

e. A Water Quality Management plan containing requirements applicable to such point sources is approved; or 


