 

As stated in the NRC letter transmitting the Notice, the NRC's conclusion that the technologist failed to measure
the dosages was based on: (1) The setting of a different isotope channel on both dose calibrators during the time the
technologist stated he measured three patient doses, (2) the missing radioactive material, (3) the high volume of
radioactive material recorded by the technologist on the patient dose log, and (4) the technologist's past history
of committing errors and omissions in patient dose records. 

If proper measurements had occurred, the technologist would have noticed the improper radionuclide channel (i.e.,
Thallium) and reset it when measuring the doses. The technologist would not have recorded the high volumes on the patient
dose log. The technologist admitted that the volumes in the records were fabricated, indicating that he had no knowledge
of the amount of doses administered providing further evidence that he has not measured the doses. The Licensee's
response did not address any of the evidence which indicated that the dosages had not been measured prior to administration.


Moreover, the staff disagrees with the Licensee's argument that it is not credible to have the count rate of the seven
doses favorably compare with the doses administered on July 22, 1991, in the absence of measuring the dose in the dose
calibrator. An experienced technologist, knowing a prescribed radiopharmaceutical dose, may approximate with
some success the radiopharmaceutical dose by approximating the volume of the material. However, this method is not
reliable to assess the radiopharmaceutical dose and does not meet the requirement in 10 CFR 35.53(a) to measure each
radiopharmaceutical dosage in a dose calibrator. 

The preponderance of the evidence in this case indicates that the technologist failed to measure the doses. The NRC
concludes that the violation did occur as stated in the Notice. 



Restatement of Violation C.2 



10 CFR 35.21 requires, in part, that the licensee, through the Radiation Safety Officer (RSO): (1) Ensure that radiation
safety activities are being performed in accordance with approved procedures and regulatory requirements in the
daily operation of the licensee's byproduct material program; and (2) that the RSO investigate misadministrations
and other deviations from approved radiation safety practice and implement corrective actions as necessary. 

Contrary to the above, the licensee failed to conduct a prompt and adequate investigation of possible misadministrations
of radiopharmaceuticals to patients during the week of July 22 through 26, 1991. Specifically, once notified of the
allegation, the RSO failed to obtain a copy and review a letter from the acting supervisor describing the possible
misadministrations or to interview individuals who had first-hand knowledge that was material to the investigation.




Summary of Licensee's Response to Violation C.2 



The Licensee denied that Violation C.2 constituted a breach of regulations. While it admitted that the regulations
require the RSO to investigate misadministrations, the Licensee stated that the regulations provide no standard
for the performance of the investigation and do not require that the investigation be performed in a ``prompt or adequate''
manner or to the satisfaction of the NRC. The Licensee stated that it conducted an investigation concerning this matter.


The Licensee also stated that during the enforcement conference held on February 16, 1993, Mr. Ebneter, Regional
Administrator, Region II, pointed out that there was no regulation that tells the Licensee what has to be included
in an investigation. The Licensee also stated that Dr. Mallett, Deputy Director, Division of Radiation Safety and
Safeguards, Region II, indicated that he was comfortable with the Licensee's statement that it has looked at the rates
(as part of the investigation) and expressed satisfaction with the results of the Licensee's investigation. 

The Licensee denied that the investigation was not prompt or thorough, since the RSO was summoned back to duty from
vacation to look into the matter, the technologist at fault was counseled, and the NRC notified. The Licensee's investigation
concluded from statistical studies that there was no misadministration and that the errors were ones of record-keeping.
In addition, the Licensee stated that the NRC has not suggested what additional information or result could have been
obtained had the investigation been performed differently. 



NRC Evaluation of Licensee's Response to Violation C.2 



The need for the Licensee to perform investigations that are prompt and adequate is implicit in 10 CFR 35.21. One purpose
of the requirement for an investigation of a possible misadministration is to determine whether there has, in fact,
been any misadministration. Further, the Commission's regulations require the licensee to implement as necessary
and, ensure corrective actions are taken. This protects individual patients and prevents future or potential misadministrations.
An investigation that is not prompt and not adequate cannot achieve these goals nor preclude potential or recurring
violation. Accordingly, the NRC rejects the Licensee's argument. In view of the above, the issue is whether the Licensee's
investigation was in fact prompt and adequate. 



