 

This policy identifies EPA's major objectives for the long-term CSO control plan. Permittees should develop and
submit this long-term CSO control plan as soon as practicable, but generally within two years after the date of the
NPDES permit provision, Section 308 information request, or enforcement action requiring the permittee to develop
the plan. NPDES authorities may establish a longer timetable for completion of the long-term CSO control plan on a
case-by-case basis to account for site-specific factors which may influence the complexity of the planning process.
Once agreed upon, these dates should be included in an appropriate enforceable mechanism. 
EPA expects each long-term CSO control plan to utilize appropriate information to address the following minimum
elements. The Plan should also include both fixed-date project implementation schedules (which may be phased) and
a financing plan to design and construct the project as soon as practicable. The minimum elements of the long-term
CSO control plan are described below. 


1. Characterization, Monitoring, and Modeling of the Combined Sewer System 


In order to design a CSO control plan adequate to meet the requirements of the CWA, a permittee should have a thorough
understanding of its sewer system, the response of the system to various precipitation events, the characteristics
of the overflows, and the water quality impacts that result from CSOs. The permittee should adequately characterize
through monitoring, modeling, and other means as appropriate, for a range of storm events, the response of its sewer
system to wet weather events including the number, location and frequency of CSOs, volume, concentration and mass
of pollutants discharged and the impacts of the CSOs on the receiving waters and their designated uses. The permittee
may need to consider information on the contribution and importance of other pollution sources in order to develop
a final plan designed to meet water quality standards. The purpose of the system characterization, monitoring and
modeling program initially is to assist the permittee in developing appropriate measures to implement the nine minimum
controls and, if necessary, to support development of the long-term CSO control plan. The monitoring and modeling
data also will be used to evaluate the expected effectiveness of both the nine minimum controls and, if necessary,
the long-term CSO controls, to meet WQS. 
The major elements of a sewer system characterization are described below. 
a. Rainfall Records_The permittee should examine the complete rainfall record for the geographic area of its existing
CSS using sound statistical procedures and best available data. The permittee should evaluate flow variations in
the receiving water body to correlate between CSOs and receiving water conditions. 
b. Combined Sewer System Characterization_The permittee should evaluate the nature and extent of its sewer system
through evaluation of available sewer system records, field inspections and other activities necessary to understand
the number, location and frequency of overflows and their location relative to sensitive areas and to pollution sources
in the collection system, such as indirect significant industrial users. 






