 

<TABLE>





Table

 4._

EPACML: Calculated Compliance-Point Concentrations (ppm) 
Stabilized Filter Cake 



1Constituents 
1Compliance-point concentrations 
1Levels of regulatory concern1
 



Arsenic 
0.0003 
0.05 

Barium 
0.0521 
2.0 

Chromium 
0.0014 
0.1 

Lead 
0.0004 
0.015 

Mercury 
0.00004 
0.002 

Nickel 
0.0021 
0.1 

Selenium 
0.0005 
0.05 

Zinc 
0.0469 
7.0 


1See ``Docket Report on Health-Based Levels and Solubilities Used in the Evaluation of Delisting Petitions,'' July
1992, located in the RCRA public docket for today's notice.

</TABLE>



The maximum reported or calculated leachate concentrations of arsenic, barium, chromium, lead, mercury, nickel,
selenium, and zinc in the stabilized filter cake yielded compliance point concentrations well below the health-based
levels used in delisting decision-making. The Agency did not evaluate the mobility of the remaining inorganic constituents
(

i.e.

, cadmium, silver, and cyanide) from BSC's waste because they were not detected in the leachate using the appropriate
analytical test methods (see Tables 2 and 3). The Agency believes that it is inappropriate to evaluate non-detectable
concentrations of a constituent of concern in its modeling efforts if the non-detectable value was obtained using
the appropriate analytical method. If a constituent cannot be detected (when using the appropriate analytical method
with an adequate detection limit), the Agency assumes that the constituent is not present and therefore does not present
a threat to either human health or the environment. 

As also reported in Table 1, the maximum concentration of total cyanide in BSC's stabilized filter cake is 52 ppm. Because
reactive cyanide is a specific subcategory of the general class of cyanide compounds, the maximum level of reactive
cyanide will not exceed 52 ppm. Thus, the Agency concludes that the concentration of reactive cyanide will be below
the Agency's interim standard of 250 ppm. See ``Interim Agency Thresholds for Toxic Gas Generation,'' July 12, 1985,
internal Agency Memorandum in the RCRA public docket. Lastly, because the total constituent concentration of sulfide
in the stabilized filter cake is 160 ppm (see Table 1), the Agency believes that the concentration of reactive sulfide
will be below the Agency's interim standard of 500 ppm. See ``Interim Agency Thresholds for Toxic Gas Generation,''
July 12, 1985, internal Agency Memorandum in the RCRA public docket. 

As noted previously, chloroform was detected in the TCLP extracts of unstabilized waste, and also in one of the method
blanks. Thus, the presence of chloroform is uncertain and may be attributed to laboratory contamination. However,
the Agency also used the EPACML to evaluate the mobility of chloroform detected in the extract from BSC's dewatered
(unstabilized) filter cake as a worst-case analysis of this constituent. The Agency's evaluation, using a maximum
annual waste volume estimate of 1100 cubic yards per year and a maximum leachate concentration of 0.0624 ppm, yielded
a compliance-point concentration of 0.0006 ppm. Thus, even under these worst-case assumptions, this concentration
is less than the delisting health-based level for chloroform of 0.006 ppm. 

The Agency concluded, after reviewing BSC's processes and raw materials list, that no other hazardous constituents
of concern, other than those tested for, are being used by BSC and that no other constituents of concern are likely to
be present or formed as reaction products or by-products in BSC's waste. In addition, on the basis of explanations
provided by BSC, pursuant to 260.22, the Agency concludes that the waste does not exhibit any of the characteristics
of ignitability, corrosivity, or reactivity. See 261.21, 261.22, and 261.23, respectively.


During its evaluation of BSC's petition, the Agency also considered the potential impact of the petitioned waste
via non-ground water routes (

i.e.,

 air emission and surface runoff). With regard to airborne dispersal in particular, the Agency believes that exposure
to airborne contaminants from BSC's stabilized waste is unlikely. 

BSC's dewatered (unstabilized) filter cake is composed of metal hydroxides, primarily chromic hydroxide, which
is one of the more stable wastes in the environment. BSC's dewatered filter cake will then be stabilized through the
pozzolanic reaction of lime and fly ash, which adsorbs and binds the heavy metals present in the chromium filter cake
into a calcium-alumino-silicate matrix, thereby rendering them essentially immobile. The stabilization product
will ultimately cure into a concrete-like solid material. Therefore, EPA does not believe that airborne exposure
to hazardous contaminants released from BSC's chemically stabilized filter cake is likely to present a hazard to
human health. In addition, there are no significant volatile constituents of concern present in the filter cake for
that could lead to airborne exposure to any organic constituent. 

However, the Agency evaluated the potential hazards resulting from the unlikely scenario of airborne exposure to
hazardous constituents released from BSC's waste in an open landfill. The results of this worst-case analysis indicated
that no substantial present or potential hazard to human health from exposure to particulate emissions from BSC's
waste is likely. A description of the Agency's assessment of the potential impact of BSC's waste, with regard to airborne
dispersal of waste contaminants, is presented in the docket for today's proposed rule. 

The Agency also considered the potential impact of the petitioned wastes via a surface water route. Because BSC's
waste will be stabilized in a solidified form, contamination of surface water is unlikely to occur through particulate
runoff from a landfill containing the BSC's waste. The Agency also believes that containment structures at municipal
solid waste landfills can effectively control surface water run-off, as the recently promulgated Subtitle D regulations
(see 56 FR 50978, October 9, 1991) prohibit pollutant discharges into surface waters.



