 

Computation of Time 


11. (1) In computing any time period fixed in these rules or by an order or decision of a committee, the day from which
the time period begins to run shall be excluded and, subject to subrules (2) and (3), the last day of the time period shall
be included. 
(2) Where the last day of a time period computed in accordance with subrule (1) falls on a legal holiday of the responsible
Secretariat, that day and any other legal holidays of the responsible Secretariat immediately following that day
shall be excluded from the computation. 
(3) In computing any time period of five days or less fixed in these rules or by an order or decision of a committee, any
legal holiday that falls within the time period shall be excluded from the computation. 
12. A committee may extend any time period fixed in these rules if 
(a) the extension is made in the interests of fairness and justice; and 
(b) in fixing the extension, the committee takes into account the intent of the rules to secure just, speedy and inexpensive
final resolutions of challenges of decisions of panels. 


Counsel of Record 


13. (1) Subject to subrule (2), the counsel of record for a participant in an extraordinary challenge proceeding shall
be 
(a) the counsel for the participant in the panel review; or 
(b) in the case of a Party who was not a participant in the panel review or of a panelist, the counsel who signs any document
filed on behalf of the Party or panelist in the extraordinary challenge proceeding. 
(2) A participant may change its counsel of record by filing with the responsible Secretariat a Notice of Change of
Counsel of Record signed by the new counsel, together with proof of service on the former counsel and other participants.



Costs 


14. Each participant shall bear the costs of, and incidental to, its own participation in an extraordinary challenge
proceeding. 


Protection of Non-Public Information 


15. (1) Where proprietary information has been filed in a panel review that is the subject of an extraordinary challenge
proceeding, every member of a committee, assistant to a committee member, court reporter and translator shall provide
the responsible Secretariat with a Disclosure Undertaking or a Protective Order Application. 

(2) Upon receipt of a Disclosure Undertaking or Protective Order Application, the responsible Secretary shall file
with the appropriate investigating authority the Disclosure Undertaking or Protective Order Application and any
additional copies of those documents required by the investigating authority. 
(3) The investigating authority shall, if appropriate, issue the Disclosure Order or Protective Order and provide
the responsible Secretariat with the original and any additional copies of those documents required by the responsible
Secretariat. 
(4) Upon receipt of a Disclosure Order or Protective Order, the responsible Secretary shall transmit the original
Disclosure Order or Protective Order to the appropriate member of a committee, assistant to a committee member, court
reporter or translator. 
16. (1) A member of a committee, assistant to a committee member, court reporter or translator who amends or modifies
a Disclosure Undertaking or Protective Order Application shall provide a copy of the amendment or modification to
the responsible Secretariat. 
(2) Upon receipt of an amended or modified Disclosure Undertaking or Protective Order Application, the responsible
Secretary shall file with the appropriate investigating authority that document and any additional copies of that
document required by the investigating authority. 






