 

Comment 5: Chevron Research and Technology Company, by 
letter dated October 4, 1994, requested a copy of the NPDES 
Best Management Practice (BMP) Guidance Document. 
Response: EPA sent the NPDES BMP Guidance document to 
Chevron on October 13, 1994. 
Comment 6: Morgan, Lewis  Bockius (MLB), Counselors at 
Law, by letter dated October 15, 1994, made two comments 
concerning the permit. MLB mentioned that all references 
to Florida Administrative Code Chapter 17770, 17302, or 
any other ``17-'' should be changed to Chapter ``62770, or 62- 
302, and mentioned that Chapter ``62-'' is where the current 
law is found. MLB also mentioned that the Fact Sheet 
should contain some discussion of discharge to ``surface 
waters'', the triggering event. MLB also mentioned that the 
permittee should know where to go in order look up the 
definition of ``surface waters'' or discharges to surface 
waters. Mentioned that these issues and basic guidance 
thereon may ensure that all facilities obligated under the 
general permit actually apply for coverage and discussion of 
this significant jurisdictional issue in the Fact Sheet or 
permit itself seems appropriate. 
Response: EPA refers the commentor to the Clean Water Act 
(CWA) which requires that point source discharges of 
pollutants to waters of the United States be covered by 
NPDES permits. The definition of ``point source'' and ``waters 
of the U.S.'' can be found at 40 CFR Section 122.2. 
Additionally, all references that refer to Florida 
Administrative Code Chapter ``17'' will be changed to Florida 
Administrative Code Chapter ``62.'' 
Comment 7: Mobil Oil Corporation (MOC), by letter dated 
October 17, 1994, supported the reissuance of the general 
permit, since it is more efficient and cost effective 
approach to permitting routine activity than the individual 
permitting process. MOC raised several concerns on the 
draft NPDES general permit concerning the new requirements 
of the whole effluent toxicity (WET) tests. MOC stated that 
the need for WET testing has not been established. It was 
stated that the Fact Sheet cited that the chemical criteria 
was significantly more stringent than Florida's water 
quality standards and MOC stated that meeting the chemical 
criteria, coupled with the required treatment processes 
should be more than adequate to protect aquatic life. 
Response: In response to MOC comment, EPA notes that the 
chemical specific discharge limitations mentioned do provide 
adequate protection to meet Florida's chemical specific 
water quality standards. However, since previous toxicity 
monitoring tests did indicate that a number of effluents 
were toxic, which is also a violation of Florida 
Administrative Code (FAC) Section 174.244(3)(a), WET limits 
were incorporated into the permit. 
Comment 8: MOC stated that if WET testing is required, the 
procedure outlined in Part V should be modified. MOC stated 
that if the compliance limit for WET testing is an LC50 

&gt;

 
100%, the requirement for a full concentration test is not 
warranted and only a screening test (control and 100% final 
effluent only) should be run to demonstrate compliance. 
Response: Regarding Mobil's comment on the use of multiple 
dilutions, per the EPA acute WET protocol manual (EPA/600/4- 
90/027F) cited in the September 19,1994 

Federal Register

 
notice, such dilutions are recommended to assess NPDES 
compliance for all WET tests (pg. 4748). They provide more 
information about the dose-response of the test, increase 
the statistical power of the test, and decrease the inherent 
variability found in conducting a single test concentration 
with a control. 



