 

1. 

Design requirements

. Disclosures must be presented in a format that allows consumers to readily understand the terms of their account.
Disclosures may be made: 
&bull;In any order 
&bull;In combination with other disclosures or account terms 
&bull;On more than one page and on the front and reverse sides 
&bull;By using inserts to a document or filling in blanks 
&bull;On more than one document, as long as the documents are provided at the same time 
2. 

Multiple account disclosures

. Institutions may prepare combined disclosures for all accounts offered, or prepare different documents for different
types of accounts. If an institution provides one document for several types of accounts, consumers must be able to
understand clearly which disclosures apply to their account. 
3. 

Consistent terminology

. An institution must use the same terminology to describe terms or features that are required to be disclosed. For
example, if an institution describes a monthly fee (regardless of account activity) as a ``monthly service fee''
in account-opening disclosures, the same terminology must be used in its periodic statements and change-in-term
notices. 


(b) General 


1. 

Specificity of legal obligation

. An institution may use the term ``monthly'' to describe its compounding or crediting policy when interest is compounded
or paid at the end of each calendar month or for twelve periods during the year even if the actual days in each period vary
between 28 and 33 days. 


(c) Relation to Regulation E 


1. 

General rule

. Compliance with Regulation E (12 CFR part 205) is deemed to satisfy the disclosure requirements of this regulation,
such as when: 
&bull;An institution changes a term that triggers a notice under Regulation E, and the timing and disclosure rules
of Regulation E are used for sending change-in-term notices. 
&bull;A consumer adds an ATM access feature to an account, and the institution provides disclosures pursuant to Regulation
E, including disclosure of fees before the consumer receives ATM access. (See 12 CFR 205.7.) If the institution
complies with the timing rules of Regulation E, fees related to electronic services (such as balance inquiry fees
imposed if the inquiry is made at an ATM) that are required to be disclosed by this regulation but not by Regulation E
may also be provided at that time. 
&bull;An institution relies on Regulation E's disclosure rules regarding limitations on the frequency and amount
of electronic fund transfers, including security-related exceptions. But any limitation on the number of ``intra-institutional
transfers'' from other accounts at the institution during a given time period must be disclosed, even though those
transfers are exempt from Regulation E. 


(e) Oral Response to Inquiries 


1. 

Application of rule

. Institutions need not provide rate information orally. 
2. 

Relation to advertising

. An oral response to a question about rates is not covered by the advertising rules. 


(f) Rounding and Accuracy Rules for Rates and Yields 
(f)(2) Accuracy 


1. 

Annual percentage yield and annual percentage yield earned

. The tolerance for annual percentage yield and annual percentage yield earned calculations is designed to accommodate
inadvertent errors. Institutions may not purposely incorporate the tolerance into their calculation of yields.

2. 

Interest rate

. There is no tolerance for an inaccuracy in the interest rate. 


Section 230.4_Account Disclosures


(a) Delivery of Account Disclosures 
(a)(1) Account Opening 


1. 

New accounts

. New account disclosures must be provided when: 
&bull;A time account that does not automatically rollover is renewed by a consumer 
&bull;A consumer changes the term for a renewable time account (from a one-year time account to a six-month time account,
for instance) 
&bull;Funds in an MMDA account are transferred by an institution to open a new account for the consumer, such as a NOW
account, because the consumer exceeded transaction limitations on the MMDA account 





