 




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 50213]</RINDOCK>





<DOCTITLE>Connecticut Yankee Atomic Power Company; Consideration of Issuance of Amendment to Facility Operating License
and Opportunity for a Hearing</DOCTITLE>




The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is considering issuance of an amendment to Facility Operating
License No. DPR61, issued to Connecticut Yankee Atomic Power Company (the licensee), for operation of the
Haddam Neck Plant located in Middlesex County, Connecticut.

The proposed amendment would revise various technical specification sections and the associated Bases sections
to reflect the changes to the shutdown margin requirement for Modes 4 and 5 and the boron dilution setpoint to assure
that the required margin for operator action in a boron dilution accident is met.

Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission will have made findings required by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (the Act) and the Commission's regulations.

By Oct. 27, 1994, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respect to issuance of the amendment to the subject
facility operating license and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and who wishes to participate
as a party in the proceeding must file a written request for a hearing and a petition for leave to intervene. Requests
for a hearing and a petition for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rules of Practice
for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. Interested persons should consult a current copy of 10 CFR 2.714
which is available at the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington,
DC 20555 and at the local public document room located at the Russell Library, 123 Broad Street, Middletown, CT 06457.
If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety
and Licensing Board, designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and Licensing Board Panel,
will rule on the request and/or petition; and the Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will
issue a notice of hearing or an appropriate order.

As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall set forth with particularity the interest of the
petitioner in the proceeding, and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding. The petition
should specifically explain the reasons why intervention should be permitted with particular reference to the following
factors: (1) The nature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to the proceeding; (2) the nature and
extent of the petitioner's property, financial, or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect
of any order which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest. The petition should also identify
the specific aspect(s) of the subject matter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Any person
who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has been admitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting
leave of the Board up to 15 days prior to the first prehearing conference scheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended
petition must satisfy the specificity requirements described above.




