 

(iii) Discuss the requirements of the Agency with respect to compliance with local, regional, and State regulations;
construction practices; energy efficiency; nondiscrimination; market analysis; good site planning; and location.
Also, when applicable, provide and explain Form FmHA 4004, ``Assurance Agreement,'' Form FmHA 4001
``Equal Opportunity Agreement,'' and HUD Form 935.2, ``Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plans.'' 

(2) 

Technical services. 

(i) Professional assistance is available from the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) and the Cooperative Extension
Service. 

(ii) An applicant or developer for a Multiple Family Housing project or a Single Family Housing site which requires
technical services under 1924.13(a) of subpart A of this part, must contract for the technical services of
an architect, engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect, or site planner, as appropriate, to provide complete
planning, drawings, and specifications. Such services may be provided by the applicant's or developer's ``in house''
staff subject to Agency concurrence. Technical services must be performed by professionals who are qualified and
authorized to provide such services in the State in which the project would be developed. All technical services must
be provided in accordance with the requirements of professional registration or licensing boards. For payments
for technical services, follow 1924.102(c) of this subpart. At completion of all construction or completion
of a phase or phases of the total project, the person(s) providing technical services under this section must notify
the Agency office in writing that all work has been completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and
specifications. 

(iii) For developments not specifically required to have technical services under paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this
section, such services may be required by the State Director when construction of streets or installation of utilities
is involved. 

(3) Drawings, specifications, contract documents, and other documentations.

 Adequate drawings and specifications must be provided by the applicant or developer to fully describe the work. Contract
documents must be prepared under 1924.6 or, in the case of more complex construction, 1924.13 of subpart
A of this part. 

(b) 

Single Family Housing.

 Proposals for development of individual dwelling sites have the following specific requirements: 

(1) 

Site development design requirements.

 Exhibit B of this subpart will be used as a guide by applicants or developers in preparing proposals and supporting
documents for Single Family Housing loans, in addition to specific requirements made in this subpart. 

(2) 

Environmental review. 

(i) An individual Single Family Housing loan is normally considered a Categorical Exclusion under the National Environmental
Policy Act (NEPA). However, Form FmHA 194022, ``Environmental Checklist for Categorical Exclusions,''
must be completed by the Agency to determine that the specific action complies not only with NEPA, but also with other
applicable environmental laws, executive orders, and regulations. To complete the form, the preparer will use reliable
environmental information. Sources of such information include, but are not limited to, the State's Natural Resource
Management Guide and the appraisal. If the completed Form FmHA 194022 indicates a potential impact to one or
more environmental resources, the action is subject to disqualification as Categorical Exclusion and a Class I assessment
must be completed in accordance with 1940.317(g) of subpart G of Part 1940 of this chapter. If it is obvious at
the outset that the action will be disqualified as a Categorical Exclusion, the preparer should forego completion
of Form FmHA 194022 and proceed directly to the Class I assessment. 

(ii) If it appears that an action will be subject to disqualification as a Categorical Exclusion due to indications
of cumulative impacts, a Class I or Class II assessment will be completed, as appropriate, in accordance with subpart
G of Part 1940 of this chapter. A cumulative impact is the impact on the environment which results from the incremental
impact of the proposed action, when added to other past, present and reasonably foreseeable future actions, regardless
of what Agency (Federal or non-Federal) or person undertakes such other actions. 

(c) Multiple Family Housing.

 Exhibit C of this subpart should be used as a guide by the applicant or developer in preparing a proposal and supporting
documents for Multiple Family Housing projects. Exhibit B of this subpart contains site development design requirements
which apply to all Multiple Family Housing projects. 



1924.106 

Location. 



(a) 

General.

 It is the Agency's policy to promote compact community development and not to approve sites located in floodplains,
on wetlands, or on important farmlands, unless there is no practical alternative. Furthermore, the Agency will not
accept locations that adversely affect properties which are listed or are eligible for listing on the National Register
of Historic Places, located within the Coastal Barrier Resource System, or on a barrier island. In order to be eligible
for Agency participation: 





