 

* * * * * 



15. Section 718.43 is amended by revising paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3), redesignating paragraph (b) as (c), adding
new paragraph (b) and revising the newly designated paragraph (c) to read as follows: 



718.43 


Deductions. 


(a)*** 

(2) For tobacco, three-hundredths acre, except that turn areas, terraces, permanent irrigation and drainage ditches,
sod waterways, noncropland, and subdivision boundaries each of which is at least 30 inches (approximately 3.8 links)
in width may be combined to meet the 0.03-acre minimum requirement. 

(3) For all other crops and land uses, one-tenth acre. Turn areas, terraces, permanent irrigation and drainage ditches,
sod waterways, noncropland, and subdivision boundaries each of which is at least 30 inches (approximately 3.8 links)
in width and each of which contain 0.1 acre or more may be combined to meet any larger minimum prescribed for a State in
accordance with 718.10(b). 

(b) If the area not devoted to the crop or land use is located within the planted area, then consider the part of any perimeter
area that is more than 33 links in width to be an internal deduction if the standard deduction is used. 

(c) A standard deduction of three percent of the area devoted to a row crop and zero percent of the area devoted to a close-sown
crop may be used in lieu of measuring the acreage of turn areas. The COC may use, upon approval by the STC, a different
percentage when the three percent or zero percent deduction does not adequately reflect the normal cultural practice
in the county. 

16. Section 718.45 is revised to read as follows: 



718.45 


Notice of measured acreage. 



Written notice of measured acreage shall be on form ASCS468, Notice of Determined Acreage and shall constitute
notice to all interested producers on the farm. The county committee shall furnish such notice to each farm operator
when a farm is measured, remeasured, or checked for adjustment credit. 

17. Section 718.46 is revised to read as follows: 



718.46 


Producer reliance on previous determinations. 



If, in reporting an acreage, a producer relies in good faith on an acreage previously determined for that crop year
by an employee of ASCS (except acreage determined from data furnished by the producer) and the acreage is subsequently
determined by the county committee to be incorrect, the county committee shall consider the acreage on which the producer
relied to be correct for that program year upon obtaining satisfactory proof from the producer that such producer
relied in good faith upon the incorrect determination. However, the county committee may use the correct data if the
producer would be adversely affected by an error in producer service provided under 718.21. 

18. Section 718.47 is amended by revising paragraphs (a), (b)(1)(i), and (b)(1)(ii) to read as follows, and removing
paragraph (d). 



