 




<DOCTITLE>Business Development Center Applications: Augusta, GA</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Minority Business Development Agency, Commerce.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

In accordance with Executive Order 11625 and 15 U.S.C. 1512, the Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA) is soliciting
competitive applications under its Minority Business Development Center (MBDC) program. The total cost of performance
for the first budget period (12 months) from October 1, 1994 to September 30, 1995 is estimated at $198,971. The application
must include a minimum cost-share of 15% of the total project cost through non-Federal contributions. The Federal
amount includes $4,124 for an annual audit fee. Cost-sharing contributions may be in the form of cash contributions,
client fees, in-kind contributions or combinations thereof. The MBDC will operate in the Augusta, Georgia geographic
service area.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The award number for this MBDC will be 04109400901.




The funding instrument for this project will be a cooperative agreement. Competition is open to individuals, non-profit
and for-profit organizations, state and local governments, American Indian tribes and educational institutions.

The MBDC Program provides business development services to the minority business community to help establish and
maintain viable minority businesses. To this end, MBDA funds organizations to identify and coordinate public and
private sector resources on behalf of minority individuals and firms; to offer a full range of management and technical
assistance to minority entrepreneurs; and to serve as a conduit of information and assistance regarding minority
business.

Applications will be evaluated on the following criteria: the experience and capabilities of the firm and its staff
in addressing the needs of the business community in general and, specifically, the special needs of minority businesses,
individuals and organizations (50 points); the resources available to the firm in providing business development
services (10 points); the firm's approach (techniques and methodologies) to performing the work requirements included
in the application (20 points); and the firm's estimated cost for providing such assistance (20 points). An application
must receive at least 70% of the points assigned to each evaluation criteria category to be considered programmatically
acceptable and responsive. Those applications determined to be acceptable and responsive will then be evaluated
by the Director of MBDA. Final award selections shall be based on the number of points received, the demonstrated responsibility
of the applicant, and the determination of those most likely to further the purpose of the MBDA program. Negative audit
findings and recommendations and unsatisfactory performance under prior Federal awards may result in an application
not being considered for award. The applicant with the highest points score will not necessarily receive the award.

MBDCs shall be required to contribute at least 15% of the total project cost through non-Federal contributions. To
assist in this effort, the MBDCs may charge client fees for management and technical assistance (MTA) rendered.
Based on a standard rate of $50 per hour, the MBDC will charge client fees at 20% of the total cost for firms with gross
sales of $500,000 or less, and 35% of the total cost for firms with gross sales of over $500,000.


</DATE>
