 

The limited occurrence of Red River pupfish (

Cyprinodon rubrofluviatilis

) in the Canadian River drainage since 1969 (Pigg 

et al.

 1984) indicates that the release of at least one Red River endemic has already occurred in this drainage. While the
introduction of non-native fish does not fully account for the disappearance of Arkansas River shiners, particularly
outside of the Cimarron River, competition with introduced species can have a significant adverse impact on Arkansas
River shiner populations. 

The reproductive characteristics and specialized spawning and early life-history requirements of this species
intensify the effects of certain natural or manmade factors, such as drought. Successful reproduction of the Arkansas
River shiner appears to require precise flow conditions conducive to breeding and embryonic development. Spawning
is triggered, in part, by abrupt increases in stream flow during the late spring or summer (Cross 

et al.

 1983, Moore 1944). Stream flows favorable to spawning must be sustained over at least a 24 hour period to ensure complete
embryonic and larval development. As discussed under Factor A, suitable habitat conditions are becoming scarce
and where conditions are not favorable, rapid population declines have occurred. 

Declining populations of the Arkansas River shiner may also be due to poor survival of juveniles. Bestgen 

et al.

 (1989) observed that spawning in Arkansas River shiners appeared to be primarily limited to age class I individuals,
based on an absence of age class I and older fish from collections made after the spawning period. The apparent extremely
high post-spawning mortality observed in Arkansas River shiner populations in the Pecos River suggests that the
reproductive contribution of individuals in age class II or older is very limited. Thus, the continued existence
of Arkansas River shiner populations may be almost entirely dependent upon successful annual reproduction and subsequent
recruitment of age class 0 (juvenile) individuals into the population. The loss of a single reproductive event/cycle
would seriously reduce recruitment, and possibly lead to localized extinctions. The fragmentation of Arkansas
River shiner habitat by impoundments intensifies the effects of failed reproduction by hindering repopulation
following rapid declines or localized extinctions. 

The Service has carefully assessed the best scientific and commercial information available regarding the past,
present, and future threats faced by this species in determining to propose this rule. Based on this evaluation, the
preferred action is to list the Arkansas River basin population of the Arkansas River shiner as endangered. Endangered
status, which means that the species is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range,
is appropriate for the Arkansas River shiner because of its significantly reduced range, including the apparent
extirpation of the shiner in Arkansas, Kansas, and throughout much of its historic range in Oklahoma. Threatened
status does not appear appropriate considering the extent of the species' population decline and the vulnerability
of the remaining populations. 



Critical Habitat 



Section 4(a)(3) of the Act, requires that, to the maximum extent prudent and determinable, the Secretary propose
critical habitat at the time the species is proposed to be endangered or threatened. The Service finds that designation
of critical habitat is not presently determinable for this species. The Service's regulations (50 CFR 424.12(a)(2))
state that critical habitat is not determinable if information sufficient to perform required analyses of the impacts
of the designation is lacking or if the biological needs of the species are not sufficiently well known to permit identification
of an area as critical habitat. 

Arkansas River shiners occur at scattered locations throughout the Canadian River. Specific habitat features,
such as substrate composition, water depths, and water velocities, preferred by Arkansas River shiners are unknown
and data explaining the distribution and abundance of Arkansas River shiners within a given segment of stream are
lacking. Without this information, designation of critical habitat is not possible because the Service cannot adequately
determine the precise constituent elements within specific areas that are essential to the survival and recovery
of the Arkansas River shiner. The Service has initiated studies, funded under the provisions of Section 6(d) of the
Act, which will determine and characterize the specific physical habitat requirements of the Arkansas River shiner.
Within 2 years from the date of publication of this proposed rule, the Service must designate critical habitat to the
maximum extent prudent (50 CFR 424.17(b)(2)). 



Available Conservation Measures 







