 

(3) 

Prohibited usage. 

(i) Equipment shall not be used in 
a manner that exerts sideloading stresses upon the crane or 
derrick boom. 
(ii) No crane or derrick having a visible or known defect 
that may affect safe operation shall be used. 
(4) 

Unattended cranes. 

The following steps shall be 
taken before leaving a crane unattended between work periods: 
(i) Suspended loads, such as those hoisted by lifting 
magnets or clamshell buckets, shall be landed unless the storage 
position or maximum hoisting of the suspended device will provide 
equivalent safety; 
(ii) Clutches shall be disengaged; 
(iii) The power supply shall be shut off; 
(iv) The crane shall be secured against accidental travel; 
and 
(v) The boom shall be lowered or secured against movement. 
(c) 

Protection for employees being hoisted. 

(1) No 
employee shall be hoisted by the load hoisting apparatus of a 
crane or derrick except on a platform meeting the following 
requirements: 
(i) Enclosed by a railing or other means providing 
protection equivalent of that described in 1917.112(c) of this 
chapter. If equipped with open railings, the platform shall be 
fitted with toe boards; 
(ii) Having a safety factor of four based on ultimate 
strength; 
(iii) Bearing a plate or permanent marking indicating 
maximum load rating, which shall not be exceeded, and the weight 
of the platform itself; 
(iv) Equipped with a device to prevent access doors, when 
used, from opening accidentally; 
(v) Equipped with overhead protection for employees on the 
platform if they are exposed to falling objects or overhead 
hazards; 
(vi) Secured to the load line by means other than wedge and 
socket attachments, unless the free (bitter) end of the line is 
secured back to itself by a clamp placed as close above the wedge 
as possible. 
(2) Except in an emergency, the hoisting mechanism of all 
cranes or derricks used to hoist personnel shall operate in power 
up and power down, with automatic brake application when not 
hoisting or lowering. 
(3) All cranes and derricks used to hoist personnel shall 
be equipped with an anti-two blocking device. 
(4) Variable radius booms of a crane or derrick used to 
hoist personnel shall be so constructed or secured as to prevent 
accidental boom movement. 
(5) Platforms or devices used to hoist employees shall be 
inspected for defects before each day's use and shall be removed 
from service if defective. 
(6) Employees being hoisted shall remain in continuous sight 
of and communication with the operator or signalman. 
(7) Operators shall remain at the controls when employees 
are hoisted. 
(8) Cranes shall not travel while employees are hoisted, 
except in emergency or in normal tier to tier transfer of 
employees during container operations. 
(d) 

Routine inspection. 

(1) Designated persons shall 
visually inspect each crane and derrick on each day of use for 
defects in functional operating components and shall report any 
defect found to the employer. The employer shall inform the 
operator of the findings. 
(2) A designated person shall thoroughly inspect all 
functional components and accessible structural features of each 
crane or device at monthly intervals. 
(3) Any defects found during such inspections which may 
create a safety hazard shall be corrected before further 
equipment use. Repairs shall be performed only by designated 
persons. 
(4) A record of monthly inspections shall be maintained for 
six months in or on the crane or derrick or at the terminal. 
(e) 

Protective devices. 

(1) When exposed moving parts 
such as gears, chains and chain sprockets present a hazard to 
employees during crane and derrick operations, those parts shall 
be securely guarded. 
(2) Crane hooks shall be latched or otherwise secured to 
prevent accidental load disengagement. 





