 

At the cellular level, a substance might interfere with cellular processes like protein 
synthesis, leading to a reduced production of neurotransmitters and brain dysfunction (Bondy, 
1985). Nicotine and some insecticides mimic the effects of the neurotransmitter 
acetylcholine. Organophosphorous compounds, carbamate insecticides, and nerve gases act 
by inhibiting AChE, the enzyme that inactivates the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. This 
results in a buildup of acetylcholine and can lead to loss of appetite, anxiety, muscle 
twitching, and paralysis. Amphetamines stimulate the nervous system by releasing and 
blocking reuptake of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and dopamine from nerve cells. 
Cocaine affects the release and reuptake of norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin. Both 
drugs can cause paranoia, hyperactivity, aggression, high blood pressure, and abnormal heart 
rhythms. Opium-related drugs such as morphine and heroin act at specific opioid receptors 
in the brain, producing sedation, euphoria, and analgesia. They also tend to slow the heart 
rate and cause nausea, convulsions, and slow breathing patterns. Other substances can alter 
the synthesis and release of specific neurotransmitters and activate their receptors in specific 
neuronal pathways. They may perturb the system by overstimulating receptors, blocking 
transmitter release and/or inhibiting transmitter degradation, or blocking reuptake of 
neurotransmitter precursors. 
Also at the cellular level, the flow of ions such as calcium, sodium, and potassium 
across the cell membrane may be changed and the transmission of information between nerve 
cells altered. A substance may interfere with the ionic balance of a neuron. 
Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides produce autonomic dysfunction and 
organochlorine insecticides increase sensorimotor sensitivity, produce tremors and in some 
cases cause seizures and convulsions (Ecobichon and Joy, 1982). Lindane, DDT, 
pyrethroids, and trimethyltin also produce convulsions. Conversely, solvents act to raise the 
threshold for eliciting seizures or act to reduce the severity or duration of the elicited 
convulsions. 
The role of excitatory amino acid (EAA)-mediated synaptic activation is critical for 
normal function of the CNS. Because endogenous EAA-mediated synaptic transmission is a 
widespread excitatory system in the brain and is involved in the process of learning and 
memory, the issue of the effects of endogenous and exogenous EAA-related toxicity has 
broad implications for both CNS morbidity and mortality in humans. Much of the injury and 
neuronal death associated with toxicity is mediated by receptors for excitatory amino acids, 
especially glutamic acid. When applied in sufficient excess from either endogenous or 
exogenous sources, EAAs have profound neurotoxic effects that can result in the destruction 
of neurons and, as a consequence, lead to acute phase confusion, seizures, and generalized 
weakness or to persistent impairments such as memory loss (Choi, 1988). 
A final common path in the activation of these receptor classes is an increase in free 
cytosolic Ca


&rsquo;
&rsquo;

 that can result in the release and activation of intracellular enzymes (which 
break down the cytoskeleton) and in further release of glutamate, both of which can be 
cytotoxic (Choi, 1988). Critical to an understanding of the etiopathology associated with at 
least some of the neurotoxic degeneration may be the link that impaired energy metabolism 
could have with excitotoxic neuronal death. It is likely that reduced oxidative metabolism 
results in the partial depolarization of resting membrane potential, the activation of ionotropic 
membrane receptor/channels, and the influx of Ca


&rsquo;
&rsquo;

 or its release from intracellular stores. 






