 

2.1.3. Federal Response 


In the United States, several agencies, including EPA, FDA, OSHA, CPSC, NIOSH, 
and ATSDR, have been given the mandate to regulate or evaluate public exposure to toxic 
chemicals (Tilson, 1989). 


2.1.3.1. Food and Drug Administration. 


The FDA has the authority to regulate the use of 
food and color additives as well as to determine whether or not various foods are unsafe for 
human consumption because of adulteration by environmental contaminants. The 
manufacturer must supply adequate data to establish the safety of the food additives. Before 
marketing approval, the potential toxicity of proposed food and color additives is established 
in a battery of animal toxicity studies. During all of these studies, clinical signs of toxicity, 
including abnormal behavior, are monitored and abnormalities recorded. At the termination 
of these studies, tissues from all organs, including the brain, are sectioned and evaluated for 
both gross and histopathological changes, in addition to being evaluated for their clinical 
chemistry and hematology. None of the routinely required tests is specifically designed to 
assess neurotoxicity. If neurotoxic effects are detected during any of the standard toxicity 
tests, however, they must be reported. Specific neurotoxicity testing may then be required. 
The FDA is currently revising its guidelines for the safety assessment of direct food and 
color additives to include neurotoxicity as a routine element in toxicological testing. 
The FDA is also authorized to regulate substances in food considered to be poisonous 
or deleterious. Unavoidable environmental contaminants in food fall into this category. The 
FDA determines a level at which the risks from realistically possible intakes are negligible or 
acceptable. Based on this risk assessment, an action level or tolerance is established. Once 
the action level or tolerance is formally established, the FDA may take appropriate action to 
restrict adulterated food from the market if these standards are exceeded. 
The FDA is responsible for assessing the toxicity of human therapeutic products. 
Many products have been shown to produce adverse effects on the nervous system at 
standard therapeutic doses as well as at higher doses. Before marketing approval is given, 
the toxicity of potential new products is assessed. A battery of animal toxicity study 
parameters relevant to the nervous system, including gross behavioral observation and gross 
and histopathological examination of the nervous tissue, are evaluated. This information is 
used to help guide the surveillance of human subjects for adverse effects that are assessed 
during clinical trials. 


2.1.3.2. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 


OSHA has been given the 
responsibility to ensure that the working environment is a safe and healthy place of 
employment. In the early 1970's, OSHA adopted the existing Federal standards, most of 
which were developed under the Walsh-Healy Act (including the 1968 ACGIH Threshold 
Limit Values), and approximately 20 consensus standards of the American National 
Standards Institute (ANSI) as Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs). Of the 393 remaining 
original PELs, 145 were set in part to protect the individual from neurotoxic effects. 
Since the adoption of the initial standards, OSHA has issued new or revised health 
standards or work practices for 23 substances. Of these, the one concerning lead was based 
in part on nervous system effects. Four other compounds, inorganic arsenic, acrylonitrile, 
ethylene oxide, and 1,2-dibromo-3-chloropropane, were cited as causing various disturbances 
in the nervous system, but the standards for these were based primarily on carcinogenic 
effects. 
In 1989, OSHA updated 428 exposure limits for air contaminants. Of these, 25 
substances were categorized by OSHA as ``substances for which limits are based on 
avoidance of neuropathic effects.'' In addition, 24 substances were included in the category 
``substances for which limits are based on avoidance of narcosis.'' However, OSHA stated 
that the categorization was intended as a tool to manage the large number of substances being 
regulated and not to imply that the category selected identified the most sensitive or the 
exclusive adverse health effects of that substance. 


2.1.3.3. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. 


The Occupational Safety 
and Health Act established NIOSH as a Public Health Service (PHS) agency to develop and 
recommend criteria for prevention of disease and hazardous conditions in the workplace. 
NIOSH also performs research on occupational health issues and conducts worksite 
evaluations of suspected hazards. OSHA and the Mine Safety and Health Administration 
(MSHA) use NIOSH recommendations in the promulgation of new or revised health and 
safety standards. 
In establishing recommended exposure limits (RELs) for chemicals, NIOSH examines 
all relevant scientific information about a given compound and attempts to identify exposure 
limits that will protect all workers from adverse effects. NIOSH has recommended standards 
for approximately 644 chemicals or classes of chemicals. For 214 (33 percent) of these, 
neurotoxicity was cited as a health effect considered when formulating the REL (NIOSH, 
1992). 


2.1.3.4. Environmental Protection Agency. 


The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) and 
the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) provide the legislative 
authority for EPA to require data collection for premarket approval of chemicals. Under 
section 5 of TSCA, after a manufacturer has notified EPA of its plans to produce a ``new'' 
chemical that has not yet been listed on the inventory, EPA has the responsibility to assess 
possible health hazards. Potential neurotoxicity is included in the health hazards assessment. 
If there are reasons to suspect neurotoxicologic effects (e.g., from structure-activity analysis, 
information in the literature, or data submitted by the manufacturer), EPA can issue a test 
rule requiring the manufacturer to develop data directed toward these effects. At the same 
time, EPA can restrict the chemical or prohibit it entirely from entering commerce until the 
required data are submitted and reviewed. In addition, for ``old'' chemicals (under section 4 
of TSCA), if EPA suspects neurotoxicity, a test rule would be the mechanism used for 
obtaining the data. Many other statutes provide authority to regulate chemicals through the 
setting of standards, including the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, and Safe Drinking Water 
Act. 
Neurotoxicity is recognized as a health effect of concern under FIFRA, and there are 
neurotoxicity testing requirements for premarketing submission of data to EPA for 
registration of a pesticide under FIFRA. 





