 

The FAA has determined that these maps for the New Austin airport at Bergstrom Air Force Base are in compliance with
applicable requirements. This determination is effective on February 11, 1994. FAA's determination on an airport
operator's noise exposure maps is limited to a finding that the maps were developed in accordance with the procedures
contained in Appendix A of FAR Part 150. Such determination does not constitute approval of the applicant's data,
information, or plans, or a commitment to approve a noise compatibility program or to fund the implementation of that
program.

If questions arise concerning the precise relationship of specific properties to noise exposure contours depicted
on a noise exposure map submitted under section 103 of the Act, it should be noted that the FAA is not involved in any way
in determining the relative locations of specific properties with regard to the depicted noise contours, or in interpreting
the noise exposure maps to resolve questions concerning, for example, which properties should be covered by the provisions
of Section 107 of the Act.These functions are inseparable from the ultimate land use control and plannng responsibilities
of local Government.These local responsibilities are not changed in any way under Part 150 or through FAA's review
of noise exposure maps. Therefore, the responsibility for the detailed overlaying of noise exposure contours onto
the map depicting properties on the surface rests exclusively with the airport operator which submitted those maps,
or with those public agencies and planning agencies with which consultation is required under Section 103 of the Act.
The FAA has relied on the certification by the airport operator, under 150.21 of FAR Part 150, that the statutorily
required consultation has been accomplished.

The FAA has formally received the noise compatibility program for the New Austin Airport at Bergstrom Air Force Base
also effective on February 11, 1994 Preliminary review of the submitted material indicates that it conforms to the
requirements for the submittal of noise compatibility programs, but that further review will be necessary prior
to approval or disapproval of the program. The formal review period, limited by law to a maximum of 180 days, will be
completed on or before August 10, 1994.

The FAA's detailed evaluation will be conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR part 150, 150.33. The primary
considerations in the evaluation process are whether the proposed measures may reduce the level of aviation safety,
create an undue burden on interstate or foreign commerce, or be reasonably consistent with obtaining the goal of reducing
existing noncompatible land uses and preventing the introduction of additional noncompatible land uses.

Interested persons are invited to comment on the proposed program with specific reference to these factors. All comments,
other than those properly addressed to local land use authorities, will be considered by the FAA to the extent practicable.
Copies of the noise exposure maps, the FAA's evaluation of the maps, and the proposed noise compatibility program
are available for examination at the following locations:




Federal Aviation Administration, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., room 617, Washington, DC 20591.

Federal Aviation Administration, Texas Airport Development Office, 2601 Meacham Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 761730650,

Mr. Charles Gates, Director of Aviation, division of Aviation, 3600 Manor Road, Austin, TX 78723.




Questions may be directed to the individual named above under the heading, 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT

.



Issued in Fort Worth, Texas, February 11, 1994.



<SIGNER>
John M. Dempsey,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Manager, Airports Division.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946968 Filed 32394; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING Code 491013M
</BILLING>


