 

3. Hydrogen



The Abacus report concluded that the gallon equivalent of 100 SCF of hydrogen is 0.240, using a lower heating value.




4. Hythane



Hythane is a combination of two gaseous fuels: hydrogen and natural gas. Most of the experimental engine work involves
the mixtures of 85 volume percent natural gas and 15 volume percent hydrogen (Hy5). The maximum concentration of hydrogen
that can be used without potentially causing engine problems, such as backfiring, is 15 percent (5 percent energy
content). The second Abacus report concluded that the gallon equivalent of 100 SCF of this hythane mixture is 0.725
using the lower heating value. 
NHTSA is proposing to adopt the gallons equivalent measurements for LNG, LPG, hydrogen, and hythane recommended
by the Abacus reports. The agency requests comments on the methodology used to determine the proposed gallons equivalent
measurements. NHTSA also requests comments on whether any other gaseous fuel may potentially be used in automobiles
in the foreseeable future, and thus, whether gallons equivalents for any other gaseous fuels should be established.

NHTSA plans to add the gallons equivalent measurements to Part 538. The agency is proposing a new name for this part
to reflect its expanded scope. 


Regulatory Impacts 



A. Executive Order 12866 and DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures



This notice has not been reviewed under Executive Order 12866. NHTSA has considered the impact of this rulemaking
action and has determined that the action is not ``significant'' under the Department of Transportation's regulatory
policies and procedures. In this NPRM, the agency proposes to set the minimum driving range for all dual fueled passenger
automobiles other than electric vehicles at 200 miles and to establish gallon equivalents for specified gaseous
fuels. None of the proposed changes will result in an additional burden on manufacturers. They would not impose any
mandatory requirements but would instead implement statutory incentives to encourage the manufacture of alternative
fuel vehicles. For these reasons, NHTSA believes that any impacts on manufacturers will be so minimal as not to warrant
preparation of a full regulatory evaluation. 


B. Regulatory Flexibility Act 


The agency has also considered the effects of this rulemaking action under the Regulatory Flexibility Act. I certify
that this proposed rule, if made final, will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities. The rationale for this certification is that, to the extent that any passenger automobile manufacturers
qualify as small entities, their number would not be substantial. Moreover, conversion of vehicles to dual fuel status
with the minimum ranges that would be established by this regulation would be voluntarily undertaken in order to achieve
beneficial CAFE treatment of those vehicles. Therefore, no significant costs would be imposed on any manufacturers
or other small entities. 


C. National Environmental Policy Act


The agency has also analyzed this rule for the purpose of the National Environmental Policy Act, and determined that
it would not have any significant impact on the quality of the human environment. Increased evaporative emissions
due to added fuel volume would be the most important environmental impact of this rulemaking if it induced manufacturers
to enlarge the size of existing fuel tanks in order to produce dual fuel vehicles operating on alcohol or other liquid
fuel. However, the proposed minimum range would not make it necessary for these dual fuel vehicles to have enlarged
fuel tanks. Natural gas and other gaseous dual fueled automobiles will not expect to increase evaporative emissions
since gaseous tanks do not normally vent to the atmosphere. 


D. Paperwork Reduction Act 



The procedures in this proposed rule for passenger automobile manufacturers to petition for lower driving ranges
are considered to be information collection requirements as that term is defined by the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) in 5 CFR part 1320. The information collection requirements for part 538 have been submitted to and approved
by the OMB, pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq

.) This collection of information has been assigned OMB Control No. 21270554. (Minimum Driving Ranges for
Dual Energy Passenger Automobiles) and has been approved for use through June 30, 1996. 



E. Federalism



This action has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteria contained in Executive Order 12612,
and it has been determined that the rule does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation
of a Federalism Assessment. 



F. Civil Justice Reform 



This proposed rule would not have any retroactive effect and it does not preempt any State law. 49 U.S.C. 32909 sets
forth a procedure for judicial review of automobile fuel economy regulations. That section does not require submission
of a petition for reconsideration or other administrative proceedings before parties may file suit in court. 



Public Comments 



NHTSA solicits public comments on the issues presented in this notice. It is requested, but not required, that 10 copies
be submitted. 





