 

The terms of, and any fees or interest payable in respect of, Guarantees will be established at arm's length in conformity
with market practice; provided that the cost of Guarantees (including interest on outstanding reimbursement obligations
in respect of Guarantees) provided by CSW to or for the benefit of CSWI, CSWdM or any Project Parent will not exceed CSW's
weighted cost of capital; provided further that the fees with respect to any Guarantee would not exceed 2% per annum
of the face amount of such Guarantee, and the interest payable per annum on the unreimbursed drawings under any Guarantee
would not exceed the prime rate of the issuer plus six percentage points.

Investments and, if necessary, the payment of the Guarantees shall be funded through third party financing. CSW,
CSWI, CSWdM and each Project Parent request authority to finance the Investment in Facilities or, if necessary, to
fund the payment of Guarantees through the issuance from time to time of stock, promissory notes, commercial paper
or other debt or equity securities to third parties, including, without limitation, banks, insurance companies
and other financial institutions. The aggregate of such financing will not, when added to the Investments and Guarantees,
exceed the Aggregate General Authority.

Equity securities issued by any Project Parent to any third party may include capital shares, partnership interests,
trust certificates or the equivalent of any of the foregoing under applicable foreign law. Debt securities issued
to third parties may include secured and unsecured promissory notes, subordinated notes, bonds or other evidence
of indebtedness. Securities issued by Project Parents may be denominated in either U.S. dollars or foreign currencies.
The amount and type of such securities, and the terms thereof, including (in the case of any indebtedness) interest
rate, maturity, prepayment or redemption privileges and the terms of any collateral security granted with respect
thereto, would be negotiated in arm's length transactions on a case by case basis, taking into account differences
from project to project in optimum debt-equity ratios, projections of earnings and cash flow, depreciation lives
and methods and other similar financial and performance characteristics of each project.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, CSW states that no equity security having a stated par value would be issued or sold
by a Project Parent for a consideration that is less than such par value. CSW also states that no note, bond or other evidence
of indebtedness issued or sold by any Project Parent will mature later than 30 years from the date of issuance thereof,
and will bear interest at a rate not in excess of the following: (1) if such note, bond or other indebtedness is U.S. dollar
denominated, at a rate not to exceed seven percent over the then applicable prime rate as announced from time to time
by Mellon Bank, N.A. (``Applicable Rate''); and (2) if such note, bond or other indebtedness is denominated in the
currency of a country other than the United States, at a rate which, when adjusted (i.e., reduced) for the prevailing
rate of inflation in such country, as reported in official indices published by such country would be equivalent to
a rate on a U.S. dollar denominated borrowing of identical average life that does not exceed 10% over the Applicable
Rate.

It is anticipated that fees in the form of placement or commitment fees, or other similar fees, would be paid to lenders,
placement agents or other third parties in connection with the issuance of any such non-recourse debt securities.
CSW requests authority for any Project Parent to agree to pay placement or commitment fees, and other similar fees,
in connection with any borrowing, provided that the effective annual interest charge on any indebtedness evidencing
such borrowing is not greater than 115% of the stated interest rate thereon.

In connection with the issuance of debt securities by any Project Parent, it is anticipated that such Project Parent
may pledge and/or grant a security interest in its assets. Such pledge or security interest may include, without limitation,
the shares or other equity securities of any FUCO, EWG or Project Parent that it owns, including, without limitation,
a security interest in any distributions from any such FUCO, EWG or Project Parent, or a collateral assignment of its
rights under and interests in its other property, including, without limitation, any rights under any power purchase
agreement, fuel supply agreement or other project agreement to which it is a party.

It is proposed that the aggregate outstanding principal amount of non-recourse debt securities issued by Project
Parents to third parties will not exceed $600 million at any one time. Such amount is separate and apart from, and in
excess of, the Aggregate General Authority. No more than $200 million principal amount of such non-recourse debt
securities at any time outstanding may be denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars. In any case in which CSW
directly or indirectly owns less than all of the equity interests of a Project Parent, only that portion of the non-recourse
indebtedness of such Project Parent equal to CSW's equity ownership percentage shall be included for purposes of
the foregoing limitations.

CSW, Energy, CSWI, CSWdM, CSWdM Servicios and their affiliates further request that no additional authority be required
from the Commission after December 31, 1997 in order to maintain existing Guarantees and/or Investments made prior
to such date in accordance with the Act and all applicable rules, regulations and orders of the Commission. If CSW,
Energy, CSWI, CSWdM or CSWdM Servicios determine to make any additional investments after December 31, 1997, appropriate
authority of the Commission will be sought.




For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, pursuant to delegated authority.



<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9421005 Filed 82594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>



