 

7. Proposed 120.210 would require the designation of restricted areas on each covered passenger vessel where
access is limited to selected persons. Restricted areas would deter the introduction of prohibited persons, and
prohibited weapons, incendiaries, or explosives into sensitive areas where they could be used to hijack a vessel.
For each restricted area an intrusion detection system, with both local and remote alarms, would alert security personnel
to any illicit entry.

8. Proposed 120.220 would require the designation of a ship security officer, who would be responsible for
managing day to day security on the vessel. Such designation is necessary to identify the person responsible for ensuring
that the security program is carried out.

9. Proposed 120.230 would require training, which is necessary to ensure that security personnel know how
to perform their duties.

10. Proposed 120.240 would mandate coordination of security activities between the vessel and each passenger
terminal at which it calls. Such coordination is currently lacking. It would both eliminate duplication of efforts
and reduce the likelihood of gaps in the security system.

11. Proposed 120.250 would require reports of specified acts directed against the vessels or their passengers.
These reports are necessary to inform the Coast Guard and other law enforcement agencies of the extent of such acts
occurring so that they can allocate resources to deter or respond to similar acts in the future.

12. Proposed 120.300, 120.305, and 120.307 would require a ship security plan and specify procedures
for review and amendment of the plan. The ship security plan is the basic document that sets forth each vessel's strategy
for security. It includes a written description of the ship security program, which comprises the ship security survey,
the ship security bill, and various security procedures. This document provides a ready source of information for
security personnel and law enforcement agencies which may be called upon to respond to an incident. It also enables
the Coast Guard to evaluate the vessel's strategy for security. When the plan has been reviewed by the Coast Guard and
found to meet the requirements, a letter of adequacy is provided to the operator. Since the plan must be updated from
time to time, 120.307 sets up the means for the operator to make amendments, either because of changed circumstances
or when directed to do so. A provision is included to allow the imposition of emergency measures by the Coast Guard.
No exemption from Freedom of Information Act disclosure requirements is currently provided for ship security plans.
Comments are solicited on whether these plans should be exempted from Freedom of Information Act disclosure to preserve
their confidentiality.

13. Proposed 120.310 and 120.320 would require a ship security survey that provides the information
necessary to develop the ship security plan. The procedures constituting the plan will depend upon the threats and
vulnerabilities identified in the survey. The survey must undergo periodic updates to reflect changes in threats
and vulnerability. The recent pace of changes in threats suggests that two years is the longest prudent interval between
updates. The survey also needs to be updated when new ports are visited or there are changes to the vessel that may affect
vessel security. An update is also required when there is a change in key vessel personnel because a change in these
personnel may influence vessel security.



