 


Approximately 15% (20,250) of 135,000 hospital admissions per year that last an average of more than eight days are
due to allergic disease [Ex. 441]. Burge and Hodgson estimate that these hospitalizations cost five million
work days per year. The prevalence of symptoms consistent with hypersensitivity pneumonitis, an interstitial lung
disease caused by organic dusts or by aerosols has been examined in subpopulations at well-defined, increased risk,
such as farmers (0.132%) or pigeon breeders (0.121%) [Exs. 441, 4214]. The only unbiased
source of complaint rates in unselected office workers are control buildings used in the study of hypersensitivity
pneumonitis in the U.S. Arnow et al. [Ex. 415] reported complaints consistent with hypersensitivity pneumonitis
in 1.2 percent and Gamble et al. [Ex. 4116] in 4 percent of these populations. Since no clinical data are available,
it is not known how these complaints are related to actual disease, and it is unknown whether these complaints are associated
with lost work time, doctor visits or hospital admissions [Ex. 441]. 



Humidifier fever, a less serious variant of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, also is caused by exposure to microorganisms
contained in an aerosol. Attack rates in building epidemics have been as high as 75%, whereas complaint rates are usually
23% in nonepidemic situations [Ex. 441]. Because of the similarity of the individual symptoms to other
diseases (fever, headache, polyuria, weight loss and joint pain), it is often difficult to separate actual disease
from complaints related to the common cold in nonepidemic situations [Exs. 433, 441]. While rare, a
workplace epidemic of humidifier fever can virtually shut down an entire building, and only removal of the contamination
will end the epidemic [Exs. 441, 4144, 4214]. 



Microbial contamination of building structures, furnishings, and HVAC system components contribute to poor indoor
air quality problems, especially those related to building-related illnesses. OSHA believes that consequent health
effects constitute material impairment of health [Exs. 361, 441]. These can be categorized as irritation,
pulmonary, cardiovascular, nervous system, reproductive, and cancer effects. 



Irritation effects, either from the physical presence of bioaerosols or from exposure to VOCs released by biologicals,
have been demonstrated in susceptible workers [Ex. 332]. In addition, water leakage on furnishings or within
building components can result in the proliferation of microorganisms that can release acutely irritating substances
into the air. Typically, where microorganisms are allowed to grow, a moldy smell develops. This moldy smell is often
associated with microbial contamination and is a result of VOCs released during microbial growth on environmental
substrates [Ex. 441]. 



Pulmonary effects which have been associated with exposure to bioaerosols include rhinitis, asthma, allergies,
hypersensitivity diseases, humidifier fever, spread of infections including colds, viruses, and tuberculosis,
and the occurrence of Legionnaire's disease [Exs. 317, 332, 338, 361B, 3188, 3440A,
3446, 3500, 441, 4144, 4214]. 



Building-related asthma has also recently been documented in office workers [Exs. 361, 443] and some
case reports show it to be associated specifically with humidifier use. Biocides used in humidification systems
are suspected causes of office-associated asthma [Ex. 4103]. 



Cardiovascular effects manifested as chest pain, and nervous system effects manifested as headache, blurred vision,
and impaired judgment, have occurred in susceptible people following exposure to bioaerosols [Exs. 332,
3446]. It has been suggested that these effects may be caused by VOCs released by the microbiologicals, or they
may be a complication of related pulmonary effects. 



The development of cancer in susceptible people is possible following exposure to certain types of toxigenic fungi
and mycotoxins. However, the probability of such exposures occurring in workplaces covered by this standard is probably
limited. Mycotoxins (toxins produced as secondary metabolites by many fungi) are among the most carcinogenic of
known substances, and are also acutely toxic. The American Conference of Governmental and Industrial Hygienists
wrote ``[t]he toxigenic fungi are common contaminants of stored grain and other food products and have caused well-described
outbreaks of acute systemic toxicosis as well as specific organ carcinogenesis when such food is consumed ***
It appears clear that massive contamination with a highly toxigenic fungus strain of a site in which aerial dispersion
of metabolic products occurred would be necessary to induce acute symptoms. However, considering the carcinogenicity
of many fungal toxins, an examination of the risks of chronic inhalation exposure appears justified'' [Ex. 361].




In summary, most of the health effects associated with SBS and BRI occur in indoor environments were concentrations
of pollutants are much less than the OSHA Permissible Exposure Levels (PELs) (29 CFR 1910.1000) [Ex. 43]. It
is important to point out that the PELs are chemical-specific standards that are not only based on health effects but
also on technological feasibility, cost restraints and a ``healthy'' worker exposed for a 40-hour work week. In the
industrial workplace, hazards are minimized by the use of administrative and engineering controls and the use of
personal protective equipment. The nonindustrial environment, however, does not have these controls. Ventilation
systems are designed only to remove occupant-generated contaminants, such as carbon dioxide and odors. These types
of systems were not designed to dilute multiple point sources of contaminants that are typically found in nonindustrial
workplaces (see section III). Unless adequate ventilation and source controls are utilized and adequately maintained,
many of the chemical contaminants can concentrate to levels that induce symptoms. The possibility exists that synergistic
effects occur. These effects occur not only between substances to enhance their toxicity but also by lowering the
resistance to lung infection in susceptible persons. 



C. Environmental Tobacco Smoke





ETS is composed of exhaled mainstream and sidestream smoke. The chemical composition and exposure sources of ETS
are described in the Exposure section of this preamble (see Section III). The pharmacokinetics of ETS have been widely
studied and are described in the following section.




