 

The Service found that the following toucan species, which commenters requested be included in the approved list,
could not be added to the approved list of captive-bred species because it did not meet the criteria for approval in
15.31(

a

) and wild-caught birds are in trade and have been imported into the United States: Toco toucan (

Ramphastos toco

). 




Law Enforcement Concerns 



The Service found that the following bird species, all of which commenters requested be included in the approved list,
could not be added to the approved list of captive-bred species because they did not meet the criteria for approval
in 15.31 due to law enforcement concerns that wild-caught birds are in trade illegally and have been imported
either into the United States or other countries: Nyasa lovebird (

Agapornis lilianae

), Australian king parrot (

Alisterus scapularis

), Double yellow-headed Amazon (

Amazona ochrocephala oratrix

), Green-cheeked Amazon (

Amazona viridigenalis

), Gang-gang cockatoo (

Callocephalon fimbriatum

), Major Mitchell's cockatoo (

Cacatua leadbeateri

), Western long-billed cockatoo (

Cacatua pastinator

), Long-billed corella (

Cacatua tenuirostris

), Spix's macaw (

Cyanopsitta spixii

), Rose-breasted cockatoo or Galah (

Eolophus roseicapillus

), Mexican parrotlet (

Forpus cyanopygius

), Black Palm cockatoo (

Probosciger aterrimus

), Lanner falcon (

Falco biarmicus

), Saker falcon (

Falco cherrug

), Gyrfalcon (

Falco rusticolus

), Red siskin (

Carduelis cucullata

), and Crimson finch (

Neochmia phaeton

). 

Illegal trade in lanner falcons and saker falcons was reported in the Review of Alleged Infractions and Other Problems
of Implementation of the Convention (Doc. 9.22), which is a document prepared by the CITES Secretariat for discussion
at the Ninth Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to CITES. These species appear to be involved in illegal trade
on a fairly regular basis, including the laundering of wild-caught specimens through captive-breeding operations.



The Service received 1708 form letters requesting that all cockatoo species from Australia be added to the approved
list of captive-bred species. The Service disagrees, because all cockatoo species do not meet the criteria for approval
in 15.31 due to the illegal trade in wild-caught birds from Australia. A recent three-year covert law enforcement
investigation, dubbed Operation Renegade, found that over a 10-year period individuals were hired as couriers and
travelled to Australia each fall during the cockatoo nesting season to remove eggs from nests in the wild. Several
hundred smuggled eggs were then incubated, hand-reared, and sold as captive-bred birds to collectors in the United
States. Among the smuggled species were Rose-breasted cockatoos, Red-tailed black cockatoos, Major Mitchell's
cockatoos, and Slender-billed corellas. This investigation was a joint effort with law enforcement officials from
Australia, New Zealand, and the United States, and to date, has resulted in criminal convictions against 17 individuals.





CITES-Listed Passerines That Cannot Be Added to the Approved List 



