 

1. Marking Provisions


Different types of permanent marking would be acceptable. Industry members would be able to choose the type that is
most suitable for the product, and least expensive, so long as the appropriate information is communicated and will
remain on the product permanently.
The retail packaging of consumer products already contains a great deal of information and the amount of required
information has been kept to a minimum. The name and location of a manufacturing, importing or private labeling firm
located in the United States are the most important pieces of identifying information to help the Commission trace
a product. (As discussed in section 2(a) below, a code on file with the Commission may be sufficient.) If there is a recall,
it is also important to have products identified according to their model and their production run, or according to
similar categories that will help pinpoint the particular products that are unsafe. (As discussed in section 2(b)
below, this information could also be in code.) This helps limit recalls to just the products that are unsafe.
The size and conspicuousness of the marking are less significant in this type of proposal than they would be in one designed
to provide information to consumers at the time of purchase. Here, it would be sufficient if the information can be
read without disassembly of the product or magnification.


2. Exceptions


The proposal could include various exceptions to minimize its economic impact:
(a) Firms might prefer to mark products with a code such as a registered trademark or a corporate symbol or logo in place
of its name and address. The proposal could permit this if the firm notifies the Commission and waits ten working days
after receipt of the notification for the Commission to object. An objection would be made, for example, if some other
firm was already using the same or a too similar code.
(b) The model and date of production information could be provided in code, as well. If the Commission needed to know
that information, it would obtain the code or the information from the firm.
(c) Because consumer products vary greatly in size and material, the Commission recognizes that it may be impracticable
to permanently mark some limited number of products. The proposal would therefore give firms some leeway in complying.
As examples, it is impracticable to mark modeling clay because of its texture, and it is probably impracticable to
mark small glass marbles. However, the containers of any products that qualify for an exception might have to be permanently
marked or printed with the same identifying information. While containers may be discarded or lost, this provision
is intended to afford a reasonable alternative for products which cannot practicably be permanently marked.
(d) Products consisting of more than one piece, such as a set or collection, may not have to be permanently marked on
every piece. The largest piece might have to be so marked_as well as any container that comes with the product. For example,
the board in a board game (assuming it is the largest piece) and the box would be marked, but not the dice, markers or other
pieces in the game. If all pieces in a set or collection are essentially the same size, they might all have to be permanently
marked. In addition, if many pieces would fall into the category of ``the largest,'' all of those pieces might have
to be marked. While requiring every piece in a set or collection to be permanently marked would be preferable from a
safety standpoint, such a broad provision might be unduly burdensome.


3. 

Effective Date


The Commission solicits all available relevant information on an appropriate effective date, including industry
cycling schedules for replacing capital equipment.


4. Text of Possible Provisions


To obtain specific public comments and specific information, the Commission is providing the text of the possible
product identification provisions that it is considering. Again, the Commission emphasizes its willingness to
consider alternative approaches for accomplishing its objectives.


