 

A. Participant Certification



Participants must certify, in a statement made under penalty of perjury, regarding all professionals working on
a transaction, whether for the participant or for a contractor of a participant, that neither the corporate or partnership
entity nor any officer, partner, or professional presently employed and who will work on the subject matter of this
Notice has been convicted of, or found liable in a civil action for, fraud, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction
of records, making false statements or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity that seriously and
directly affects the present responsibility of the officer, partner or professional and is not currently suspended
or debarred by any government agency.



B. Maintaining Eligibility.



Participants will provide Ginnie Mae annually with such documentation as Ginnie Mae shall require demonstrating
that the participant continues to meet the eligibility requirements for participation in the Ginnie Mae REMIC program.



C. Disclosures



A participant shall provide disclosures of the following:

(1) Any indictments, convictions, civil suits or judgments described in Section V, within 30 days of their occurrence;

(2) Material adverse changes in status including voluntary and non-voluntary terminations, defaults, fines, and
agency findings of material non-compliance or non-conformance with agency rules and policies with state and federal
agencies and government sponsored enterprises within 5 business days of their occurrence; and

(3) A change in control within 30 days of its occurrence. In a merger, consolidation, acquisition, division, issuance
of securities, sale, or other business combination where the control of the original participant has changed materially,
the surviving party shall demonstrate to Ginnie Mae's satisfaction its qualification to act as a participant and
its ability and agreement to assume all previously incurred obligations and liability to Ginnie Mae of the original
approved participant.



D. Suspension From the Ginnie Mae REMIC Program



The participant's eligibility may be suspended upon written notice from Ginnie Mae, which shall include the reasons
for the suspension. Upon such notice, the participant shall have the opportunity to present a written submission
to the President of Ginnie Mae in support of its reinstatement, which submission shall exhaust the participant's
administrative remedies.



VII. Default



If Ginnie Mae is required to perform under its guarantee of any REMIC security, Ginnie Mae intends to pursue all available
avenues of recovery.



VIII. Minority and Women-Owned Business Participation



Ginnie Mae requests comments on how Ginnie Mae can best meet its goals for participation by minorities and women. For
the initial stage, the CAP for sponsors provides for the selection of both sponsors and minority and women-owned businesses
(``MWOB'') co-sponsors. Ginnie Mae will require that sponsors include a MWOB co-sponsor selected by Ginnie Mae in
each initial stage Ginnie Mae REMIC transaction. It is Ginnie Mae's understanding that a similar mandatory co-sponsor
approach for MWOBs is used by the Resolution Trust Corporation (``RTC'') and Department of Veterans Affairs (``VA'')
for their REMIC programs.

However, Ginnie Mae anticipates that the full participation stage of its REMIC program may involve 100 or more REMIC
transactions per year, which is much larger than the RTC and VA programs. The RTC and VA REMIC programs also are distinguishable
in that RTC and VA own the collateral and actively participate in the issuance of REMIC securities. In contrast, during
the full participation stage of the Ginnie Mae program, collateral will be assembled and REMIC transactions will
be presented to Ginnie Mae for guaranty approval with the participants and the proposed terms of the transactions
already in place.



A. Types of MWOB Participation



GNMA requests comments on the type of MWOB participation in the GNMA REMIC program. For example, should there be an
aggregate MWOB goal for each transaction (e.g., accounting firm, trust counsel, and others), or should the Ginnie
Mae REMIC program include a co-sponsor component only, as in the initial stage.

If a commentor believes that Ginnie Mae should have an MWOB co-sponsor component, Ginnie Mae requests comments on
how a co-sponsor component could be coordinated in the full participation stage and whether there are other programs
comparable to the Ginnie Mae REMIC program that use a co-sponsor component (including information on the size of such
other programs and contact persons and telephone numbers).

Also, Ginnie Mae solicits detailed comments on what the role of any co-sponsor should be and how Ginnie Mae should oversee
arrangements between sponsors and co-sponsors. Comments should address: (1) Whether Ginnie Mae should specify
a minimum percentage for co-sponsor participation and, if so, what the percentage should be and to what it should apply;
(2) whether co-sponsors should be required to take harder-to-sell REMIC tranches as well as easier-to-sell tranches;
(3) whether co-sponsors should be required to share in the capital risk of accumulating MBS; (4) whether Ginnie Mae
should specify the discount at which co-sponsors acquire their REMIC securities and, if so, what that discount should
be; (5) whether Ginnie Mae should specify the consequences of a co-sponsor's failure to fulfill its obligations to
the lead sponsor and, if so, what those consequences should be; and (6) the process that Ginnie Mae should employ before
consequences are imposed upon a co-sponsor.

In the comments on these issues, Ginnie Mae requests that commentors include a discussion of the feasibility of their
proposals, and the advantages and disadvantages of each proposal.



B. Types of Incentives



Ginnie Mae requests comments on: (1) What might be appropriate incentives to encourage participants to include MWOB
participation in the Ginnie Mae REMIC transactions, either in the aggregate or as co-sponsors; (2) whether a mandatory
or an encouragement/goal oriented system should be used; (3) the current state of the law, including the recent cases


Metro Broadcasting, Inc. 

v.

 F.C.C.

, 110 S.Ct. 2997 (1990) and 

Lamprecht 

v.

 F.C.C.

, 958 F.2d 382 (DC Cir. 1992). Executive Orders 12432 (3 CFR, 1983 Comp., p. 198) and 12138 (3 CFR, 1979 Comp., p. 39),
respectively, are applicable to participation in the Ginnie Mae REMIC program.



