 

(1) Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences 
of an accident previously evaluated since the integrity of the 
steam generator tubes after sleeving will be equivalent to that 
of the original tubes. The sleeve, sleeve joint, and F* joint 
have been analyzed and tested for design, operating, and faulted 
condition loadings in accordance with NRC Regulatory [G]uide 
1.121 safety factors. The potential for a tube rupture is not 
increased with sleeving or F*. At worst case, a tube leak would 
occur, resulting in a small primary to secondary leak. Primary 
to secondary leakage occurring from within the sleeved or F* 
portions of the tube is bounded by the steam generator tube 
rupture scenario evaluated in the Final Safety Analysis Report. 
In addition, the steam generator tube remains capable of 
performing its required heat transfer function. Placing a sleeve 
in the steam generator tube or leaving a tube in service with a 
defect in a portion of the tube that provides no function results 
in a more efficient steam generator than plugging an affected 
tube. Thus, the consequences of any accident previously 
evaluated are not increased because the structural integrity and 
the heat transfer capability of the steam generators are not 
significantly altered by the proposed change. 
(2) Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident 
from any accident previously evaluated because both the 
structural integrity and the heat transfer capability of the 
steam generators will not be significantly affected by the use of 
either of the sleeving processes or the implementation of the F* 
criteria. Testing and previous experience indicate that any 
primary to secondary leakage would be well below technical 
specification limits. In addition, in the unlikely event the 
defective tube failed completely at the defect, the remaining 
sleeve end or F* joint would restrain tube movement due to the 
sleeve end geometry or length of expanded contact within the 
tubesheet bore. Therefore, there is no threat to adjacent tubes 
and no other plant systems will be affected by this change. 
Thus, there is no potential for a new or different kind of 
accident. 
(3) Involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety. The heat 
transfer capabilities of Indian Point 2 Steam Generators will be 
improved by utilizing the proposed sleeving process or 
implementing the F* criteria rather than the currently required 
tube plugging and subsequent loss of heat transfer area. The 
proposed change will allow a repaired (sleeved) tube or a tube 
with a tube end defect below the F* distance to remain in 
service, rather than completely blocking the tube's flow with 
plugs. Because the structural integrity of the tubes will be 
unaltered, the net effect of implementing the proposed change, 
rather than the currently required plugging procedure, will be an 
increase in the heat transfer characteristics of the steam 
generator. Westinghouse has done an evaluation of selected LOCA 
[loss-of-coolant accident] and non-LOCA transients to verify that 
use of sleeves resulting in a plugging equivalency at the current 
plant limit will not have an adverse affect on the thermal-hydraulic performance of the plant. Therefore, the margin
of 
safety is not reduced.

 

The NRC staff has reviewed the licensee's analysis and, based on this 
review, it appears that the three standards of 50.92(c) are satisfied. 
Therefore, the NRC staff proposes to determine that the amendment request 
involves no significant hazards consideration. 


Local Public Document Room location:

 White Plains Public Library, 100 
Martine Avenue, White Plains, New York 10610. 


Attorney for licensee:

 Brent L. Brandenburg, Esq., 4 Irving Place, New 
York, New York 10003. 


NRC Project Director:

 Robert A. Capra. 


Consumers Power Company, Docket No. 50255, Palisades Plant, Van Buren 
County, Michigan 




Date of amendment request:

 November 15, 1991, as supplemented February 22, 
March 11, and April 7, 1994. 



Description of amendment request:

 The amendment request, as submitted 
November 15, 1991, proposed completely rewritten requirements for the 
instrumentation and control (IC) sections of the Palisades Technical 
Specifications (TS) and was initially noticed in the 

Federal Register

 
October 28, 1992 (57 FR 48819). Since that time the licensee has updated 
its submittal, providing (1) changes to pages affected by intervening 
amendments, (2) clarifications suggested by NRC and Palisades reviewers, 
(3) addition of two instrument channels to the accident monitoring 
instruments Limiting Condition for Operation (LCO), (4) deletion of 
surveillance requirements for safety injection tank (SIT) instruments, as 
suggested by Generic Letter (GL) 9305, ``Line-Item Technical Specifications 
Improvements to Reduce Surveillance Requirements for Testing During Power 
Operation,'' and (5) addition of a general ``Applicability'' LCO which appears 
in the Standard TS but not in the Palisades TS. Changes (4) and (5) were 
not addressed in the initial proposed no significant hazards consideration (NSH) determination. The licensee's
NSH analysis for these two changes was 
provided in its April 7, 1994, letter to the NRC and is discussed below. 



Basis for proposed no significant hazards consideration determination:

 As required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee has provided its analysis of the issue of no significant hazards consideration,
which is presented below:


 

Consumers Power Company finds that activities associated with the 
February 22, 1994 and March 11, 1994 Instrument and Control 
Technical Specification change revisions include no significant 
hazards; and accordingly, a no significant hazards determination 
in accordance with 10CFR50.92(c) is justified. The following 
summary supports the finding that the proposed change would not: 
1. 

Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences 
of an accident previously evaluated. 
Neither the deletion of instrument surveillance requirements for the 
Safety Injection Tank (SIT) instrumentation nor the addition of 
allowance of temporarily returning inoperable equipment to service for 
maintenance or testing would affect the probability or consequences of 
an accident. 
The SIT instrument channels themselves have no accident function. 
Their only purpose is to allow verification that the SITs themselves 
are operable. Surveillance requirements for these instruments were 
purposely deleted from STS during the Technical Specification 
Improvement Program. Their removal from Technical Specifications was 
suggested in GL 9305. 
Returning inoperable equipment to service as allowed by LCO 3.0.5 is 
necessary if failed channels are to be restored to operable status. 
The restoration of such channels enhances the ability to monitor for 
and mitigate abnormal operating conditions and accidents. 
Therefore, the proposed changes do not involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences of an accident
previously 
evaluated. 



