 




<USBUREAU>Social Security Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Privacy Act of 1974; Report of New Routine Use </DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Social Security Administration (SSA), Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Addition of a new routine use to seven systems of records. 


 

</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 In accordance with the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4) and (11)), we are issuing public notice of our intent to establish
a new routine use applicable to seven of SSA's systems of records. The proposed routine use would provide for disclosure
from the systems of records to law enforcement agencies and private security contractors when information is needed
to respond to, investigate, or prevent activities that jeopardize the security and safety of SSA customers, employees
or workplaces or that otherwise disrupt the operation of SSA facilities. Information would also be disclosed to assist
in the prosecution of persons charged with violating Federal or local law in connection with such activities. 



We invite public comment on this publication. 




</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 We filed a report of a new routine use with the Chairman, Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives,
and the Chairman, Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and the Administrator, Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget on September 20, 1994. The routine use will become effective,
as proposed, without further notice October 31, 1994, unless we receive comments on or before that date that would
result in a contrary determination. 



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Interested individuals may comment on this publication by writing to the SSA Privacy Officer, Social Security Administration,
Room 3D1 Operations Building, 6401 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland 21235. All comments received
will be available for public inspection at that address. 



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Mr. Andrew Garreis, Social Insurance Specialist, Standards and Compliance Branch, Division of Technical Documents
and Privacy, Office of Regulations, Office of Policy, Social Security Administration, 3D1 Operations
Building, 6401 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland 21235, telephone 4109655533.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
 
I. Discussion of Proposed Routine Use 



A. Background 



We propose to add a routine use to the systems of records listed below. The proposed routine use is necessary to ensure
the security of SSA workplaces and the safety of SSA customers and employees. 

Occasionally SSA offices find it necessary to disclose information to law enforcement agencies and private security
contractors in order to ensure the security of the workplace and the safety of those in it. These incidents usually
involve: Physical violence; the use, attempted use or display of a weapon; malicious damage to SSA or employee property;
credible threats of physical violence against an employee, a customer or the premises; verbal abuse against an employee
or customer; and other activities that disrupt the operations of SSA offices. 



B. Disclosures to Law Enforcement Agencies and Private Security Contractors 



Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies and private security contractors have responsibility for preventing,
handling, monitoring, and investigating incidents that affect the safety and security of SSA customers, employees
and workplaces or otherwise disrupt SSA operations. Prosecution of persons involved in these activities for violation
of Federal or local laws may also be appropriate. SSA managers of most SSA leased facilities have to rely primarily
on local law enforcement authorities and private security contractors to meet the protective security needs of customers,
employees and workplaces. 

In order to protect individuals and premises and deal with incidents, law enforcement and private security personnel
need information from SSA systems of records. Although the Privacy Act permits disclosure without consent to protect
the health or safety of individuals (5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(8)), the conditions which must be met under this provision sometimes
preclude its application in follow-up investigations when there is no immediate emergency. Also, the requirement
under this exception that the individual must be notified of the disclosure could have potentially dangerous consequences
for SSA employees. They could be subjected to retaliation. The Privacy Act 
(5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(7)) also permits disclosure without consent to a law enforcement agency for a valid law enforcement
activity when an appropriate official of that agency submits a written request. However, this provision does not
permit disclosure without such a request and would not apply when SSA has a need to disclose on its own initiative. 

To enable SSA to disclose information in compliance with the Privacy Act in all situations that affect the safety and
security of SSA customers, employees or workplaces, we are proposing the following routine use to permit disclosure:







To Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies and private security contractors, as appropriate, information
necessary 

(a) To enable them to protect the safety of SSA employees and customers, the security of the SSA workplace and the operation
of SSA facilities, or 

(b) To assist investigations or prosecutions with respect to activities that affect such safety and security or activities
that disrupt the operation of SSA facilities. 





We are not republishing in their entirety the notices of the systems of records to which we are adding the new routine
use statement because of the large number of those systems of records and the costs of republishing the individual
notices of each one. Instead, we are republishing only the identification number and the name of each system, and the
volume, page number, and date of the 

Federal Register

 issue in which the systems notice was last published, either in a composite listing of systems of records or as an individual
system notice. 

The following systems notices were last published at 52 FR 12084, April 14, 1987, in a composite listing which added
a routine use: 




09600005_Hearing Office File, HHS/SSA/OHA; 

09600066_Claims Development Record, HHS/SSA/RO; and 

09600078_Public Inquiry Correspondence File, HHS/SSA/RO. 




The following systems notices were published at 58 FR 35025, 
June 30, 1993, as individual notices: 





09600058_Master Files of Social Security Number Holders, HHS/SSA/OSR; 

09600089_Claims Folders System, HHS/SSA/OP; 

09600090_Master Beneficiary Record, HHS/SSA/OSR; and 

09600103_Supplemental Security Income Record, HHS/SSA/OSR. 



II. Compatibility of Proposed Routine Use 



We are proposing the changes discussed above in accordance with the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a(a)(7), (b)(3), and
(e)(11)) and our disclosure regulation (20 CFR part 401). 

The Privacy Act permits us to disclose information about individuals without their consents for a routine use, i.e.,
where the information will be used for a purpose that is compatible with the purpose for which we collected the information.
As here pertinent, our regulation implementing that statute states that a disclosure serves such a compatible purpose
when the disclosure is necessary to carry out SSA's programs. We believe that the disclosures contemplated under
this routine use meet the compatibility requirement for routine uses under the Privacy Act and the regulation. In
order for SSA to carry out its programs, it must ensure that its places of business are safe and secure for both customers
and employees, that premises and property are safe from theft and damages, that employees can perform their duties
without fear of intimidation or injury, and that SSA can prevent and appropriately deal with disruptions in the operation
of its facilities. In so far as disclosure to law enforcement agencies and private security contractors will help
to accomplish these objectives, the disclosures are an integral part of our program administration responsibilities.
Thus, the proposed disclosures meet the compatibility criterion discussed above because they are necessary for
program administration. 



III. Effect of the Proposal on Individual Rights 



Although disclosures will be made to law enforcement and/or private security personnel, SSA will follow all statutory
and regulatory requirements for disclosure. Therefore, we do not anticipate that the disclosures will have any unwarranted
effect on the privacy or other rights of individuals. 



IV. Other Changes 



No changes, other than the new routine use, are being made to the notices of systems of records in this publication.





Dated: September 20, 1994. 



</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Shirley S. Chater,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Commissioner of Social Security.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9425546 Filed 101494; 8:45 am] 


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 419029P
</BILLING>

