 

In addition, if the required examination reveals a fine equi-axed grain structure, replacing the spar cap will be
required at a cost of approximately $100,000, parts and labor included. If the required examination reveals an unusual
grain structure that was not a fine equi-axed structure, inspecting the spar cap for stress corrosion will be required
at a cost of approximately $2,750 (50 workhours at $55 per hour). An airplane affected by this AD could have a compliance
cost as low as $1,007 if the spar cap was found acceptable during the metallurgical examination, and as high as approximately
$100,857 if the operator replaces the spar cap.

Based on an expected average remaining operating life of 30 years per affected airplane, the annualized compliance
cost would be:

&bull;If only a metallurgical examination is necessary: $1,007^$150 (cost incurred by manufacturer)=$857&times;0.8145
(capital recovery factor at an interest rate of 7 percent)=$70 annualized cost; or 

&bull;If replacing the spar cap is necessary: approximately $100,857&times;0.8145 (capital recovery factor at
an interest rate of 7 percent)=$8,215 annualized cost.

The required AD's from Dockets No. 92CE38AD (for Model 690B), No. 92CE43AD
(for Model 500S), and 92CE58AD (for both Models 500S and 690B) also affect certain airplanes
included in this AD. The compliance costs of these other AD's add to the cost discussed above. However, replacing the
spar cap is only required once, so the $100,000 replacement cost, if required, would be a one-time action.

The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (RFA) was enacted by Congress to ensure that small entities are not unnecessarily
or disproportionally burdened by government regulations.The RFA requires government agencies to determine whether
rules would have a ``significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities,'' and, in cases where
they would, conduct a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis in which alternatives to the rule are considered. FAA Order
2100.14A, Regulatory Flexibility Criteria and Guidance, outlines FAA procedures and criteria for complying with
the RFA. Small entities are defined as small businesses and small not-for-profit organizations that are independently
owned and operated or airports operated by small governmental jurisdictions.

Of the 56 U.S.-registered airplanes affected by this AD that have not complied with Twin Commander SB No. 215, dated
March 3, 1992, no owner owns more than one. Of these 56 different owners, 50 are businesses, not-for-profit enterprises,
or state or local governments; and six are individuals.

The FAA cannot determine the sizes of all the 50 non-individual owner entities nor the relative significance of the
costs estimated above. Because of these uncertainties, no cost thresholds for significant economic impact can be
reasonably determined. Based on the possibility that this AD could have a significant impact on a substantial number
of small entities, the FAA conducted a regulatory flexibility analysis. A copy of this analysis may be obtained by
contacting the Rules Docket at the location provided under the caption 

ADDRESSES.

The regulations adopted herein will not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this proposal will not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.

For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this action (1) is not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive
Order 12866; (2) is significant under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034, February 26, 1979) because
of substantial public interest; and (3) may have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.
The FAA has conducted an Initial Regulatory Flexibility Determination and Analysis and has considered alternatives
to this action that could minimize the impact on small entities. A copy of this analysis may be obtained by contacting
the Rules Docket at the location provided under the caption ADDRESSES

. After careful consideration, the FAA has determined that the required action is the best course to achieve the safety
objective of returning the airplane to its original certification level of safety.



List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39



Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Incorporation by reference, Safety.



Adoption of the Amendment



Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration
amends 14 CFR part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations as follows:

