 

3. Quantification of Monetary Payment for Order Flow


Over 20 commenters addressed the proposed requirement that broker-dealers inform customers annually about the
aggregate amount of monetary compensation received for routing order flow. The majority oppose the inclusion of
any aggregate value requirement.
<FOOTCITE>37</FOOTCITE>
 The Commission has determined to solicit further comment on this issue in the Companion Release because it believes
that aggregate information provides useful information to customers to evaluate the magnitude of payment for order
flow practices and whether such payments, taken as a whole, might affect adversely order routing determinations.
As discussed in the Companion Release, the Commission has determined to solicit further comment on this issue in conjunction
with its proposal to require valuation of all forms of payment for order flow because disclosure of monetary payment
for order flow without similar disclosures regarding non-monetary payment for order flow and internalization could
mislead investors or foster non-monetary payments or internalized/affiliate practices.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
37

</FOOTNAME>
Several broker-dealers argue that disclosure of aggregate amounts of monetary order flow would be misleading to
customers. One commenter voiced concerns that investors who transact business in mutual funds or options would be
misled by disclosure which only derives from equity order flow. Others believe that even equity customers are likely
to be misled because payment derives from large numbers of the broker's own or other customer's orders directed to
various marketplaces which may be unrelated to that particular customer's business with the broker-dealer. Still
others believe that such disclosure may lead to the misperception that investors are being disadvantaged.
It should be noted that the same commenters opposing aggregate disclosure of monetary compensation also oppose the
Commission's proposal regarding confirmation disclosure of monetary compensation. 

See infra

 Section III.C. (Customer Confirmation Statements). In contrast, some commenters suggest quantification requirements
extend to non-monetary inducements for order flow and to internalization.
</FOOTNOTE>


C. Customer Confirmation Statements


As proposed, amended Rule 10b10(a)(7)(iii)
<FOOTCITE>38</FOOTCITE>
 required customer confirmations to disclose whether any payment for order flow has been received for a national market
system security and the amount of any monetary payment, discount, rebate or reduction of fee. More than 30 commenters
expressed concern about the proposed requirement that broker-dealers disclose on customer order confirmations
the amount of any monetary payment, discount, rebate or reduction of fee received in connection with a transaction
in a national market system security. Most of these commenters considered this unworkable.
<FOOTCITE>39</FOOTCITE>



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
38

</FOOTNAME>
Currently, the Commission's confirmation disclosure rule, Rule 10b10 under the Act, requires that confirmations
sent to customers for agency transactions disclose the ``price'' of the security purchased or sold by the customer,
as well as the remuneration paid to the broker-dealer by the customer in the trade. Rule 10b10 also requires
broker-dealers to disclose the source and amount of any other remuneration received in connection with a transaction.
In most transactions, however, the Rule permits broker-dealers merely to state ``whether any other remuneration
has been or will be received,'' and to furnish the source and amount of such other remuneration on written request.

</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
39

</FOOTNAME>
Several commenters argue that specific confirmation disclosure is nearly impossible considering that brokers
have a variety of arrangements with firms which often include conditions, such as requiring a minimum amount of order
flow per month before payments begin; different rates for low-priced securities; and graduated payments based on
dollar volume per month. Others argue that it would place an extreme burden on recipient broker-dealers to determine
that amount of order flow received for each order in time for a confirmation. Several commenters also argue that specific
disclosure would require broker-dealers to reprogram computer systems, perform tracking and report cash payments,
and that such expenses are disproportionately high in relation to the potential benefits to customers. Some commenters
recommend a generic disclosure statement which would eliminate the high cost of systems changes, yet still inform
the customer as to the receipt of payment for order flow. Another concern raised by opponents of the Commission's proposal
is that payment is given for an aggregation of orders directed to a particular market center and does not attach to a
particular order.

</FOOTNOTE>

