 

For a part-time employee or an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, the final regulations provide that the basic
amount of sick leave to be made available for family care or bereavement purposes shall be equal to the average number
of hours of work in the employee's scheduled tour of duty each week. In addition, a part-time employee or an employee
with an uncommon tour of duty who maintains a sick leave balance equal to at least 

twice 

the average number of hours of work in the employee's scheduled tour of duty each week may use an amount equal to the number
of hours of sick leave normally accrued by the employee during a leave year for these purposes. These limitations are
consistent with the amendments made by the Federal Employees Family Friendly Leave Act, which authorizes OPM to prescribe
limitations for such employees that are proportional to those applicable to full-time employees with a tour of duty
of 40 hours per week.

OPM believes an annual limit of 104 hours (13 workdays) of sick leave to provide care for an ill or injured family member
will be an ample amount of time for most employees to give care and attendance to family members for illness or injury


when viewed in the context of other available options and entitlements. 

The entitlement to use a total of up to 104 hours of sick leave, in conjunction with a generous annual leave system, advanced
annual leave, the leave transfer and leave bank programs, flexible work schedules, flexiplace, unpaid leave under
the FMLA, and compensatory time off will further assist the vast majority of employees to meet their sickness-related
family care needs.



Sick Leave for Exposure to a Communicable Disease



A labor organization, an agency, and some individuals commented that the 5-day limit on the use of sick leave for family
care purposes would restrict, rather than expand, entitlement to use sick leave in the case of employees who provide
care for a family member who is afflicted with a contagious disease. The labor organization pointed out that 630.401(c)
of the current regulations places no limit on the amount of sick leave that may be used under these circumstances and
suggested that the 5-day limit would impose an unfair hardship when compared to the current policy.

The current regulatory provision authorizing the use of sick leave to care for ``a member of [the employee's] immediate
family who is afflicted with a contagious disease'' is based primarily on the need to prevent the spread of contagion
in the workplace. When the health authorities having jurisdiction or a health care provider determines that an employee's
exposure to a communicable disease would jeopardize the health of other employees, we continue to believe it is appropriate
to grant sick leave to the employee for the entire period of time during which the danger to the health of other employees
exists. However, when it cannot be determined that an employee's exposure to a communicable disease would jeopardize
the health of other employees, we do not believe there is any justification for allowing the employee to use more sick
leave than would be available to other employees who wish to provide care for a family member whose illness or incapacitation
is not the result of a communicable disease. In such cases, employees may request annual leave or leave without pay
to provide additional care and may also be eligible for participation in the Federal leave sharing program.

The determination as to whether an employee's exposure to a communicable disease would jeopardize the health of other
employees necessarily is a matter of judgment. Supervisors should rely on the expertise of the health authorities
having jurisdiction or a health care provider in determining the period of time for which sick leave should be authorized
and may require the employee to submit medical documentation to support the use of sick leave under these circumstances
for an extended period of time.

OPM also received five comments relating to other aspects of the proposed regulation on the use of sick leave in cases
of communicable disease. Some asked for additional clarification concerning what constitutes a ``severe communicable
disease.'' One agency recommended that the word ``severe'' be deleted. The agency reasoned that if the local health
authorities or health care provider has determined that a person so exposed is required to be isolated for a specified
period of time, the communicable disease must be ``severe.'' The agency suggested that using the modifier ``severe.''
may put management in the difficult position of second-guessing health authorities. We find this observation compelling
and have deleted the word ``severe.'' We have not attempted to define the term ``communicable disease,'' however,
because the key determination that has to be made is not whether a particular illness constitutes a ``communicable
disease,'' but whether an employees's exposure to the illness would jeopardize the health of other employees. This
determination can be made only by the health authorities having jurisdiction or a health care provider.

A labor organization objected to the characterization of a ``severe communicable disease'' as one that requires
``isolation for a specified period.'' It suggested that this characterization implies that if the health authorities
or health care provider does not, or cannot, identify a ``specified period'' of isolation, an application for sick
leave will be denied. We agree that this characterization is unnecessary and have revised 630.401(a)(5) to
remove the reference to ``isolation'' altogether. In addition, we have removed the definition of ``contagious disease''
in 630.201(b)(3). In response to another comment, we have also provided a definition of ``health care provider''
in 630.201(b)(5).

As a result of these changes, employees will be permitted to use sick leave for the entire period of time during which
the health authorities having jurisdiction or a health care provider determines that an employee's exposure to a
communicable disease would jeopardize the health of other employees. Full-time employees will be limited to a total
of 13 days of sick leave per year (subject to the requirement in 630.401(c) to maintain 80 hours of sick leave
in their account) when it cannot be determined that an employee's exposure to a family member's communicable disease
would jeopardize the health of other employees.



