 

3. Involve a significant reduction in the margin of safety.
The proposed technical specification change does not involve a significant reduction in the margin of safety. The
proposed change increases the time required for the plant to be in hot standby from 6 to 24 hours should the ultimate
heat sink average water temperature exceed 75
&cir;F. An evaluation has been performed to demonstrate that the risk significance associated with the increased
action time is very low. In addition, safe shutdown capability has been demonstrated for ultimate heat sink average
water temperatures as high as 77
&cir;F.
The NRC staff has reviewed the licensee's analysis and, based on this review, it appears that the three standards of
10 CFR 50.92(c) are satisfied. Therefore, the NRC staff proposes to determine that the amendment request involves
no significant hazards consideration.
The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination. Any comments received within 15 days after
the date of publication of this notice will be considered in making any final determination.
Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expiration of the 15-day notice period. However,
should circumstances change during the notice period, such that failure to act in a timely way would result, for example,
in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission may issue the license amendment before the expiration of the
15-day notice period, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involves no significant hazards
consideration. The final determination will consider all public and State comments received. Should the Commission
take this action, it will publish in the 

Federal Register

 a notice of issuance. The Commission expects that the need to take this action will occur very infrequently.
Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Rules Review and Directives Branch, Division of Freedom of Information
and Publications Services, Office of Administration, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555,
and should cite the publication date and page number of this 

Federal Register

 notice. Written comments may also be delivered to Room 6D22, Two White Flint North, 11545 Rockville Pike, Rockville,
Maryland, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Federal workdays. Copies of written comments received may be examined at the
NRC Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20555.
The filing of requests for hearing and petitions for leave to intervene is discussed below.
By September 29, 1994, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respect to issuance of the amendment to the
subject facility operating license and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and who wishes
to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a written request for a hearing and a petition for leave to intervene.
Requests for a hearing and a petition for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rules
of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. Interested persons should consult a current copy
of 10 CFR 2.714 which is available at the Commission's Public Document Room, The Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW.,
Washington, DC 20555 and at the local public document room located at the Learning Resource Center, Three Rivers Community-Technical
College, Thames Valley Campus, 574 New London Turnpike, Norwich, Connecticut 06360. If a request for a hearing or
petition for leave to intervene is filed by the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board,
designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and Licensing Board Panel, will rule on the request
and/or petition; and the Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a notice of hearing
or an appropriate order.
As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall set forth with particularity the interest of the
petitioner in the proceeding, and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding. The petition
should specifically explain the reasons why intervention should be permitted with particular reference to the following
factors: (1) The nature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to the proceeding; (2) the nature and
extent of the petitioner's property, financial, or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect
of any order which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest. The petition should also identify
the specific aspect(s) of the subject matter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Any person
who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has been admitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting
leave of the Board up to 15 days prior to the first prehearing conference scheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended
petition must satisfy the specificity requirements described above.
Not later than 15 days prior to the first prehearing conference scheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file
a supplement to the petition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions which are sought to be litigated
in the matter. Each contention must consist of a specific statement of the issue of law or fact to be raised or controverted.
In addition, the petitioner shall provide a brief explanation of the bases of the contention and a concise statement
of the alleged facts or expert opinion which support the contention and on which the petitioner intends to rely in proving
the contention at the hearing. The petitioner must also provide references to those specific sources and documents
of which the petitioner is aware and on which the petitioner intends to rely to establish those facts or expert opinion.
Petitioner must provide sufficient information to show that a genuine dispute exists with the applicant on a material
issue of law or fact. Contentions shall be limited to matters within the scope of the amendment under consideration.
The contention must be one which, if proven, would entitle the petitioner to relief. A petitioner who fails to file
such a supplement which satisfies these requirements with respect to at least one contention will not be permitted
to participate as a party.
Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subject to any limitations in the order granting leave
to intervene, and have the opportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, including the opportunity
to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
If the amendment is issued before the expiration of the 30-day hearing period, the Commission will make a final determination
on the issue of no significant hazards consideration. If a hearing is requested, the final determination will serve
to decide when the hearing is held.
If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration, the Commission
may issue the amendment and make it immediately effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing
held would take place after issuance of the amendment.

