 

(iii) If the agency grants accreditation or preaccreditation to a program notwithstanding the actions described
in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, the agency provides to the Secretary a thorough explanation, consistent
with its accreditation standards, why the previous action by a recognized institutional accrediting agency or the
State does not preclude the agency's grant of accreditation or preaccreditation; and
(iv) If a recognized institutional accrediting agency takes adverse action with respect to the institution offering
the program or places the institution on public probationary status, the agency promptly reviews its accreditation
or preaccreditation of the program to determine if it should take adverse action against the program.
(3) The agency routinely shares information with other appropriate recognized accrediting agencies and State agencies
information about the accreditation or preaccreditation status of an institution or program and any actions it has
taken regarding the institution's or program's accreditation or preaccreditation.
(b) An accrediting agency is subject to the requirements contained in paragraph (a) of this section if the accrediting
agency knew, or should have known, of the actions being taken by another recognized accrediting agency or State agency.



(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1099b)





Note: 

This appendix will not appear in the Code of Federal Regulations.


Appendix A to Preamble_Major Issues Discussed at the Regional Meetings


The Department convened four regional meetings in September 1992 to obtain public involvement in the development
of regulations to implement Title IV, part H, subpart 2 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended by the Higher
Education Amendments of 1992, Public Law 102325. This subpart describes the procedures and criteria to be
used for the Secretary's recognition of accrediting agencies.
The Department invited individuals and representatives of groups involved in student financial assistance programs
to the four regional meetings. At each meeting, the Department provided for a comprehensive discussion and exchange
of information regarding the implementation of subpart 2 by providing participants with an issue paper that raised
issues and questions with regard to the statutory provisions included in subpart 2. The following is a summary of the
information provided to the Department by participants at the regional meetings. The section of the proposed regulations
that is the subject of the information is provided as a reference.


Separate and independent requirement_602.3. 

Participants in the regional meetings suggested that, in order for an accrediting agency to obtain a waiver of the
requirement that it be separate from and independent of, both administratively and financially, any related, associated,
affiliated, trade association or membership organization, an agency should have to demonstrate that (a) its parent
body has no role in making or ratifying its accrediting decisions, (b) it has sufficient budget and administrative
autonomy to carry out its required accrediting responsibilities, and (c) information obtained in the course of its
accrediting process is not made available to the parent body unless it is public information.


Unannounced visits by the Secretary_602.10. 

Participants discussed the conditions under which an unannounced visit to either an accrediting agency or an institution
or program that it accredits, as part of the Secretary's comprehensive review and evaluation of the agency, was appropriate
and suggested that such a visit would be appropriate only if (a) the Secretary had evidence of the agency's non-compliance
with the statute or Departmental regulations and (b) an unannounced site visit would assist in investigating the
non-compliance.


Review by the National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and Integrity_602.12. 

Participants discussed the role of the National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and Integrity in reviewing
the applications of accrediting agencies seeking recognition by the Secretary and suggested that an agency should
have an opportunity to appeal the Advisory Committee's recommendation before the Secretary reaches a final decision.


Limitation, suspension, or termination of recognition_602.14. 

Participants discussed the process the Secretary should use in determining whether to limit, suspend, or terminate
an accrediting agency's recognition if the Secretary determines, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, that
the agency has failed to satisfy one or more of the requirements for recognition. They suggested that the proposed
regulations should afford the agency due process by providing (a) written notice to the agency, (b) opportunity for
the agency to respond in writing, (c) public review by the Advisory Committee, (d) a written decision by the Advisory
Committee, and (e) an appeal to the Secretary.


