 

d. Title IV, Section 410, Emergency Powers



The Navajo Nation proposed deletion of its emergency powers provisions at Title IV, section 410 of its AMLR Code of
1987. Deletion of these provisions is consistent with the approval of the Navajo Nation's AMLR plan (53 FR 17186, 17190;
May 16, 1988) where the Secretary deferred decision on the emergency response program pending additional documentation
addressing the specific criteria concerning assumption of emergency response authority. Because the Navajo Nation
did not submit such additional documentation, the emergency powers program was never approved. The Director, therefore,
approves deletion of the provisions for emergency powers at section 410 of the Navajo Nation AMLR Code of 1987 and notes
that it is the Navajo Nation's intent to delete all references to emergency powers within its AMLR Code of 1987.



e. Title IV, Section 414, Interagency Cooperation



The Navajo Nation proposed new language in its AMLR Code of 1987 at Title IV, section 414 to provide for interagency
cooperation in implementing and administering the provisions of the Navajo Nation plan ``where such cooperation
does not conflict with existing Navajo Nation and/or applicable federal laws.'' Section 413(a) of SMCRA provides,
in part, that a Tribe has the authority to engage in any work and to do all things necessary or expedient to implement
and administer the provisions of Title IV. Therefore, the limitation of interagency cooperation to instances where
no conflict with existing Navajo Nation or applicable Federal laws occur meets the requirements of section 413 of
SMCRA. Accordingly, the Director approves section 414 of the Navajo Nation AMLR Code of 1987.


OSM notes that the Navajo Nation plan provides the authority for the Tribe to conduct a reclamation program on Navajo
(Indian) lands as that term is defined in section 701(9) of SMCRA. Indian lands occur within and outside traditional
reservation boundaries. Although there may be jurisdictional limitations to the Navajo Nation's authority to undertake
certain reclamation actions outside the reservation, the Navajo Nation plan presents a variety of reclamation procedures
and activities which would allow the Tribe to undertake its reclamation program without violating the jurisdictional
rights of other parties. Because certain lands within the boundaries of the Navajo Nation Reservation are ``disputed
lands'' and other lands are under the control of the Office of the Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, it is understood
by OSM that any reclamation or abatement action proposed by the Navajo Nation will be coordinated with and due consideration
given to concerns raised by all parties asserting ownership of these lands.



f. Navajo Nation II(L)(1)(d), Interim Program Coal Sites



The Navajo Nation proposed the addition of provisions in its Navajo Nation Rules at II(L)(1)(d) that address interim
program coal sites.


Section 402(g)(4) of SMCRA provides for the reclamation of interim coal program sites and further provides that sections
403(a) (1) and (2) of SMCRA determine which sites to reclaim.

The Navajo Nation does not have a statutory requirement that addresses reclamation of interim program coal sites.
OSM acknowledges that the Navajo Nation has submitted a grant application in accordance with the provisions of 30
CFR 886 to fund reclamation of all remaining priority 1 and 2 abandoned coal mine sites, including interim program
coal reclamation projects, as required by section 403(a) of SMCRA. The Navajo Nation has also demonstrated to OSM's
satisfaction that the Navajo Nation AMR fund contains enough monies in reserve to address reclamation of the remaining
sites. On this basis and upon approval of the proposed plan amendment that is the subject of this notice, OSM will begin
reviewing the pending grant application. OSM also understands that the Navajo Nation is in the process of revising
its AMLR Code of 1987 to provide for the reclamation of interim program coal sites. The Director, therefore, approves
the Navajo Nation's proposed rule at section II, Part L, subsection 1(d) addressing interim program coal reclamation.



2. Request for Concurrence With Certification of Completion of Coal Reclamation



The President of the Navajo Nation notified the Secretary of the Interior that the Navajo Nation certifies to the completion
of all its coal reclamation projects. Section 411(a) of SMCRA provides that the head of an Indian tribe may certify
to the Secretary that all of the priorities stated in section 403(a) of SMCRA for eligible lands and water have been
achieved and that the Secretary, after notice in the 

Federal Register

 and opportunity for public comment, shall concur with such certification if the Secretary determines that such certification
is correct.


Since the Secretary's approval of the Navajo Nation plan, the Navajo Nation has conducted reclamation to correct
or mitigate problems caused by past coal mining. The Navajo Nation has completed this reclamation in the order of priority
set forth in section 403(a) of SMCRA. OSM acknowledges that there are remaining priority 1 and 2 abandoned coal mine
sites yet to be reclaimed by the Navajo Nation, but upon approval of the grant application submitted by the Navajo Nation
in accordance with 30 CFR 886 and as discussed in finding No. 1.e. above, the Navajo Nation will have addressed all known
remaining pre-SMCRA and interim program abandoned coal mine lands.


Based upon the Navajo Nation's May 4, 1994, certification, and the absence of any known unreclaimed coal-related
impacts, the Director of OSM, on behalf of the Secretary, concurs with the Navajo Nation's certification that all
coal-related abandoned mine land problems have been abated or reclaimed, and finds that the Navajo Nation has satisfied
the requirements of section 403 of SMCRA. If a coal problem occurs or is identified in the future, the Navajo Nation
would have to seek immediate funding to reclaim the coal-related problem. Concurrence with the Navajo Nation's certification
of completion of coal reclamation means that the Navajo Nation may now use annual grants made available under section
402(g)(1) of SMCRA to carry out activities or construction of specific public facilities related to the coal or minerals
industry in accordance with section 411(f) of SMCRA.


