 

One of the modifications would provide a location adjustment to the basic formula price for Order 135 because additional
milk supplies likely would be made into cheese that would have to be transported elsewhere to be sold. Another reason
advanced is because a lower price would improve competition with cheese made from milk priced under the California
State milk order, which has a lower price.
This proposed modification should not be adopted. The purpose of the basic formula is to move prices for milk in most
uses in all Federal order markets. It should not be modified for the purpose of accommodating expected sales competition
for one product under one order.
Similarly, the Class III cheese formula price modification advanced by NWI and endorsed by Darigold in its brief also
must be denied. With the exception of consideration of a lower price for milk used to make nonfat dry milk (Class IIIA),
it has long been the policy of USDA that the lowest-priced class of use under the Federal order program is based on the
concept of a national market for products (butter, powder, and cheese) made from milk not needed for Class I use. Those
products made from Grade A milk marketed under Federal orders compete with products made from non-grade A milk. Since
these products compete in a national market, there has been a common surplus class price in almost all Federal orders
for many years. It should be noted, of course, that the policy of uniformly pricing surplus milk was modified with the
adoption of a Class IIIA pricing formula that was implemented in 27 Federal orders, including the Pacific Northwest
order, on December 1, 1993. Despite this change, however, the policy of uniformly pricing all surplus milk, except
skim milk used in the production of nonfat dry milk, should be continued, at least for the present.
There are other considerations as well. As noted earlier, a hearing has already been held on a replacement or an alternative
to the MW price for the basic formula price under the orders. Also, as noted above, there is now a separate Class
IIIA price for skim milk used to produce nonfat dry milk in the Pacific Northwest order. There appears to be a
question about whether a separate Class IIIA price could be justified if the proposed price to be derived from
the cheese exchange prices were adopted as a basic formula price. The record in this proceeding is not adequate to deal
with this question.
Also, there appears to be a dilemma in the difference between handler prices for milk to make cheese prescribed under
the Federal orders and those provided under the California milk pricing program. However, we do not feel the proper
approach to this problem is to lower the surplus milk price to handlers under one particular order.


