 

(i) Radar navigation_determining the position and direction of movements of a vessel.

(ii) Collision-avoidance, including visual techniques, appropriate to the circumstances and the equipment in
use.

(iii) Factors to consider when determining changes of course and/or speed of a vessel to, on the basis of radar observation,
prevent collisions with other vessels.

(c) Each Radar-Operation course must be conducted by an individual who possesses the knowledge and skills taught
in the course, with at least one year of experience in their practical application, except that_

(1) A marine instructor or company official may substitute a currently valid certificate from an approved Radar-Observer
(Unlimited or Inland Waters) course for the one year of experience; and

(2) An instructor of any approved radar-observer course may teach a Radar-Operation course without further seagoing
experience.

(d) A holder of the Radar-Operation certificate seeking a radar-observer endorsement is considered an applicant
for an original endorsement rather than an applicant for renewal of the endorsement.

4. Section 10.480 is revised to read as follows:



10.480 

Radar observer.



(a) This section contains the requirements that an applicant must meet to qualify as a radar observer. (Part 15 of this
chapter specifies who must qualify as a radar observer.)

(b) If an applicant meets the requirements of this section, one of the following radar-observer endorsements will
be added to his or her deck officer's license:

(1) Radar Observer (Rivers).

(2) Radar Observer (Inland Waters).

(3) Radar Observer (Unlimited).

(c) Endorsement as Radar Observer (Rivers) is valid only on any river, canal, or similar body of water designated by
the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. Endorsement as Radar Observer (Inland Waters) is valid only for those waters
covered by the Inland Navigational Rules other than the Great Lakes. Endorsement as Radar Observer (Unlimited) is
valid on all waters.

(d) Except as provided by paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section, each applicant for a radar-observer endorsement
or for renewal of an endorsement must complete the appropriate course approved by the Coast Guard, receive the appropriate
certificate of training, and present the certificate to the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection.

(e) An applicant who possesses a radar-observer endorsement, resides in a remote geographic area, and can substantiate
to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, that the applicant's absence would disrupt normal
movement of commerce, or that the applicant cannot attend an approved radar-observer renewal course, any have his
or her endorsement renewed upon successful completion of an examination administered by the Coast Guard.

(f) An endorsement as radar observer issued under this section is valid for five years after the month of issuance of
the certificate of training from a course approved by the Coast Guard. The endorsement is not terminated by the issuance
of a new license during these five years.

(g) The month and year of the expiration of the radar-observer endorsement are printed on the license.

(h) A radar-observer endorsement may be renewed at any time.

(i) An applicant for renewal of a license that does not need a radar-observer endorsement may renew the license without
meeting the requirements for a radar-observer endorsement.

(j) An applicant seeking to raise the grade of a license or increase its scope, where the increased grade or scope requires
a radar-observer certificate, may use an expired radar-observer certificate to fulfill that requirement.



PART 15_MANNING REQUIREMENTS



5. The citation of authority for part 15 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 46 U.S.C. 2103, 3703, 8502; 49 CFR 1.45, 1.46.




6. In 15.815, new paragraph (c) is added:



15.815 

Radar observers.



* * * * *



(c) On or after February 15, 1995, each person having to be licensed under 46 U.S.C. 8904(a) for employment or service
as master, mate, or operator on board an uninspected towing vessel of 8 meters (approximately 26 feet) or more in length
shall, if the vessel is equipped with radar, hold_

(1) A valid endorsement as radar observer; or,

(2) If the person holds a valid license dated before February 15, 1995, a valid certificate from a Radar-Operation
course.



<SIGNER>
J.C. Card,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Rear Admiral, U.S. Coast Guard, Chief, Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environmental Protection.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9426506 Filed 102594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491014M
</BILLING>



