 




<DOCTITLE>Privacy Act of 1974; Alteration of a Record System</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Defense Logistics Agency, DoD.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Alteration of a record system.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Defense Logistics Agency proposes to alter an existing system of records notice subject to the Privacy Act of 1974
(5 U.S.C. 552a), as amended. The Defense Logistics Agency proposes to add an additional routine use for the system
as follows: To the Department of Health and Human Services for the purpose of conducting studies concerned with the
health and well being of the active duty and veteran population.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The alteration will be effective without further notice on October 19, 1994, unless comments are received that would
result in a contrary determination.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Send comments to Privacy Act Officer, Programs and Analysis Division, Office of Planning and Resource Management,
Defense Logistics Agency Administrative Support Center, Room 5A120, Cameron Station, Alexandria, VA 223046100.




</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Ms. Susan Salus at (703) 6177583. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The complete inventory of Defense Logistics Agency record system notices subject to the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C.
552a), as amended, have been published in the 

Federal Register

 and may be obtained from the address above.




An altered system report, as required by 5 U.S.C. 552a(5) of the Privacy Act was submitted on September 8, 1994, to the
Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the
Senate, and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) pursuant to paragraph 4c of Appendix I to OMB Circular No. A130,
`Federal Agency Responsibilities for Maintaining Records About Individuals,' dated July 15, 1994 (59 FR 37906,
July 25, 1994). The specific changes to the record system are set forth below followed by the system notice as altered
in its entirety.


Dated: September 13, 1994.






</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Patricia L. Toppings,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Alternate OSD Federal Register Liaison Officer, Department of Defense.
 

S322.10 DMDC


System name: 


Defense Manpower Data Center Data Base 

(February 22, 1993, 58 FR 10872).


Changes:


* * * * *


Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categories of users and the purposes of such uses:



Add a sixth paragraph under the purposes for the Department of Health and Human Services as follows: `6. To the Center
for Disease Control, DHHS, for the purpose of conducting studies concerned with the health and well being of the active
duty and veteran population.'



* * * * *


S322.10 DMDC


System name: 


Defense Manpower Data Center Data Base (February 22, 1993, 58 FR 10872).


System location:


Primary location_W.R. Church Computer Center, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 939435000.
Back-up files maintained in a bank vault in Hermann Hall, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 939435000.
Decentralized segments_Portions of this file may be maintained by the military and non-appropriated fund personnel
and finance centers of the military services, selected civilian contractors with research contracts in manpower
area, and other Federal agencies.



Categories of individuals covered by the system:


All uniformed services officers and enlisted personnel who served on active duty from July 1, 1968, and after or who
have been a member of a reserve component since July 1975; retired military personnel; participants in Project 100,000
and Project Transition, and the evaluation control groups for these programs. All individuals examined to determine
eligibility for military service at an Armed Forces Entrance and Examining Station from July 1, 1970, and later.
DOD civilian employees since January 1, 1972. All veterans who have used the GI Bill education and training employment
services office since January 1, 1971. All veterans who have used GI Bill education and training entitlements, who
visited a state employment service office since January 1, 1971, or who participated in a Department of Labor special
program since July 1, 1971. All individuals who ever participated in an educational program sponsored by the U.S.
Armed Forces Institute and all individuals who ever participated in the Armed Forces Vocational Aptitude Testing
Programs at the high school level since September 1969.
Individuals who responded to various paid advertising campaigns seeking enlistment information since July 1, 1973;
participants in the Department of Health and Human Services National Longitudinal Survey. Individuals responding
to recruiting advertisements since January 1987; survivors of retired military personnel who are eligible for or
currently receiving disability payments or disability income compensation from the Department of Veteran Affairs;
surviving spouses of active or retired deceased military personnel; 100% disabled veterans and their survivors;
individuals identified in Service child and spouse abuse registries as sponsors, offenders or victims.
Individuals receiving disability compensation from the Department of Veteran Affairs or who are covered by a Department
of Veteran Affairs' insurance or benefit program; dependents of active duty military retirees, selective service
registrants.
Individuals receiving a security background investigation as identified in the Defense Central Index of Investigation.
Former military and civilian personnel who are employed by DOD contractors and are subject to the provisions of 10
U.S.C. 2397. 
All U.S. Postal Service employees.
All Federal Civil Service employees.
All non-appropriated funded individuals who are employed by the Department of Defense.



Categories of records in the system:


Computerized personnel/employment/pay records consisting of name, Service Number, Selective Service Number,
Social Security Number, compensation data, demographic information such as home town, age, sex, race, and educational
level; civilian occupational information; civilian and military acquisition work force warrant location, training
and job specialty information; military personnel information such as rank, length of service, military occupation,
aptitude scores, post-service education, training, and employment information for veterans; participation in
various inservice education and training programs; military hospitalization records; home and work addresses;
and identities of individuals involved in incidents of child and spouse abuse, and information about the nature of
the abuse and services provided.
CHAMPUS claim records containing enrollee, patient and health care facility, provided data such as cause of treatment,
amount of payment, name and Social Security or tax I.D. of providers or potential providers of care. 
Selective Service System registration data.
Department of Veteran Affairs disability payment records.
Credit or financial data as required for security background investigations. 
Criminal history information on individuals who subsequently enter the military.
U.S. Postal Service employment/personnel records containing Social Security Number, name, salary, home and work
address. U.S. Postal Service records will be maintained on a temporary basis for approved computer matching between
the U.S. Postal Service and DOD.
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Central Personnel Data File (CPDF), an extract from OPM/GOVT1, General
Personnel Records, containing employment/personnel data on all Federal employees consisting of name, Social Security
Number, date of birth, sex, work schedule (full-time, part-time, intermittent), annual salary rate (but not actual
earnings), occupational series, position occupied, agency identifier, geographic location of duty station, metropolitan
statistical area, and personnel office identifier. Extract from OPM/CENTRAL1, Civil Service Retirement
and Insurance Records, containing Civil Service Claim number, date of birth, name, provision of law retired under,
gross annuity, length of service, annuity commencing date, former employing agency and home address. These records
provided by OPM for approved computer matching.
Non-appropriated fund employment/personnel records consist of Social Security Number, name, and work address.



Authority for the maintenance of the system:


10 U.S.C. 136, Assistant Secretaries of Defense; Appointment Powers and Duties; 10 U.S.C. 2358; Research Projects;
5 U.S.C. App. 3 (Pub. L. 95452, as amended (Inspector General Act of 1978)); and E.O. 9397. 



Purpose(s):


The purpose of the system of records is to provide a single central facility within the Department of Defense to assess
manpower trends, support personnel functions, to perform longitudinal statistical analyses, identify current
and former DOD civilian and military personnel for purposes of detecting fraud and abuse of pay and benefit programs,
to register current and former DoD civilian and military personnel and their authorized dependents for purposes
of obtaining medical examination, treatment or other benefits to which they are qualified, and to collect debts owed
to the United States Government and state and local governments.
All records in this record system are subject to use in authorized computer matching programs within the Department
of Defense and with other Federal agencies or non-Federal agencies as regulated by the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended,
(5 U.S.C. 552a).



Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categories of users and the purposes of such uses:


In addition to those disclosures generally permitted under 5 U.S.C. 552a(b) of the Privacy Act, these records or information
contained therein may specifically be disclosed outside the DoD as a routine use pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(3) as
follows:
To the Department of Veteran Affairs (DVA) to provide military personnel and pay data for present and former military
personnel for the purpose of evaluating use of veterans benefits, validating benefit eligibility and maintaining
the health and well being of veterans.
To the Department of Veteran Affairs (DVA) to provide identifying military personnel data to the DVA and its contractor,
the Prudential Insurance Company, for the purpose of notifying members of the Individual Ready Reserve (IRR) of their
right to apply for Veteran's Group Life Insurance coverage.
To the Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) to register eligible veterans and their dependents for DVA programs.
To the Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) to conduct computer matching programs regulated by the Privacy Act of
1974, as amended (5 U.S.C. 552a), for the purpose of:
1. Providing full identification of active duty military personnel, including full-time National Guard/Reserve
support personnel, for use in the administration of DVA's Compensation and Pension benefit program (38 U.S.C. 3104(c),
30063008). The information is used to determine continued eligibility for DVA disability compensation to
recipients who have returned to active duty so that benefits can be adjusted or terminated as required and steps taken
by DVA to collect any resulting over payment.
2. Providing military personnel and financial data to the Veterans Benefits Administration, DVA for the purpose
of determining initial eligibility and any changes in eligibility status to insure proper payment of benefits for
GI Bill education and training benefits by the DVA under the Montgomery GI Bill (Title 10 U.S.C., Chapter 106 
Selected Reserve and Title 38 U.S.C., Chapter 30  Active Duty). The administrative responsibilities designated
to both agencies by the law require that data be exchanged in administering the programs.
3. Providing identification of reserve duty, including full-time support National Guard/Reserve military personnel,
to the DVA, for the purpose of deducting reserve time served from any DVA disability compensation paid or waiver of
VA benefit. The law (10 U.S.C. 684) prohibits receipt of reserve pay and DVA compensation for the same time period,
however, it does permit waiver of DVA compensation to draw reserve pay.
4. Providing identification of former active duty military personnel who received separation payments to the DVA
for the purpose of deducting such repayment from any DVA disability compensation paid. The law (38 U.S.C. 3104(c))
requires recoupment of severance payments before DVA disability compensation can be paid.
5. Providing identification of former military personnel and survivor's financial benefit data to DVA for the purpose
of identifying military retired pay and survivor benefit payments for use in the administration of the DVA's Compensation
and Pension program (38 U.S.C. 3104(c), 30063008). The information is to be used to process all DVA award actions
more efficiently, reduce subsequent overpayment collection actions, and minimize erroneous payments.
To the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) consisting of personnel/employment/financial data for the purpose
of carrying out OPM's management functions. Records disclosed concern pay, benefits, retirement deductions and
any other information necessary for those management functions required by law (Pub. L. 83598, 84356,
86724, 94455 and 5 U.S.C. 1302, 2951, 3301, 3372, 4118, 8347).
To the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to conduct computer matching programs regulated by the Privacy Act of
1974, as amended (5 U.S.C. 552a) for the purpose of:
1. Exchanging personnel and financial information on certain military retirees, who are also civilian employees
of the Federal government, for the purpose of identifying those individuals subject to a limitation on the amount
of military retired pay they can receive under the Dual Compensation Act (5 U.S.C. 5532), and to permit adjustments
of military retired pay by the Defense Finance and Accounting Service and to take steps to recoup excess of that permitted
under the dual compensation and pay cap restrictions.
2. Exchanging personnel and financial data on civil service annuitants (including disability annuitants under
age 60) who are reemployed by DOD to insure that annuities of DOD reemployed annuitants are terminated where applicable,
and salaries are correctly offset where applicable as required by law (5 U.S.C. 8331, 8344, 8401 and 8468).
3. Exchanging personnel and financial data to identify individuals who are improperly receiving military retired
pay and credit for military service in their civil service annuities, or annuities based on the `guaranteed minimum'
disability formula. The match will identify and/or prevent erroneous payments under the Civil Service Retirement
Act (CSRA) 5 U.S.C. 8331 and the Federal Employees' Retirement System Act (FERSA) 5 U.S.C. 8411. DOD's legal authority
for monitoring retired pay is 10 U.S.C. 1401.
4. Exchanging civil service and Reserve military personnel data to identify those individuals of the Reserve forces
who are employed by the Federal government in a civilian position. The purpose of the match is to identify those particular
individuals occupying critical positions as civilians and cannot be released for extended active duty in the event
of mobilization. Employing Federal agencies are informed of the reserve status of those affected personnel so that
a choice of terminating the position or the reserve assignment can be made by the individual concerned. The authority
for conducting the computer match is contained in E.O. 11190, Providing for the Screening of the Ready Reserve of the
Armed Services.
To the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for the purpose of obtaining home addresses to contact Reserve component members
for mobilization purposes and for tax administration. For the purpose of conducting aggregate statistical analyses
on the impact of DOD personnel of actual changes in the tax laws and to conduct aggregate statistical analyses to lifestream
earnings of current and former military personnel to be used in studying the comparability of civilian and military
pay benefits. To aid in administration of Federal Income Tax laws and regulations, to identify non-compliance and
delinquent filers.
To the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS):
1. To the Office of the Inspector General, DHHS, for the purpose of identification and investigation of DOD employees
and military members who may be improperly receiving funds under the Aid to Families of Dependent Children Program.

2. To the Office of Child Support Enforcement, DHHS, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 653 and Pub. L. 94505, to assist state
child support offices in locating absent parents in order to establish and/or enforce child support obligations.
3. To the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), DHHS for the purpose of monitoring HCFA reimbursement to civilian
hospitals for Medicare patient treatment. The data will ensure no Department of Defense physicians, interns or residents
are counted for HCFA reimbursement to hospitals. 
4. To the Social Security Administration (SSA), Office of Research and Statistics, DHHS for the purpose of conducting
statistical analyses of impact of military service and use of GI Bill benefits on long term earnings.
5. To the Bureau of Supplemental Security Income, SSA, DHHS to conduct computer matching programs regulated by the
Privacy Act of 1974, as amended (5 U.S.C. 552a), for the purpose of verifying information provided to the SSA by applicants
and recipients who are retired military members or their survivors for Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits.
By law (42 U.S.C. 1383) the SSA is required to verify eligibility factors and other relevant information provided
by the SSI applicant from independent or collateral sources and obtain additional information as necessary before
making SSI determinations of eligibility, payment amounts or adjustments thereto. 
6. To HHS for the purpose of conducting studies concerned with the health and well being of the active duty and veteran
population.
To the Selective Service System (SSS) for the purpose of facilitating compliance of members and former members of
the Armed Forces, both active and reserve, with the provisions of the Selective Service registration regulations
(50 U.S.C. App. 451 and E.O. 11623).
To DOD Civilian Contractors for the purpose of performing research on manpower problems for statistical analyses.
To the Department of Labor (DOL) to reconcile the accuracy of unemployment compensation payments made to former DOD
civilian employees and military members by the states. To the Department of Labor to survey military separations
to determine the effectiveness of programs assisting veterans to obtain employment.
To the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) of the Department of Transportation (DOT) to conduct computer matching programs
regulated by the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended (5 U.S.C. 552a), for the purpose of exchanging personnel and financial
information on certain retired USCG military members, who are also civilian employees of the Federal government,
for the purpose of identifying those individuals subject to a limitation on the amount of military pay they can receive
under the Dual Compensation Act (5 U.S.C. 5532), and to permit adjustments of military retired pay by the U.S. Coast
Guard and to take steps to recoup excess of that permitted under the dual compensation and pay cap restrictions.
To the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to provide data contained in this record system that includes
the name, Social Security Number, salary and retirement pay for the purpose of verifying continuing eligibility
in HUD's assisted housing programs maintained by the Public Housing Authorities (PHAs) and subsidized multi-family
project owners or management agents. Data furnished will be reviewed by HUD or the PHAs with the technical assistance
from the HUD Office of the Inspector General (OIG) to determine whether the income reported by tenants to the PHA or
subsidized multi-family project owner or management agent is correct and complies with HUD and PHA requirements.
To Federal and Quasi-Federal agencies, territorial, state, and local governments to support personnel functions
requiring data on prior military service credit for their employees or for job applications. To determine continued
eligibility and help eliminate fraud and abuse in benefit programs and to collect debts and over payments owed to these
programs. To assist in the return of unclaimed property or assets escheated to states of civilian employees and military
member and to provide members and former members with information and assistance regarding various benefit entitlements,
such as state bonuses for veterans, etc. Information released includes name, Social Security Number, and military
or civilian address of individuals. To detect fraud, waste and abuse pursuant to the authority contained in the Inspector
General Act of 1978, as amended (Pub. L. 95452) for the purpose of determining eligibility for, and/or continued
compliance with, any Federal benefit program requirements.

1To private consumer reporting agencies to comply with the requirements to update security clearance investigations
of DOD personnel. 
To consumer reporting agencies to obtain current addresses of separated military personnel to notify them of potential
benefits eligibility.
To Defense contractors to monitor the employment of former DOD employees and members subject to the provisions of
10 U.S.C. 2397.
To financial depository institutions to assist in locating individuals with dormant accounts in danger of reverting
to state ownership by escheatment for accounts of DOD civilian employees and military members.
To any Federal, state or local agency to conduct authorized computer matching programs regulated by the Privacy Act
of 1974, as amended, (5 U.S.C. 552a) for the purposes of identifying and locating delinquent debtors for collection
of a claim owed the Department of Defense or the Unites States Government under the Debt Collection Act of 1982 (Pub.
L. 97365).
To state and local law enforcement investigative agencies to obtain criminal history information for the purpose
of evaluating military service performance and security clearance procedures (10 U.S.C. 2358).
To the United States Postal Service to conduct computer matching programs regulated by the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended (5 U.S.C. 552a), for the purposes of:
1. Exchanging civil service and Reserve military personnel data to identify those individuals of the Reserve forces
who are employed by the Federal government in a civilian position. The purpose of the match is to identify those particular
individuals occupying critical positions as civilians and who cannot be released for extended active duty in the
event of mobilization. The Postal Service is informed of the reserve status of those affected personnel so that a choice
of terminating the position on the reserve assignment can be made by the individual concerned. The authority for conducting
the computer match is contained in E.O. 11190, Providing for the Screening of the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces.
2. Exchanging personnel and financial information on certain military retirees who are also civilian employees
of the Federal government, for the purpose of identifying those individuals subject to a limitation on the amount
of retired military pay they can receive under the Dual Compensation Act (5 U.S.C. 5532), and permit adjustments to
military retired pay to be made by the Defense Finance and Accounting Service and to take steps to recoup excess of that
permitted under the dual compensation and pay cap restrictions.
The `Blanket Routine Uses' set forth at the beginning of the DLA compilation of record system notices also apply to
this record system.



Policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, and disposing of records in the system:

Storage:


Electronic storage media.



Retrievability:


Retrieved by name, Social Security Number, occupation, or any other data element contained in system. 



Safeguards:


W.R. Church Computer Center - Tapes are stored in a locked cage in a controlled access area; tapes can be physically
accessed only by computer center personnel and can be mounted for processing only if the appropriate security code
is provided. 
Back-up location - Tapes are stored in a bank-type vault; buildings are locked after hours and only properly cleared
and authorized personnel have access.



Retention and disposal:


Files constitute a historical data base and are permanent.
U.S. Postal Service records are temporary and are destroyed after the computer matching program results are verified.



System manager(s) and address:


Deputy Director, Defense Manpower Data Center, 99 Pacific Street, Suite 155A, Monterey, CA 939402453.



Notification procedure:


Individuals seeking to determine whether this system of records contains information about themselves should address
written inquiries to the Deputy Director, Defense Manpower Data Center, 99 Pacific Street, Suite 155A, Monterey,
CA 939402453.
Written requests should contain the full name, Social Security Number, date of birth, and current address and telephone
number of the individual.
For personal visits, the individual should be able to provide some acceptable identification such as driver's license
or military or other identification card. 



Record access procedures:


Individuals seeking access to records about themselves contained in this system of records should address inquiries
to the Deputy Director, Defense Manpower Data Center, 99 Pacific Street, Suite 155A, Monterey, CA 939402453.
Written requests should contain the full name, Social Security Number, date of birth, and current address and telephone
number of the individual.
For personal visits, the individual should be able to provide some acceptable identification such as driver's license
or military or other identification card. 



Contesting record procedures:


DLA rules for contesting contents and appealing initial agency determinations are contained in DLA Regulation 5400.21,
Personal Privacy and Rights of Individuals Regarding Their Personal Records; 32 CFR part 323; or may be obtained from
the system manager.



Record source categories:


The military services, the Department of Veteran Affairs, the Department of Education, Department of Health and
Human Services, from individuals via survey questionnaires, the Department of Labor, the Office of Personnel Management,
Federal and Quasi-Federal agencies, Selective Service System, and the U.S. Postal Service. 



Exemptions claimed for the system:


None. 



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423042 Filed 91694;8:45am]. 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 500004F
</BILLING>

