 

(b) ACR acreage devoted to perennial cover, on which cost-share assistance for the establishment of the perennial
cover has been provided, shall not be credited towards the producer's RCC requirement under an agreement. 

(c) 50 percent of the RCC acreage designated as ACR may be hayed and grazed any time during the entire year. The remaining
acreage designated as ACR may be hayed and grazed, except during the 5-month period during which haying and grazing
of ACR is not allowed. The remaining acreage designated as ACR that include a small grain (other than barley, oats,
and wheat), may be hayed and grazed after the small grain is harvested. Haying includes silage, forage, haylage, and
green chop. 

(d) Barley, oats, or wheat, as part of an RCC, on ACR may not be harvested in kernel form. 

(e) Other small grains that are part of an RCC and other RCC's on ACR acreage may be harvested in kernel form. 



1414.28

Resource-conserving crops on payment acres. 



(a) Program payments with respect to acreage enrolled in the program shall not be paid to a producer if such producer
hays or grazes such acreage (excluding acreage designated as ACR) during the 5-month period in which haying and grazing
of conserving use acres is not allowed under the provisions of 1413.66 of this chapter, unless the crop planted
on such acreage includes a small grain except barley, oats, and wheat, and the producer harvests the small grain crop
in kernel form. 

(b) Acreage planted to an RCC, which is used to determine the producer's deficiency payment, may be harvested in kernel
form. 

(c) CAB acreage devoted to RCC's as part of a RCC rotation shall be credited as planted and considered planted acreage
to the program crop in the priority order as designated by the producer. 

(d) The COC shall not reduce crop program payment yields as a result of a producer planting an RCC on CAB acreage. 



1413.29

Resource-conserving crops on other acreage. 



Acreage that is devoted to RCC's and not designated in accordance with 1414.27 and 1414.28 may be designated
as conserving use acres if all eligibility requirements are met in accordance with 1413.10 of this title, and
may be hayed and grazed throughout the crop year but shall not be harvested for grain or seed. 



1414.30

Traditionally underplanted acreage and reduction of payment acres. 



(a) RCC's planted on program payment acreage shall be eligible for program payments if the planting of such RCC is part
of an RCC rotation as specified in the plan. 

(b)(1)(i) Traditionally underplanted acreage (TUA) means the difference in a particular year between the producer's
CAB and: 

(A) The total of the acreage planted to the program crop,

(B) Approved as prevented planted, and, 

(C) For participating crops, the part of the CAB subject to the required ACR. If the producer is using the provisions
set forth in 1413.41 or 1413.42, traditionally underplanted acreage means 8 or 15 percent, as applicable,
of the producer's permitted acreage for such year. The acreage shall never be less than zero, and is used only to the
extent that such number exceeds the number of acres resulting from the reduction in payment acres because of the provisions
in 1413.43. RCC's for program payments and RCC's for ACR shall not be considered when calculating traditionally
underplanted acreage for farms previously enrolled in the IFM program. RCC's for planted and considered planted
credit are considered as traditionally underplanted acreage. 

(ii) Traditionally underplanted acreage shall be determined by using the average of the calculation in paragraph
(b) of this section for the 3 years prior to enrollment in IFM. 

(2) If a rotation CAB has been established for a crop, and the rotation cycle includes zero acreage in the rotation,
the previous three years with CAB's greater than zero shall be used. 

(c) Producers enrolled in an RCC rotation shall not be eligible to receive payment for the amount that the average number
of traditionally underplanted acreage of a crop exceeds the normal flex acreage for such crop, in accordance with
1413.43 of this chapter. 



Subpart E_Payment Provisions 



1414.36

Payments. 



Farm program payments of participants in IFM shall not be reduced as a result of planting a RCC as part of a RCC rotation
on payment acres. Payments shall be made in accordance with part 1413 of this title. 



1414.37

Offsets and assignments. 



The offset and assignment regulations set forth in parts 1403 and 1404 of this chapter are applicable to this part.


23. Part 1415 is added to read as follows: 



PART 1415_OPTIONS PILOT PROGRAM 





Subpart A_General Provisions 



Sec. 



1415.1General description of the program. 

1415.2Administration. 

1415.3Appeals. 

1415.4Performance based upon advice or action of county or State Committee. 

1415.5Compliance with part 12 of this title, highly erodible land and wetland provisions. 

1415.6Paperwork Reduction Act assigned numbers. 



Subpart B_Definitions Used in This Part 



1415.9Definitions. 



Subpart C_Agreement and Enrollment Provisions 


