 

The R

T

's of less than 0.040 represent periods of zero or abnormally low production. These low-operating levels occurred
more frequently than normal during the period in which the data in Table 2 were generated because of the depressed operating
level of the industry at that time. Operation at R

T

's below 0.040 results in widely varying VOC emissions in terms of kg VOC per liter of applied coating solids. Under
these low-operating conditions, emissions expressed in units of the standard range from 0.17 kg of VOC per liter of
applied coating solids to over 19 kg of VOC per liter of applied coating solids. Since operation with R

T

's below 0.040 result in widely varying emissions even when EDP prime coat systems are operated and maintained properly,
it is infeasible to establish a standard for these low-operating levels that distinguishes between proper and improper
operation regarding emissions of VOC. In addition, since the number of vehicles produced during 4-week periods with
R

T

's less than 0.040 is small, the total VOC emissions from the EDP tank during such periods of operation are only a fraction
of the emissions emitted when the EDP tank is operating properly at full production. Consequently, the revised standard
includes no emission limit for operation at R

T

's of 0.040 or less. 
The emission limits discussed above, therefore, were selected for the final revised standard. If there is little
or no production, almost no solids would be added to the EDP system, the R

T

 would always be below 0.040, and the owner would not have to comply with an emission limit. Prime coat systems other
than EDP would be required to comply with a single numerical emission limit of 0.17 kg of VOC per liter of applied coating
solids. 
One commenter suggested that the revised prime coat emission limit be based on the performance of the single EDP system
with the best observed performance. As mentioned earlier, however, the statistical analysis performed on 37 EDP
prime coating systems showed that there was no statistically significant difference in the observed performance
of any of the EDP systems. Consequently, all of the data on all of the EDP systems were used to develop the final revised
emission limits. 
One commenter suggested that the units of the prime coat standard be changed from kilograms of VOC per liter of applied
coating solids to kilograms of VOC per liter of coating minus water. The commenter indicated that this change would
make the prime coat standard units consistent with most State emission limits for existing facilities. Such a change
would have the effect of deleting the requirement that a transfer efficiency be used in determining compliance with
the emission limit. For an EDP system, the system upon which the standard is based, the transfer efficiency that is
allowed to be used for determining compliance is 100 percent. Therefore, for an EDP system, such a change would have
little effect on the allowable or actual emissions. However, if prime coat application systems other than EDP which
have transfer efficiencies of less than 100 percent are used, then the suggested changes in the units of the standard
could result in allowing increased actual VOC emissions while still apparently meeting the emission limit. Since
there is a possibility that systems other than EDP will be used in the future and a format of kg of VOC per liter of applied
coating solids is most consistent with the use of the solids turnover ratio, the units of the standard were not changed.

The Administrator certifies that a regulatory flexibility analysis under 5 U.S.C. 605(b), is not required for this
rulemaking because the rulemaking would not have a significant impact on a substantial number of small entities.
The rulemaking would not impose any new requirements; therefore, no additional costs would be imposed. 
Under Executive Order 12866 (58 FR 51735 (October 4, 1993)), the Agency must determine whether the regulatory action
is ``significant'' and therefore subject to OMB review and the requirements of the Executive Order. The Order defines
``significant regulatory action'' as one that is likely to result in a rule that may: 
1. Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector
of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local, or tribal
governments or communities; 
2. Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise 
interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; 
3. Materially alter the budgetary impact of 
entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations or recipients thereof; or 
4. Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of 
legal mandates, the president's priorities, or the principles set forth in the Executive Order. 
Pursuant to the terms of Executive Order 12866, it has been determined that this rule is a ``significant regulatory
action'' within the meaning of the Executive Order. For this reason, this action was submitted to OMB for review. Changes
made in response to OMB suggestions or recommendations will be documented in the public record. 


