 

e.FIPS PUB 83, Guideline of User Authentication Techniques for Computer Network Access Control.

f.FIPS PUB 112, Password Usage.

g.FIPS PUB 113, Computer Data Authentication.

h.FIPS PUB 171, Key Management Using ANSI X9.17.

i.FIPS PUB 180, Secure Hash Standard.

j.Special Publication 500157, Smart Card Technology: New Methods for Computer Access Control.

k.Special Publication 8002, Public Key Cryptography.

Other NIST publications may be applicable to the implementation and use of this standard. A list (NIST Publications
List 91) of currently available computer security publications, including ordering information, can be obtained
from NIST.

7. Applicability. 

This standard is applicable to all Federal agencies that use cryptographic-based security systems to protect unclassified
information within computer and telecommunication systems (including voice systems) that are not subject to Section
2315 of Title 10, U.S. Code, or Section 3502(2) of Title 44, U.S. Code. This standard shall be used in designing, acquiring
and implementing cryptographic-based security systems within computer and telecommunication systems (including
voice systems), operated by a Federal agency or by a contractor of a Federal agency or other organization that processes
information (using a computer or telecommunications system) on behalf of the Federal Government to accomplish a
Federal function. Federal agencies which use cryptographic-based security systems for protecting classified
information may use those systems for protecting unclassified information in lieu of systems that comply with this
standard. Non-Federal government organizations are encouraged to adopt and use this standard when it provides the
desired security for protecting valuable or sensitive information.

8. 

Applications. 

Cryptographic-based security systems may be utilized in various computer and telecommunication (including voice)
applications (e.g., data storage, access control and personal identification, radio, facsimile, video) and in
various environments (e.g., centralized computer facilities, office environments, hostile environments). The
cryptographic services (e.g., encryption, authentication, digital signature, key management) provided by a cryptographic
module will be based on many factors which are specific to the application and environment. The security level of a
cryptographic module shall be chosen to provide a level of security appropriate for the security requirements of
the application and environment in which the module is to be utilized and the security services which the module is
to provide. The security requirements for a particular security level include both the security requirements specific
to that level and the security requirements that apply to all modules regardless of the level. System characteristics
not related to security (e.g., telecommunications interoperability) are beyond the scope of this standard.

9. 

Specifications. 

Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 1401, 

Security Requirements for Cryptographic Module 

(affixed).

10. 

Implementations. 

This standard covers implementations of cryptographic modules including, but not limited to, hardware components
or modules, software programs or modules, computer firmware, or any combination thereof. Cryptographic modules
that are validated by NIST, or that comply with the requirements of the FIPS 1401 implementation and FIPS 140
acquisition schedules in Section 14 of the announcement of this standard, will be considered as complying with this
standard. Information about the FIPS 1401 validation program can be obtained from the National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Computer Systems Laboratory, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

11. 

FIPS Approved Security Methods. 

Cryptographic modules that comply with this standard shall employ cryptographic algorithms, cryptographic key
generation algorithms and key distribution techniques, and authentication techniques that have been FIPS approved
for protecting Federal Government unclassified information. FIPS approved cryptographic algorithms, cryptographic
key generation algorithms and key distribution techniques, and authentication techniques include those that are
either:

a. Specified in a Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS), or

b. Adopted in a FIPS and specified either in an appendix to the FIPS or in a document referenced by the FIPS.

If a cryptographic module is required to incorporate a trusted operating system, then the module shall employ trusted
operating systems that have been evaluated by a NIST accredited evaluation authority and against a FIPS approved
evaluation criteria.

Information about approved cryptographic methods and approved operating system evaluation authorities and criteria
can be obtained from NIST.

12. 

Interpretation. 

Resolution of questions regarding this standard will be provided by NIST. Questions concerning the content and specifications
should be addressed to: Director, Computer Systems Laboratory, ATTN: FIPS 1401 Interpretation, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

13. 

Export Control. 

Certain cryptographic devices and technical data regarding them are deemed to be defense articles (i.e., inherently
military in character) and are subject to Federal government export controls as specified in Title 22, Code of Federal
Regulations, parts 120128. Some exports of cryptographic modules conforming to this standard and technical
data regarding them must comply with these Federal regulations and be licensed by the U.S. Department of State. Other
exports of cryptographic modules conforming to this standard and technical data regarding them fall under the licensing
authority of the Bureau of Export Administration of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The Department of Commerce is
responsible for licensing cryptographic devices used for authentication, access control, proprietary software,
automatic teller machines (ATMs), and certain devices used in other equipment and software. For advice concerning
which agency has licensing authority for a particular cryptographic device, please contact the respective agencies.




<IMPORT>




E:GRAPHICSEN11JA94.000



</IMPORT>



14. 

Implementation Schedule. 

Table 1 summarizes the implementation schedule for FIPS 1401. The effective date of this standard is June 30,
1994.

From approval of FIPS 1401 to its effective date, agencies may purchase equipment with FIPS 1401 cryptographic
modules that have been affirmed in writing from the manufacturer as complying with this standard. From June 30, 1994
until six months after the establishment of the FIPS 1401 validation program by NIST, agencies that have determined
a need for equipment with cryptographic modules shall purchase equipment with FIPS 1401 cryptographic modules
that have been affirmed in writing by the manufacturer as complying with this standard. A copy of the written affirmation
shall have been sent to the Director, Computer Systems Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD 20899.
 

