 

E. For purposes of this policy, ``tuition charges'' include, 
but are not limited to, charges for any equipment (including 
books and supplies) issued by an institution to a student if the 
institution specifies in the enrollment agreement a separate 
charge for equipment that the student actually obtains or if the 
institution refers the student to a vendor operated by the 
institution or an entity affiliated or related to the 
institution.

(F) The institution may exclude from the calculation of a 
refund owed under this paragraph the documented cost to the 
institution of unreturnable equipment issued to the student in 
accordance with paragraph (VIII)E of this appendix or of 
returnable equipment issued to the student in accordance with 
paragraph (VIII)E of this appendix if the student does not return 
the equipment in good condition, allowing for reasonable wear and 
tear, within 20 days following the date of the student's 
withdrawal. For example, equipment is not considered to be 
returned in good condition and, therefore, is unreturnable, if 
the equipment cannot be reused because of clearly recognized 
health and sanitary reasons. The institution must clearly and 
conspicuously disclose in the enrollment agreement any 
restrictions on the return of equipment, including equipment that 
is unreturnable. The institution must notify the student in 
writing prior to enrollment that return of the specific equipment 
involved will be required within 20 days of the student's 
withdrawal.

(IX) The institution must assess no penalty charges where 
the institution, as opposed to the student, is in error. 

Penalty 
charges, such as those involving late registration fees, 
change-of-schedule fees, and late payment fees, must not be 
assessed if it is determined that the student is not responsible 
for the action causing the charges to be levied.

(X) 

The institution must advise students that any 
notifications of withdrawal or cancellation and requests for 
refund must be in writing and addressed to the designated 
institution officer. 

A student's written notification of 
withdrawal or cancellation and request for a refund provides an 
accurate record of transactions and also ensures that the request 
will be processed on a timely basis. Acceptance of oral requests 
is an undesirable practice.

(XI) 

The institution must pay or credit refunds due in 
accordance with 668.22(i)(2). 

(XII) The institution must publicize, as a part of its 
dissemination of information on charges and refunds, that an 
appeals process exists for students or parents who believe that 
individual circumstances warrant exceptions from published 
policy. The informational materials must include the name, 
title, and address of the official responsible for handling 
appeals. 

Although charges and refund policies should reflect 
extensive consideration of student and institutional needs, it 
will not be possible to encompass in these structures the variety 
of personal circumstances that may exist or develop. 
Institutions are required to provide a system of due process to 
their students, and charges and refund policies are legitimately 
a part of that process. Students and parents should be informed 
regularly of procedures for requesting information concerning 
exceptions to published policies.

44. Appendix D to part 668 is amended by revising the 
introductory paragraphs to read as follows:



Appendix D to Part 668_Default Reduction Measures



This appendix describes measures that an institution with a 
high default rate under the Federal Stafford Loan and Federal SLS 
programs should find helpful in reducing defaults. An 
institution with a fiscal year default rate that exceeds the 
threshold rate for a limitation, suspension, or termination 
action under 668.17 may avoid that sanction by demonstrating 
that the institution has implemented the measures included in 
this appendix. Other institutions should strongly consider 
taking these steps as well.

To reduce defaults, the Secretary recommends that the 
institution take the following measures:



* * * * *



PART 682_FEDERAL FAMILY EDUCATION LOAN (FFEL) PROGRAMS



45. The authority citation for part 682 continues to read 
as follows:






Authority:

 20 U.S.C 1071 to 10872, unless otherwise noted.




46. In 682.200 paragraph (b) is amended by revising 
paragraph (1) and adding a new paragraph (5) in the definition of 
``Lender'' and adding a new definition of ``Third-party servicer'' in 
alphabetical order, and by revising the authority citation to 
read as follows:



682.200 

Definitions.



* * * * *


(b) ***



Lender. 

(1) The term ``eligible lender'' is defined in 
section 435(d) of the Act, and in paragraphs (2)(5) of this 
definition.



* * * * *



