 

Only a relatively small percentage of the comments received, however, focused on the 9 specific issues targeted for
comment, though an overwhelming majority of the comments remarked that recent regulatory initiatives taken by the
FDIC, OTS, and state bank supervisory agencies were more than adequate to prospectively curb potential management
abuses and windfalls and appraisal deficiencies. 

The comments received by the FDIC on the Notice were helpful and informative. In all, the FDIC believes that the Notice
was a useful means for the FDIC to obtain views from industry members and others on the issues surrounding mutual-to-stock
conversions. The FDIC will continue to monitor the conversion process and will continue to be mindful of potential
abuses; however, in light of comments received on the Notice, the Board has decided not to further pursue the suggestions
in the Notice or any other avenues to address the issues discussed in the Notice. The Board believes that: 
(1) Any fundamental re-design of the conversion process should involve the appropriate legislative bodies, Congress
or State legislatures; and 
(2) The industry and associated interests should offer their own solutions to any flaws in the current conversion
process. 



IV. Summary of Comments and Discussion of Issues 


The FDIC requested public comment on each of the specific requirements in the Proposed Rule and on other issues individually
identified in the Proposed Rule. In the Proposed Policy Statement and the Interim Rule the FDIC requested comment
on more general issues, including: What abuses are prevalent in mutual-to-stock conversions and why the FDIC should
take action against such abuses; whether federal oversight in conversions of State Savings Banks is necessary; whether
the FDIC should issue a regulation closely following the OTS conversion regulations or the FDIC should take a less
formal approach; whether the FDIC should seek Congressional action in this area; and the mechanics and substantive
provisions of the Interim Rule. 
The FDIC received 65 comments on the Proposed Rule: 29 from banks, savings banks, cooperative banks and savings associations;
11 from consultants, law firms and conversion agents; 9 from banking and thrift industry trade groups; 7 from state
banking and thrift regulators; 6 from consumer groups and individuals; 2 from United States Senators; and 1 from a
delegation of 10 United States Congressmen. In addition, the FDIC had received 85 written comments on the Proposed
Policy Statement and Interim Final Rule: 60 from banks, savings banks, cooperative bank and saving associations;
7 from bank and thrift industry trade groups; 6 from state banking and thrift regulators; 5 from individuals; 5 from
law firms; 1 from a bank holding company; and 1 from a regulatory ``shadow'' group. 
The following is a combined summary of the comments received on the Proposed Rule, Interim Final Rule and Proposed
Policy Statement

1

 and a discussion of the related issues. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
 This discussion does not include comments received on the Notice (and the theories discussed therein). 

</FOOTNOTE>


1. The FDIC's Oversight Role 


In general, the comments acknowledged that there had been notable examples of insider abuse in mutual-to-stock conversions
of State Savings Banks in the recent past and suggested how future potential abuses could be avoided. Many of those
who commented recommended that the FDIC continue to play an oversight role in the mutual-to-stock conversions of
State Savings Banks, noting that federal oversight will continue to safeguard the integrity of the process. One noted
that ``present abuses in several recent and proposed conversions have demonstrated the need for the FDIC to maintain
oversight of the conversion process, to ensure that issues of both safety and soundness and of fiduciary care are identified
and adequately addressed''. A trade group commented that ``with recent publicity over some apparent abuses in the
[conversion] process and resulting Congressional concerns, *** it is most appropriate and important
for the FDIC to assert regulatory jurisdiction over conversions by state nonmember banks''. One state regulator
noted that the Interim Final Rule was an ``excellent set of rules'' with a ``very conservative, realistic approach
to a situation which could have gotten out of hand if left to go unchecked''. One savings bank said simply that ``past
abuses [in mutual-to-stock conversions] support the need for FDIC oversight''. 




