 

(y)

 Project costs

 means all allowable costs, as set forth in the applicable Federal cost principles, incurred by a recipient and the
value of the contributions made by third parties in accomplishing the objectives of the award during the project period.


(z)

 Project period

 means the period established in the award document during which Federal sponsorship begins and ends. 

(aa)

 Property 

means, unless otherwise stated, real property, equipment, intangible property and debt instruments. 

(bb)

 Real property

 means land, including land improvements, structures and appurtenances thereto, but excludes movable machinery
and equipment. 

(cc)

 Recipient

 means an organization receiving financial assistance directly from Federal awarding agencies to carry out a project
or program. The term includes public and private institutions of higher education, public and private hospitals,
and other quasi-public and private non-profit organizations such as, but not limited to, community action agencies,
research institutes, educational associations, and health centers. The term may include commercial organizations,
foreign or international organizations (such as agencies of the United Nations) which are recipients, subrecipients,
or contractors or subcontractors of recipients or subrecipients at the discretion of the Federal awarding agency.
The term does not include government-owned contractor-operated facilities or research centers providing continued
support for mission-oriented, large-scale programs that are government-owned or controlled, or are designated
as federally-funded research and development centers. 

(dd)

 Research and development

 means all research activities, both basic and applied, and all development activities that are supported at universities,
colleges, and other non-profit institutions. ``Research'' is defined as a systematic study directed toward fuller
scientific knowledge or understanding of the subject studied. ``Development'' is the systematic use of knowledge
and understanding gained from research directed toward the production of useful materials, devices, systems, or
methods, including design and development of prototypes and processes. The term research also includes activities
involving the training of individuals in research techniques where such activities utilize the same facilities
as other research and development activities and where such activities are not included in the instruction function.


(ee)

 Small awards

 means a grant or cooperative agreement not exceeding the small purchase threshold fixed at 41 U.S.C. 403(11) (currently
$25,000).

(ff)

 Subaward

 means an award of financial assistance in the form of money, or property in lieu of money, made under an award by a recipient
to an eligible subrecipient or by a subrecipient to a lower tier subrecipient. The term includes financial assistance
when provided by any legal agreement, even if the agreement is called a contract, but does not include procurement
of goods and services nor does it include any form of assistance which is excluded from the definition of ``award''
in paragraph (e) of this section. 

(gg)

 Subrecipient

 means the legal entity to which a subaward is made and which is accountable to the recipient for the use of the funds provided.
The term may include foreign or international organizations (such as agencies of the United Nations) at the discretion
of the Federal awarding agency. 

(hh)

 Supplies

 means all personal property excluding equipment, intangible property, and debt instruments as defined in this section,
and inventions of a contractor conceived or first actually reduced to practice in the performance of work under a funding
agreement (``subject inventions''), as defined in 37 CFR part 401, ``Rights to Inventions Made by Nonprofit Organizations
and Small Business Firms Under Government Grants, Contracts, and Cooperative Agreements.'' 



