 



Comment:

 Commenters pointed out that States often find that it takes more than 3 months to determine the extent of liability
when a third party is responsible for a medical bill. The commenters suggested that these bills be dated from the point
at which liability is determined. 


Response:

 We acknowledge that there may be a delay in determining the extent of the individual's liability when a third party
may be liable for some or all of the expenses. However, we do not agree that the State should change how it determines
the age of a bill as a result. As we explained in response to an earlier comment, the age of a bill is measured from the date
the expense is incurred_that is, the date the liability arises. (We have clarified in new 435.831(d)
and 436.831(d) that an expense is incurred on the date liability for the expense arises.) The date of the determination
of the extent of the individual's liability is treated as the date the individual's liability begins. That is the date
from which the age of the individual's expenses is measured. We see no reason why the State should use any other date.

When a third party may be liable for part or all of an expense, any portion of the expense that can be attributed to the
individual with reasonable certainty should be treated as the individual's liability and included in the spenddown
calculation pending the final determination of third party liability. When there is a reasonable question of the
extent of the third party's liability, the State may, but is not required to, include the questionable portion in the
spenddown calculation on an interim basis pending the final determination of liability. In either case, the date
the individual incurs the expense in question is the date of the determination that there is no third party liability
for the expense or, if earlier, the date that the State elects to include the questionable amount in the spenddown calculation
pending the determination of third party liability. When there is a determination of third party liability for the
expense, the amount in question is excluded (retroactively, if necessary) in spenddown calculations. 


Comment:

 Commenters suggested that we use the phrase, ``3 months before the month of application'', rather than ``3 months
before the date of application''. 


Response:

 We agree with the commenters as this is a more flexible approach. Therefore, we are revising proposed 435.831(d)(5)
and 436.831(d)(5), designated as 435.831(g)(2) and 436.831(g)(2) in the final rule, to specify that
States may include bills incurred earlier than 3 months before the month of application. 


Comment:

 Some commenters thought that the use of a 3-month period is arbitrary. 


Response:

 Under section 1902(a)(17) of the Act, we have authority to prescribe the extent to which costs of medical care may be
deducted from income. We believe that permitting States to limit the applicability of medical expenses to the 3-month
period before the month in which a Medicaid application is filed or to include earlier expenses is reasonable in that
it affords States some administrative relief, while recognizing that individuals may be liable for old bills. It
also corresponds to the 3-month period in section 1902(a)(34) of the Act and, therefore, is not arbitrary. We believe
that Congress' decision to restrict the retroactivity of eligibility to 3 months provides a suitable guideline for
determining how far back States should be required to look in accounting for incurred health care expenses since both
cases reflect efforts to provide a measure of coverage for services received before application is made for medical
assistance. 


Comment:

 Commenters were concerned that this provision penalizes individuals who, in trying to pay their own medical bills,
may not apply for Medicaid until they are far behind in payments, often more than 3 months after the bills were incurred.
Commenters suggested that we revise the regulations so that an individual may deduct an entire bill older than 3 months
if the individual verifies that he or she is still liable for the bill. 


Response:

 By permitting an individual who actually makes payment on old bills to deduct the amount paid toward the spenddown,
the regulation addresses an objective of section 1902(a)(17) of the Act for the medically needy. That objective is
that an individual's income for purposes of Medicaid eligibility should be reduced to cover the costs of his or her
uncovered medical care since if the individual spends this income on medical care, he or she will not have that income
available for maintenance needs. However, if the individual does not pay the old bills, the individual's income need
not be reduced by the amount of a liability which the individual may never satisfy. To give an individual a one shot lifetime
opportunity to reduce income for each unpaid bill encourages individuals to forgo making payment on their liability
for medical care. The regulation permits States to minimize this disincentive to paying old bills.



Comment:

 Some commenters (State agencies) proposed that medical expenses which may be used to meet the spenddown be limited
to those expenses that are incurred within the current budget period. 


Response:

 It would be unnecessarily harsh to limit income deductions to newly incurred expenses, especially when an expense
is incurred shortly before the current budget period. We believe the requirement to deduct income for expenses incurred
in the retroactive eligibility period is a reasonable compromise between deducting income for all old expenses and
deducting income only for newly incurred expenses. Therefore, we did not adopt the commenter's suggestion.

