 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 


Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service


<CFRNO>7 CFR Part 301 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 940821] </RINDOCK>


Pink Bollworm Regulated Areas 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA.

 
</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Interim rule and request for comments. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 We are amending the pink bollworm regulations by adding certain portions of Dyer and Lauderdale Counties in Tennessee
to the list of suppressive areas for pink bollworm and by adding Tennessee to the list of States quarantined because
of pink bollworm. This action will impose restrictions on the interstate movement of regulated articles from those
regulated areas in Dyer and Lauderdale Counties, TN. This action is necessary to prevent the interstate movement
of pink bollworm into noninfested areas.

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Interim rule effective August 30, 1994. Consideration will be given only to comments received on or before October
31, 1994.

 
</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Please send an original and three copies of your comments to Chief, Regulatory Analysis and Development, PPD, APHIS,
USDA, room 804, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782. Please state that your comments refer
to Docket No. 940821. Comments received may be inspected at USDA, room 1141, South Building, 14th Street
and Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC, between 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays.
Persons wishing to inspect comments are requested to call ahead on (202) 6902817 to facilitate entry into the
comment reading room.

 
</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Ms. Coanne E. O'Hern, Assistant Operations Officer, Domestic and Emergency Operations, Plant Protection and Quarantine,
APHIS, USDA, room 645, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782, (301) 4366365. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


The pink bollworm, 

Pectinophora gossypiella

 (Saunders), is one of the world's most destructive pests of cotton. This insect spread to the United States from Mexico
in 1917, and now exists throughout most of the cotton-producing States west of the Mississippi River. 
The pink bollworm regulations, contained in 7 CFR 301.52 through 
301.5210 (referred to below as the regulations), quarantine certain States and restrict the interstate movement
of regulated articles from regulated areas in quarantined States for the purpose of preventing the spread of pink
bollworm. 
Regulated areas for the pink bollworm are designated as either suppressive areas or generally infested areas. Restrictions
are imposed on the interstate movement of regulated articles from both types of areas in order to prevent the movement
of pink bollworm into noninfested areas. However, eradication of pink bollworm infestations is undertaken as an
objective only in places that are designated as suppressive areas. 
Prior to the effective date of this document, Tennessee contained no areas regulated because of pink bollworm. However,
surveys conducted by inspectors of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and by State agencies in Tennessee
have established that pink bollworm has spread into areas of Dyer and Lauderdale Counties, TN. Therefore, in order
to prevent the further spread of pink bollworm, we are amending the list of regulated areas in 301.522a
of the regulations by designating portions of Dyer and Lauderdale Counties, TN, as pink bollworm suppressive areas.
Descriptions of those areas designated as suppressive areas are set forth in the rule portion of this document. We
are also adding Tennessee to the list in 301.52(a) of States that are quarantined because of pink bollworm.

Section 301.522 of the regulations states that less than an entire quarantined State will be designated as
a regulated area only if the State is enforcing a quarantine or regulations that impose restrictions on the intrastate
movement of regulated articles that are substantially the same as those imposed with respect to the interstate movement
of such articles under the Federal regulations. Tennessee has elected to regulate the intrastate movement of regulated
articles from the designated areas of Dyer and Lauderdale Counties under the State's Plant Pest Act of 1955. 


Emergency Action 


The Administrator of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service has determined that an emergency exists that
warrants publication of this interim rule without prior opportunity for public comment. Immediate action is necessary
to prevent the artificial spread of pink bollworm to noninfested areas of the United States. 
Because prior notice and other public procedures with respect to this action are impracticable and contrary to the
public interest under these conditions, we find good cause under 5 U.S.C. 553 to make it effective upon publication
in the 

Federal Register

. We will consider comments that are received within 60 days of publication of this rule in the 

Federal Register

. After the comment period closes, we will publish another document in the 

Federal Register

. It will include a discussion of any comments we receive and any amendments we are making to the rule as result of the
comments. 


Executive Order 12866 and Regulatory Flexibility Act 


This interim rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12866. For this action, the Office of Management and Budget
has waived its review process required by Executive Order 12866. 
This interim rule restricts the interstate movement of regulated articles from the regulated areas of Dyer and Lauderdale
Counties in Tennessee. Based on information compiled by the Department, we have determined that there are nine cotton
farms and four gin and seed disposal companies that will be affected by the new restrictions. All of these farms and
gin and seed disposal companies are considered to be small entities under Small Business Administration criteria.

Approximately 834,000 bales of cotton and 332,000 metric tons of cottonseed were produced in Tennessee in 1992; of
that total, 3,963 bales of cotton and 1,530 metric tons of cottonseed were produced in those areas of Dyer and Lauderdale
Counties affected by this interim rule. Thus, production in the affected areas of Dyer and Lauderdale Counties represents
only about 0.5 percent of the cotton and 0.5 percent of the cottonseed produced in Tennessee in 1992. 





</SUPPLEM>
