 

6. Will species-specific standards and guidelines improve the efficiency of Forest project planning and implementation?

7. Will the efficiency and effectiveness of the Forest sensitive plant program improve?

Based on the preliminary issues listed above and other issues that may be developed, the Forest Service will identify
and consider a range of alternatives for managing sensitive plant species. These alternatives will include a no action
alternative (continuing with existing 

Eldorado National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan 

direction). Other alternatives to consider may include implementation of species-specific standards and guidelines
and/or delisting one or more of the species under consideration. These preliminary alternatives may be revised before
the draft EIS is issued as new information is developed or new comments are received:

Public participation will be especially important at several points during the analysis. The first point is during
the scoping process (40 CFR 1501.7).

The Forest Service will be seeking information, comments, and assistance from federal, state, and local agencies
and other individuals or organizations who may be interested in or affected by the proposed project. This input will
be used in preparation of the draft EIS. The scoping process includes:

1. Defining the scope of the analysis and nature of the decision to be made.

2. Identifying the issues and determining the significant issues for consideration and analysis within the EIS.

3. Defining the proper interdisciplinary team make-up.

4. Determining the effective use of time and money in conducting the analysis.

5. Identifying potential environmental, technical, and social impacts of the EIS and alternatives.

6. Determining potential cooperating agencies.

7. Identifying groups or individuals interested or affected by the decision.

John Phipps, Forest Supervisor, Eldorado National Forest, is the responsible official.

The draft EIS is expected to be filed with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and to be available for public
review in September 1994. At that time, EPA will publish a notice of availability of the draft EIS in the 

Federal Register

. The comment period on the draft EIS will be 45 days from the date that EPA's notice of availability appears in the 

Federal Register

.

The Forest Service believes, at this early stage, it is important to give reviewers notice of several court rulings
related to public participation in the environmental review process. First, reviewers of draft environmental impact
statements must structure their participation in the environmental review of the proposal so that it is meaningful
and alerts an agency to the reviewers's position and contentions. 

Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. NRDC, 435 U.S. 519, 553 (1978). 

Also, environmental objections that could be raised at the draft environmental impact statement stage, but that
are not raised until after completion of the final environmental impact statement may be waived or dismissed by the
courts. 

City of Angoon v. Hodel, 803 F.2d 1016, 1022 (9th Cir. 1986) 

and 

Wisconsin Heritages, Inc. v. Harris, 490 F. Supp. 1334, 1338 (E.D. Wis. 1980).

Because of these court rulings, it is very important that those interested in this proposed action participate by
the close of the 45-day comment period so that substantive comments and objections are made available to the Forest
Service at a time when it can meaningfully consider them and respond to them in the final environmental impact statement.

To assist the Forest Service in identifying and considering issues and concerns on the proposed action, comments
on the draft environmental impact statement should be as specific as possible. It is also helpful if comments refer
to specific pages or chapters of the draft statement. Comments may also address the adequacy of the draft environmental
impact statement or the merits of the alternatives formulated and discussed in the statement. Reviewers may wish
to refer to the Council on Environmental Quality. Regulations for implementing the procedural provisions of the
National Environmental Policy Act at 40 CFR 1503.3 in addressing these points.

After the comment period ends on the draft EIS, the comments will be analyzed and considered by the Forest Service in
preparing the final EIS. The final EIS is scheduled to be completed by January 1994. In the final EIS the Forest Service
is required to respond to the comments and responses received (40 CFR 1503.4). The responsible official will consider
the comments, responses, and environmental consequences discussed in the draft EIS; and applicable laws, regulations,
and policies in making a decision regarding this project. If a decision is made to amend the Land and Resource Management
Plan, the responsible official will document the decision and reasons for the decision in the Record of Decision.
That decision will be subject to appeal pursuant to 36 CFR part 215.




Dated: July 21, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Rex Baumback,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Forest Supervisor, Eldorado National Forest.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9418319 Filed 72794; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341011M
</BILLING>


