 

EPA proposes that the current system continue after January 
1, 1996, and that companies be permitted to produce or import 
controlled substances explicitly for uses that result in 
transformation or destruction with the same requirements as under 
the current regulation.
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 Therefore, such producers and 
importers will continue to receive an IRS certification of intent 
to transform or a destruction verification from the second- or 
third-party transformers or destroyers. The producers and 
importers will also continue to submit these certificates or 
verifications to EPA along with their quarterly reports (see 
Section C.7. Recordkeeping and Reporting). 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
Controlled substances produced for export to be transformed or destroyed are discussed in section C.3. ``Administrative
Changes to Production Allowance Requirements for Exports that are Transformed or Destroyed.''
</FOOTNOTE>


b. 

Production or importation of controlled substances intended 
for emissive use but subsequently transformed or destroyed. 

Under the current regulation a person who transforms or 
destroys a controlled substance that was produced or imported 
with expended allowances may petition the Agency for ``additional'' 
consumption and production allowances. The person who transforms 
or destroys a controlled substance that was produced or imported 
with expended allowances is essentially requesting a ``refund'' of 
the allowances originally used in the production or importation 
of the substance. 

EPA proposes that, after the phaseout begins on January 1, 
1996, companies will no longer be able to request additional 
production allowances or consumption allowances for the 
transformation or destruction of controlled substances which were 
produced or imported for emissive uses (other than for methyl 
bromide). The Agency proposes the elimination of the specific 
provisions that grant additional production and consumption 
allowances, beginning January 1, 1996, for all class I controlled 
substances, except methyl bromide, in anticipation of the post-phaseout elimination of production and consumption
allowances for 
those substances. Thus, a person who expends allowances to 
produce or import a class I substance, other than methyl bromide, 
and then transforms or destroys that substance after January 1, 
1996, will not be granted additional production or consumption 
allowances. However, a person who expends allowances and then 
transforms or destroys methyl bromide after January 1, 1996, 
would still be able to petition the Agency for additional 
production and consumption allowances until January 1, 2001, as 
under the current regulation. In this respect, a person who 
transforms or destroys methyl bromide that was produced or 
imported for an intended emissive use may continue to follow the 
existing regulation as described under 82.9 and 82.10. 



