 

How To Request a Review of the Notice of Noncoverage


&bull;If the 

Notice of Noncoverage

 states that your physician agrees with the hospital's decision.




_You must make your request for review to the PRO by noon of the first work day after you receive the 

Notice of Noncoverage 

by contacting the PRO by phone or in writing.
_The PRO must ask for your views about your case before making its decision. The PRO will inform you by phone or in writing
of its decision on the review.
_If the PRO agrees with the 

Notice of Noncoverage

, you may be billed for all costs of your stay beginning at noon of the day you receive the PRO's decision.
_Thus, you will not be responsible for the cost of hospital care before you receive the PRO's decision.


&bull;If the 

Notice of Noncoverage

 states that the PRO agrees with the hospital's decision:




_You should make your request for reconsideration to the PRO immediately upon receipt of the 

Notice of Noncoverage

 by contacting the PRO by phone or in writing.
_The PRO can take up to three working days from receipt of your request to complete the review. The PRO will inform you
in writing of its decision on the review.
_Since the PRO has already reviewed your case once, prior to the issuance of the 

Notice of Noncoverage, 

the hospital is permitted to begin billing you the cost of your stay beginning with the third calendar day after you
receive your 

Notice of Noncoverage

 even if the PRO has not completed its review.
_Thus, if the PRO continues to agree with the 

Notice of Noncoverage,

 you may have to pay for at least one day of hospital care.






Note: 

The process described above is called ``immediate review.'' If you miss the deadline for this immediate review while
you are in the hospital, you may still request a review of Medicare's decision to no longer pay for your care at any point
during your hospital stay or after you have left the hospital. The 

Notice of Noncoverage

 will tell you how to request this review.


Post-Hospital Care


When your doctor determines that you no longer need all the specialized services provided in a hospital, but you still
require medical care, he or she may discharge you to a skilled nursing facility or home care. The discharge planner
at the hospital will help arrange for the services you may need after your discharge. Medicare and supplemental insurance
policies have limited coverage for skilled nursing facility care and home health care. Therefore, you should find
out which services will or will not be covered and how payment will be made. Consult with your doctor, hospital discharge
planner, patient representative, and your family in making preparations for care after you leave the hospital. Don't
hesitate to ask questions.
Acknowledge of Receipt_My signature only acknowledges my receipt of this Message from (name of hospital) on (date)
and does not waive any of my rights to request a review or make me liable for any payment.







Signature of beneficiary or person acting on behalf of beneficiary







Date of receipt


