 

D. Technical Revision 


General provisions relating to Medicaid services are included in 42 CFR part 440. Section 440.160, Inpatient psychiatric
services for individuals under age 21, currently contains an abbreviated definition of the psychiatric

L

21 benefit. This abbreviated definition has caused confusion because it does not make it clear that this benefit must
always be provided in a psychiatric facility. Therefore, we propose to revise the definition in this section to list
the three possible settings and to cross refer to the detailed requirements in subpart D of part 441 and subpart F of
part 483. 


VI. Collection of Information 


Regulations at 441.152 contain collection of information requirements that are subject to the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). The information collection requirements concern resident information.
The respondents who will provide the information include physicians and medical personnel. Public reporting burden
for this collection of information is estimated to be 30 minutes per respondent. A notice will be published in the 

Federal Register

 when approval is obtained. Organizations and individuals desiring to submit comments on the information collection
and recordkeeping requirements should direct them to the OMB official whose name appears in the 

ADDRESSES

 section of this preamble. 


VII. Response to Public Comments 


Because of the large number of items of correspondence we normally receive on a proposed rule, we are unable to acknowledge
or respond to them individually. However, we will consider all comments that we receive by the date and time specified
in the ``

DATES

'' section of this preamble to the final rule. 


VIII. Regulatory Impact Statement 


We generally prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis that is consistent with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)
(5 U.S.C. 601 through 612), unless the Secretary certifies that a proposed regulation would not have a significant
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. For purposes of the RFA, psychiatric residential treatment
facilities and psychiatric hospitals are considered to be small entities. Individuals and States are not included
in the definition of small entity. 
In addition, section 1102(b) of the Act requires the Secretary to prepare a regulatory impact analysis for any final
rule that may have a significant impact on the operations of a substantial number of small rural hospitals. Such analysis
must conform to the provisions of section 603 of the RFA. For purposes of section 1102(b) of the Act, we define a small
rural hospital as a hospital with fewer than 50 beds located outside a Metropolitan Statistical area. 
There are various aspects of this proposed regulation that might have some cost or saving, but the net impact of all
of them appears to be negligible. 
The establishment of the psychiatric residential treatment facility as a new category of Medicaid facility for the
purposes of inpatient psychiatric care has varying impacts. On one hand, daily charges at such facilities are projected
to be lower than at psychiatric hospitals. On the other hand, lengths of stay seem to be longer, probably due to the less
acute, more chronic nature of the conditions they are designed to treat. However, if we assume that some recipients
are currently getting inappropriate care in more expensive settings merely because of Medicaid regulations, then
this regulation may save some money. This assumption, though, is impossible to verify. 


