 





h. NO

X

 emissions sources_

 (1) Source category description. The proposed rule for this source category will regulate NO

X

 emissions in Ventura County from the following processes: 

&bull;Any boiler, furnace, oven, dryer, heater, incinerator, test cell and any solid, liquid or gaseous fueled equipment
with a maximum rated capacity greater than or equal to 2 million Btu per hour; 

&bull;Any internal combustion engine with rated brake horsepower (bhp) greater than or equal to 50 bhp, regardless
of operating time; 

&bull;Any gas turbine rated greater than or equal to 0.2 megawatts excluding any emergency standby equipment or peaking
unit; 

&bull;Any petroleum refinery fluid catalytic cracking unit; 

&bull;Any petroleum refinery tail gas unit; 

&bull;Any kiln or calciner; 

&bull;Any equipment burning or incinerating solid fuels or materials; 

&bull;Any sulfuric acid production unit; 

&bull;Any portable combustion and process equipment; 

&bull;Any emergency standby equipment or peaking unit; 

&bull;Any NO

X

 source for which NO

X

 emissions reported to the state or local agency were equal to or greater than 2 tons per year for the calendar year 1990.


The proposed reporting exemption level of 2 tons per year of NO

X

 emissions is based on work done by the SCAQMD in their development of the RECLAIM program. 

(2) Issues. EPA is requesting comment on alternative exemption levels particularly for the FIP areas for these sources.
For instance, the participation level could be as low as 2 tons per year, with an exemption level of 1 ton per year in the
control areas. With respect to the South Coast FIP area, EPA is intending to use the RECLAIM NO

X

 program's reductions for use toward attainment in lieu of implementing the FIP cap NO

X

 program (this strategy may also be used in the case of a VOC RECLAIM program if the South Coast should develop such a program).
If EPA is unable to approve the NO

X

 RECLAIM program, EPA would promulgate the NO

X

 cap program in the South Coast to achieve comparable reductions. 




i. Alternatives to the FIP cap program_

At present, EPA has identified several alternatives to the design of EPA's proposed FIP cap program. For example,
the FIP cap program does not include a trading component (i.e., the current proposal does not provide for trading of
emission credits to achieve reductions). In addition, the industrial and commercial coatings and solvents source
category could be regulated at the manufacturer level as opposed to the user level. Finally, the use of other economic
instruments such as fees is also an alternative to the cap program proposed today. EPA seeks public comment on any of
the following issues as well as any other issues or designs that may be available to achieve equivalent emissions reductions.


