 

&bull;What is the time period in which the account is available to an individual (i.e. is there an established expiration
date at the time of issuance)?

&bull;How will a participant's continuing participation in the program be monitored? At what point(s) will termination
occur?



C. Use of Existing Services and Resources 



An identification of the specific sources and amounts of other funds which will be used, in addition to funds provided
through this grant, to implement the project. The application must include information on the non-JTPA resources
committed to this project, including employer funds, secured and unsecured loans, grants, and other forms of assistance,
public and private. The application shall also describe the relationship of this project to the ongoing assistance
to dislocated workers through the formula-funded JTPA Title III program(s) in the service area.



D. Coordination and Linkages



A description of the consultation with relevant parties in developing the project design and of the role of these parties
in implementing the project. Required consultation shall include: State JTPA Dislocated Worker Unit, Substate
Title III grantee(s) and administrative entity(ies), organized labor, and local organizations in the project service
area providing education, training and supportive services.



E. Participant Services



A description of the services to be available and/or provided to participants. The services supported with funds
under this grant must be allowable under Section 314 of the Act. This description should include a participant service
flowchart indicating the sequence in the participant service process and the criteria/decision points which are
used to determine the appropriateness of specific services for individual participants.



F. Outcomes



A description of the project outcomes and of the specific measures, and planned achievement levels, that will be used
to determine the success of the project. These outcomes and measures should include, but are not limited to:

&bull;The number of participants projected: to be enrolled in services, to successfully complete services through
the project, and to be placed into jobs;

&bull;Measurable effects of the services provided to project participants as indicated by gains in individuals'
skills, competencies, or other outcomes;

&bull;Average wages of participants prior to and at completion of project;

&bull;Customer satisfaction with the new job compared to the job from which they were dislocated;


