 

(2) Persons entering a space containing a hazardous atmosphere shall be instructed in the nature of the hazard, precautions
to be taken, and the use of protective and emergency equipment. Standby observers, similarly equipped and instructed,
shall continuously monitor the activity of employees within such space; 
(3) Except for emergency or rescue operations, employees shall not enter into any atmosphere which has been identified
as flammable or oxygen deficient (less than 19.5% oxygen). Persons who may be required to enter flammable or oxygen
deficient atmospheres in emergency operations shall be instructed in the dangers attendant to those atmospheres
and instructed in the use of self-contained breathing apparatus, which shall be utilized. 
(4) To prevent inadvertent employee entry into spaces that have been identified as having hazardous, flammable or
oxygen deficient atmospheres, appropriate warning signs or equivalent means shall be posted at all means of access
to those spaces. 
(e) 

Asbestos cargo leak

. When the packaging of asbestos cargo leaks, spillage shall be cleaned up by designated employees protected from
the harmful effects of asbestos as required by 1910.1001 of this chapter. 


1918.94 

Ventilation and atmospheric conditions. 


(See also 1918.2(j).) 
(a) 

Ventilation with respect to carbon monoxide.

 (1)(i) When internal combustion engines exhaust into a hold, intermediate deck, or any other compartment, the employer
shall see that tests of the carbon monoxide content of the atmosphere are made with such frequency to ensure that dangerous
concentrations do not exceed allowable limits. Such tests shall be made in the area in which employees are working
by persons competent in the use of the test equipment and procedures. If operations are located in a deep tank or refrigerated
compartment, the first test shall be made within one half hour of the time the engine starts. In order to determine the
need for further testing, the initial test in all other cargo handling areas shall be taken no later than one hour after
the time the engine starts. 
(ii) The carbon monoxide content of the atmosphere in a compartment, hold, or any enclosed space shall be maintained
at not more than 35 parts per million (ppm) (0.0035%) as an 8-hour time weighted average and employees shall be removed
from the enclosed space if the carbon monoxide concentration exceeds 100 ppm (0.01%). The short term exposure limit
in outdoors, non-enclosed spaces shall be 200 ppm (0.02%) measured over a 5 minute period. 
(A) The term 

time weighted average

 means that for any period of time in which the concentration exceeds 35 parts per million, it shall be maintained at
a corresponding amount below 35 parts per million for an equal period of time. 
(B) The formula for ``time weighted average'' for an 8-hour work shift is as follows: 




E=(C

a

T

a

+C

b

T

b

+...C

n

T

n

)/8





Where: E is the equivalent exposure for the working shift. C is the concentration during any period of time T where the
concentration remains constant. T is the duration in hours of the exposure at the concentration C. 




(iii) When both natural ventilation and the vessel's ventilation system are inadequate to keep the carbon monoxide
concentration within the allowable limits, the employer shall use supplementary means to bring such concentration
within allowable limits, as determined by actual monitoring. 
(2) A record of the date, time, location and results of the tests required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall
be maintained for at least 30 days after the work has been completed. Such records may be entered on any retrievable
medium, and shall be available for inspection. 
(3) The intakes of portable blowers and any exposed belt drives shall be guarded to prevent injury to employees. 
(4) The frames of portable blowers shall be grounded at the source of the current by means of an equipment grounding
conductor run with or enclosing the circuit conductors. When the vessel is the source of the current, the equipment
grounding conductor shall be bonded to the structure of the vessel. Electric cords used shall be free from visible
defects. 
(b) 

Fumigated grains.

 (1) Before commencing to handle bulk grain in any compartment of a vessel in which employees will or may be present,
the employer shall: 
(i) ascertain from the elevator operator whether the grain has been or will be fumigated at the elevator; and 
(ii) ascertain from the vessel's officers, agent, or other knowledgeable source whether those compartments, or
any cargo within them that was loaded at a prior berth, have been treated with a fumigant or any other chemical. 
(2) If such treatment has been carried out, or if there is reason to suspect that such treatment has been carried out,
it shall be determined by atmospheric testing that the compartment's atmosphere is within allowable limits. (See
paragraph (b)(3) of this section.) 
(3) A test of the fumigant concentration in the atmosphere of the compartment shall be made after loading begins and
before employees enter the compartment. Additional tests shall be made as often as necessary to ensure that hazardous
concentrations do not develop. 
(i) Tests for fumigant concentration shall be conducted by a designated person, who shall be thoroughly familiar
with the characteristics of the fumigant being used, the correct procedure for measurement, the proper measuring
equipment to be used, the manufacturer's recommendations and warnings, and the proper use of personal protective
equipment employed to guard against the specific hazards. 
(ii) A record of the date, time, location and results of the tests required by paragraph (b) of this section shall be
maintained for at least 30 days after the work has been completed. Such records may be entered on any retrievable medium,
and shall be available for inspection. 





