 

(i) The name, address, and telephone number of both parties.

(ii) The protege firm's business classification, based upon the SIC code(s) which represents the contemplated supplies
or services to be provided by the protege firm to the mentor firm.

(iii) A statement that the protege firm meets the eligibility criteria in either paragraph I104(a)(1), (2)
or (3).

(iv) A preliminary assessment of the developmental needs of the protege firm and the proposed developmental assistance
the mentor firm envisions providing the protege firm to address those needs and enhance the protege firm's ability
to perform successfully under contracts or subcontracts with DoD, other federal agencies and commercial contracts.

(v) An estimate of the dollar amount and type of subcontracts that will be awarded by the mentor firm to the protege firm,
and the period of time over which they will be awarded.

(vi) Information as to whether the protege firm's development will be concentrated on a single major system, a service
or supply program, research and development programs, initial production, mature systems, or in the mentor firm's
overall contract base.

(3) An estimate of the cost of the developmental assistance program and the period of time over which the assistance
will be provided.

(d) A company that has identified Program funds to be made available through a DoD program manager must provide: the
information in paragraphs I106(b) and (c) to the appropriate program manager and to the OUSD(AT)SADBU,
with a letter signed by the appropriate program manager indicating the amount of funding that has been identified
for the developmental assistance program.

(e) Companies seeking credit only for the cost of developmental assistance, reimbursement of program costs via their
inclusion in indirect expense pools and credit for such costs, or reimbursement with funds made available by a DoD
program manager, shall submit four copies of the information specified in paragraphs I106(b) and (c) to: DoD,
OUSD(AT)SADBU, 3061 Defense Pentagon, Washington, DC. 203013061, Attn: Pilot Mentor-Protege Program
Manager. Upon receipt of this information, OUSD(AT)SADBU will review and evaluate each request and, to the
maximum extent possible, within 30 days advise each applicant of approval or rejection of its request to become a mentor
firm.

(f) Companies interested in reimbursement of costs of a developmental assistance program through either a separate
contract, cooperative agreement, or other agreement awarded for that purpose will be solicited to provide the information
in paragraphs I106(b) and (c) as well as any other information specified in the program solicitation.

(g) A company approved as a mentor firm for credit only, for reimbursement through funds made available by a DoD program
manager, or for reimbursement via inclusion of program costs in indirect expense pools and credit for such costs,
may proceed with the negotiation of the mentor-protege agreement with the identified protege firm(s).

(h) Companies that apply for participation in the program pursuant to paragraph I106(e) and are not approved,
will be provided the reasons and an opportunity to submit additional information for reconsideration.

(i) A company may not be approved for participation in the Program as a mentor firm if at the time of requesting participation
in the Program it is currently debarred or suspended from contracting with the Federal government pursuant to FAR
subpart 9.4.

(j) If the mentor firm is suspended or debarred while performing under an approved mentor-protege agreement, the
mentor firm_

(1) May continue to provide assistance to its protege firms pursuant to approved mentor-protege agreements entered
into prior to the imposition of such suspension or debarment;

(2) May not be reimbursed or take credit for any costs of providing developmental assistance to its protege firm, incurred
more than 30 days after the imposition of such suspension or debarment; and 

(3) Shall promptly give notice of its suspension or debarment to its protege firm and OUSD(AT)SADBU.



I107

Mentor-protege agreements.



(a) A signed mentor-protege agreement for each mentor-protege relationship identified under I106(b)(2)
must be submitted to OUSD(AT)SADBU and approved before developmental assistance costs may be incurred. To
the maximum extent possible, such mentor-protege agreements will be approved within five business days of receipt.

(b) Each signed mentor-protege agreement submitted for approval under the Program shall include_

(1) The name, address and telephone number of the mentor firm and the protege firm and a point of contact within the mentor
firm who will administer the developmental assistance program;

(2) The SIC code which represents the contemplated supplies or services to be provided by the protege firm to the mentor
firm and a statement that at the time the agreement is submitted for approval, the protege firm, if an SDB concern, does
not exceed the size standard for the appropriate SIC code.

(3) A developmental program for the protege firm specifying the type of assistance identified in paragraph I107(f)
that will be provided. The developmental program shall also include_

(i) Factors to assess the protege firm's developmental progress under the Program including milestones for providing
the identified assistance; and

(ii) The anticipated number, dollar value, and type of subcontracts to be awarded the protege firm consistent with
the extent and nature of mentor firm's business, and the period of time over which they will be awarded.



