 

(3) Upon receipt of an amended or modified Disclosure Undertaking or Protective Order Application, the investigating
authority shall, as appropriate, amend, modify or revoke the Disclosure Order or Protective Order and provide the
responsible Secretariat with the original of the amendment, modification or notice of revocation and any additional
copies of the document required by the responsible Secretariat. 
(4) Upon receipt of an amended or modified Disclosure Order or Protective Order or a notice of revocation, the responsible
Secretary shall transmit the amended or modified Disclosure Order or Protective Order or the notice of revocation
to the appropriate member of a committee, assistant to a committee member, court reporter or translator. 
17. The responsible Secretary shall serve Disclosure Orders and Protective Orders granted to members of a committee,
assistants to committee members, court reporters or translators, and any amendments or modifications thereto or
notices of revocation thereof, on all participants other than the investigating authority. 
18. (1) A counsel of record, or a professional retained by, or under the control or direction of, a counsel of record,
who has not been issued a Disclosure Order or Protective Order in the panel review or in these proceedings and who wishes
disclosure of proprietary information in the file of an extraordinary challenge proceeding, shall file a Disclosure
Undertaking or a Protective Order Application, as follows: 

(a) with the responsible Secretariat, four copies; and 
(b) with the investigating authority, one original and any additional copies that the investigating authority requires.

(2) A Disclosure Undertaking or Protective Order Application referred to in subrule (1) shall be served on all participants.

(3) The investigating authority shall, within 10 days after a Disclosure Undertaking or Protective Order Application
is filed with it in accordance with subrule (1), serve on the person who filed the Disclosure Undertaking or Protective
Order Application 
(a) a Disclosure Order or Protective Order; or 
(b) a notification in writing setting out the reasons why a Disclosure Order or Protective Order is not issued. 
19. (1) Where 
(a) the investigating authority refuses to issue a Disclosure Order or Protective Order to a counsel of record or to
a professional retained by, or under the control or direction of, a counsel of record, or 
(b) the investigating authority issues a Disclosure Order or Protective Order with terms unacceptable to a counsel
of record, 
the counsel of record may file with the responsible Secretariat a Notice of Motion requesting that the committee review
the decision of the investigating authority. 
(2) Where, after consideration of any response made by the investigating authority referred to in subrule (1), the
committee decides that a Disclosure Order or Protective Order should be issued or that the terms of a Disclosure Order
or Protective Order should be amended or modified, the committee shall so notify counsel for the investigating authority.

(3) Where the final determination was made in the United States and the investigating authority fails to comply with
the notification referred to in subrule (2), the committee may issue such orders as are just in the circumstances,
including an order refusing to permit the investigating authority to make certain arguments in support of its case
or striking certain arguments from its pleadings. 
20. (1) Where a Disclosure Order or Protective Order is issued to a person in an extraordinary challenge proceeding,
the person shall file with the responsible Secretariat a copy of the Disclosure Order or Protective Order. 
(2) Where a Disclosure Order or Protective Order is revoked, amended or modified by an investigating authority, the
investigating authority shall provide to the responsible Secretariat and to all participants a copy of the Notice
of Revocation, amendment or modification. 
21. In an extraordinary challenge proceeding that commences with a Request for an Extraordinary Challenge Committee
pursuant to Article 1904.13(a)(i) of the Agreement, personal information shall be kept confidential 
(a) where a Notice of Motion is filed pursuant to subrule 42(1)(c), 
(i) until the committee makes an order referred to in subrule 46(1)(a), or 





