 

As stated in the February 28, 1994 NPRM, the establishment 
of a maximum time frame would take into account a student's 
enrollment status. Institutions are currently required to 
monitor enrollment status of students receiving Title IV, HEA 
program funds and 150% of published program length can and should 
be viewed only in the context of an individual student's 
enrollment status. Thus, if a nontraditional student who is 
enrolled in a baccalaureate program that a full-time student is 
expected to complete in four years and a half-time student is 
expected to complete in eight years, vacillates between full-time 
and half-time enrollment, that student would have a computed 
maximum enrollment period somewhere between six and 12 years. 
Further, because the requirement is designed to set an upper 
limit on the period of time for which a student may receive Title 
IV, HEA program assistance, periods of nonenrollment, during 
which the student is not receiving Title IV, HEA program funds, 
would not be counted against the length of time the student is 
pursuing a degree or certificate. Thus, a student who enrolls 
and receives Title IV, HEA program funds sporadically would be 
treated differently from a full-time student who pursues a degree 
or certificate without interruption. 
Paragraph (e)(1)(vii) of this section requires an 
institution to have procedures under which a student may appeal a 
determination that the student is not making satisfactory 
progress. With regard to eligible programs of an academic year 
or less, these regulations make even clearer the longstanding 
requirement that the maximum time frame must be divided into 
increments. Satisfactory academic progress policies are expected 
to measure whether students are progressing satisfactorily toward 
their educational goals and should serve also as a device for 
counseling students about their need to improve their progress, 
if applicable. If maximum time frames are not divided into 
increments, these policies are not serving their purpose. This 
principle applies to programs shorter than an academic year no 
less than to longer programs. 


Changes:

 Section 668.16(e)(3)(B) is amended to clarify that a 
maximum time frame in which a student must complete his or her 
educational program must be no longer than 150 percent of the 
published length of the educational program for full-time 
students. 


Comments:

 Two commenters recommended expanding the requirement 
that an institution must develop and apply an adequate system to 
identify and resolve discrepancies in the information that the 
institution receives to include documentation of a student's 
social security number. They reasoned that resolution of social 
security number discrepancies is an important part of controlling 
fraud and abuse in the Title IV, HEA programs and the ability of 
an institution to obtain appropriate documentation to resolve 
such discrepancies should be considered in determining 
administrative capability. 


Discussion:

 The Secretary concurs with the commenters that 
resolution of social security number discrepancies is essential 
and should be expressly stated in this section. 


Changes:

 Section 668.16(f)(3) is amended to include 
documentation of a student's social security number in the 
information normally available to an institution and for which 
the institution must have a system to identify and resolve 
discrepancies. 


Comments:

 About half the commenters expressed concern, to 
varying degrees, that the proposed reporting requirement is too 
vague and broad and would result in overreporting that would 
overwhelm the Office of Inspector General. Some of these 
commenters recommended that the word ``evidence'' replace 
``information.'' Other commenters suggested that there be some 
kind of internal review or discussion. Several commenters 
recommended that institutions continue to make referrals to local 
law enforcement officials or at least consult with them. Two 
commenters wanted assurance that the institution would be 
protected in the event that it made a referral. 


Discussion:

 The Secretary cannot accept the substitution of 
``evidence'' for ``information'' because that the word ``evidence'' has 
legal ramifications. Evidence is normally determined in a court 
of law when the judge determines what permissible evidence is. 
Institutions may contact the Office of Investigations within the 
Office of Inspector General for advice before making a formal 
referral. The Secretary also cannot accept the suggestion that 
institutions establish an internal review mechanism prior to 
referral as such a mechanism may work to block appropriate 
referrals. However, the Secretary believes that an institution 
should only be required to refer to the Office of the Inspector 
General of the Department of Education 

credible

 information 
indicating fraud and abuse. 
The Secretary sees no problem with institutions making 
concurrent referrals to local law enforcement authorities, but 
cannot support the referral to local authorities as an 
alternative to making referrals to the Office of Inspector 
General. Concurrent referrals can be made with the regulation as 
written; no change is necessary. The Secretary cannot guaranty 
protection to institutions or individuals that make referrals. 


Changes:

 Section 668.16(g) has been amended to clarify that an 
institution must only refer to the Office of the Inspector 
General of the Department of Education 

credible

 information 
indicating fraud and abuse. 


Comments:

 Almost two-thirds of the commenters supported the 
concept of requiring institutions that serve significant numbers 
of students with special needs to have and implement plans for 
providing students with information about how to meet their 
needs, but half of these commenters recommended that the 
requirement be imposed only on institutions with high withdrawal 
rates. Two commenters recommended that institutions be required 
actually to provide the necessary support services. 
Several commenters suggested that students with language 
barriers be considered to have special needs. One commenter 
suggested that students from low socio-economic background, as 
determined by using the Expected Family Contribution (EFC) 
figures under the Federal Need Analysis formula, be determined to 
have special needs. Those commenters who responded to the 
Secretary's request for how to define significant number 
suggested either that 66 percent of total enrollment be used, as 
that would be consistent with the mitigating circumstances 
threshold for appealing determinations of excessive cohort 
default rates, or that percentages of enrollment, for example 
five percent, 10 percent, or 20 percent, be used as thresholds, 
depending on the number of students. 






