 

By 10 CFR 0.73529, the Commission has long prohibited most of its employees, their spouses, minor children,
and other members of their households, from holding stocks, bonds, and other securities issued by major entities
in the commercial nuclear field. Section 5801.102 imposes very similar restrictions upon designated employees,
their spouses and minor children, based upon the Commission's determination that these restrictions are necessary
to maintain public confidence in the impartiality and objectivity with which the NRC executes its regulatory functions.
The restrictions also will help to maintain public confidence that sensitive information relating to agency operations
is not misused for private gain and will help accomplish the NRC's mission by avoiding widespread disqualification
of employees from the performance of their official duties. 

Section 5801.102 is narrower in scope than 10 CFR 0.73529 in that it does not apply to all members of the employee's
household. Consistent with 5 CFR 2635.403(a) and 2635.403(c)(1), it restricts only the holdings of designated employees,
their spouses, and minor children. The Commission has determined that application of the securities restrictions
in 5801.102 to spouses and minor children is necessary to the efficiency of the service. As evidenced by 10 CFR
0.73529, the NRC believes it is important to the success of its mission for regulated entities and others affected
by agency decisions to have this additional degree of assurance that agency decisions are not influenced by considerations
of personal gain on the part of NRC personnel. 

In addition to limiting the section's application to employees, their spouses, and minor children, the Commission
has made other minor revisions to the restrictions as stated in 10 CFR 0.73529. The categories of prohibited
securities set forth in 5801.102(b) have been revised to reflect the new types of licenses established in 10
CFR part 52 and to include securities issued by State or local governments to finance low-level waste facilities.
Section 5801.102(b)(8) also prohibits employees for the first time from owning securities issued by an energy or
utility sector mutual fund that has invested more than 25 percent of the fund's assets in prohibited securities. 

The time frames for complying with the security ownership regulations have also been modified. Under 10 CFR 0.73529,
NRC employees have had 30 days to comply after commencing employment or being promoted to a position covered by the
security ownership prohibitions; one year to divest any security interest newly added to the agency's prohibited
security list; and a ``reasonable time'' to dispose of securities inherited by gift. Consistent with 5 CFR 2635.403(d),
the final rule provides a uniform 90-day period for divestiture, with extension available in cases of undue hardship.


The criteria in 5801.102(e) for waiving the prohibition on holding a specific security have been modified
to provide greater specificity. A criterion has been newly added to cover circumstances in which legal constraints
prevent divestiture. One example of such a legal constraint would be the situation in which the prohibited security
is held as part of the assets of a trust of which the employee is a beneficiary and where the trustee, who has sole authority
to purchase and sell the assets, refuses the employee's request to sell the prohibited security. 

The Commission has eliminated the requirement contained in 10 CFR 0.73529 that employees who are subject to
the security ownership restrictions certify each year that they are in compliance. Because the annual certifications
have rarely revealed violations of the substantive restrictions, there is inadequate justification for continuing
this requirement. However, to monitor compliance, the NRC will continue to require employees holding designated
positions to certify compliance upon commencement of employment with the agency or upon promotion for the first time
to a position covered by the security ownership restriction. Agency employees will also be required to report to the
Office of the General Counsel in writing any prohibited securities obtained after the initial certification. This
will permit the Office of the General Counsel to track required divestitures. 

On the effective date of this regulation, the NRC will issue Management Directive 7.7 and its accompanying Handbook
which lists those agency positions covered by the security ownership restrictions. The Handbook will also describe
procedures for obtaining Certificates of Divestiture and waivers from the security ownership restrictions. Both
the Management Directive and Handbook will be available at the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington,
DC 205550001. Copies will also be available in each NRC Office.

