 

(ii) Computer software documentation required to be delivered under this contract;

(iii) Corrections or changes to computer software or computer software documentation furnished to the contractor
by the government;

(iv) Computer software or computer software documentation that is otherwise publicly available or has been released
or disclosed by the contractor or subcontractor without restriction on further use, release or disclosure, other
than a release or disclosure resulting from the sale, transfer, or other assignment of interest in the software to
another party or the sale or transfer of some or all of a business entity or its assets to another party;

(v) Computer software or computer software documentation obtained with unlimited rights under another government
contract or as a result of negotiations; or,

(vi) Computer software or computer software documentation furnished to the government, under this or any other government
contract or subcontract thereunder with_

(A) Restricted rights in computer software, limited rights in technical data, or government purpose license rights
and the restrictive conditions have expired; or,

(B) Government purpose rights and the contractor's exclusive right to use such software or documentation for commercial
purposes has expired.

(2) 

Government purpose rights.

(i) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(1) of this clause, the government shall have government purpose rights in
computer software developed with mixed funding.

(ii) Government purpose rights shall remain in effect for a period of five years unless a different period has been
negotiated. Upon expiration of the five year or other negotiated period, the government shall have unlimited rights
in the computer software or computer software documentation. The government purpose rights period shall commence
upon execution of the contract, subcontract, letter contract (or similar contractual instrument), contract modification,
or option exercise that required development of the computer software.

(iii) The government shall not release or disclose computer software in which it has government purpose rights to
any other person unless:

(A) Prior to release or disclosure, the intended recipient is subject to the use and non-disclosure agreement at 227.4037;
or,

(B) The recipient is a government contractor receiving access to the software or documentation for performance of
a government contract that contains the clause at 252.2277025, ``Limitations on the Use or Disclosure of Government
Furnished Information Marked with Restrictive Legends.''


(3) Restricted rights.

 (i) The government shall have restricted rights in noncommercial computer software required to be delivered or otherwise
provided to the government under this contract that were developed exclusively at private expense.

(ii) The contractor, its subcontractors, or suppliers are not required to provide the government additional rights
in noncommercial computer software delivered or otherwise provided to the government with restricted rights. However,
if the government desires to obtain additional rights in such software, the contractor agrees to promptly enter into
negotiations with the contracting officer to determine whether there are acceptable terms for transferring such
rights. All noncommercial computer software in which the contractor has granted the government additional rights
shall be listed or described in a license agreement made part of the contract (see paragraph (b)(4) of this clause).
The license shall enumerate the additional rights granted the government.


(4) 

Specifically negotiated license rights.

 (i) The standard license rights granted to the government under subparagraphs (b)(1) through (b)(3) of this clause,
including the period during which the government shall have government purpose rights in computer software, may
be modified by mutual agreement to provide such rights as the parties consider appropriate but shall not provide the
Government lesser rights in computer software than are enumerated in paragraph (a)(14) of this clause or lesser rights
in computer software documentation than are enumerated in paragraph (a)(13) of the clause at 252.2277013,
Rights in Technical Data_Noncommercial Items.

(ii) Any rights so negotiated shall be identified in a license agreement made part of this contract.

(5) 

Prior government rights. 

Computer software or computer software documentation that will be delivered, furnished, or otherwise provided
to the Government under this contract, in which the Government has previously obtained rights shall be delivered,
furnished, or provided with the pre-existing rights, unless_


(i) The parties have agreed otherwise; or,

(ii) Any restrictions on the Government's rights to use, modify, reproduce, release, perform, display, or disclose
the data have expired or no longer apply.

(6) 

Release from liability.

 The contractor agrees to release the government from liability for any release or disclosure of computer software
made in accordance with subparagraphs (a)(14), or (b)(2)(iii) of this clause, in accordance with the terms of a license
negotiated under (b)(4) of this clause, or by others to whom the recipient has released or disclosed the software,
and to seek relief solely from the party who has improperly used, modified, reproduced, released, performed, displayed,
or disclosed contractor software marked with restrictive legends.



