 

Thomas Built Bus, another manufacturer of school buses, has contacted the agency to express its opposition to Blue
Bird's petition. After spending significant amounts of time and money reconfiguring and retesting its buses and
mirrors to comply with the final rule, Thomas Built believes that it would be inappropriate for the agency now to amend
the standard to accommodate a specific school bus or mirror design of another manufacturer. Memoranda memorializing
these contacts have been placed in the docket. 



III. Agency Proposal 



After reviewing the petition, NHTSA has decided to propose amending Standard No. 111 so that System A mirrors would
no longer be required to provide a field-of-view of the ground forward of cylinders by the bus's rear wheels to areas
directly beneath the mirror surface. The agency tentatively believes that the current requirement makes it necessary
for school bus manufacturers to install either a small radius of curvature convex mirror or a second convex mirror.
NHTSA is concerned that the current requirement may compromise safety either by making it more difficult for the driver
to use the driving mirror when the bus is in motion as the result of having a more distorted image from a more convex mirror
or by reducing the driver's direct line of sight as the result of creating a larger blind spot near the bus, based on Blue
Bird's demonstration and other available information. The agency has tentatively concluded that the driveability
problems resulting from requiring System A mirrors to have a view of the ground directly beneath them outweigh the
safety benefits obtained by having a redundant view of this area. Specifically, the agency believes that the proposed
amendment would not adversely affect pedestrian safety because System B mirrors would still be required to have a
view of the ground directly below the System A mirrors, as well as the areas alongside the bus to the rear axles. 


NHTSA did not anticipate that there would be a driveability problem associated with the System A mirror requirements
when it issued the final rule. The requirement that the driving mirrors provide a view of the ground from beneath the
mirror surface to 200 feet rearward was considered necessary because several pedestrian fatalities have occurred
near the front entrance doors and the rear tires. In issuing the final rule, NHTSA was aware that the System B convex
crossview mirror already provides a view of these areas. The agency's intention was to reduce the number of pedestrian
fatalities by providing the school bus driver with the largest field-of-view possible. Redundant views of these
areas seemed logical and the view of the test grid was comprehensive. However, the school buses with complying System
A mirrors were not actually driven as part of the agency evaluation of the new mirror system requirements in connection
with the final rule. 



