 

Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions



Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certain interested parties. These briefs, proposed
findings and conclusions, and the evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusions set
forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusions filed by interested parties are inconsistent
with the findings and conclusions set forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusions are
denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision.



General Findings



The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement those that were made when Orders 124 and 135 were
first issued and when they were amended. The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed,
except where they may conflict with those set forth herein.

(a) The tentative marketing agreements and the orders, as hereby proposed to be amended, and all of the terms and conditions
thereof, will tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act;

(b) The parity prices of milk as determined pursuant to section 2 of the Act are not reasonable in view of the price of
feeds, available supplies of feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply and demand for milk
in the respective marketing areas, and the minimum prices specified in the tentative marketing agreements and the
orders, as hereby proposed to be amended, are such prices as will reflect the aforesaid factors, insure a sufficient
quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and be in the public interest; and

(c) The tentative marketing agreements and the orders, as hereby proposed to be amended, will regulate the handling
of milk in the same manner as, and will be applicable only to persons in the respective classes of industrial and commercial
activity specified in, marketing agreements upon which a hearing has been held.



Rulings on Exceptions



In arriving at the findings and conclusions, and the regulatory provisions of this decision, each of the exceptions
received was carefully and fully considered in conjunction with the record evidence. To the extent that the findings
and conclusions and the regulatory provisions of this decision are at variance with any of the exceptions, such exceptions
are hereby overruled for the reasons previously stated in this decision.



Marketing Agreements and Order Amending the Orders



Annexed hereto and made a part hereof are two documents, a Marketing Agreement regulating the handling of milk, and
an Order amending the orders regulating the handling of milk, in the Pacific Northwest and Southwestern Idaho-Eastern
Oregon marketing areas, which have been decided upon as the detailed and appropriate means of effectuating the foregoing
conclusions. It is hereby ordered that this entire decision and the two documents annexed hereto be published in the


Federal Register

.



Referendum Order To Determine Producer Approval for the Southwestern Idaho-Eastern Oregon Order; Determination
of Representative Period; and Designation of Referendum Agents



It is hereby directed that a referendum be conducted and completed on or before the 30th day after the date this decision
is issued, in accordance with the procedure for the conduct of referenda (7 CFR 900.300311), to determine whether
the issuance of the order as amended and as hereby proposed to be amended, regulating the handling of milk in the Southwestern
Idaho-Eastern Oregon marketing area is approved or favored by producers, as defined under the terms of each of the
orders_as amended and as hereby proposed to be amended_who during the representative period were engaged in the production
of milk for sale within the Southwestern Idaho-Eastern Oregon marketing area.

The representative period for the conduct of such referendum is hereby determined to be September 1993. The agent
of the Secretary to conduct the referendum is James R. Daugherty, market administrator of the Southwestern Idaho-Eastern
Oregon order.



Determination of Producer Approval and Representative for the Pacific Northwest Order



September 1993 is hereby determined to be the representative period for the purpose of ascertaining whether the issuance
of the order, as amended and as hereby proposed to be amended, regulating the handling of milk in the Pacific Northwest
marketing area is approved or favored by producers as defined under the terms of the order (as amended and as hereby
proposed to be amended) who during the representative period were engaged in the production of milk for sale within
the Pacific Northwest marketing area.



List of Subjects in 7 CFR Parts 1124 and 1135



Milk marketing orders.




Dated: February 9, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Patricia Jensen,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Inspection Services.


</SIGNJOB>
