 

The Federal meat inspection regulations define meat in 9 CFR 301.2(rr) as follows: 



The part of the muscle of any cattle, sheep, swine, or goats, which is skeletal or which is found in the tongue, in the
diaphragm, in the heart, or in the esophagus, with or without the accompanying and overlying fat, and the portions
of bone, skin, sinew, nerve, and blood vessels which normally accompany the muscle tissue and which are not separated
from it in the process of dressing. It does not include the muscle found in the lips, snout, or ears. This term, as applied
to products of equines, shall have a meaning comparable to that provided in this paragraph with respect to cattle,
sheep, swine, and goats.


 

The Federal meat inspection regulations also establish a definition and standard of identity for a meat food product
called ``mechanically separated (species)'' (MS(S)) in 9 CFR 319.5. ``Species'' refers to the species of livestock,
e.g., beef or pork. At various times, this product has also been called mechanically deboned meat and mechanically
processed (species) product. This meat food product is defined as ``any finely comminuted product resulting from
the mechanical separation and removal of most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle of livestock carcasses and
parts of carcasses'' and meeting the other provisions specified in 9 CFR 319.5. This provision and other provisions
in the Federal meat inspection regulations provide, among other things, for: (1) A definition and standard that classifies
MS(S) as a meat food product, (2) limitations on the amount of MS(S) that can be used in permitted products (viz., 20
percent of the livestock and poultry product portion of the product), (3) prohibitions on the use of MS(S) in certain
products (e.g., baby food), (4) limitations on certain components of MS(S), e.g., bone particle size, bone content
(measured as calcium content), protein quality, and a maximum fat content and minimum protein content, (5) requirements
for handling and for the production of MS(S) under an approved quality control program, and (6) a requirement that
MS(S) be separately identified in the ingredients statement of a meat food product in which it is used (9 CFR 317.2(c)
and (f), 318.18, 319.5, and 319.6). FSIS' 1982 final rulemaking on MS(S) (47 FR 28214) indicates that the Agency determined
that material differences in the consistency and the composition of MS(S) place it outside the scope of product traditionally
defined as meat (9 CFR 301.2(rr)), and that its differences are such that it should be defined as a distinctive standardized
product. As such, it should be identified by a name that adequately differentiates it from meat, viz., MS(S). When
MS(S) is used in meat food products, it must be separately listed in the ingredients statement by its standardized
name, e.g., ``mechanically separated beef (or pork).'' 
FSIS considered issues in regard to the lack of a regulatory definition and standard for certain poultry products
produced by mechanical deboning_products which are deemed to be similar to MS(S). Poultry products produced by mechanical
separation are similar to MS(S) in that they are finely comminuted and paste-like in consistency and form, and result
from the mechanical separation and removal of most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle and other tissue of poultry
carcasses and parts of carcasses. Over the years, the meat and poultry industries have referred to poultry product
produced by mechanical separation as ``mechanically deboned poultry'' and ``comminuted poultry,'' and have declared
the product as poultry or poultry meat (e.g., ``chicken'' and ``turkey meat'') on the labels of products in which they
are used as ingredients. The Agency first conducted a rulemaking regarding poultry products produced by mechanical
separation in 1969. In subsequent years, the amount of such product being manufactured and the number and range of
poultry products and meat food products in which it is used as an ingredient, has increased significantly. Moreover,
the Agency has gained a great deal of knowledge from its rulemakings regarding the livestock product resulting from
the mechanical separation and removal process, viz., MS(S). More recently, in a lawsuit, 

Bob Evans Farm, Inc. et al., 

v. 

Mike Espy, Secretary of Agriculture (D.D.C. Civil Action No. 930104) 

several red meat sausage manufacturers alleged that, without a regulatory definition and standard for poultry products
produced by mechanical separation, a disparate situation exists between labeling mechanically separated poultry
and MS(S), the livestock product resulting from the mechanical separation and removal process, for which a regulatory
definition and standard exist. The red meat sausage manufacturers have alleged that the disparate labeling situation
poses an unfair advantage for the manufacturers of mechanically separated poultry products. 




