 

(c) any response to the written submissions referred to in subrule (b) shall be filed by the investigating authority,
and by any participant supporting the investigating authority, within 20 days after the last day on which written
submissions in opposition to the Determination on Remand may be filed. 

(3) If, on remand, the investigating authority has not supplemented the record, 

(a) any participant who intends to challenge the Determination on Remand shall file a written submission within 20
days after the date on which the investigating authority filed the Determination on Remand with the panel; and 

(b) any response to the written submissions referred to in subrule (a) shall be filed by the investigating authority,
and by any participant filing in support of the investigating authority, within 20 days after the last day on which
such written submissions may be filed. 

(4) In the case of a panel review of a final determination made in Mexico, where a participant who fails to file a brief
under rule 57 files a written submission pursuant to subrule (2) or (3), the submission shall be disregarded by the
panel. 

(5) If no written submissions are filed under subrule (2)(b) or (3)(a) within the time periods established by these
rules, and if no motion pursuant to rule 20 is pending, the panel shall, within 10 days after the later of the due date
for such written submissions and the date of the denial of a motion pursuant to rule 20, issue an order affirming the
investigating authority's Determination on Remand. 

(6) Where a Determination on Remand is challenged, the panel shall issue a written decision pursuant to rule 72, either
affirming the Determination on Remand or remanding it to the investigating authority, no later than 90 days after
the Determination on Remand is filed. 

74. In setting the date by which a Determination on Remand shall be due from the investigating authority, the panel
shall take into account, among other factors, 

(a) the date that any Determination on Remand with respect to the same goods is due from the other investigating authority;
and 

(b) the effect the Determination on Remand from the other investigating authority might have on the deliberations
of the investigating authority with respect to the making of a final Determination on Remand. 



Re-examination of Orders and Decisions 



75. A clerical error in an order or decision of a panel, or an error in an order or decision of a panel arising from any accidental
oversight, inaccuracy or omission, may be corrected by the panel at any time during the panel review. 

76. (1) A participant may, within 10 days after a panel issues its decision, file a Notice of Motion requesting that
the panel re-examine its decision for the purpose of correcting an accidental oversight, inaccuracy or omission,
which shall set 

(a) the oversight, inaccuracy or omission with respect to which the request is made; 

(b) the relief requested; and 

(c) if ascertainable, a statement as to whether other participants consent to the motion. 

(2) The grounds for a motion referred to in subrule (1) shall be limited to one or both of the following grounds: 

(a) that the decision does not accord with the reasons therefor; or 

(b) that some matter has been accidentally overlooked, stated inaccurately or omitted by the panel. 

(3) No Notice of Motion referred to in subrule (1) shall set out any argument already made in the panel review. 

(4) There shall be no oral argument in support of a motion referred to in subrule (1). 

(5) Except as the panel may otherwise order under subrule (6)(b), no participant shall file a response to a Notice of
Motion filed pursuant to subrule (1). 

(6) Within seven days after the filing of a Notice of Motion under subrule (1), the panel shall 

(a) issue a decision ruling on the motion; or 

(b) issue an order identifying further action to be taken concerning the motion. 




