 

(1) One grant with a range of $270,000$360,000 to train nurse practitioners from the following regions:
Region I (Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont);
Region II (New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands);
Region III (Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia and the District of Columbia).
(2) One grant with a funding range of $245,000$325,000 to train nurse practitioners from the following region:
Region IV (Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, N. Carolina, S. Carolina and Tennessee).
(3) One grant with a funding range of $200,000$275,000 to train nurse practitioners from the following region:
Region V (Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, Wisconsin).
(4) One grant with a funding range of $300,000$395,000 to train nurse practitioners from the following regions:
Region VI (Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas);
Region VII (Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska).
(5) One grant with a funding range of $350,000$455,000 to train nurse practitioners from the following regions:
Region VIII (Colorado, Montana, N. Dakota, S. Dakota, Utah, Wyoming);
Region IX (Arizona, California, Hawaii, Nevada, American Samoa, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Marshall
Islands, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Republic of Palau and Guam);
Region X (Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, Washington).


Statutory and Regulatory Background


Title X of the Public Health Service Act, enacted by Public Law 91572, authorizes grants for projects to provide
family planning services to persons from low-income families and others. Section 1001 of the Act, as amended, authorizes
grants ``to assist in the establishment and operation of voluntary family planning projects which shall offer a broad
range of acceptable and effective family planning methods and services (including natural family planning methods,
infertility services, and services for adolescents).'' Section 1003 of the Act, as amended, authorizes the Secretary
to make grants to entities to provide the training for personnel to carry out the family planning services programs.
The regulations set out at 42 CFR part 59, subpart C, govern grants for family planning service training. Prospective
applicants should refer to the regulations in their entirety.


Role and Operation of the Training Program


The nurse practitioner is an integral part of the family planning system and performs a critical role in the delivery
of high quality family planning and women's health services. Nurse practitioner training programs are focused on
the preparation of registered professional nurses to function in an advanced nursing role as obstetric-gynecologic
or women's health nurse practitioners.
Successful applicants will be required to work closely with Central and Regional Office staffs and a network of agencies,
including Title X service delivery providers and nurse practitioner training advisory committees. Title X service
grantees from the regions serve on the nurse practitioner training advisory committees. Successful applicants
will be required to review and consider policy and program goals of both the Title X family planning training and services
programs, solicit advice from the regional training advisory committee, and consult with Title X service delivery
providers about training priorities, course content, and curriculum.
The nurse practitioner training curriculum must focus on preparation of obstetric-gynecologic or women's health
care nurse practitioners [hereafter referred to as nurse practitioner(s)] for advanced nursing practice. The nurse
practitioner training curriculum must include content sufficient to prepare graduates to perform the full range
of services required for nurse practitioners in the Title X family planning services program. The nurse practitioner
training program graduate should acquire, through the training program, special knowledge and skills in health
promotion and maintenance, disease prevention, psychosocial and physical assessment, and management of health-illness
needs in the primary care of women, provided predominantly in an ambulatory setting. The nurse practitioner will
provide such care in collaboration with the physician as well as with other members of the health-care team.
The design of the nurse practitioner training program, including the curriculum, must be consistent with national
and regional Title X goals. The program must be eligible for accreditation as a nurse practitioner program by a national
nursing accrediting body and must meet national or State recognition requirements as a provider of continuing education
through a national nursing organization or one of its constituents. Graduates of the nurse practitioner training
program must be eligible for State and/or national certification and meet State requirements for licensure or recognition.
The application should set out how the nurse practitioner training program will address the national health objectives
relating to family planning that are discussed in section 5 of the PHS document, Healthy People 2000, discussed below.
Specific attention should be given to training which would enable nurse practitioners to work more effectively to:
Reduce teen pregnancy; reduce unintended pregnancy among all women; reduce the initiation of sexual activity by
teenagers; increase the effectiveness of contraception, including barrier contraception, among all women; implement
pre-conception care; and reduce sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV.
Successful applicants will be responsible for the overall management of a nurse practitioner training program within
the geographic area for which the grant is made. This responsibility includes:
&bull;Developing an annual nurse practitioner training plan, which reflects national Title X program goals and
regional priorities and the training needs of local Title X services grantees;


