 



Sensor, Wheel Heating 

means a device that measures and indicates the temperature of the wheel tread. 


Service Application 

means a brake application that results from one or more service reductions. 


Service Reduction 

means a decrease in brake pipe pressure, usually from 6 to 25 pounds per square inch (psi) at a rate sufficiently rapid
to move the operating valve to service position, but at a rate not rapid enough to move the operating valve to emergency
position. 


Single Car Test 

means a comprehensive test of the functioning of all critical brake system components installed on an individual
car. Single car tests may be conducted within a predefined period of time and/or when components of the brake system
are removed, repaired, or replaced. 


 Single Car Test, Conventional Freight Brake 

means a comprehensive ``Freight Single Car Test'' of the air brake system on a freight car in accordance with the AAR
Standard S486, Section 4.0, contained in the AAR ``Manual of Standards and Recommended Practices, Section
E, Part II'' (November 1992). The test is required when certain repairs as defined in 232.605 are made to the
brake system. 


Single Car Test, Conventional Passenger Car 

means a comprehensive test of a conventional brake system on a passenger car in accordance with the AAR Standard S044,
contained in the AAR ``Instruction Pamphlet 50394, Supp. 3'' (April 1991). The test is required on a periodic
basis and when components of the brake system are removed, repaired, or replaced. 


Single Car Test, Conventional Periodic Freight Brake 

means a ``Periodic Freight Brake Test'' of the brake system on a freight car in accordance with the Association of American
Railroads (AAR) Standard S486, Section 3.0, contained in the AAR ``Manual of Standards and Recommended Practices,
Section E, Part II'' (Nov. 1992). The test is required on a periodic basis depending on car utilization. 



Single Car Test Device 

means a device capable of controlling the application and release of the brakes on a single car through defined orifices
and of measuring air flow. 


Single Passenger Train Set Test 

means a test equivalent to the single car test, but conducted on a passenger train set as a unit rather than a car at a time.



Slack Adjuster, Automatic 

means an appliance for automatically adjusting brake cylinder piston travel to a predetermined length. 


Spot Checks 

means random checks of train brake system inspections, tests, or maintenance operations conducted by qualified
train brake system supervisors. 


Switching Service 

means the classification of cars according to commodity or destination; assembling of cars for train movements;
changing the position of cars for purposes of loading, unloading, or weighing; placing of locomotives and cars for
repair or storage; or moving of rail equipment in connection with work service that does not constitute a road movement.



Track, Main 

means a track, other than an auxiliary track, extending through yards or between stations, upon which trains are operated
by timetable or mandatory directives or both, or the use of which is governed by a signal system. 


Train 

means one or more locomotives coupled with one or more rail cars, except during switching operations or where the operation
is that of classifying rail cars within a railroad yard for the purpose of making or breaking up trains. 


Train Air Brake System 

means an arrangement of air brake equipment wherein (1) air is stored in reservoirs on cars and locomotives; (2) an
operating valve, such as a control valve causes the brakes to apply and release through changing the brake-pipe pressure;
and (3) a reduction in the brake-pipe pressure tends to cause a brake application, and an increase in the brake-pipe
pressure tends to cause a brake release. 




