 

(5) Execution of documents relating to inter-borrower assumption of indebtedness. 
(6) Approval in amounts of less than $25,000,000 of: 
(i) The use of general funds; or 
(ii) Sales or transfers of property and related releases of lien. 
(7) Approval or disapproval of the selection of a manager or attorney by an electric borrower. 
(d) Memoranda to electric staff or to two or more electric borrowers. 
(e) Approval of staff instructions affecting only the Electric Program. 
(f) Waivers of borrower requirements pursuant to 7 CFR part 1710, Subpart E_Power Requirements Studies. 
(g) All authorities conferred upon other persons in 1700.123. 


1700.123 

Deputy Assistant Administrator_Electric. 


The Deputy Assistant Administrator_Electric in conformance with applicable regulations and REA policy is delegated
authority to approve or execute for the electric program: 
(a) Any contracts for the acquisition of plant-in-place for $10,000,000 or less and related financial transactions.

(b) The following matters concerning borrowers' facilities, organization or corporate structure: 
(1) Changes in borrowers' corporate status. 
(2) Power supply contracts and agreements including wholesale power, fuel, interconnections and wheeling agreements,
participation agreements, lease agreements for facilities or properties, power sales agreements with non-RE Act
beneficiaries, and integrated transmission agreements between REA borrowers and non-borrowers, any of which require
a construction expenditure of more than $10,000,000. 
(c) Approvals required under the mortgage to retire capital credits or make other cash distributions in the following
cases: (1) Any distribution borrower that does not meet the following conditions: 
(i) The retirement will not reduce total equity to less than 25 percent of total assets and other debits; 
(ii) The oldest capital credits outstanding before the retirement are at least 10 years old where the retirement method
is first-in, first-out, or the retirement is not more than 7 percent of all outstanding capital credits before the
retirement where another method of retirement, authorized by the bylaws, is used; and 
(iii) TIER and DSC ratios exceed mortgage minimum, i.e., the average of the highest two of the last 3 years exceeds 1.5
for TIER and 1.25 for DSC. 
(2) Any power supply borrower. 
(d) All authorities conferred upon other persons in 1700.124 and 1700.131. 


1700.124 

Regional Directors. 


Regional Directors in conformance with applicable regulations and REA policy are delegated authority to approve
or execute for the electric program's distribution borrowers: 
(a) The following loans, loan guarantees, lien accommodations, and documents: 
(1) Insured loans, loan guarantees, and lien accommodations or subordinations in amounts of less than $10,000,000,
except for those approvals reserved for the Administrator in 1700.72(a), or those reserved for the Assistant
Administrator_Electric under 1700.122(a). 
(2) All certifications and findings required by the RE Act or other applicable laws and regulations, the imposing
and releasing of conditions precedent to the advance of loan funds, and all mortgages, loan contracts or other documents
relating to the delegations set forth in paragraph (a)(1) of this section. 
(b) The following matters for unpaid and outstanding loans: 
(1) Rescission of loans or termination of loan guarantee commitments when the amount of the rescission or termination
is $10,000,000 or less, except for discretionary or operating loans. 
(2) Requests to extend the period for advancing loan funds when the amount of unadvanced loan funds is $10,000,000
or less, except for: 
(i) Requests from borrowers that are delinquent in their loan payments to REA or in loans guaranteed by REA or in litigation
that may affect loan security. 
(ii) Requests that do not fully comply with the requirements specified in REA regulations. 
(iii) Cases where the Administrator has further reserved this authority. 





