 




<USBUREAU>Health Resources and Services Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Ryan White Title IV_HIV Demonstration Program for </DOCTITLE>
Children, Adolescents, and Families 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), PHS. 


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of availability of funds. 



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB), HRSA, 
announces that fiscal year (FY) 1994 funds are available for grants 
for demonstration projects to provide services for children, 
adolescents, women and families infected with or affected by the 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Projects will be funded to 
demonstrate strategies and innovative models of family-centered, 
community-based coordinated care and research for children, youth, 
women of childbearing age, and families infected and affected by 
HIV infection, AIDS or other related conditions, or those at risk 
for developing infection. Funds were appropriated for this purpose 
under Section 2671, Title IV, of the Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS 
Resource Emergency (CARE) Act of 1990, Public Law 101381, which 
amended Title XXVI of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S. Code 
300ff11 

et seq.

). 



The PHS is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease 
prevention objectives of Healthy People 2000, a PHS national 
activity for setting priority areas. Title IV directly addresses 
the Healthy People 2000 objectives related to the priority area of 
HIV infection. Potential applicants may obtain a copy of Healthy 
People 2000 (Full Report; Stock Number 01700104740) or Healthy 
People 2000 (Summary Report: Stock No. 017001004731) through 
the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC 204029325 (telephone 202 7833238). 




</SUMMARY>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Grant applications for HIV Demonstration Program for 
Children, Adolescents, and Families (PHS form 

#

51611, approved 
under OMB 

#

09370189) must be obtained from and submitted to: 
Chief, Grants Management Branch, Office of Program Support, 
Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health Resources and Services 
Administration, room 1812, Parklawn Building, 5600 Fishers Lane, 
Rockville, Maryland 20857, (301) 4431440.



</ADDRESS>
<DATE>
DATES:

 The application deadline date is April 8, 1994. Competing 
applications will be considered to be on time if they are either: 
(1) Received on or before the deadline date, or 
(2) postmarked on or before the deadline date and received in 
time for orderly processing. (Applicants should request a legibly 
dated receipt from a commercial carrier or U.S. Postal Service 
postmark or obtain a legibly dated receipt from a commercial 
carrier or U.S. Postal Service. Private metered postmarks shall 
not be acceptable as proof of timely mailing. 


Late applications not accepted for processing or those sent to an 
address other than specified in the 

ADDRESSES 

section will be 
returned to the applicant. 
Applicants will be notified of grant awards in July 1994. The 
starting dates for projects will be specified in the program 
guidance. 


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Additional information regarding 
technical and program issues may be obtained from: Beth Roy, 
Division of Services for Children with Special Health Needs, 
Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health Resources and Services 
Administration, room 18A19, Parklawn Building, 5600 Fishers Lane, 
Rockville, Maryland 20857, Telephone (301) 4439051. Requests for 
information concerning business management issues should be 
directed to: John Gallicchio, Grants Management Officer (GMO), 
Maternal and Child Health Bureau, at the address specified in the 


ADDRESSES 

section. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Program Background and Objectives 


The Pediatric AIDS Demonstration Program was initiated in 1988. 
The program grew from 13 projects funded at $4.4 million to a total 
of 44 projects funded at $20.8 in 1993. Since 1988, the program 
has evolved from a primary focus on the coordination of services 
for the management and care of infected children and their families 
to also address the broader prevention and care needs of youth and 
women affected by the HIV infection, AIDS or related conditions. 
In FY 1994, Congress funded the Pediatric AIDS Demonstration 
Program under Title IV of the Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS 
Resources Emergency (CARE) Act (Title IV). The program will be 
permanently authorized in section 2671 of the Public Health Service 
Act. Title IV authorizes demonstration grants to organizations to 
provide comprehensive services and enhance access to clinical 
research trials for children, youth, women, and families with or 
affected by HIV infection. As a result of this transfer to Title 
IV, the focus of the program is further expanded to develop 
innovative models that link systems of comprehensive 
primary/community-based medical and social services for the 
affected population with NIH and other clinical research trials. 


Purpose 


The purpose of the funding is to improve and expand the system of 
comprehensive care services for children, youth, women, and 
families who are infected with or affected by HIV and AIDS and to 
link comprehensive care systems with clinical research. Funds 
authorized and appropriated under Title IV will be used to 
demonstrate and test potentially replicable models of service 
delivery and clinical research to respond to the unique and 
challenging problems of access to a comprehensive care system faced 
by HIV and AIDS affected children, youth, women, and families. 
While children, youth, and women represent the most rapidly growing 
population groups affected by HIV and AIDS, they also represent the 
groups facing the greatest barriers in accessing care and research. 
These groups disproportionately are minorities and living in 
poverty. Children, youth, and women have a complex array of 
economic and social problems that increase their need for 
comprehensive services and increase the cost and intensity of care. 
Furthermore, since they comprise the most recent and fastest 
growing population groups impacted by HIV and AIDS, the care 
infrastructure and provider capacity are often not developed and 
require targeted resources and efforts to develop an appropriate 
system of care. 
Given these unmet needs, activities under the demonstration grants 
should address the following goals: 



_Foster the development of comprehensive care 
infrastructures, including primary care, that increase access to 
culturally-competent, family-centered, community-based, coordinated 
care. 
_Emphasize prevention within the comprehensive care 
system in order to reduce the spread of the HIV infection to 
vulnerable populations. 




</SUPPLEM>
