 

(3) What additional research is needed to help the FHWA define its vision standard; 
(4) Upon conclusion of the Vision Waiver Program, what should be the driving status of waived drivers, assuming continued
safe driving performance. 
The FHWA is eager to gain a broader perspective of the public's viewpoint concerning other studies, data and experiences
which will enhance the agency's knowledge on the subject. The FHWA is also interested in sharing its data with other
researchers and modes which may undertake useful analysis and initiate studies leading to more enlightened approaches
to establishing future physical qualification standards, standards that are both necessary and valid to increasing
opportunities in the truck-driving profession while ensuring that society's high expectations of CMV safety are
realized. Notice of the hearing will be published in the 

Federal Register

 and will contain further questions to which the agency seeks responses, as well as directions on how to obtain information
about the data collected during the vision waiver study. 








Conclusion 


The FHWA will publish, within 30 days of the date of publication of this notice, its determination regarding the continuation
of the vision waiver program through the proposed March 31, 1996 deadline. This determination will be based upon comments
received in response to this notice, as well as all empirical evidence gathered to date. 
If the FHWA determines, based upon comments and related information, not to extend the program to such date, the agency
will publish its rationale for such determination and the date upon which waived drivers may no longer operate in interstate
commerce. Additionally, waived drivers will be notified directly of the agency's decision to terminate the program.

If the FHWA determines, based upon comments and related information, that the waiver program may continue until March
31, 1996, the agency will also publish that determination as well in the 

Federal Register

. 


Appendix_The Vision Waiver Standards and Conditions 


The vision waiver application procedure, standards and conditions are being reproduced here for informational
purposes only. The agency 

is not

 accepting applications for vision waivers at this time. 
Applicants for a waiver from the vision qualification requirement were required to submit their applications on
plain paper (there is no application form), include all supporting documents, and use the format set forth below.
Each information item must have been completed by an appropriate answer or marked ``None'', or ``NA'' if not applicable.





