 

<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Philip Spiller, 
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS401), 
Food and Drug Administration, 
200 C St. SW., 
Washington, DC 20204, 
2022543885. 


For further information concerning the guidance entitled ``Fish 
and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guide,'' contact: 
Donald W. Kraemer (address above). 
For further information concerning the economic impact analysis 
contained in this proposal, contact: 
Richard A. Williams, Jr., 
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS726), 
Food and Drug Administration, 
200 C St. SW., 
Washington, DC 20204, 
2022055271. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
I. Overview 


The purpose of these proposed regulations is to establish 
mandatory preventive controls to ensure the safety of seafood 
products sold commercially in the United States and exported 
abroad. These preventive controls will be based on a system 
known as HACCP. HACCP is a system by which food processors and 
importers can evaluate the kinds of hazards that could affect 
their products, institute controls necessary to keep these 
hazards from occurring, monitor the performance of these 
controls, and maintain records of this monitoring as a matter of 
routine practice. 
FDA is proposing to require that domestic and foreign 
processors and importers adopt HACCP controls to prevent the 
occurrence of hazards that could affect the safety of these 
seafood products for consumers. If these regulations are 
adopted, FDA will review the adequacy of HACCP controls as part 
of its program of mandatory inspections and import examinations. 
Such a review will occur in addition to traditional inspection 
activities. FDA is also encouraging, but not proposing to 
require, that processors and importers adopt the same types of controls for nonsafety hazards relating to economic
adulteration 
and quality. 
FDA is proposing to make HACCP mandatory for the seafood 
industry for the following reasons: 
1. Adoption of HACCP controls by the seafood industry, 
coupled with inspections by FDA based on the HACCP system, will 
produce a more effective and more efficient system for ensuring 
the safety of seafood products than currently exists. The 
current inspection system places too great a burden on Government 
inspectors to uncover problems and to take regulatory action to 
address those problems. HACCP places primary responsibility upon 
the industry to demonstrate that hazards are understood and are 
being prevented. 
2. A nationally mandated HACCP system will provide a basis 
for enhanced consumer confidence in the safety of seafood 
products. Consumers should not be afraid to eat foods, such as 
seafood, that are recommended as useful lower fat and lower 
saturated fat substitutes for higher fat meats (Ref. 1, p. 13; 
Ref. 2, p. 21). 
3. The know-how for applying HACCP to seafood is in an 
advanced state of development. A considerable amount of work on 
applying HACCP to seafood has already been done by some States, 
academia, and the Federal Government as well as through 
cooperative activities between the Federal Government and 
industry and through independent industry efforts.



</SUPPLEM>
