 


Definitions To Be Revised 





Title X amends the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Act to change the childhood age of concern from less than 7 years of age
to less than 6 years. This change, which also reflects the advice of the CDC in its Statement, cited above, requires
revisions to HUD's lead-based paint regulations in several locations. For example, the current definition of residential
structure (24 CFR 35.3), includes a reference to nondwelling facilities ``commonly used by children under seven
years of age.'' A similar reference currently is found in 24 CFR 200.815(c), which requires that, in the case of a sale
of a HUD-owned single-family property, if the purchaser is an owner-occupant and the occupant family contains one
or more children under the age of seven years, the sale of a HUD-owned single-family property must be deferred to allow
time to check for elevated blood lead levels and test for and abate lead-based paint. A similar requirement pertains
to multifamily properties (see 24 CFR 200.820(c)(ii) and 24 CFR 200.825(c)(1)). 



HUD also would revise or add definitions of the following terms in 24 CFR 35.22: defective paint, HEPA, HUD-associated
housing, misted scraping, paint removal, replacement, and residential structure. 



Options To Test Defective Surfaces and Use Laboratory Analysis 





The proposed rule would provide an option for testing of defective paint surfaces to determine if, in fact, lead-based
paint is present; if the test results are below 1.0 mg/cm

2

, abatement is not required. For structures built prior to 1978, the existing regulations require visual inspection
for defective paint surfaces and treatment of those surfaces found to be defective. Therefore, under the existing
regulations, surfaces that are defective but do not contain lead and are not hazardous may be unnecessarily treated.
Testing the surface is the only way to determine if it is hazardous and thus requires treatment. The revision would
permit a cost review between testing and treatment without testing. 



The proposed rule also specifically would permit laboratory analysis as an approved alternative to XRF testing.
Current program regulations require the Federal Housing Commissioner's permission to use laboratory analysis
on a case-by-case basis. This has led to a burdensome and growing number of individual concurrence actions. XRF readings
are given in milligrams per square centimeter (mg/cm2), but laboratories frequently report test results as a percent
of lead by weight. Therefore, an alternative standard of 0.5 percent by weight or 5000 parts per million (ppm) would
be permitted as an alternative to the more widely used standard of 1.0 mg/cm2.



 
Approved Abatement and Dust-Control Practices 





At the time the existing regulation was written, abatement techniques were not refined and the danger of lead dust
was relatively unknown. Research and experience in both the public and private sectors have advanced the state of
knowledge on these subjects. The proposed rule would reference various abatement methods (defined in 24 CFR 35.22)
that are consistent with the HUD Interim Guidelines and In-Place Management Recommendations. The proposed rule
also would warn about the danger of lead dust. Sections 35.56(a) (1) and (2), concerning requirements applicable
to the sale of federally owned property that will be used for residential purposes, also would be amended in this proposed
rule. 




Including Up-to-Date Sampling and Testing Information 





Given the high cost of testing for lead-based paint, it is desirable to follow a statistically sound random sampling
technique that provides satisfactory assurance of detecting lead-based paint, while not requiring the testing
of all units in a multifamily property. Existing regulations for the multifamily mortgage insurance and multifamily
property disposition programs require the testing of chewable surfaces in a random sample of ten housing units in
properties of 20 units or more. For properties with fewer than 20 units, six units must be tested. These requirements
do not have statistical validity and consequently do not provide the desired degree of assurance. Using the sample
sizes and random sampling procedures in this proposed rule, if no unacceptable hazards are observed in the sample
units tested, then there would be at least 95 percent confidence that no more than 5 percent of all units or 50 units,
whichever is smaller, would have an unacceptable lead-based paint hazard. The table included in 200.820(e)
of the proposed rule was developed to achieve the 95 percent confidence level. 



As an example, the table would require that 56 units must be tested in a 600-unit development. If lead (above th e standard
of 1.0 mg/cm

2

) is not found in any of the 56 tested units, the Department can be 95 percent confident that no more than 30 units (the
lesser of 50 or 5 percent of 600) have lead levels above the standard. As a second example, 236 units (5.9 percent of 4,000)
must be tested in a 4,000-unit development. If all are below the standard, there is 95 percent confidence that no more
than 50 of the 4,000 units (the lesser of 50 or 5 percent of 4000) have lead levels above the standard. 



The size of the sample (number of units to be tested) is determined by three factors:






N = Total number of units in the project; 


k = Maximum number of leaded units (a unit with one or more components with lead-based paint at or above the standard
of 1.0 mg/cm

2

) that can be tolerated to be missed completely; 

n = Smallest number of units that must be tested to provide 95 percent confidence that the total number of leaded units
is less than ``k'', based on finding no leaded units in the sample tested.






For example, to be 95 percent confident that no more than 5 percent of 300 units have lead, then k=15; if no more than 50
out of 4,000 with lead, then k=50. 





In the usual statistical convention, ``n'' is defined as the smallest integer for which the probability of obtaining
no positives in a simple random sample of size ``n'' from a population of size ``N'', of which ``k'' are positive, is
less than 0.05. When ``k'' of ``N'' total are positive, the probability of observing no positives in a simple random
sample of size ``n'' is given by the formula:




[(N^k)(N^k^1) ... (N^k^n+1)]/[(N)(N^1) ... (N^n+1)].







