 

(6) 

Section 3280.305(d)

_Interpretative Bulletin D576, under which the Department has been operating since the late 1970s,
is paraphrased as a new paragraph (2). It clarifies that the deflection limit for a cantilevered roof is 2 times the
length divided by 180. Eaves and cornices shall be designed for a net uplift pressure of 2.5 times the design uplift
wind pressure cited in 3280.305(c)(1)(i) for Wind Zone I, and for the design pressures cited in 3280.305(c)(1)(ii)
for Wind Zones II and III. This change has already been issued in the Energy Rule (58 FR 54975, 55006), but is modified
in this rule to reflect the standards established for the new Wind Zones.

(7) 

Section 3280.305(e)

_The standards for fastening of roof framing to wall framing and wall to floor framing are changed to require the use
of 26 gage minimum steel strapping, or those elements shall be connected by a combination of strapping and structural
rated wall sheathing that overlaps the roof and floor. Investigations after Hurricane Andrew revealed that current
designs allowed 30 gage straps with staples for connections of roofs to walls, and walls to floors; such straps were
inadequate to resist even moderate wind forces.

(7) 

Section 3280.306(a)

_The wind design loads used for calculating resistance of support and anchoring systems to overturning and lateral
movements are revised to include the simultaneous application of the horizontal drag and uplift forces determined
in 3280.305(c).

(8) 

Section 3280.306(g)(2)

_The standards are amended to require that the manufacturer's instructions for anchoring equipment be certified
in accordance with the testing procedures found in ASTM D395391, Standard Specification for Strapping, Flat
Steel and Seals. The certification must be made by a registered engineer, architect, or independent third party testing
agency. This is an updated standard for steel strapping that supersedes the standard originally referenced in the
Federal standard.

(9) 

Sections 3280.403 and 3280.404

_These sections are amended to require all primary windows, including egress windows and sliding glass doors, to
resist the design exterior and interior wind pressures specified in 3280.305(c)(1) for components and cladding.
These requirements are effective one year from today's date of publication of this rule, as provided in the ``DATES''
section of this preamble. In addition, manufacturers are required to provide instructions for the installation
of shutters or protective covers, to protect the windows and doors.

(10) 

Section 3282.362

_Minor conforming changes regarding the data plate are made in paragraph (c)(3)(i). These changes are explained
under 3280.5.



V. Other Matters



Significant Regulatory Action



The Director of the Office of Management and Budget has indicated that this rule could constitute a ``significant
regulatory action'' as that term is defined in section 3(f) of the Executive Order on Regulatory Planning and Review
issued by the President on September 30, 1993. Because an estimation of the new requirements as proposed indicated
that they might have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more, a regulatory impact analysis has been prepared
for this final rule. This analysis concludes that the requirements that will be imposed by this final rule will have
an effect on the economy of less than $100 million, and will have benefits that outweigh the costs of the additional
requirements. This analysis is available for public inspection during regular business hours in room 10276, Rules
Docket Clerk, Office of General Counsel, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington,
DC 20410.



Regulatory Flexibility Act



The Secretary, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 605(b)), has reviewed this rule before
publication and by approving it certifies that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities. However, the regulatory impact analysis referenced in the preceding paragraph also provides
relevant analysis and discussion of possible economic impact on businesses, including small businesses, that must
comply with the provisions of this rule. The rule will establish additional safety standards for manufactured housing,
and therefore would affect the design and construction requirements in specified areas of the country. The nature
of the rule and its purpose do not present an opportunity for the Department to vary the rule's requirements so as to
reduce burdens on small entities.



Environmental Impact



At the time of publication of the proposed rule, a finding of no significant impact with respect to the environment
was made in accordance with HUD regulations in 24 CFR part 50 that implement section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332). The proposed rule is adopted by this final rule without any change that would be
significant for purposes of additional environmental impact. Accordingly, the initial finding of no significant
impact remains applicable, and is available for public inspection between 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. weekdays in the
office of the Rules Docket Clerk at the above address.



Executive Order 12612, Federalism



The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under section 6(a) of Executive Order 12612, Federalism, has determined
that the policies contained in this rule have federalism implications, and are subject to review under the Order.
Specifically, the rule provides for mandatory specifications for the construction of manufactured homes that exceed
the standards currently permitted in certain areas of the country. States and local governments would no longer have
the option of imposing separate requirements that exceed current standards, but are less stringent than these new
standards. However, because the Federal standards already preempt local discretion in the construction of manufactured
homes, this marginal degree of preemption is not believed to be significant for purposes of identifying federalism
concerns.

Therefore, for these reasons and because of the health and safety aspects of this rule, the General Counsel has determined
that the federalism implications are not sufficient to warrant the preparation of a federalism assessment under
the Order.



Executive Order 12606, the Family



In the proposed rule, the Department indicated that the rule was not subject to review under Executive Order 12606,
The Family. As addressed earlier in this preamble, some of the commenters were concerned about this position. Although
the Department does not believe this final rule implicates family concerns within the spirit of the Executive Order,
the Department has analyzed the rule as required under the Order.

The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under the Executive Order, has evaluated the potential of this rule
to have a significant impact on family formation, maintenance, and general well-being. Although as a result of the
more stringent construction requirements implemented by this rule, some families may lose an ownership option for
housing, the general well-being of families, and society, is served better by ensuring minimal quality standards
for such housing. The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development has certified that, to the extent permitted by law,
the rule has undergone a Family Impact Assessment under the Executive Order.






