 

Final Rules



Part 0 of Chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:



PART 0_COMMISSION ORGANIZATION



1. The authority citation for Part 0 continues to read as follows:







Authority: 

Secs. 5, 48 Stat. 1068, as amended; 47 U.S.C. 155.




2. Section 0.5 is amended by adding a new paragraph (a)(14) to read as follows:



0.5



General description of Commission organization and operations.



(a)***

(14) Cable Services Bureau.



* * * * *



3. Section 0.61 is amended by revising paragraph (a); removing paragraph (h) and paragraphs (j) through (n); and redesignating
paragraph (i) as paragraph (h) to read as follows:



0.61



Functions of the Bureau.



* * * * *



(a) Process applications for authorizations in radio and television services, including conventional and auxiliary
broadcast services, and direct broadcast satellite services.



* * * * *



4. Section 0.101 is added to Subpart A to read as follows:



Cable Services Bureau



0.101



Functions of the Bureau.



The Cable Services Bureau develops, recommends and administers policies and programs with respect to the regulation
of services, facilities, rates and practices of cable television systems and with respect to the creation of competition
to cable systems. The Bureau has the following duties and responsibilities:

(a) Administer and enforce cable television related rules and policies including those relating to rates, technical
standards, customer service, ownership, competition to cable systems, broadcast station signal retransmission
and carriage, program access, wiring, equipment, channel leasing, and federal-state/local regulatory relationships.

(b) Plan and develop proposed rulemakings and conduct studies and analyses (legal, engineering, social and economic)
of various petitions for policy or rule changes submitted by industry or the public.

(c) Conduct studies and compile data relating to cable television operation necessary for the Commission to develop
and maintain an adequate regulatory program.

(d) Advise and assist the public, other government agencies and industry groups on cable television regulation and
related matters.

(e) Administer financial and other reporting systems.

(f) Investigate complaints and answer general inquiries from the public regarding cable television service.

(g) Participate in hearings before the Administrative Law Judges, the Review Board and the Commission.



