 

The basis for this requirement is the concern that ATT's acquisition of McCaw could put it in the position of being
the only interexchange carrier with the ability to offer prospective customers of wireless interexchange service
the option of receiving a single bill for both cellular and interexchange services. Given ATT's already dominant
position in this segment of the interexchange market, this added advantage could be sufficient to further increase
ATT's ability to increase prices or exclude interexchange competitors by virtue of its control of a cellular
duopolist. The language used in Section IV.D.1 was adopted in preference to a simple nondiscrimination requirement
out of a concern that, given its position as a possibly major provider of billing services to McCaw, arrangements that
could be workable for ATT could be totally uneconomic for other interexchange carriers. Thus, it might not be
practical for smaller interexchange carriers to perform all of the rating and processing of local cellular calls
if they only provide interexchange service to a relatively small number of McCaw customers. The chosen language was
intended to assure that sufficiently refined billing information was provided to such interexchange carriers that
they could readily incorporate it with their interexchange bills with a minimum of additional processing and programming
required.

Section IV.F. permits ATT to act as McCaw's agent in marketing local cellular services and in jointly marketing
local cellular, interexchange and other services on specified conditions. These conditions, which basically track
those the United States has recommended for the Bell Companies if they should be permitted to provide wireless interexchange
service, are 

first,

 if ATT engages in marketing local cellular service for McCaw, it must advise actual or prospective subscribers
of their right to resubscribe to the interexchange carrier of their choice; 

second,

 ATT must state the price, terms and rate plans for local cellular and interexchange service separately, meaning
that it cannot sell bundled offerings of local cellular and interexchange service; and 

third,

 ATT is enjoined from selling interexchange service at a price, term or discount that depends on whether the customer
obtains local cellular service from McCaw, and McCaw and McCaw Cellular Systems are enjoined from selling local cellular
service at a price, term or discount that depends on whether the customer obtains interexchange service from ATT.

Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, ATT may, without separately stating the charges for interexchange
service and terminating local cellular service, offer a ``calling party pays'' service for calls made to a cellular
telephone. Ordinarily, the cellular subscriber receiving the calls pays for the cellular airtime. Section IV.E.2
would permit ATT to charge a single price for the interexchange portion of such a call and the terminating airtime
(paid by the caller, not the called party), under the following conditions: 

First,

 ATT must obtain the underlying local cellular service used to terminate the call at a generally available rate
which, to prevent against artificially high transfer prices,is no higher than the rate offered to resellers of local
cellular service; and 

second,

 this rate must be disclosed to other interexchange carriers and be described in the Equal Access plan to be filed for
approval by the United States. These conditions will allow a potentially useful new service to be provided while assuring
that ATT's competitors will have a fair opportunity to compete with ATT in providing this service.

Section IV.G provides that if the United States certifies, upon a showing by ATT, that there is insufficient
demand by interexchange carriers for access to McCaw Cellular systems within any Local Cellular Service Area, McCaw
Cellular Systems may provide new services in which access is provided to interexchange carriers at centralized points.

Section IV.H permits McCaw to hand off cellular digital packet data transmissions (as specified in Section II.F)
to interexchange carriers at centralized points. The United States understands that the transport cost for packetized
data, especially that using the Internet Protocol, is small in comparison to other elements of the service, and, thus,
this service could be economically justified more easily (in more locations) if providers did not need to implement
switching or routing points in each local Cellular Service Area. In addition, since transport across the Internet
does not involve distance-sensitive charges, it will not make any difference to users where their messages are transfered
onto the Internet. Finally, the Internet protocol does not have any position for indicating a customer's choice of
access provider and thus it would make use of the CDPD service less convenient and probably more expensive for such
users if they were required to include addressing for separate access providers in addition to the customary Internet
address normally employed by such users.

Cellular systems in which McCaw has voting interest of fifty percent or less and does not have the right, power or ability
to control are defined in Section II.U as ``McCaw Minority Owned Cellular Systems.'' These systems are not subject
to most of the equal access requirements of Section IV of the proposed Final Judgment, but are subject to the non-bundling
requirements of Section IV.F.
<FOOTCITE>7</FOOTCITE>
 Section IV.E provides that if ATT or McCaw obtains control of a cellular system after entry of the proposed Final
Judgment, it will be converted to equal access within one year (or within 21 months after the commencement of this action,
whichever is later).



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
7

</FOOTNAME>
Some of the cellular systems in which McCaw has an interest are deemed ``Bell Companies'' under the MFJ and are subject
to the MFJ's equal access requirements. The United States has proposed an order to the MFJ Court that would impose certain
requirements in order to protect the provision of equal access by those systems. Whether these systems are also McCaw
Cellular Systems, or are McCaw Minority Owned Cellular Systems, depends on whether McCaw (as well as the Bell Company)
controls the system.



</FOOTNOTE>

