 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 

I. Statutory Authority 



Today's proposal discusses several regulatory programs 
administered by EPA which provide for the importation of vehicles 
into the United States. Section 203 of the Clean Air Act (Act), 
42 U.S.C. 7522, provides the statutory authority for regulations 
relating to the importation of new motor vehicles
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 and motor 
vehicle engines which are not covered by a certificate of 
conformity. Sections 203(a)(1) and 203(b)(2) provide the 
statutory authority for the regulations in today's proposal. 
Generally, section 203(a)(1) prohibits the importation of 
vehicles not covered by a certificate of conformity by any person 
except as provided by regulation of the Administrator. The 
exception for regulations of the Administrator in section 
203(a)(1) refers to the grant of authority in section 203(b)(2), 
which states that a vehicle not covered by a certificate of 
conformity and offered for importation shall be refused admission 
into the United States unless the Administrator, by regulation, 
provides for deferring final determination regarding admission of 
the vehicle offered for importation upon such terms and 
conditions as may appear appropriate to insure that any imported 
vehicle will be brought into conformity with applicable 
standards, requirements and limitations. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
The word ``vehicle'' hereinafter refers to a motor 
vehicle and motor vehicle engine. 

</FOOTNOTE>


To implement section 203(b)(2), EPA has established 
procedures regarding the importation of vehicles not covered by a 
certificate of conformity. EPA first promulgated regulations on 
November 15, 1972 (37 FR 24314) which allowed individuals to 
import vehicles and perform modifications subsequent to 
importation. This regulatory structure was replaced on July 1, 
1988 with a new regulatory program promulgated on September 25, 
1987. This program established the independent commercial 
importer (ICI) as the entity responsible for the importation of 
nonconforming vehicles. The primary purpose of this NPRM is to 
propose additional provisions regarding the importation of 
vehicles intended for sale in Canada but identical to U.S. 
certified configurations. See section II for a discussion of the 
importation of Canadian vehicles. This proposal also includes 
amendments to the procedures governing the importation of 
nonconforming vehicles generally. 

In addition to the regulations administering the importation 
of vehicles pursuant to section 203(b)(2), EPA is proposing 
amendments to regulations which implement section 203(b)(1) of 
the Act. Section 203(b)(1) states, ``[t]he Administrator may 
exempt any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine *** 
upon such terms and conditions as he may find necessary for the 
purpose of research, investigations, studies, demonstrations, or 
training or for reasons of national security.'' To implement this 
section of the Act, regulations were initially promulgated on 
September 10, 1974 (39 FR 32609), codified at 40 CFR part 85, 
subpart R, to provide for a program allowing manufacturers to 
apply for and receive exemptions for vehicles that were used for 
the purposes specified in section 203(b)(1) of the Act. These 
regulations were amended on March 3, 1980 (45 FR 13733) to extend 
the availability of exemptions under section 203(b)(1) to 
individuals and other non-manufacturers. On July 14, 1982 (47 FR 
30482) these regulations were amended to reduce the information 
required in a manufacturer's exemption application. The 
regulations were also amended on August 27, 1985 (50 FR 34797) to 
require that a claim of confidentiality accompany information 
submitted to EPA that is covered by such a claim. 

The proposed amendments to the regulations, codified at 40 
CFR 85.1703, implement section 203(b)(1) of the Act to address 
the definition of a motor vehicle; to clarify the definition of a 
precertification vehicle in contrast to a vehicle subject to a 
testing exemption; and, to revise the regulations regarding 
obtaining a display exemption pursuant to 40 CFR 85.1511(b)(4) 
and 85.1707. These proposed changes are discussed in section V, 
Proposed Amendments to subpart R. 



II. Background for Canadian Importations 



The framework of EPA's current Imports regulations 
establishes, with some limited exceptions, that only independent 
commercial importers (ICIs) holding a valid certificate of 
conformity may import nonconforming vehicles into the United 
States. An ICI bears the responsibility not only for performing 
all necessary modifications and testing, but also for ensuring 
that the vehicle it imports complies with United States emission 
requirements for the vehicle's useful life. In effect, this 
imposes on the ICI the same emission requirements the Act imposed 
on original equipment manufacturers (OEMs). 

On November 24, 1987, potential importers of Canadian 
vehicles for resale in the U.S. petitioned EPA
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>
 to reconsider 
the regulations as they apply to the commercial importation of 
vehicle models originally designed and built for sale in Canada 
which are identical to vehicles certified by EPA for sale in the 
United States. The petitioners maintained that, although these 
vehicles may not be labeled by the OEM as meeting United States 
emission requirements, the vehicles do not have to be 
mechanically modified to comply with such requirements and do not 
present air quality concerns similar to those presented by other 
imported nonconforming vehicles. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
A copy of the petition may be found in the docket at A8920. 


</FOOTNOTE>
</SUPPLEM>
