 




<USBUREAU>Health Resources and Services Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Funding Notice for Grants for Family Medicine Training for Fiscal Year 1995 </DOCTITLE>



The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) announces that applications will be accepted for fiscal
year (FY) 1995 Grants for Family Medicine Training funded under the authority of section 747 (a) and (b), title VII
of the Public Health Service Act (the Act), as amended by the Health Professions Education Extension Amendments of
1992, Public Law 102408, dated October 13, 1992. These grant programs include: 




Grants for Predoctoral Training in Family Medicine 
Grants for Graduate Training in Family Medicine 
Grants for Faculty Development in Family Medicine 
Grants for Establishment of Departments of Family Medicine 





This program announcement is subject to the appropriation of funds. The Administration's budget request for FY 1995
includes funding for each of these programs. Applicants are advised that this program announcement is a contingency
action being taken to assure that should authority and funds become available for these purposes, awards can be made
in a timely fashion consistent with the needs of the programs as well as to provide for even distribution of funds throughout
the fiscal year. Please see Table 1 for specific budget estimates for each of the grant programs. 



Grants for Predoctoral Training in Family Medicine 





Purpose: 

Section 747(a) of the Public Health Service Act authorizes the award of grants to assist in meeting the cost of planning,
developing and operating or participating in approved predoctoral training programs in the field of family medicine.
Grants may include support for the program only or support for both the program and the trainees. 



Eligibility: 

Eligible applicants are accredited public or nonprofit 
private schools of medicine or osteopathic medicine. 


To receive support, programs must meet the requirements of regulations as set forth in 42 CFR part 57, subpart Q and
section 791(b) of the PHS Act. 



Grants for Graduate Training in Family Medicine 






Purpose: 

Section 747(a) of the Public Health Service Act authorizes the Secretary to award grants to assist in meeting the costs
of planning, developing and operating or participating in approved graduate training programs in the field of family
medicine. In addition, section 747(a) authorizes assistance in meeting the cost of supporting trainees, who are
in need thereof, in such programs who plan to specialize or work in the practice of family medicine.
 


Eligibility: 

Eligible applicants are accredited schools of medicine or osteopathic medicine, public or nonprofit private hospitals,
and other public or private nonprofit entities. 

To receive support, programs must meet the requirements of regulations as set forth in 42 CFR part 57, subpart Q and
section 791(b) of the PHS Act. 



Grants for Faculty Development in Family Medicine 





Purpose: 

Section 747(a)(3) of the PHS Act authorizes the award of grants to assist in meeting the cost of planning, developing
and operating programs for the training of physicians who plan to teach in family medicine training programs. In addition,
section 747(a)(4) authorizes assistance in meeting the cost of supporting physicians who are trainees in such programs
and who plan to teach in a family medicine training program. 



Eligibility: 

Eligible applicants are public or nonprofit private hospitals, schools of medicine or osteopathic medicine, or
other public or private nonprofit entities. 

To receive support, applicants must meet the requirements of regulations as specified in 42 CFR part 57, subpart Q
and section 791(b) of the PHS Act. 



Grants for Establishment of Departments of Family Medicine 





Purpose: 

Section 747(b) of the PHS Act authorizes support to meet the costs of projects to establish, maintain, or improve family
medicine academic administrative units (which may be departments, divisions, or other units) to provide clinical
instruction in family medicine. Funds awarded will be used to: (1) Plan and develop model educational predoctoral,
faculty development and graduate medical education programs in family medicine which will meet the requirements
of section 747(a), by the end of the project period of section 747(b) support; and (2) support academic and clinical
activities relevant to the field of family medicine. 

The program may also assist schools to strengthen the administrative base and structure that is responsible for the
planning, direction, organization, coordination, and evaluation of all undergraduate and graduate family medicine
activities. Funds are to complement rather than duplicate programmatic activities for actual operation of family
medicine training programs under section 747(a). 



Eligibility: 

To be eligible to receive support for this grant program, the applicant must be a public, or nonprofit private, accredited
school of medicine or osteopathic medicine. 

To receive support, programs must meet the requirements of regulations as set forth in 42 CFR part 57, subpart R, 
and section 791(b) of the PHS Act. 



National Health Objectives for the Year 2000 



The Public Health Service urges applicants to submit work plans that address specific objectives of Healthy People
2000. Potential applicants may obtain a copy of 

Healthy People 2000 

(Full Report; Stock No. 017001004740) or 

Healthy People 2000 

(Summary Report; Stock No. 017001004731) through the Superintendent of Documents, Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 204029325 (Telephone 2027833238). 




