 

FSIS is considering, among other things, that certain poultry products produced by mechanical deboning, i.e., those
with greater than 0.6 percent bone solids content, but no more than one percent bone solids content, be separately
identified on the labels of products in which they are used as ingredients by a distinct name. However, because of the
improvements in separating the bone from muscle and other tissues of poultry carcasses and parts of carcasses, FSIS
is considering, among other things, that some boneless poultry products derived from mechanical deboning machinery,
i.e., those with 0.6 percent or less bone solids, be identified on the label of products in which they are used as poultry
or poultry meat, e.g., ``chicken'' and ``turkey meat.'' Until the Agency receives further data and information to
support this position, it cannot take a firm position on the content of a proposed regulation on this topic. Therefore,
FSIS is issuing this ANPR that provides an in-depth discussion, which follows, on the labeling of MDP, as well as other
issues related to boneless poultry product produced by mechanical deboning, and expresses the Agency's tentative
positions regarding these issues. It is FSIS's intent to obtain the information and data necessary to solidify its
position regarding the labeling, use, and production of poultry products produced by mechanical deboning.



Tentative Positions



I. 

Boneless poultry products produced by mechanical deboning with greater than 0.6 percent bone solids content 

(Boneless poultry products produced by mechanical deboning with greater than 0.6 percent bone solids content are
hereafter referred to as ``MDP.'')



A. Tentative position: Definition and standard of identity and composition. 

FSIS's tentative position is to prescribe a definition and standard of identity for the finely comminuted poultry
product resulting from the mechanical separation and removal of most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle and
other tissue of poultry carcasses and parts of carcasses which has greater than 0.6 percent bone solids content. While
whole carcasses sometimes are used, the starting materials for this type of processing frequently are parts of carcasses,
such as frames, backs and necks, which contain relatively low proportions of skeletal muscle, or parts, such as breast
frames, from which most of the skeletal muscle already has been removed by traditional deboning techniques. This
product is commonly known in the poultry industry as mechanically deboned poultry or MDP.

The changes under consideration would include (1) amending the Federal poultry products inspection regulations
by defining MDP as ``mechanically separated (kind),'' or another appropriate term, using limits for bone solids
content and bone particle size, and criteria for protein quality, and requirements for labeling of the product in
products in which it is used as an ingredient, and (2) amending the poultry products inspection regulations to require
that such poultry products produced by mechanical deboning be kept at temperatures of 40 degrees F or below within
2 hours of the deboning operation. The resulting product differs from poultry products produced by traditional deboning
techniques in its highly comminuted and spread-like consistency and in its content of bone and associated tissue,
as well as muscle, skin, and fat. These differences have a potential consequence for finished product microbiological
quality and, thus, for health and safety. Therefore, certain handling requirements may be needed.

In view of the differences between MDP and boneless poultry derived by traditional methods (e.g., hand-deboning),
it appears inappropriate to continue to include MDP within the category of ``boneless poultry products'' (9 CFR 381.117(d)).
Instead, FSIS is considering defining it as a distinct poultry product ingredient and standardizing its characteristics
under Subpart P of the poultry products inspection regulations (9 CFR part 381, subpart P).

FSIS's tentative position is that the boneless poultry products regulation (9 CFR 381.117(d)) no longer would apply
to MDP. Consequently, the current restriction on bone solids content in this regulation_as enforced by limiting
calcium content_would be included with other compositional requirements in a MDP standard. Product failing to meet
the bone particle size, or protein quality requirements of the standard could be used only in producing poultry extractives,
including fats, stocks, and broths, (i.e., processors would be permitted to employ acceptable procedures for extracting
components such as fat, but such product resulting from the mechanical separation and removal process could only
be used for further processing). Mechanically deboned poultry with a protein content of less than 14 percent and/or
a fat content of more than 25 percent would be deemed to be product for processing. Moreover, as a standardized product,
MDP would be differentiated from other poultry product ingredients; and it would be designated in the ingredient
statements on finished product labels by the name specified in its definition and standard, in accordance with 9 CFR
317.2(c)(2) and (f)(1) and 381.118(a).


