 

_Program Impact; and 
_Outstanding performance in fair housing and equal opportunity.




A maximum of 615 points is possible under this system with the maximum points for each factor being: 




<TABLE>





1 
1Points




Need_absolute number of persons in poverty 
75
Need_percent of persons in poverty 
75 
Program Impact 
400


Outstanding performance_FHEO:


Provision of fair housing choice 
20
Fair Housing Programs 
20
Minority contracting 
15
Equal opportunity employment 
10
n,s


Total 
615

</TABLE>




Each of the four factors is outlined below. All points for each factor are rounded to the nearest whole number. Applicants
should note that there is a distinct difference in the methods used to evaluate Program Impact for Single Purpose grants
versus Program Impact for Comprehensive grants. These differences are more fully discussed below. 

a. 

Need_Absolute number of persons in poverty. 

HUD uses 1990 census data to determine the absolute number of persons in poverty residing within the applicant unit
of general local government. Comprehensive and Single Purpose grant applicants are grouped and rated separately
for this factor. Applicants which are county governments are rated separately from all other applicants. Applicants
in each group are compared in terms of the number of persons whose incomes are below the poverty level. Individual scores
are obtained by dividing each applicant's absolute number of persons in poverty by the greatest number of persons
in poverty of any applicant and multiplying by 75. 

b. 

Need_Percent of persons in poverty. 

HUD uses 1990 census data to determine the percent of persons in poverty residing within the applicant unit of general
local government. Comprehensive and Single Purpose grant applicants are grouped and rated separately for this factor.
Applicants in each group are compared in terms of the percentage of their population below the poverty level. Individual
scores are obtained by dividing each applicant's percentage of persons in poverty by the highest percentage of persons
in poverty of any applicant and multiplying by 75. 

c. 

Program Impact_General. 

In evaluating program impact, HUD will consider:




_Extent and seriousness of the identified needs; 
_Results to be achieved; 
_Number of beneficiaries, given the type of program; 
_Nature of the benefit; 
_Additional actions that may be necessary to fully resolve the need; 
_Previous coordinated actions taken by the applicant to address the need; 
_Environmental considerations; 
_Whether displacement will be involved and what steps will be taken to minimize displacement and to mitigate its adverse
effects or related hardships; and 
_Where appropriate, housing site selection standards. 





Assessments are done on a comparative basis and, as a result, it is important that each applicant present information
in a detailed and uniform manner. 


In addressing Program Impact criteria, applicants should adhere to the following general guidelines for quantification.
Where appropriate, absolute and percentage figures should be used to describe the extent of community development
needs and the impact of the proposed program. This includes, but is not limited to, appropriate units of measure (e.g.,
number of housing units or structures, linear feet of pipe, pounds per square inch, etc.), and costs per unit of measure.
These quantification guidelines apply to the description of need, the nature of proposed activities and the extent
to which the proposed program will address the identified need.



