 

In summary, long-term provisions to govern future Libby Dam water management that fully consider the habitat needs
of white sturgeon reproduction in the Kootenai River are still required and have not been implemented to date. See
Factor D in ``Summary of Factors Affecting the Species'' for a complete discussion on the inadequacy of existing regulatory
mechanisms for the Kootenai River population of white sturgeon. 


Issue 5: 

Several respondents expressed support for the Kootenai River white sturgeon recovery strategy prepared by the Kootenai
Tribe of Idaho. The Kootenai Tribal Plan (Plan), submitted during the public comment period, describes a detailed
conservation program based on three recovery strategies: (1) the re-establishment of natural spawning, (2) a supplementation
program, and (3) additional research. The Pacific Northwest Utilities Conference Committee; Direct Services Industries,
Inc.; City of Bonners Ferry, Idaho; Boundary County Board of Commissioners, Idaho; and Idaho's U.S. Senators Larry
Craig and Dirk Kempthorne, among others, endorsed the Plan and requested that the Service implement the Plan in lieu
of federally listing the sturgeon. Additionally, the IDFG and MDFWP each submitted recovery strategies that describe
their respective recommendations for recovery of the Kootenai River white sturgeon. Both IDFG and MDFWP's recovery
strategies are similar in that each relies on re-establishment of natural spawning in years when precipitation provides
average or above average water availability, and population augmentation and/or supplementation in below average
or drought water years. 


Service response: 

According to section 2(b) of the Act, one of the ``purposes of this Act [is] to provide a means whereby the ecosystems
upon which endangered species and threatened species depend may be conserved.'' Once a species becomes listed as
threatened or endangered, section 4(f) of the Act directs the Service to develop and implement recovery plans for
that species. Recovery means improvement in the status of a listed species to the point at which listing is no longer
appropriate under the criteria provided in section 4 of the Act (50 CFR 402.02). Two goals of the recovery process are:
(1) the maintenance of secure, self-sustaining wild populations of the species; and (2) restoration of the species
to a point where it is a viable, self-sustaining component of its ecosystem. 
Recovery programs submitted by the Kootenai Tribe of Idaho, IDFG, and MDFWP are basically similar in that their overall
goal is to achieve a naturally reproducing, self-sustaining population of Kootenai River white sturgeon. However,
each of the three programs differs in its reliance on supplementation as an interim augmentation measure, and for
meeting long-term recovery goals. While the Service recognizes that captive propagation and supplementation can
be valid conservation tools and assist in recovery efforts, they, by themselves, do not contribute to the maintenance
of a secure, self-sustaining Kootenai River white sturgeon population in the wild. For example, if the Service were
to implement provisions of any or each of the three agency recovery strategies in lieu of listing, such implementation
would not be binding on the Corps or BPA to modify the current Libby Dam operations or flow regime in the Kootenai River
for the long-term benefit of white sturgeon recruitment and survival in the wild. See Factor D in ``Summary of Factors
Affecting the Species'' for a complete discussion on the inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms for the Kootenai
River population of white sturgeon. 
In summary, the Service believes that information contained in each of the three agency recovery strategies will
be useful in future recovery planning efforts and the development of a recovery plan. Such a recovery plan would include
measures to address all threats to the sturgeon and incorporate provisions that implement realistic, natural flow
based solutions within water management constraints for successful white sturgeon recruitment in the Kootenai
River. 


Issue 6: 

Several comments were received from Canadian agencies and individuals requesting that the Service consider the
international implications of any final listing decision. For example, the Canadian Department of Fisheries and
Oceans, while concurring that action must be taken to protect the sturgeon, was concerned that ``***
in protecting the white sturgeon, measures could be implemented which have the potential to impact other non-targeted
stocks of Canadian fish.'' British Columbia Environment also expressed similar concerns regarding impacts to fish
resources and recreational angling in area reservoirs and rivers ``*** given the integrated
nature of the power grid in B.C., Washington, Idaho and Montana.'' B.C. Hydro believes listing the sturgeon population
will impose adverse environmental, social (recreational), and energy costs on many citizens in Canada. 


Service response: 

As stated previously (Issue 

#

2), listing decisions are to be based solely on the best scientific and commercial information available, and socioeconomic
considerations and non-biological impacts may not be considered in listing decisions. The Service shares Canada's
concerns regarding possible environmental and economic impacts from any listing decision. The Service will work
with Canadian government agencies to promote international cooperation for recovery of the Kootenai River white
sturgeon and address potential environmental impacts to other aquatic resources in Canada and the United States.




