 

As a result, the Dietary Guidelines are based on the best available scientific and medical knowledge. Consequently,
the Department is proposing to use the Dietary Guidelines as the basis for the nutrition standards for school meals.
This established procedure enables medical and scientific experts to continually review and recommend updating
of the Dietary Guidelines in light of the most current and highly-regarded data in this area. Moreover, the private
sector and general public have widely endorsed and relied upon the Dietary Guidelines in nutrition education programs,
activities and marketing. Because of the widespread acceptance of the recommendations in the Dietary Guidelines,
the Department believes that the transition to using these recommendations as the cornerstone for the school meal
programs will be readily accepted.

The 1988 Surgeon General's Report on Nutrition and Health and a 1989 National Academy of Science Report: Diet and Health:
Implications for Reducing Chronic Disease Risk reinforce the Dietary Guidelines. One common theme runs throughout
each of the publications, that is, an improved diet can have positive health consequences.

The most recent Diet and Health report issued by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences (1989)
provides a very thorough review of the scientific evidence linking diet to disease and gives quantifiable goals for
some of the Dietary Guidelines. The report recommends that Americans reduce fat intake to 30% or less of calories,
reduce saturated fat intake to less than 10% of calories and reduce the intake of cholesterol to less than 300 mg per
day. The report also recommends that sodium intake be limited to 2400 milligrams or less per day.



School Meals' Lack of Compliance With Current Dietary Guidelines



The current Dietary Guidelines recommend that people eat a variety of foods; maintain a healthy weight; choose a diet
with plenty of vegetables, fruits, and grain products; and use sugar and sodium in moderation. The Dietary Guidelines
also recommend diets low in fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol so that over time, fat comprises 30 per cent or less
of caloric intake, and saturated fat less than 10 per cent of total calories, for persons two years of age and older.

However, information available to the Department consistently shows that children's diets, including meals served
in schools, do not conform to the recommendations of the Dietary Guidelines. For example, according to data from the
1989 and 1990 Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals conducted by USDA, fat composed, on average, 35 per
cent of calories for the diets of children ages six to nineteen.

Equally significant were the findings of a nationally representative USDA study entitled the School Nutrition Dietary
Assessment (SNDA) Study. Released in October, 1993, the SNDA Study presented findings on the nutrients and foods
provided in school meals and described the dietary intakes of students on a typical school day. A total of 545 schools
were surveyed, and approximately 3,350 students in grades one through twelve (with assistance from parents for children
grades one and two) provided detailed information about foods and beverages consumed in a day that included school
attendance. The study compared nutrients provided in school meals with the Dietary Guidelines' recommendations
on fat and saturated fat, the National Research Council's (NRC) Diet and Health Recommendations on sodium, cholesterol
and carbohydrate intake, and the current objective that the nutrients provided in the NSLP meet one-third of the RDA
and that the School Breakfast Program (SBP) meet one-fourth of the RDA.

The SNDA findings showed that, while school lunches meet or exceed one-third of the RDA for key nutrients and food energy,
they do not meet the recommended levels of fat and saturated fat established by the Dietary Guidelines. In fact, the
report showed that school lunches exceeded the Dietary Guidelines' recommendations for fat and saturated fat. Specifically,
the average percentage of calories from total fat was 38 per cent compared with the recommended goal of 30 per cent or
less; and the percentage from saturated fat was 15 per cent, compared with the recommended goal of less than 10 per cent.
The report also found that children who ate the school lunch consumed a significantly higher amount of calories from
fat than children who brought their lunch from home or obtained a lunch from vending machines or elsewhere at school.
Further, the report showed that virtually no schools were in compliance with the Dietary Guidelines. In over 40 percent
of schools, students could select a meal that met the Dietary Guidelines, but few did so. The SNDA study also showed
that while school meals met the NRC recommendation on cholesterol, the meals did not meet the NRC recommendations
on sodium and carbohydrate levels. In fact, the level for sodium, at 1,479 milligrams, was nearly two times the lunch
target of 800 milligrams.

Even though the SBP did meet most of the recommendations in the Dietary Guidelines, the majority of school meals do
not conform to current scientific knowledge of what constitutes a healthful diet. The SNDA findings underscore that
the program has not adapted or changed school meal patterns over the years to incorporate scientific knowledge about
diet. This situation is cause for concern because it demonstrates the need for significant improvement if the programs
are to play their appropriate role in promoting long-term health through proper nutrition.

As the first step toward achieving meaningful improvement in children's diets and, thus, their health and future
well being, the Department considers it necessary to update the regulations which establish the specific nutrition
criteria for reimbursable school meals to incorporate the RDA for key nutrients, energy allowances for calories,
and the most current nutritional standards as outlined in the Dietary Guidelines. In this way, the school meal programs
can provide an example of nutritional achievement as well as ensuring that children are served healthful meals.

Before proceeding with a rulemaking, however, the Department recognized the importance of public input. The following
is a description of the Department's procedure for obtaining input and a discussion of significant issues raised
by commenters.



Providing a Public Forum






