 

II. Cable Television System Regulatory Fees



9. Section 9 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, requires the Commission to collect cable system regulatory
fees of $370 per 1,000 subscribers from cable television systems on an annual basis. 47 U.S.C. 159. The statute also
permits the Commission to adjust the amount of the regulatory fees in subsequent years. The purpose of requiring cable
systems to pay regulatory fees to the Commission is to permit the Commission to recover the annual cost of its various
regulatory activities. In a Report and Order released June 8, 1994, in MD Docket No. 9419, the Commission adopted
implementing rules providing for the payment of regulatory fees in fiscal year 1994 and thereafter. Implementation
of Section 9 of the Communications Act: Assessment and Collection of Regulatory Fees for the 1994 Fiscal Year, MD Docket
No. 9419, Report and Order, 59 FR 30984 (June 16, 1994). In that Report and Order, we decided to assess the cable
system regulatory fee on an exact per subscriber basis (i.e., $0.37 per subscriber per year or approximately $0.03
per subscriber per month). We provided that regulatory fees be paid on this basis so that cable systems serving less
than 1,000 subscribers would not pay a disproportionately high regulatory fee. The first cable system regulatory
fee payments for fiscal year 1994 were due on August 12, 1994.

10. Cable operators in MD Docket No. 9419 urged the Commission to permit cable systems to pass regulatory fees
through to subscribers as external costs. In our Report and Order in that docket, we concluded that the pass-through
issue was not within the scope of the docket and should, therefore, be addressed separately.

11. Cable television system regulatory fees are mandated by Congress, collected by the Commission, and are intended
to reimburse the Commission for administering its regulatory responsibilities under the Communications Act of
1934. As such, they are exceptional, newly imposed, governmentally-assessed fees that further the purposes of the
Communications Act. These fees are also beyond the control of the cable operator. Furthermore, the fees are easily
measurable in amount. Consistent with the Commission's prior decision to determine on a case-by-case basis whether
categories of costs should be accorded external cost treatment, we determine that Commission cable television system
regulatory fees should be accorded external cost treatment under our price cap rules governing cable service rates.

12. We further determine that cable system regulatory fees should be directly assigned to the basic service tier.
Direct assignment to the basic service tier is appropriate because the cable system regulatory fees are assessed
on a per subscriber basis and all subscribers receive the basic service tier. Assignment to the basic service tier
is also consistent with the fact that regulatory fees are intended to reimburse the Commission for the costs of regulating
cable service, including Commission oversight of the basic service tier and other regulatory activities such as
rulemaking, the direct regulation of some systems' basic tier rates and review of local franchising authorities'
decisions.




