 

Another commenter suggested that the OCC include net unrealized holding gains and losses on available-for-sale
securities in regulatory capital, but exclude the adjustment from capital calculations that are tied to other regulations
such as prompt corrective action or FDIC insurance premiums. This approach would also be complex and burdensome and
essentially require a bank to maintain yet another set of capital calculations. Accordingly, the OCC determined
not to implement this alternative. 
Another commenter suggested that banks disclose market values but exclude them from regulatory capital. Since the
OCC has adopted FAS 115 for regulatory reporting, but will not adopt it for regulatory capital purposes, in effect,
the OCC is implementing this suggestion. 


The Final Rule 


After considering all the comments received, the OCC, in consultation with the other Federal banking agencies, decided
not to adopt the proposal to include the net unrealized holding gains and losses on available-for-sale securities
in the definition of common stockholders' equity. The significant changes in market interest rates that occurred
during the first two quarters of 1994 demonstrated that bank capital levels could be significantly more volatile
if the definition of common stockholders' equity included the FAS 115 adjustment for net unrealized holding gains
and losses. This is especially true for smaller banks that tend to have more of their assets in marketable securities.
Additionally, smaller banks may lack the financial resources to establish a portfolio management function dedicated
to hedging interest rate risks. 
Based on the comment letters received, the OCC determined that including the FAS 115 adjustment in capital could have
consequences that may adversely impact the banking industry. For example, market-driven fluctuations in interest
rates could cause temporary changes in regulatory capital levels, which in turn could trigger inappropriate regulatory
intervention. In addition, industry profitability could decline due to higher expenses and lower investment yields,
simply due to the accounting implications of FAS 115. The OCC is concerned that adoption of the proposal would encourage
management to place excessive weight on the accounting implications of their decisions, rather than on their long-term
economic impacts. 
Additionally, the OCC is concerned that the lack of consistent application of market valuation for assets and liabilities
would present a misleading report of a bank's regulatory capital. Since FAS 115 only requires market value accounting
for certain segments of the investment portfolio, only one side of the balance sheet reflects the impact of interest
rate changes. The OCC believes it would be inappropriate to take regulatory action without evaluating the impact
of rate changes on both sides of the balance sheet. 
The OCC, considered the comments received regarding FDICIA's requirement that regulatory accounting policy be
no less stringent than GAAP. In fact, section 121 of FDICIA (12 U.S.C. 1831n) requires that policies applicable to
reports and statements filed with the Federal banking agencies conform to GAAP. The section does not require the calculation
of an institution's regulatory capital or the components of regulatory capital to conform to GAAP, and the legislative
history of the section indicates that was not the intent of Congress. By adopting FAS 115 for regulatory reporting
purposes, the OCC's policy conforms to the section 121 requirement. 
Although the OCC and other Federal regulatory agencies attempt to conform to GAAP when formulating regulatory policy,
it is not always appropriate. When formulating GAAP, the accounting policy makers do not focus on the unique capital
adequacy requirements of banks. Moreover, the bank regulators' framework of bank supervision is being linked increasingly
to capital levels. Therefore, it is logical to expect some differences between GAAP and bank regulatory policy in
appropriate circumstances. In fact, the definition of capital in the capital adequacy rules already differs from
the GAAP definition. For example, the regulatory definition includes a limited amount of the allowance for loan and
lease losses (ALLL) in Tier 2 capital, while the GAAP definition of capital does not include any amount of ALLL. By adopting
FAS 115 for regulatory reporting, the agencies minimized the difference between the Reports of Condition and Income
(Call Reports) and financial reports issued under GAAP. 
Additionally, the OCC and the other Federal banking agencies recognize that the net unrealized holding gains and
losses recorded under FAS 115 are often temporary. 




