 

(c) 

Rules and discipline

_(1) 

System of rewards and sanctions

. The administrator shall provide for a system to reward the positive behavior of juveniles and to provide sanctions
for misbehavior. 
(2) 

Rules of conduct

. The administrator shall develop written rules of juvenile conduct that specify acts prohibited within the facility
and penalties that may be imposed for various degrees of violations. The administrator or designee shall provide
these rules to all juveniles and shall ensure that all juveniles understand them. All personnel who deal with juveniles
shall receive sufficient training prior to working in the facility to be thoroughly familiar with the rules of juvenile
conduct, the sanctions available and the rationale for the rules. The administrator shall review the written rules
of juvenile conduct annually and update them, if necessary, to ensure that they are consistent with constitutional
and legal principles and BIA and tribal standards and codes. 
(3) 

Minor infractions

. The administrator shall provide guidelines for the informal resolution of minor juvenile misbehavior. 
(4) 

Grievance procedure

. The administrator or designee shall make a written grievance procedure available to all juveniles. The procedure
shall include at least one level of appeal. 
(5) 

Criminal violations

. In instances in which a juvenile is alleged to have committed a crime, the administrator or designee shall refer the
case to the appropriate law enforcement officials for possible prosecution. 
(6) 

Disciplinary reports

. When rule violations require formal resolution, staff members shall prepare a disciplinary report and forward
it to the administrator or designee. The disciplinary report shall include, but not be limited to: 
(i) specific rules violated; 
(ii) a formal statement of the charge(s); 
(iii) an explanation of the event, which should include who was involved, what transpired and the time and location
of the occurrence; 
(iv) unusual juvenile behavior; 
(v) staff witnesses; 
(vi) disposition of any physical evidence; 
(vii) any immediate action taken, including the use of force; 
(viii) reporting staff member's signature; and 
(ix) date and time the report is made. 
(7) 

Disciplinary process

. Juveniles shall receive notification of the rules violated, a formal statement of the charge, a description of the
incident and notice of the date and time of hearing. The administrator or designee shall advise juveniles of their
rights to be present at the hearing, to call witnesses on their behalf, to make a statement, to present documentary
evidence, and to ask for assistance from staff in representing them at the hearing. An impartial person or panel of
persons shall conduct the hearing. (8) 

Pre-hearing detention.

 The administrator shall provide for the pre-hearing segregation of juveniles who are charged with a rule violation
if the safety of the juvenile, other juveniles, staff or the security of the facility is at stake. 
(9) 

Disciplinary detention

. The administrator or designee shall place juveniles in disciplinary detention for a rule violation only after a
hearing. 
(10) 

Record of disciplinary hearing

. The persons conducting the disciplinary hearing shall make a written copy of the decision and its disposition and
shall provide copies to the juvenile and administrator for review. Juveniles shall have the right to appeal the decision
to the administrator or the next level of authority. The disciplinary report shall be removed from all files of juveniles
found not guilty of an alleged rule violation. 
(d) 

Room restriction and special management confinement

_(1) 

Explanation for restriction

. Prior to room and/or privilege restriction, detention staff shall explain the reasons for the restriction to juveniles,
and juveniles shall have the opportunity to explain the behavior leading to the restriction. 
(2) 

Room restriction

. Room restriction for minor misbehavior shall serve only a ``cooling off'' purpose and shall be short in duration,
with the time period (fifteen_sixty minutes) specified at the time of assignment. 
(3) 

Special management confinement (disciplinary)

. When a juvenile has been charged with a major rule violation requiring confinement for the safety of the juvenile,
other juveniles, or to ensure the security of the facility, the juvenile may be confined for a period of up to twenty-four
hours. The administrator or designee, who was not involved in the incident, shall review confinement for periods
over twenty-four hours. 
(4) 

Administrative removal from program

. Only an administrator or supervisor shall direct the administrative removal of juveniles from program. The administrator
or supervisor shall direct administrative removal from program only to provide for the safety of the juvenile, other
juveniles, or to ensure the security of the facility. An administrator or designee shall review the status of juveniles
who have been removed from program for periods over twenty-four hours, within twenty-four hours of their removal
and every seventy-two hours thereafter. 
(5) 

Referral of juveniles removed from program

. The administrator or designee shall refer juveniles removed from program to the health authority and/or social
service director within twenty-four hours. 
(6) 

Individualized plan for juveniles removed from program

. The administrator or designee shall develop an individual plan for the management of juveniles in special management
confinement for protective care or serious behavioral problems. 
(7) 

Frequency of staff contact during room restriction

. During room restriction, staff shall contact juveniles at least every fifteen minutes depending on their emotional
state. Juveniles shall assist in determining the end of the restriction period. 
(8) 

Frequency of staff contact during special management Confinement

. Staff shall visually check juveniles placed in confinement, at least every fifteen minutes. Personnel from the
administrative, health care, or social work units shall visit juveniles in special management confinement at least
once each day. 
(9) 

Special management privileges

. Juveniles placed in confinement shall be afforded living conditions and privileges approximating those available
to the general juvenile population. Exceptions shall be justified by clear and substantiated evidence. 



