 

(b) Assess the penalty in 42.7091(a)(2), when the submitted cost was determined to be unallowable for that
contractor prior to submission of the proposal. Prior determinations of unallowability may be evidenced by_

(1) A DCAA Form 1, Notice of Contract Costs Suspended and/or Disapproved (see 48 CFR 242.7052 [Defense FAR Supplement,
paragraph 242.7052]) which the contractor elected not to appeal and was not withdrawn by DCAA, or any similar
notice;


(2) A contracting officer final decision which was not appealed;


(3) A prior executive agency Board of Contract Appeals or court decision involving the contractor, which upheld the
cost disallowance; or


(4) A determination or agreement of unallowability under 31.2016.


(c) Issue a final decision (see 33.211) which includes a demand for payment of any penalty assessed under paragraphs
(a) or (b) of this section. The letter shall state that the determination is a final decision under the Disputes clause
of the contract. (Demanding payment of the penalty is separate from demanding repayment of any paid portion of the
disallowed cost.)



42.7094 



Computing interest. 




For 42.7091(a)(1)(ii), compute interest on any paid portion of the disallowed cost as follows:


(a) Consider the overpayment to have occurred, and interest to have begun accumulating, from the midpoint of the contractor's
fiscal year. Use an alternate equitable method if the cost was not paid evenly over the fiscal year.


(b) Use the interest rate specified by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to Pub. L. 9241 (85 Stat. 97).


(c) Compute interest from the date of overpayment to the date of the demand letter for payment of the penalty.


(d) Determine the paid portion of the disallowed costs in consultation with the contract auditor.



42.7095 

Waiver of the penalty. 




The cognizant contracting officer shall waive the penalties at 42.7091(a) when_


(a) The contractor withdraws the proposal before the Government formally initiates an audit of the proposal and the
contractor submits a revised proposal (An audit will be deemed to be formally initiated when the Government provides
the contractor with written notice that audit work on a specific final indirect cost proposal has begun or the Government
holds an audit entrance conference with the contractor.);


(b) The amount of the unallowable costs under the proposal which are subject to the penalty is $10,000 or less (i.e.,
if the amount of expressly or previously determined unallowable costs allocable to the contracts specified in 42.709(b)
is $10,000 or less); or


(c) The contractor demonstrates, to the cognizant contracting officer's satisfaction, that_


(1) It has established policies and personnel training and an internal control and review system that provide assurance
that unallowable costs subject to penalties are precluded from being included in the contractor's final indirect
cost rate proposals (e.g., the types of controls required for satisfactory participation in the Department of Defense
sponsored self-governance programs, specific accounting controls over indirect costs, compliance tests which
demonstrate that the controls are effective, and Government audits which have not disclosed recurring instances
of expressly unallowable costs); and


(2) The unallowable costs subject to the penalty were inadvertently incorporated into the proposal; i.e., their
inclusion resulted from an unintentional error, notwithstanding the exercise of due care.



42.7096 

Contract clause.




Use the clause at 52.24200, Penalties for Unallowable Costs, in all solicitations and contracts over $500,000
except fixed-price contracts without cost incentives or any firm-fixed-price contract for the purchase of commercial
items. Generally, covered contracts are those which contain one of the clauses at 52.2167, 52.21613,
52.21616, or 52.21617, or a similar clause from an executive agency's supplement to the FAR.



PART 52_SOLICITATION PROVISIONS AND CONTRACT CLAUSES




5. Section 52.24200 is added to read as follows:



52.24200 

Penalties for unallowable costs.




As prescribed in 42.7096, use the following clause:



Penalties for Unallowable Costs (Date)




(a) Definition. 

Proposal 

means either_


(1) A final indirect cost rate proposal submitted by the Contractor after the expiration of its fiscal year which_


(i) Relates to any payment made on the basis of billing rates or


(ii) Will be used in negotiating the final contract price; or


(2) The final statement of costs incurred and estimated to be incurred under the Incentive Price Revision clause (if
applicable), which is used to establish the final contract price.


(b) Contractors which include unallowable indirect costs in a proposal may be subject to penalties. The penalties
are prescribed in 10 U.S.C. 2324 or 41 U.S.C. 256, as applicable, which is implemented in Section 42.709 of the Federal
Acquisition Regulation (FAR).


(c) The Contractor shall not include in any proposal any cost which is unallowable, as defined in Part 31 of the FAR,
or an executive agency supplement to Part 31 of the FAR.


(d) If the Contracting Officer determines that a cost submitted by the Contractor in its proposal is expressly unallowable
under a cost principle in the FAR, or an executive agency supplement to the FAR, that defines the allowability of specific
selected costs, the Contractor shall be assessed a penalty equal to_


