 




<USBUREAU>Defense Logistics Agency</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Privacy Act of 1974; Alteration of a Record System</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Defense Logistics Agency, DoD.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Alteration of a record system.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Defense Logistics Agency proposes to alter an existing system of records notice subject to the Privacy Act of 1974
(5 U.S.C. 552a), as amended. The alteration adds the Department of Labor as a routine user to comply with regulatory
requirements to report serious accidents (29 CFR 1960.70). 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The alteration will be effective without further notice on October 19, 1994, unless comments are received that would
result in a contrary determination.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Send comments to Privacy Act Officer, Programs and Analysis Division, Office of Planning and Resource Management,
Defense Logistics Agency Administrative Support Center, Room 5A120, Cameron Station, Alexandria, VA 223046100.




</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Ms. Susan Salus at (703) 6177583. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The complete inventory of Defense Logistics Agency record system notices subject to the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C.
552a), as amended, have been published in the 

Federal Register

 and may be obtained from the address above.




An altered system report, as required by 5 U.S.C. 552a(5) of the Privacy Act was submitted on September 8, 1994, to the
Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the
Senate, and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) pursuant to paragraph 4c of Appendix I to OMB Circular No. A130,
`Federal Agency Responsibilities for Maintaining Records About Individuals,' dated July 15, 1994 (59 FR 37906,
July 25, 1994). The specific changes to the record system are set forth below followed by the system notice as altered
in its entirety.


Dated: September 13, 1994.






</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Patricia L. Toppings,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Alternate OSD Federal Register Liaison Officer, Department of Defense.




S370.20 DLA-WH



System name:


Individual Accident Case Files 

(February 22, 1993, 58 FR 10891).



Changes: 


* * * * *



System Identifier: 


Delete entry and replace with `S600.30 CAAE.'



System name:


Delete entry and replace with `Safety and Health Accident Case Files.'



System location:


Delete entry and replace with `Headquarters Defense Logistics Agency, Cameron Station, Alexandria, VA 223046100,
and the DLA Primary Level Field Activity Safety and Health offices. Official mailing addresses are published as an
appendix to DLA's compilation of systems of records notices.'



Categories of individuals covered by the system:


Delete entry and replace with `All individuals who are injured, made ill, or suffer property damage resulting from
DLA operations.'



Categories of records in the system:


Delete entry and replace with `Name, Social Security Number, age, home address and telephone number, accident reports,
witness statements, photographs, and proposed or actual corrective action, where appropriate.'



Authority for maintenance of the system:


Delete and replace with `10 U.S.C. 136, Assistant Secretaries of Defense; 29 U.S.C. 651 et seq., The Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA); E.O. 9397 (SSN); E.O. 12196, Occupational Safety and Health Programs for Federal
Employees; 29 CFR part 1960, subpart I, Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements for Federal Occupational Safety
and Health Programs.'



Purpose(s):


Delete entry and replace with `Information is maintained to comply with regulatory reporting requirements; to identify
cause of accident; to formulate accident prevention programs; to identify individuals involved in repeated accidents;
and to prepare statistical reports as required.'



Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categories of users and the purposes of such uses:


Add as a second paragraph after `as follows:' `To the Department of Labor to comply with the requirement to report Federal
civilian employee on-the-job accidents.' 




Storage:


Delete entry and replace with `Records are stored in paper and electronic formats.'



Retrievability:


Delete entry and replace with `Retrieved by name, Social Security Number, or mishap report number.'



Safeguards: 


Delete entry and replace with `Access is limited to record custodian or persons responsible for servicing the record
in performance of their official duties. Paper records are stored in locked cabinets or rooms controlled by personnel
screening. Access to electronic records is restricted by the use of passwords which are changed periodically.'



Retention and disposal:


Delete entry and replace with `Cases involving reportable mishaps are destroyed five years after case is closed.
Cases involving non-reportable mishaps are destroyed three years after case is closed.'



System manager(s) and address:


Delete entry and replace with `Staff Director, Environmental and Safety Policy, Headquarters, Defense Logistics
Agency, Cameron Station, Alexandria, VA 223046100; and the Safety and Health Offices of the Defense Logistics
Agency Primary Level Field Activities. Official mailing addresses are published as an appendix to DLA's compilation
of systems of records notices.' 



Notification procedure:


Delete entry and replace with `Individuals seeking to determine whether this system of records contains information
about themselves should address written inquiries to the system manager of the particular Defense Logistics Agency
activity involved. Official mailing addresses are published as an appendix to DLA's compilation of systems of records
notices.' 



Record access procedures:


Delete entry and replace with `Individuals seeking access to records about themselves contained in this system of
records should address inquiries to the system manager of the particular Defense Logistics Agency activity involved.
Official mailing addresses are published as an appendix to DLA's compilation of systems of records notices.' 



* * * * *



Record source categories:


Delete entry and replace with `Information is obtained from the record subject, supervisors, medical units, DLA
protective service, civilian police, fire departments, investigating officers, or witnesses to accident.'


* * * * *



S600.30 CAAE



System name: 


Safety and Health Accident Case Files. 



System location: 


Headquarters Defense Logistics Agency, Cameron Station, Alexandria, VA 223046100, and the DLA Primary Level
Field Activity Safety and Health offices. Official mailing addresses are published as an appendix to DLA's compilation
of systems of records notices.



Categories of individuals covered by the system: 


All individuals who are injured, made ill, or suffer property damage resulting from DLA operations.



Categories of records in the system: 


Name, Social Security Number, age, home address and telephone number, accident reports, witness statements, photographs,
and proposed or actual corrective action, where appropriate.



Authority for maintenance of the system: 


10 U.S.C. 136, Assistant Secretaries of Defense; 29 U.S.C. 651 et seq., The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970
(OSHA); E.O. 9397 (SSN); E.O. 12196, Occupational Safety and Health Programs for Federal Employees; 29 CFR part 1960,
subpart I, Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements for Federal Occupational Safety and Health Programs.



Purpose(s): 


Information is maintained to comply with regulatory reporting requirements; to identify cause of accident; to formulate
accident prevention programs; to identify individuals involved in repeated accidents; and to prepare statistical
reports as required.



Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categories of users and the purposes of such uses:


In addition to those disclosures generally permitted under 5 U.S.C. 552a(b) of the Privacy Act, these records or information
contained therein may specifically be disclosed outside the DoD as a routine use pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(3) as
follows: 
To the Department of Labor to comply with the requirement to report Federal civilian employee on-the-job accidents
(29 CFR 1960).
The `Blanket Routine Uses' set forth at the beginning of DLA's compilation of systems of records notices apply to this
system.



Policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, and disposing of records in the system: 

Storage: 


Records are stored in paper and electronic formats.



Retrievability: 


Retrieved by name, Social Security Number, or mishap report number.



Safeguards: 


Access is limited to record custodian or persons responsible for servicing the record in performance of their official
duties. Paper records are stored in locked cabinets or rooms controlled by personnel screening. Access to electronic
records is restricted by the use of passwords which are changed periodically.



Retention and disposal: 


Cases involving reportable mishaps are destroyed five years after case is closed. Cases involving non-reportable
mishaps are destroyed three years after case is closed.
 


System manager(s) and address: 


Staff Director, Environmental and Safety Policy, Headquarters, Defense Logistics Agency, Cameron Station, Alexandria,
VA 223046100; and the Safety and Health Offices of the Defense Logistics Agency Primary Level Field Activities.
Official mailing addresses are published as an appendix to DLA's compilation of systems of records notices.



Notification procedure: 


Individuals seeking to determine whether this system of records contains information about themselves should address
written inquiries to the system manager of the particular Defense Logistics Agency activity involved. Official
mailing addresses are published as an appendix to DLA's compilation of systems of records notices.



Record access procedures: 


Individuals seeking access to records about themselves contained in this system of records should address inquiries
to the system manager of the particular Defense Logistics Agency activity involved. Official mailing addresses
are published as an appendix to DLA's compilation of systems of records notices.



Contesting record procedures: 


The DLA rules for accessing records and for contesting contents and appealing initial agency determinations are
published in DLA Regulation 5400.21; 32 CFR part 323; or may be obtained from the system manager.



Record source categories: 


Information is obtained from the record subject, supervisors, medical units, DLA protective service, civilian
police, fire departments, investigating officers, or witnesses to accident.



Exemptions claimed for the system:


None. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423041 Filed 91694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 500004F
</BILLING>

