 

Accordingly, since manufacture dairy products (unlike fluid milk) compete in a national market, there is a relationship
between the MW price for Grade B milk and the price of surplus Grade A milk, which, like Grade B milk, is used to
produce manufactured dairy products. The MW price reflects a competitive free market price for raw farm milk
and the explicit link between Grade B and Grade A surplus milk prices. Thus, the MW price automatically incorporates
the effects of innumerable economic factors which have an impact on both buyers and sellers including the relative
price and availability of feed for dairy cows. Month-to-month changes in the unregulated free market MW price
(i.e., the price of Grade B milk) reflect changes in the overall supply and demand conditions for milk and its products
nationally. 
Concern for the need to ensure competitive equity among handlers and the existence of basic price differences between
adjacent marketing areas also led to the universal adoption of the MW price in all federal milk orders. Marketing
areas which relied on the other basic pricing formulae noted above often resulted in producer prices that were too
low compared to those received by Midwestern producers. This situation created a competitive disadvantage for Midwestern
processors with respect to sales of such manufactured dairy products as butter, nonfat dry milk and cheese because
these products, which compete on a national rather than ``local'' market, were more expensive relative to similar
products manufactured elsewhere. Consequently, it became clear that a competitive pay price would most accurately
indicate the basic value of milk on a national level. Use of the MW price which, as noted above, is a competitive
pay price, automatically indicates the basic value of milk and eliminates the need for making possibly inaccurate
judgments concerning particular products, prices, yield factors and manufacturing allowances which otherwise
would be used to calculate product price formulae. 
In short, the MW price provides automatic adjustments concerning all of the factors affecting the supply of
and demand for milk and its products. Thus, the MW price has been adopted in all federal milk orders as the ``mover''
of all Class I and Class II prices and is the Class III price (subject to certain minor adjustments). Using the MW
as the Class III price maintains price coordination between Grade B and surplus Grade A milk supplies used for manufacturing
purposes. 


Price and Supplies of Feed 


Agricultural commodities typically follow cyclical price-quantity patterns. Given fixed levels of demand, as
supplies become plentiful, price for feed trends downward. When supplies become scarce, price for feed trends upward.
The market signals incorporated into the MW price indicate price movements up and down and elicit either more
or less commodity production. This coupling pattern between feed supplies and feed prices allows market analysts
to focus on either factor and implicitly know what the other is doing. 
The cost of feed is a significant factor involved in milk production. Officially noticed documents that are part of
the record of the administrative hearing outline cash feed expenses as they relate to the total economic costs of producing
milk. (``Economic Indicators of the Farm Sector: Costs of Production, Economic Research Service'', ECIFS 31,
1983; ECIFS 61, 1986; and ECIFS 91, 1989.) For the period 1981 through 1989, data describing the annual
average cost of producing one hundred pounds of milk were reviewed. Statistics for six individual regions plus the
entire United States were examined. Information for one additional region was available for the 1987, 1988, and 1989
years. 
Annual regional and total United States summary statistics for a nine-year period from 1981 through 1989 were reviewed.
The review of these statistics revealed that the total cash feed expenses as a percentage of the total economic costs
of production, on a per hundredweight (cwt.) basis, ranged from 30 percent to 58 percent from year-to-year. This percentage
measures the relative significance of cash feed expenses for each region and the United States relative to the estimated
total cost of milk production for the respective regions and the United States. 
Although the availability and cost of feed are primary factors involved in farm level milk production, there is a limit
to how much milk output can be obtained from a given quantity of feed input. This is a physical milk production constraint.
It relates to the biological limits of the cow and the economics of milk production decisions made by individual farmers.
In general, given a specified level of feed costs, a dairy farmer decides to purchase and/or grow a quantity of feed
and forage. This in turn determines the amount of feed that may be made available to cows for milk production and has
a direct impact on the aggregate level of milk that may be produced in absence of any consideration being given to the
price that can be obtained for the milk that is produced. 
Such analysis of the availability and costs of feed provides only one dimension, albeit an important dimension, of
the factors the Secretary must consider in establishing a price for milk. These important statutory pricing factors,
however, are automatically embodied in the MW price. The MW is a superior basic price indicator for milk
because it reflects all of the economic factors that affect the supply of milk as well as all of the factors that affect
the demand for the products of milk. 









