 

Batterymarch Financial Management (BFM) 
Located in Boston, Massachusetts; Exemption



[Prohibited Transaction Exemption 9461; 
Application No. D9230] 



The restrictions of section 406(b)(2) of the Act shall not apply to the proposed cross-trading of equity securities
between various accounts managed by BFM (the Accounts) where at least one Account involved in any cross-trade is an
employee benefit plan account (Plan Account) for which BFM acts as a fiduciary. 


Conditions and Definitions 


This exemption is subject to the following conditions: 
1. (a) Each Plan Account's participation in the cross-trade program is subject to BFM's receipt of a written authorization
executed in advance by a qualified Plan fiduciary, which is independent of BFM and its Affiliates (the Independent
Fiduciary). 
(b) The authorization referred to in paragraph (a) is terminable at will, without penalty to the Plan Account, upon
receipt by BFM of written notice of termination. 
(c) Before an authorization is made for any Account, an independent account representative, which must be an Independent
Fiduciary in the case of a Plan Account (collectively, an Independent Account Representative) must be furnished
with any reasonable available information necessary for the Independent Account Representative to determine whether
the authorization should be made, including (but not limited to) a copy of the proposed and final exemption issued
by the Department, an explanation of how the authorization may be terminated, a description of BFM's cross-trade
practices, and any other information requested by the Independent Account Representative. 
2. Each cross-trade transaction must satisfy the following: 
(a) The cross-trade opportunity must be triggered as a result of an Account participating in the program experiencing
a need to sell equity securities arising from one of the following three circumstances: 
(i) the Independent Account Representative specifically directs that all of the assets in the Account be liquidated;

(ii) the Independent Account Representative specifically directs that a portion of the Account be liquidated and
the selection of the particular equity securities to be sold is made either by the Independent Account Representative
or by an optimization program used by BFM (the Optimization Program) which operates, pursuant to certain prescribed
objective criteria, to automatically generate an optimal portfolio for such Accounts; or 
(iii) the application of the Optimization Program to the specific investment objectives and restrictions established
by the Independent Account Representative requires the sale of a security which is otherwise ranked by BFM as a buy
or a hold for all relevant Accounts under the Stock Evaluation Process. 
(b) With respect to each cross-trade opportunity triggered under paragraph 2(a), the Optimization Program used
by BFM must determine, in the ordinary course of its considering all available equity securities in the applicable
universe, that another Account or Accounts participating in the program should purchase some or all of the available
equity securities. 
(c) The cross-trade transaction must take place within three business days of the ``triggering event'' giving rise
to the cross-trade opportunity described in paragraph 2(a) above. 
(d) The cross-trade transaction must be effected through a broker which is unaffiliated with BFM and its Affiliates.

(e) The Independent Account Representative of each Account engaging in a cross-trade transaction must be provided
with a written confirmation of the cross-trade transaction within 10 days after the completion of the transaction.
The confirmation must set forth: 
(i) the particular equity securities involved; 
(ii) the number of shares involved; 
(iii) the price at which the transaction was executed; and 
(iv) the specific triggering event, identified above in paragraph 2(a), which caused the cross-trade transaction
to occur. 
3. (a) Each cross-trade must be effected at the closing price for the equity securities involved on the date of the transaction,
as quoted by the exchange on which such securities are principally traded or by the NASDAQ National Market System (NASDAQ).
In the case of domestic equity securities traded over-the-counter, other than those traded on NASDAQ, the price must
be the mean between the closing daily ``bid'' and ``asked'' prices on the date of the transactions, obtained from recognized
independent sources, unless such securities have actually traded within 24 hours of the cross-trade transaction
in which case the price must be the last sale price for the securities. If more than one source is used by BFM to price a
particular domestic equity security traded over-the-counter, then the price must be equal to the average of the highest
current independent bid and lowest current independent offer obtained from such sources. No foreign equity securities,
other than those traded on a recognized foreign securities exchange for which market quotations are readily available,
shall be cross-traded by the Accounts. 
(b) The equity securities involved in the cross-trade are those for which there is a generally recognized market with
adequate pricing information to enable BFM to use the Optimization Program for the Accounts in the transaction. 






