 

Similarly, the direct costs imposed on consumers as a result of the amendments appear to be minimal since consumers
will still obtain disclosures in the customary inch/pound system. There are, however, likely to be some indirect
costs associated with the amendments as firms incur costs associated with complying with the amendments. There are
basically three types of costs that firms incur as a result of labeling regulations. These costs are inventory disposal
costs, administrative costs, and printing costs. Inventory disposal costs consist of the value of inventory that
must be disposed of in order to comply with the proposed regulation. These costs will be zero since the amendments do
not apply to labels that were printed before the effective date of the regulation. 

Administrative costs represent the additional costs incurred at an administrative level in order to comply with
the regulation. Administrative costs include determining which products fall within the scope of the regulation;
establishing a corporate position on the policy; devising a compliance strategy; and overseeing the compliance
strategy. These costs are likely to be relatively low for the proposed change to the FPLA. Most products that are already
covered by the FPLA will be subject to the amendments adopted today and the amendments appear to clearly state what
products would be excluded. In addition, firms would not need to undertake potentially costly analytic or market
testing to comply with the changes. Thus, it appears that administrative costs per firm would be low. 

Printing costs consist of the additional printing costs incurred due to the changes in the regulations adopted today.
These costs will vary among firms depending on various factors including, but not necessarily limited to the following:
(1) How frequently the firm typically changes its label; (2) the average inventory of labels; and (3) the printing
process utilized by the firm. For example, if the firm updates its labels on a yearly basis, it may delay its normal label
update to coincide with changes it will have to make in response to the changes in the FPLA. If so, the additional printing
costs caused by the change would be minimal. If, however, the firm normally updates its labels only once every ten years
and if it has recently updated its labels, then its costs will be higher. 

Incremental printing costs will also depend, to some extent, on the average inventory. The greater the time period
between reordering labels, the more likely it is that the label change due to the regulation can be planned to coincide
with a planned label change, all else being equal. The type of printing process utilized by the firm also affects the
incremental printing costs. While firms may be able to simply engrave the new information on existing plates if flexography
or lithography printing methods are used and space permits, new cylinders would be required if gravure printing is
utilized. 

Given the relative simplicity of the label change required by the proposed amendment, the fact that many firms already
disclose information in metric, and the fact that many firms are likely to have been aware since late 1992 that the amendments
were scheduled to take effect on February 14, 1994, printing costs per firm associated with the amendments are likely
to be low. Thus, the amendments adopted today, may not have a significant impact on a substantial number of small entities.

59

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


59

</FOOTNAME>
The FDA, based on studies it conducted to determine the economic impact of its nutritional labeling rules, stated
that the metric amendments to its food labeling rules ``*** may have a significant economic impact
on small businesses ***'' in the food industry (58 FR 29719, May 21, 1993). The FTC does not have equivalent
economic information on the myriad industries covered by the FTC regulations issued under the FPLA, although it sought
such economic information in the NPR. 

</FOOTNOTE>


Section 604 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act sets out three subjects which must be addressed in the final regulatory
flexibility analysis. Section 605 of the Act (Avoidance of duplicative or unnecessary analysis) states that the
analysis required by section 604 may be done in conjunction with other analysis. 

A succinct statement of the need for and the objectives of the rule are set out in Part II above. (5 U.S.C. 604(a)(1).)
A summary of the issues raised by the public comment in response to the initial regulatory flexibility analysis and
the Commission's assessment thereof are discussed above in this section and in Part IV.D., regarding the Commission's
Regulatory Review Program. (5 U.S.C. 604(a)(2).) 

There are no significant alternatives to the amended regulations adopted today which will accomplish the stated
objectives of the applicable statutes and which minimize any significant economic impact on small entities. (5 U.S.C.
604(a)(3).) For example, it would be difficult to devise different or simplified labeling requirements for small
entities that would still implement dual disclosure requirements and yet avoid the principal cost to such businesses,


i.e.

, redesigning labels. For the same reason, the use of general performance standards rather than explicit requirements
likely would not result in substantial cost savings. Moreover, the FPLA is quite specific in directing the use of particular
modes of disclosure in most instances. Further, as discussed in Part III.D. regarding the Commission's Regulatory
Review Program, the amendments adopted today have been designed to minimize the economic impact on small business.




