 

Sampling Methodology 



We applied our sampling methodology in the following manner. First, each of the 18 companies included in the sample
pool was assigned points according to its percentage share of total export sales, by volume, to the United States.
One point was given for each 1/2 percent of U.S. sales. (Each company received a minimum of one point.) Each company
was represented in the sample pool in proportion to the number of points it received. For example, a company that comprised
25 percent of exports to the United States would receive 50 points and go ``into the hat'' 50 times. A company that comprised
one percent of total exports would receive two points and go ``into the hat'' twice. In this way, the company with a greater
volume of exports had a greater chance of being selected than a company with a smaller volume of exports. There was a
total of 203 points in the pool. We then selected random numbers between one and 203 corresponding to the points until
four separate companies were selected. (In all, we selected seven points, four of which corresponded to the same company.)


For the preliminary results, the companies in the sample pool that were not selected to be analyzed received a rate
which was the simple average of the margins of the four selected companies. For the final results we have determined
that it is more appropriate to weight the sample by the points drawn from the pool. Since each point represents a percentage
of the total sales volume, each time we randomly selected a point we were, in effect, selecting a segment of the sales
volume as representative of the entire pool. Each volume segment had an equal chance for selection, and each segment
is equally representative of the pool. Therefore, each segment should be given equal weight in calculating the sample
pool rate. Four points assigned to Hayward were drawn; therefore, Hayward's rate of 5.86 percent has entered the sample
rate calculation four times. Points assigned to Apace, Bond and LaMagma were drawn only once; therefore, their rates
of 115.15 percent, 5.86 percent, and zero percent have each entered the sample rate once. The sample rate for these
final results is 20.64 percent. 



Analysis of the Comments Received 



Comment 1 



Peninsula et al. contend that the Department does not have legal authority to utilize sampling to select respondents
in administrative reviews. Peninsula et al. argue that the provision in the Trade Agreements Act of 1979 dealing with
sampling was not intended to permit the Department to use sampling in selection of respondents, but in the calculation
of foreign market value (FMV). They argue that, while the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984 expanded the Department's authority
with regard to sampling, it did not give the Department the authority to sample respondents. 

Peninsula et al. argue that the statute and legislative history indicate that Congress intended to extend the authority
for sampling to the calculation of U.S. price and other variables within the databases of a particular respondent,
rather than to a group of respondents. They claim that when the Department restricts its review to a sample of the respondents
named by the domestic industry, those respondents not selected for active participation are 

ipso facto

 excluded from the administrative process, and their fate is entirely in the control of their competitors. Peninsula
et al. further contend that because the consequences of sampling are so dire, it should not be assumed, in the absence
of an explicit statutory provision, that Congress intended that the Department investigate anything less than the
entire universe of named parties in an administrative review. 

Peninsula et al. further contend that there is no judicial precedent to support the Department's sampling authority.
They argue that in the one case where the Court of International Trade (CIT) considered the Department's exercise
of sampling for respondent selection in an administrative review, 

Floral Trade Council 

v. 

United States, 

775 F. Supp. 1492, 15 CIT 497 (1991), the Court assumed that the Department had the authority to use representative
samples, and that the argument was therefore untested. 



Department's Position: 

We disagree. Section 777A of the Tariff Act provides the Department with broad authority to apply sampling techniques
in administrative reviews (19 U.S.C. 1677f-1). The legislative history of the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984 indicates
that this provision grants the Department the discretion to apply sampling to any aspect of an antidumping review:

 


Section 109 [of H.R. 4784] authorizes sampling and averaging techniques utilized by the administering authority
in determining foreign market value under the present antidumping law also to be used in determining United States
price in dumping investigations and 

in all aspects of the annual review of outstanding countervailing and antidumping duty orders. 

(emphasis added) (H.R. Rep. No. 98725, 98th Cong., 2nd. Sess., Reprinted in 1984 U.S. AAN., 5127, 5135.)




The only criteria for using the sampling provision of section 777A are that a significant volume of sales be involved
or a significant number of adjustments to prices be required, and that such samples shall be representative of the
transactions under review. (See 19 U.S.C. 1677f-1.) Those criteria were met in this case. (See comment 4.) 

We have employed sampling techniques to select respondents to be analyzed in past administrative reviews. See, 

e.g., 

Certain Fresh Cut Flowers From Colombia; Preliminary Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review, Partial
Termination of Administrative Review and Intent To Revoke Order (In Part) (58 FR 65329, December 14, 1993) Fresh and
Chilled Atlantic Salmon from Norway; Preliminary Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review, (58 FR 17380,
April 2, 1993), and Certain Fresh Cut Flowers from Colombia: Final Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review
(55 FR 20491, 2049596, May 17, 1990). 
 

