 



Comment:

 One commenter stated that paragraph (b) of proposed 409.44 should be revised to recognize the medical necessity
of extended therapy in certain cases and of active therapy furnished to patients whose health is declining in certain
cases.



Response:

 We do not believe that such a revision is necessary. Paragraph (c) (paragraph (b) in the proposed rule) states that
Medicare will pay for the services of a therapist when his or her skills are necessary for the safe and effective performance
of a maintenance program. This policy clearly recognizes that, in certain cases, an extended maintenance program
can be considered medically necessary.

We also believe that active therapy for a beneficiary whose health is declining can be covered. The new paragraph (a)
of this section that we have added in this final rule specifies that the intermediary's decision on whether care is
reasonable and necessary must be based on objective clinical evidence and the beneficiary's unique need for care.
Therefore, this rule specifically prohibits claims decisions based on general inferences about patients with similar
diagnoses, which means that it would be inappropriate for an intermediary to deny therapy services solely on the basis
that they were furnished over a long period of time or to a patient whose general health status is in decline.



Comment:

 One commenter stated that we should require that the expectation that the beneficiary's condition will materially
improve be based on the therapist's assessment of the patient's rehabilitation potential and the physician's assessment
of the patient's unique medical condition. (We proposed only to require the physician's assessment.)



Response:

 We believe that such a revision would not be appropriate. Our policy concerning the physician's role in determining
the patient's need for care is based on section 1861(m) of the Act, which requires covered home health services to be
furnished under a plan of care established and periodically reviewed by a physician, and sections 1814(a)(2)(C)
and 1835(a)(2)(A), which require qualified Medicare home health beneficiaries to be under the care of a physician
and receiving services under a plan of care established and periodically reviewed by a physician. Because the law
specifically assigns these responsibilities to the physician, we do not believe that it would be appropriate to shift
the responsibility for assessment of the patient to an individual other than the physician. In addition, we believe
that the therapist's role in establishing the plan of care is adequately protected by the Medicare HHA conditions
of participation at 42 CFR 484.18(a), which specifically requires the consultation and participation of the therapist
(as well as other HHA staff) in the development of the plan of care.



Dependent Services Requirements (409.45)





Comment:

 Several commenters stated that Medicare should cover home health aide and medical social services furnished after
the final qualifying skilled visit.



Response:

 The Act at sections 1814(a)(2)(C) and 1835(a)(2)(A) specifically requires that a beneficiary be in need of physical
therapy, speech pathology services, continuing occupational therapy, or intermittent skilled nursing care to
be eligible for Medicare coverage of home health services. Because a patient who has received his or her last qualifying
service can no longer be considered in need of that service, Medicare cannot pay for any home health aide or medical
social services furnished that patient after the final qualifying visit. We have revised paragraph (a) of 409.45
to clarify that dependent services furnished after the final qualifying service are not covered, except when the
dependent service was not followed by a qualifying service due to an unanticipated event such as the unexpected inpatient
admission or death of the beneficiary.



