 

80.92 



Baseline auditor requirements. 




(a) 

General requirements.

 (1) Each refiner or 
importer is required to have its individual baseline 
determination methodology, resulting baseline fuel 
parameter, volume and emissions values, and 19901993 
blendstock-to-gasoline ratios (per 80.102) verified by an 
auditor which meets the requirements described in this 
section. A refiner or importer which has the anti-dumping 
statutory baseline as its individual baseline is exempt from 
this requirement. 


(2) An auditor may be an individual or organization, 
and may utilize contractors and subcontractors to assist in 
the verification of a baseline. 


(3) If an auditor is an organization, one or more 
persons shall be designated as primary analyst(s). The 
primary analyst(s) shall meet the requirements described in 
paragraphs (c) (2) and (3) of this section and shall be 
responsible for the baseline audit per paragraph (f) of this 
section. 


(b) 

Independence.

 The auditor, its contractors, 
subcontractors and their organizations shall be independent 
of the submitting organization. All of the criteria listed 
in paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) of this section must be met by 
every individual involved in substantive aspects of the 
baseline verification. 


(1)

 Previous employment criteria. 

(i) None of the auditing personnel, including any 
contractor or subcontractor personnel, involved in the 
baseline verification for a refiner or importer shall have 
been employed by the refiner or importer at any time during 
the three (3) years preceding the date of hire of the 
auditor by the refiner or importer for baseline verification 
purposes. 


(ii) Auditor personnel may have been a contractor or 
subcontractor to the refiner or importer, as long as all 
other criteria listed in this section are met. 


(iii) Auditor personnel may also have developed the 
baseline of the refiner or importer whose baseline they are 
auditing, but not as an employee (per paragraph (b)(1)(i) of 
this section). Those involved only in the development of 
the baseline of the refiner or importer need not meet the 
requirements specified in this section. 


(2) 

Financial criteria.

 Neither the primary analyst, 
nor the auditing organization nor any organization or 
individual which may be contracted or subcontracted to 
supply baseline verification expertise shall: 


(i) Have received more than one quarter of its revenue 
from the refiner or importer during the year prior to the 
date of hire of the auditor by the refiner or importer for 
auditing purposes. Income received from the refiner or 
importer to develop the baseline being audited is excepted; 
nor 


(ii) Have a total of more than 10 percent of its net 
worth with the refiner or importer; nor 


(iii) Receive compensation for the audit which is 
dependent on the outcome of the audit. 


(c) 

Technical ability.

 All of the following criteria 
must be met by the auditor in order to demonstrate its 
technical capability to perform the baseline audit: 


(1) The auditor shall be technically capable of 
evaluating a baseline determination. It shall have 
personnel familiar with petroleum refining processes, 
including associated computational procedures, methods of 
product analysis and economics, and expertise in conducting 
the auditing process, including skills for effective data 
gathering and analysis. 


(2) The primary analyst must understand all technical 
details of the entire baseline audit process. 


(3)(i) The primary analyst shall have worked at 
least five (5) years in either refinery operations or as a 
consultant for the refining industry. 


(ii) If one or more computer models designed for 
refinery planning and/or economic analysis are used in the 
verification of an individual baseline, the primary analyst 
must have at least three (3) years experience working with 
the model(s) utilized in the verification. 


(iii) EPA may, upon petition, waive one or more of the 
requirements specified in paragraph (c)(3) of this section 
if the technical capability of the primary analyst is 
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director of the 
Office of Mobile Sources, or designee. 


(d) 

Auditor qualification statement.

 A statement 
documenting the qualifications of the auditor, primary 
analyst(s), contractors, subcontractors and their 
organizations must be submitted to EPA (Fuel Studies and 
Standards Branch, Baseline Auditor, U.S. EPA, 2565 Plymouth 
Rd., Ann Arbor, MI 48105). 


(1) 

Timing.

 (i) The auditor qualification 
statement may be submitted by the refiner or importer prior 
to baseline submission (per 80.93) or by a potential 
auditor at any time. The auditor will be deemed certified 
when all qualifications are met, to the satisfaction of the 
Director of the Office of Mobile Sources, or designee. If 
 no response is received from EPA within 45 days of 
application or today's date, whichever is later, the auditor 
shall be deemed certified. 


(ii) The auditor qualification statement may be 
submitted by the refiner or importer with its baseline 
submission (per 80.93). If the auditor does not meet the 
criteria specified in this section, the baseline submission 
will not be accepted. 


(2) 

Content.

 The auditor qualification statement 
must contain all of the following information and may 
contain additional information which may aid EPA's review of 
the qualification statement: 


(i) The name and address of each person and 
organization involved in substantive aspects of the baseline 
audit, including the auditor, primary analyst(s), others 
within the organization, and contractors and subcontractors; 


(ii) The refiners and/or importers for which the 
auditor, its contractors and subcontractors and their 
organizations do not meet the independence criteria 
described in paragraph (b) of this section; and 


(iii) The technical qualifications and experience of 
each person involved in the baseline audit, including a 
showing that the requirements described in paragraph (c) of 
this section are met. 






