 


(e) Applicability. This proposed rule would affect U.S. manufacturers and importers who offer for sale in the State
of California industrial and commercial solvents and coatings. These solvents and coatings include, but are not
limited to, the categories listed in section iii.c.5.c.(1) of this NPRM.
EPA requests comment on the inclusion or exclusion of these and other categories from the definition of industrial
solvents and coatings.
(f) Exemption limit. EPA proposes and requests comment on two options for determining the minimum size of a manufacturer
that would be subject to this rule. It is EPA's intention to include in this rule only those sources whose products have
a potential to emit a nontrivial amount of VOC to the atmosphere. Therefore, EPA proposes that only those manufacturers
whose products have a potential to emit at least 0.5 ton of VOC in California in a calendar year be subject to this manufacturers
bubble rule. This potential would be measured by multiplying the manufacturer's total annual sales in the State of
California by the VOC content of those products.
As an alternative to using potential VOC emissions as a measure of the minimum manufacturer size that would be subject
to this rule, EPA requests comment on using a manufacturer's pretax gross revenues to determine their relative potential
to emit VOCs. With this method of exemption measurement, manufacturers of industrial and commercial solvents and
coatings with annual pretax gross revenue below $500,000 would be exempt from this rule. Another alternative to determining
this exemption level is to base it on annual unit sales of VOC-containing compounds. Under this option, a manufacturer
who sold less than 100,000 units of VOC-containing materials in the State of California in one calendar year would
be exempt from the rule.
(g) Conceptual design. This rule would establish VOC content limits for a variety of solvent and coating categories
(see the applicability section of this discussion for details). These content limits would be derived from EPA's
published Control Technique Guidelines,
<FOOTCITE>70</FOOTCITE>
 as well as the reasonably available control technology/best available retrofit control technology (RACT/BARCT)
determinations established by CARB or current District rules. Manufacturers would be in compliance with this rule
if the average VOC content of their products was less than the average content limits set for those categories that
the manufacturer produced. This average would not be a simple arithmetic average. Instead, it would be a weighed average,
where the weights on VOC content would be derived from the demonstrated number of units sold by that manufacturer during
the compliance period in the State of California. This averaging is expressed mathematically in the following formulas:


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
70

</FOOTNAME>
These limits could be expressed in pounds per gallon (grams/liter), weight percent, or volume percent of VOC. EPA
seeks comment for a preferred means of expressing these limits.


</FOOTNOTE>




<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEP05MY94.000



</IMPORT>




Where:
N=Number of Products;
i=Product Index;
VOCC

i

=VOC content of product i;
SW

i

=sales weight of product i
S

i

=sales of product i
VOC

i

=Content Standard for the ith product;



A manufacturer will be in compliance if:


Average Emissions &gt; Average Content Standard


That is, if average emissions are less than or equal to the average content standard, the manufacturer is in compliance.


