 


(v) Sponsoring department's or agency's conflict of interest regulations. 
Questions about conflicts of interest and financial interest should be referred to the sponsoring department's
or agency's Designated Agency Ethics Official (DAEO). Such questions may also be directed to the Office of Government
Ethics, Washington, DC 20415. 



(e) 

Orientation and training. 

(1) The program official of the Executive Reserve unit shall give to all new members appointed to the unit an orientation
covering the overall NDER program, the appropriate emergency preparedness plans and programs of the sponsoring
department or agency, and the appointee's emergency assignment. 



(2) Members shall be kept abreast of their expected duties and of any new developments in the department's or agency's
appropriate emergency preparedness programs through formal training and exercises at least annually. 



(3) Departments and agencies are responsible for designing their own orientation and training programs. Executive
Reserve program officials shall design these programs to reflect the appropriate emergency preparedness activities
to which the members will be assigned as well as an overview of department's and agency's total national security emergency
preparedness programs. 



(f) 

Redesignation, transfer, and termination. 

(1) To be redesignated, a reservist must have attended at least one annual training session within the previous term
of appointment or have otherwise participated in approved training. However, the unit's program official of the
sponsoring department or agency may authorize the redesignation of a reservist on a case-by-case basis, where there
are special circumstances or conditions to warrant or justify such redesignation. 



(2) A Reservist who changes employment since his or her previous designation, will be required to file a new application
with a Statement of Understanding (appendix B of this part) from his or her employer agreeing to the member's participation
in the NDER program. 



(3) A sponsoring department or agency that requests the transfer of a reservist from one unit to another must obtain
the concurrence of: 



(A) The reservist current unit; 



(B) The reservist; and 



(C) The reservist's employer. 



(4) A reservist may be terminated if it is determined by the sponsoring department or agency that the member's services
are no longer needed. A reservist is terminated automatically when the member's term expires without redesignation
or when the reservist fails to meet the membership requirements as set forth in this Part or as set forth in the sponsoring
department's or agency's qualifications. A reservist may resign at any time. 



(5) A reservist who has served with distinction and who is not redesignated may be placed in Reservist Emeritus Status.
Such a reservist may participate in training programs and other activities when the unit would benefit from the member's
knowledge and experience. A Reservist Emeritus will not receive an appropriate emergency assignment nor will he
or she be called to duty in time of an emergency without consent. 



(6) Notification of any changes in status of a reservist, whether by redesignation, transfer, termination or Emeritus
determination, shall be furnished in writing to the Director of FEMA to include the date of such action and any change
of addresses, home or business. 



(g) 

Activating reservists. 

(1) The head of each department or agency with an NDER unit may activate the unit, in whole or in part, upon written determination
that an emergency exists and that the activation of the unit is necessary to carry out the emergency program functions
of the department or agency. 



(2) At least 72 hours prior to activating the NDER unit, the head of the department or agency shall notify, in writing,
the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs of the impending activation, and a copy of such plans
is to be provided to the Director, FEMA. 



(3) Once the authority to activate reservists has been approved by the Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs, whether it be an activation by unit or by individual, the sponsoring department or agency is responsible
for notifying the reservists. 



(4) The authority for appointing reservists to assigned positions upon being activated may be found in the Federal
Personnel Manual, part 9101. Appointments in the event of an attack on the United States are addressed in the
Federal Personnel Manual Supplement. 



(h) 

Central register of reservists. 

The Director of FEMA shall maintain a central register of all NDER members and candidates. The register will be used
to compile periodic and special reports and to prevent duplication in recruiting of NDER members. 



(i) 

Employment of reservist in a non-NDER status. 

Departments and agencies wishing to appoint a member of the Reserve as a Federal employee or consultant outside the
NDER, must follow the established Office of Personnel Management procedures for hiring regular Federal employees.




(j) 

Records. 

Departments and agencies sponsoring NDER units shall keep administrative records of their units' activities that
will enable them to report information to the Director of FEMA of the type necessary for the periodic reports to the
President required under Executive Order 12656 and Executive Order 12919. 


337.9

Reporting. 




Under Executive Order 12656, the Director of FEMA is required to submit a periodic report to the President on the Federal
Government's capability to respond to national security emergencies. In addition, the Director of FEMA is to report
to the President periodically concerning all program activities conducted pursuant to Executive Order 12919. An
evaluation of the NDER programs of Federal departments and agencies will be included in these reports. Therefore,
Federal departments and agencies shall report the following information to the Director on an annual basis in accordance
with written instructions provided by FEMA: 



(a) The number of active and emeritus members in each unit; 



(b) Training activities for the past fiscal year and training plans for the upcoming fiscal year, including a description
of the program, its location, the number of reserve, Federal, State, local and guest participants, and dates; and





