 

Several commenters provided additional suggestions for factors to use in determining whether an individual is capable:
An individual's record of timeliness and accuracy in administration of Title IV, HEA programs; an individual's years
of experience administering Title IV, HEA programs; an individual's on-going attendance at workshops and seminars
during each award year; and an individual's record of compliance with Title IV, HEA program regulations. 



Discussion: 

The Secretary appreciates the comments from those individuals and organizations that supported making some kind
of training, certification, or continuing education a requirement. The Secretary continues to believe that State
certification, as well as participation in and completion of quality workshops and training programs, are good indicators
of a ``capable individual'' and intends to consider these factors in evaluating capability. However, the Secretary
does not see the need at this time to make training or certification a requirement. 

Despite the lack of response to the solicitation of suggestions on training elements the Secretary might use to evaluate
and approve nondepartmental training, the Secretary believes that quality training programs exist outside the
Department that would be beneficial in determining an individual's capability and will continue to solicit advice
as to how such programs might be identified and approved. To encourage suggestions on appropriate approval of training
programs and to facilitate the use of any training programs approved in the future to evaluate capability, the Secretary
retains, without change, the provision in the final regulations that would accommodate training approved by the
Secretary. 

The Secretary agrees that previous experience and documented success in properly administering Title IV, HEA programs
are germane to the evaluation of an individual's capability. 



Changes: 

Previous experience and documented success in properly administering Title IV, HEA programs are added to the list
of factors in 668.16(b)(1) that the Secretary may consider in determining whether an individual is capable.




Comments: 

The vast majority of commenters opposed strongly the use of any prescriptive staffing standards to evaluate the adequacy
of staffing levels at institutions. Many commenters were concerned that there are too many variables_number and
type of professional programs offered by an institution, level of staff experience, degree of centralized processing,
use of third-party servicers, and diversity of the student body, in addition to the factors listed in 668.16(b)(2)_to
permit an accurate assessment of the adequacy of staff levels. A number of commenters expressed the concern that small
institutions would be penalized if staff levels were stipulated in regulations. Many commenters stated that adequate
staffing should not be an issue unless an institution demonstrates problems administering the Title IV, HEA programs,
as reflected in audits, program reviews, or student complaints. One commenter noted that during the negotiated rulemaking
sessions, non-Federal negotiators explained and stressed the potential negative impact on current aid office staffing
levels that could result from creating an artificial ratio of aid applicants or recipients to financial aid administrators.

A few commenters provided suggestions on how to evaluate the adequacy of staffing levels at institutions or recommended
that the Secretary analyze workload issues and develop appropriate formulae. Other commenters recommended to the
Secretary a recent staffing survey conducted for the National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators
(NASFAA) as an appropriate model to use in developing more precise measures of staff adequacy. A few commenters believed
that currently participating institutions should be judged on the basis of their track record, but thought that use
of ratios of aid applicants or recipients to financial aid administrators might be helpful in the assessment of the
administrative capability of institutions applying for participation in the Title IV, HEA programs for the first
time. 



Discussion: 

The Secretary believes that, in general, a currently participating institution's compliance with the other standards
of administrative capability can serve as a reliable indicator that a financial aid office is staffed adequately.
However, if an institution adds a branch campus or other location, starts using or stops using a third-party servicer,
or makes other changes that would have an impact on the administrative capability of the institution, the Secretary
believes it may be necessary to look more closely at the institution's staffing pattern. Further, an institution
that undergoes a change of ownership that results in a change of control may experience a change in its enrollment level
and financial aid office personnel and should be subject to review of its staffing level. 

In general, the Secretary intends to use the list of factors in this section especially to assess the adequacy of staffing
at institutions that make these changes, at institutions that are applying for initial participation, and at institutions
with documented compliance violations. However, the Secretary expects all institutions to be able to demonstrate
that they have an adequate number of qualified persons to administer the Title IV, HEA programs properly. 

In addition to those factors identified in the proposed regulations, the Secretary agrees with those commenters
that the use of third-party servicers could have a significant impact on the institution's ability to administer
the Title IV, HEA programs. 

Given the lack of information available currently about establishing meaningful ratios of staff to student applicants
or recipients, the Secretary is not adding a ratio to the factors used to evaluate even new institutions at this time.




Changes: 

The Secretary has amended 668.16(b)(2) by adding the use of third-party servicers to the list of factors to
be considered in assessing adequacy of staff levels. 



Comments: 

A few commenters argued that requiring communication of information from any institutional office that receives
information that has a bearing on student eligibility for Title IV, HEA program assistance to the person designated
to be responsible for administering Title IV, HEA programs was very labor intensive and should be removed. One commenter
stated that the specifications for interoffice communications bear no relationship to an expected outcome. 



Discussion: 

The Secretary notes that this requirement has existed for some time. The Secretary continues to believe that it is
an appropriate administrative standard inasmuch as proper communication among offices is essential to ensuring
that students are eligible for the amounts of Title IV, HEA program assistance they receive and that the status of borrowers
is updated, when appropriate. 



Changes: 

None. 



