 

3. Annual Fee for Fuel Facilities




a. 

Comment.

 Two commenters objected to the proposed reclassification of General Atomics' (GA) special nuclear material license
from one subclass to another. Commenters indicated that such a reclassification, with the attendant increase in
annual fees, would have the further effect of forcing GA to shut down the manufacture of a limited number of TRIGA research
reactor fuel elements, thereby eliminating any U.S. source for this type of reactor fuel. Commenters argued that
the licensee is not a ``fuel facility'' in the same sense as other fee Category 1.A.(1) licensees, in that all of the
licensees in fee Category 1.A.(1) are large suppliers of light water reactor fuel to the commercial power industry
or the U.S. Navy. Commenters stated that reclassifying the license is inconsistent with the NRC's stated underlying
basis of charging a class of licensees for NRC costs attributable to that class of licensees particularly when one
considers, for comparison purposes, the special nuclear material (SNM) throughput, facility size, employment
numbers, complexity of processes, chemical/physical forms of SNM, and number of process steps. Commenters therefore
concluded that the GA license should not be reclassified. 

General Atomics, whose license is to be reclassified, commented that after three years of being classified as a fee
Category 1.A.(2) licensee, there is no justification for suddenly reclassifying the license as a fee Category 1.A.(1)
fuel facility, because there has been no change of any kind in the activities or licensing status since 1991 that would
warrant reclassification of the facility. GA also contends that it is unfair to reclassify the license after the beginning
of the fiscal year and to impose more than an eight-fold increase in the fee associated with the new category without
the licensee having the opportunity to take licensing action to avoid the fee. GA states that when the initial rule
for 100 percent recovery was published in FY 1991, the NRC recognized that many licensees might wish to avoid or minimize
the fees by terminating or modifying their licenses, and for that reason provided a 30-day period before the effective
date of the rule for a licensee to file a request to terminate the license or request a possession-only license and thereby
avoid paying the annual fee. GA also stated that imposition of the proposed fee would force them to significantly raise
its unit fuel prices to recover the eight-fold fee increase and that many of its customers for research reactor fuel
are typically low-budget research facilities such as university research reactors, many of which are operated by
nonprofit educational institutions. 






















Response. 

The NRC established fuel facilities as a separate class of licensees in FY 1991. Within the class, there are four subclasses
of licensees described in 10 CFR 171.16(d): high-enriched uranium (HEU) fuel fabrication, low-enriched uranium
(LEU) fuel fabrication, all other materials licenses authorizing critical quantities of special nuclear material,
and UF

6

 converters. One of the questions raised by the commenters is whether GA license SNM696 should be placed in the
LEU fuel fabrication facility subclass (fee category 1.A.(1)) or the other facility subclass authorizing critical
quantities of special nuclear material (fee category 1.A.(2)). Fee Category 1.A.(1) of 10 CFR 171.16(d) is intended
to cover those licenses that authorize the possession and use of uranium 235 or plutonium for fuel fabrication activities.
In the proposed rule for FY 1994, the NRC concluded that license SNM696, held by GA, would be reclassified from
fee Category 1.A.(2) (all other materials licenses authorizing critical quantities of special nuclear material)
to fee Category 1.A.(1) (a low-enriched fuel fabrication facility). This reclassification is based on the fact that
(1) the license authorizes the possession and use of uranium 235 for fuel fabrication activities and (2) GA manufactures
TRIGA research reactor fuel elements using low-enriched fuel. As a result, the proper classification for license
SNM696 is fee category 1.A.(1) (low-enriched fuel fabrication). In the past, this license was improperly
categorized by NRC and as a result, General Atomics was assessed substantially lower fees over the past three years
than it should have been. Rather than continue using an incorrect fee classification for this license, now that the
NRC is aware of its administrative error, this final rule places the license in its proper fee category. The NRC recently
addressed a similar classification issue in response to a Babcock and Wilcox (BW) request that their LEU fuel
fabrication facility be reclassified from fee category 1.A.(1) (LEU facility) to fee category 1.A.(2) (all other
materials licenses authorizing critical quantities of special nuclear material). On January 7, 1994, the NRC denied
this request for reasons similar to those stated above for the General Atomics license. 
The other question raised by the commenter is whether the fee for the GA license should be the same as the other LEU fuel
fabrication licenses because their fuel and process is different. That is, would assessing GA the same fee as other
LEU fuel fabrication licensees represent a disproportionate allocation of costs to GA. BW has also raised similar
questions relative to their LEU facility. The NRC is considering BW's request for a partial exemption from annual
fees under 10 CFR 171.11(d). This request is currently under review. Some of the comments received concerning the
GA fuel facility are similar to the arguments presented by BW for an exemption. GA states that ``Reclassifying
GA as a Category 1.A.(1) licensee is inconsistent with the NRC's stated underlying basis of `charging a class of licensees
for NRC costs attributable to that class of licensees.' It asserts that by any measure of comparison, e.g., SNM ***
complexity of processes, chemical/physical forms of SNM, number of process steps, etc., GA's licensed activities
are nowhere close to being in the same class as the licensees listed in Category 1.A.(1). GA's *** licensed
processes are simple small batch-wise operations, there are no processes involving solutions or powders (the fuel
is a uranium-zirconium metal alloy), ***'' 
The NRC believes that consideration of GA's comment as a request for an exemption under 10 CFR 171.11(d) is appropriate
and supported by 

Allied-Signal 

v. 

NRC. 

The Court there indicated that they saw no reason to require the Commission to address rare situations in the rule itself,
especially since 10 CFR Part 171 provides for exemptions in unusual circumstances. Therefore, the NRC intends to
treat the unusual circumstances discussed in GA's comments as an exemption request, which it will address in the near
future. The Commission notes, however, that the exemption determination will not be based on factors associated
with size, ability to pay, or other economic factors. As stated in the decision to reinstate the exemption from annual
fees for non-profit educational institutions, ability to pay is not a basis for an exemption (59 FR 12539). The NRC
also addressed these issues in the Regulatory Flexibility Analysis in Appendix A to the final rule published July
10, 1991 (56 FR 31511). The Commission indicated these generally are not factors it will consider in setting fees and
finds no basis for altering its approach at this time. 



