 

We are amending 404.903 and 416.1403 to explain that if we decline to make an initial determination on
a claim for benefits based on an allegation of misinformation because one or more of the conditions specified above
are not met, our action is not an initial determination for purposes of our administrative review process or judicial
review. We also are amending 404.902 and 416.1402 to make it clear that if we make a determination on a
claim for benefits based on an allegation of misinformation, the determination is an initial determination subject
to administrative and judicial review under 404.900 

et seq.

 or 416.1400 

et seq.

 




Public Comments 




We published proposed rules in the 

Federal Register

 on 
October 16, 1992, 57 FR 47415. We gave interested parties 60 days to submit comments. We also published an amendment
to the proposed rules on January 22, 1993, 58 FR 5687, and we gave interested parties another 60 days to submit comments
on the proposed rules, as amended. We received comments from four commenters: a public policy research center concerned
with child health care, a State public health agency employee, and two attorneys who represent claimants and beneficiaries.


One commenter supported the proposed rules without modification. Another commenter supported the proposed rules
but recommended that another example of a situation involving misinformation be included in the rules. The other
commenters believed that the proposed rules should be expanded to cover certain other situations in which an individual
failed to file an application for benefits. In addition, while commending the proposed rules, two of the commenters
recommended that SSA also take steps to ensure that Agency employees provide correct information to potential applicants
when they inquire about eligibility for benefits. A summary of the comments and our responses to the comments are provided
below. 

We considered carefully all of the substantive comments which we received on the proposed rules. However, for the
reasons explained below, we did not make any changes to the proposed rules other than certain editorial changes discussed
below. Therefore, except for some editorial changes, these final rules are the same as the proposed rules. 



Comment: 

One commenter recommended that the proposed rules be expanded to include an example of a situation in which an individual,
such as a parent, inquires about filing an application on behalf of a child for SSI benefits based on disability or blindness
and is provided misinformation by SSA about the child's eligibility for benefits which causes the individual not
to file an application for the benefits. This commenter also stated that often a parent of a child who may be disabled
or blind contacts SSA to inquire about SSI benefits for the child at the suggestion of a child advocate, case manager
or hospital social worker. The commenter believed that these case workers can serve as sources to corroborate dates
and facts of the contact in cases of alleged misinformation since parents in these situations usually recontact the
case worker to advise the worker that they were dissuaded from applying for benefits because of the information which
SSA provided to them about the child's eligibility. 




Response: 

The examples in 416.351(a) are intended simply to illustrate situations in which misinformation provided
by an SSA employee concerning a potential claimant's eligibility for SSI benefits causes an individual not to file
an application for the benefits. The examples are not intended to cover all situations involving alleged misinformation
or all categories of SSI benefits. Existing 416.315(b) provides that an application for SSI benefits for a
claimant who is under age 18 may be signed by an individual who is responsible for the care of the claimant, including
a relative, or by certain other individuals described in that section. In 416.351(b)(2)(i) of the final regulations,
we explain that if an individual had authority under 416.315 to sign an application for benefits for another
person, and we determined that the individual failed to apply for SSI benefits for that person because we gave the individual
misinformation about that person's eligibility for such benefits, we will deem an application for the benefits to
have been filed on the date specified in 416.351(b)(2)(i) (A) or (B), as appropriate. Section 416.351(b)(2)(i)
makes it clear that the rules for establishing a deemed filing date of an application for benefits based on misinformation
apply to cases in which a parent, or other individual authorized to sign an application for a child, failed to apply
for SSI benefits for a child because we gave the parent, or such other individual, misinformation about the child's
eligibility for SSI benefits. Section 404.633(b)(2)(i) of the final regulations provides similar rules with respect
to claims for Social Security benefits. We do not believe that it is necessary, therefore, to add an example to the regulations
to cover the specific situation in which an individual failed to apply for benefits on behalf of a child because we gave
the individual misinformation about the child's eligibility for the benefits. 


We agree with the commenter that in some circumstances a child advocate, case manager or hospital social worker may
be able to provide information regarding an individual's alleged contact with SSA. Under 404.633(f)
and 416.351(f), an individual who makes a claim for benefits based on alleged misinformation must furnish information
that will enable us to determine if we did provide misinformation to the individual about his or her eligibility for
benefits, or the eligibility of a person on whose behalf the individual was considering applying for benefits, which
caused the individual not to file an application for the benefits. Preferred evidence of such misinformation is written
evidence, such as a letter, which shows that we gave the individual misinformation which caused the individual not
to file an application. In the absence of preferred evidence, we will consider other evidence, including the individual's
statements about the alleged misinformation as well as ``[a]ny other information regarding [the individual's]
*** alleged contact,'' as explained in 404.633(d)(2) and 416.351(d)(2). This would
include statements provided by a case worker concerning the individual's alleged contact. 




