 

g. and h. redesignating newly designated paragraphs (e)(3) and (e)(4) as paragraphs (e)(2) and (e)(3), respectively,
and revising new paragraph (e)(2); 

i. adding new paragraphs (e)(4) and (e)(5); 

j. redesignating the introductory text of newly designated paragraph (f)(1) as the introductory text to paragraph
(f) and revising it; 

k. redesignating newly designated paragraphs (f)(1)(i) through (f)(1)(xi) as paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(11),
(f)(1)(xiv) and (f)(1)(xv) as (f)(12) and (f)(13), (f)(1)(xvii) and (f)(1)(xviii) as (f)(14) and (f)(15), respectively,
removing paragraphs (f)(1)(xii), (f)(1)(xiii) and (f)(1)(xvi), and revising newly designated paragraphs (f)(1),
(f)(9) and (f)(14); 

l. revising paragraph (g); and 

m. adding a new paragraph (h). 



563.22 

Merger, consolidation, purchase or sale of assets, or assumption of liabilities. 



(a) No savings association may, without application to and approval by the Office: 

(1) Combine with any insured depository institution, if the acquiring or resulting institution is to be a savings
association; or 

(2) Assume liability to pay any deposit made in, any insured depository institution. 

(b)(1) No savings association may, without notifying the Office, as provided in paragraph (h)(1) of this section:


(i) Combine with another insured depository institution where a savings association is not the resulting institution;
or 

(ii) In the case of a savings association that meets the conditions for expedited treatment under 516.3(a)
of this chapter, convert, directly or indirectly, to a national or state bank. 

(2) No savings association that does not meet the conditions for expedited treatment under 516.3(a) of this
chapter may, directly or indirectly, convert to a national or state bank without prior application to and approval
of the Office, as provided in paragraph (h)(2)(ii) of this section. 

(c) No savings association may make any transfer (excluding transfers subject to paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section)
without notice or application to the Office, as provided in paragraph (h)(2) of this section. For purposes of this
paragraph, the term ``transfer'' means purchases or sales of assets or liabilities in bulk not made in the ordinary
course of business including, but not limited to, transfers of assets or savings account liabilities, purchases
of assets, and assumptions of deposit accounts or other liabilities, and combinations with a depository institution
other than an insured depository institution. 

(d)(1) In determining whether to confer approval for a transaction under paragraphs (a), (b)(2), or (c) of this section,
the Office shall take into account the following: 

(i) The capital level of any resulting savings association; 

(ii) The financial and managerial resources of the constituent institutions; 

(iii) The future prospects of the constituent institutions; 

(iv) The convenience and needs of the communities to be served; 

(v) The conformity of the transaction to applicable law, regulation, and supervisory policies; 

(vi) Factors relating to the fairness of and disclosure concerning the transaction, including, but not limited to:


(A) 

Equitable treatment. 

The transaction should be equitable to all concerned_savings account holders, borrowers, creditors and stockholders
(if any) of each savings association_giving proper recognition of and protection to their respective legal rights
and interests. The transaction will be closely reviewed for fairness where the transaction does not appear to be the
result of arms' length bargaining or, in the case of a stock savings association, where controlling stockholders
are receiving different consideration from other stockholders. No finder's or similar fee should be paid to any officer,
director, or controlling person of a savings association which is a party to the transaction. 

(B) 

Full disclosure. 

The filing should make full disclosure of all written or oral agreements or understandings by which any person or company
will receive, directly or indirectly, any money, property, service, release of pledges made, or other thing of value,
whether tangible or intangible, in connection with the transaction. 

(C) 

Compensation to officers. 

Compensation, including deferred compensation, to officers, directors and controlling persons of the disappearing
savings association by the resulting institution or an affiliate thereof should not be in excess of a reasonable amount,
and should be commensurate with their duties and responsibilities. The filing should fully justify the compensation
to be paid to such persons. The transaction will be particularly scrutinized where any of such persons is to receive
a material increase in compensation above that paid by the disappearing savings association prior to the commencement
of negotiations regarding the proposed transaction. An increase in compensation in excess of the greater of 15% or
$10,000 gives rise to presumptions of unreasonableness and sale of control. In the case of such an increase, evidence
sufficient to rebut such presumptions should be submitted. 

(D) 

Advisory boards. 

Advisory board members should be elected for a term not exceeding one year. No advisory board fees should be paid to
salaried officers or employees of the resulting savings association. The filing should describe and justify the
duties and responsibilities and any compensation paid to any advisory board of the resulting savings association
that consists of officers, directors or controlling persons of the disappearing institution, particularly if the
disappearing institution experienced significant supervisory problems prior to the transaction. No advisory
board fees should exceed the director fees paid by the resulting savings association. Advisory board fees that are
in excess of 115 percent of the director fees paid by the disappearing savings association prior to commencement of
negotiations regarding the transaction give rise to presumptions of unreasonableness and sale of control unless
sufficient evidence to rebut such presumptions is submitted. Rebuttal evidence is not required if: 

(1) The advisory board fees do not exceed the fee that advisory board members of the resulting institution receive
for each monthly meeting attended or $150, whichever is greater; or 

(2) the advisory board fees do not exceed $100 per meeting attended for disappearing savings associations with assets
greater than $10,000,000 or $50 per meeting attended for disappearing savings associations with assets of $10,000,000
or less, based on a schedule of 12 meetings per year. 

(E) The accounting and tax treatment of the transaction; and 

(F) Fees paid and professional services rendered in connection with the transaction. 





