 




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 50318]</RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Baltimore Gas and Electric Co., Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, Unit No. 2</DOCTITLE>



Exemption

I



The Baltimore Gas and Electric Company (BGE/licensee) is the holder of Facility Operating License No. DPR69,
which authorizes operation of the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, Unit No. 2 (the facility). The license provides,
among other things, that the facility is subject to all rules, regulations and Orders of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (the Commission) now or hereafter in effect.

The facility is a pressurized water reactor located at the licensee's site in Calvert County, Maryland.

The licensee is implementing upgrades to the existing safety-related emergency diesel generators (EDGs) to increase
their load capacity. The first part of this effort will be to upgrade Unit 1 EDG No. 11 during the upcoming Unit 1 refueling
outage (RFO11). This outage commenced on February 8, 1994, and is scheduled to be completed in early May 1994.
To support this initial portion of the upgrades, the licensee has identified one temporary exemption required at
this time. The exemption is specified below.



II



The Code of Federal Regulations at 10 CFR part 50, appendix A, General Criterion-2 (GDC2), requires that: Structures,
systems and components important to safety shall be designed to withstand the effects of natural phenomena such as
*** tornadoes, *** without loss of capability to perform their safety functions.

The licensee has requested the temporary exemption from GDC2 because of the planned upgrade of the Unit 1 EDG
No. 11. The effort will require temporary removal of a steel missile door which will expose portions of the support
systems of EDG Nos. 12 and 21. These EDGs are required to be operable to support the operation of Unit No. 2 and require
protection from the potential effects of postulated missiles generated by natural phenomena. The licensee indicates
that the steel missile door will be removed 4 times during RFO11. The licensee estimates that each of the missile
door removals will last for about 24 hours which will result in a total removal time of about 100 hours during the scheduled
89 day outage.

The licensee is providing compensatory action to assure the safe operation of Unit No. 2 for the short periods of time
during which the steel missile door will be removed. To encompass all severe weather conditions as defined in the plant
site Emergency Response Plan Implementing Procedures 3.0, Attachment 18, a concerted effort will be made to reinstall
the missile door if a tornado or hurricane watch is issued or if sustained winds are predicted to be greater than 35 miles/hour
at the site. The only factor which would impede the reinstallation of the missile door would be to ensure the safety
of the individuals performing the reinstallation.

Considering the existing design features and compensatory measure proposed by the licensee, the likelihood of damage
to the exposed EDG support systems from postulated missiles generated by natural phenomena is minimal for the short
periods of time that the protective door will be removed. Also, based on the compensatory measure provided, reasonable
assurance exists that the ability to reinstall the missile door will be maintained prior to any severe weather which
could result in airborne missiles. Therefore, there is reasonable assurance that the proposed GDC2 exemption
will present no undue risk to public health and safety.



III



The Commission has determined, pursuant to 10 CFR 50.12(a), that special circumstances as set forth in 10 CFR 50.12(a)(2)(v)
exists. The exemption would provide only temporary relief from the applicable regulation (GDC2). The exemption
is requested for a specific time period after which the facility would again be in conformance with all the requirements
of GDC2. The licensee has made good faith efforts in considering alternatives to the exemption request and
has concluded that the EDG upgrades can only be conducted without the subject exemption during a period when both units
are shut down.

Based on the above and on review of the licensee's submittal, as summarized in the Safety Evaluation, dated February
23, 1994, the NRC staff concludes that the likelihood of unacceptable damage to the exposed portions of the Unit No.
2 EDG support systems due to weather-induced missiles during the short duration exposures occurring in the exemption
period is low.

Based on the low probability of unacceptable events, coupled with the compensatory measure which the licensee has
committed to, the NRC staff finds the proposed exemption from GDC2 to be acceptable.



