 

(17) The Director, Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF); 

(18) Assistant Director, OCDETF (New York, NY; Houston, TX; Los Angeles, CA; and Miami, FL); 

(19) The Assistant Commissioner, Refugees, Asylum and Parole; or 

(20) Supervisory asylum officers. 



* * * * * 



3. Section 242.2 is amended by revising paragraphs (a)(1) and (c)(1) to read as follows: 



242.2 


Apprehension, custody, and detention. 



(a) 

Detainers in general

. (1) A detainer may be issued only in the case of an alien who there is reason to believe is amenable to exclusion or deportation
proceedings under any provision of law. The following immigration officers are hereby authorized to issue detainers:


(i) Border patrol agents, including aircraft pilots; 
(ii) Special agents; 
(iii) Deportation officers; 
(iv) Immigration inspectors; 
(v) Immigration examiners; 

(vi) Supervisory and managerial personnel who are responsible for supervising the activities of those officers
listed above; and 

(vii) Immigration officers who need the authority to issue detainers in order to effectively accomplish their individual
missions and who are designated, individually or as a class, by the Commissioner. 



* * * * * 



(c) 

Warrant of arrest

. (1) At the time of issuance of the Order to Show Cause, or at any time thereafter and up to the time the respondent becomes
the subject of a duly issued warrant of deportation, the respondent may be arrested and taken into custody under the
authority of a warrant of arrest. In the case of a respondent convicted on or after November 18, 1988, of an aggravated
felony as defined in section 101(a)(43) of the Act, the respondent shall not be released from custody, either before
or after a determination of deportability, unless the respondent has been lawfully admitted and the respondent demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the district director that he or she is not a threat to the community and is likely to appear before
any scheduled hearings. A warrant of arrest may be served only by those immigration officers listed in 287.5(e)(2)
of this chapter. A warrant of arrest may be issued only by the following immigration officers: 

(i) District directors (except foreign); 
(ii) Deputy district directors (except foreign); 
(iii) Assistant district directors for investigations; 
(iv) Deputy assistant district directors for investigations; 
(v) Assistant district directors for deportation; 
(vi) Deputy assistant district directors for deportation; 
(vii) Assistant district directors for examinations; 
(viii) Deputy assistant district directors for examinations; 
(ix) Officers in charge (except foreign); 
(x) Assistant officers in charge (except foreign); 
(xi) Chief patrols agents; 
(xii) Deputy chief patrol agents; 
(xiii) Associate chief patrol agents; 
(xiv) Assistant chief patrol agents; 
(xv) The Assistant Commissioner, Investigations; 

(xvi) The Director, Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF); or 

(xvii) Assistant Director, OCDETF (New York, NY; Houston, TX; Los Angeles, CA; and Miami, FL). 



* * * * * 



4. Section 242.4 is revised to read as follows: 



242.4 


Fingerprints and photographs. 



Every alien 14 years of age or older against whom proceedings are commenced under this part by service of an order to
show cause shall be fingerprinted and photographed. Such fingerprints and photographs shall be made available to
Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies upon request to the district director or chief patrol agent having
jurisdiction over the alien's record. Any such alien, regardless of his or her age, shall be photographed and/or fingerprinted
if required by any immigration officer authorized to issue an order to show cause as listed in 242.1(a). 



PART 287_FIELD OFFICERS; POWERS AND DUTIES 



5. The authority citation for part 287 continues to read as follows: 


 




Authority

: 8 U.S.C. 1103, 1182, 1225, 1226, 1251, 1252, 1357; 8 CFR part 2. 


 


6. Section 287.1 is amended by: 

a. Removing paragraphs (c), (d), and (e); 

b. Redesignating paragraphs (f) through (i) as paragraphs (c) through (f) respectively; and 

c. Adding a new paragraph (g) to read as follows: 



287.1 


Definitions. 



* * * * * 




