 

In 1967, the timber wolf was listed as a subspecies (

Canis lupus lycaon

) as endangered (32 FR 4001), and in 1973 the northern Rocky Mountain subspecies, as then understood, (

C. l. irremotus

) was also listed as endangered, as was the Texas subspecies (

C. l. monstrabilis

) (38 FR 14678). In 1978, the legal status of the gray wolf in North America was clarified by listing the Minnesota wolf
population as threatened and other members of the species south of Canada as endangered, without referring to subspecies
(43 FR 9607). 

2. 

Biological: 

This final rule deals with the gray wolf (

Canis lupus

), an endangered species of carnivore that was extirpated from the western portion of the conterminous United States
by about 1930. The gray wolf is native to most of North America north of Mexico City, except for the southeastern United
States, where a similar species, the red wolf (

Canis rufus

), was present. The gray wolf occupied nearly every area in North America that supported populations of hoofed mammals
(ungulates), its major food source. 

Twenty-four distinct subspecies of gray wolf had been recognized in North America. Recently, however, taxonomists
have suggested that there are five or fewer subspecies or group types of gray wolf in North America and that the wolf
type that once occupied the northern Rocky Mountains of the United States was more widely distributed than was previously
believed. 

The gray wolf occurred historically in the northern Rocky Mountains, including mountainous portions of Wyoming,
Montana, and Idaho. The drastic reduction in the distribution and abundance of this species in North America was directly
related to human activities, such as the elimination of native ungulates, conversion of wildland into agricultural
lands, and extensive predator control efforts by private, State, and Federal agencies. The natural history of wolves
and their ecological role was poorly understood during the period of their eradication in the conterminous United
States. As with other large predators, wolves were considered a nuisance and threat to humans. Today, the gray wolf's
role as an important and necessary part of natural ecosystems is better understood and appreciated. 

For 50 years prior to 1986, no detection of wolf reproduction was found in the Rocky Mountain portion of the United States.
However in 1986, a wolf den was discovered near the Canadian border in Glacier National Park. This find was presumably
due to the southern expansion of the Canadian wolf population. The Glacier National Park wolf population has steadily
grown to about 65 wolves and now exists throughout northwestern Montana. 

Reproducing wolf populations are not known to occur in Idaho or southwestern Montana. Wolves have occasionally been
sighted in these States, but do not constitute a population as defined by scientific experts (Service 1994). Historical
reports suggest that wolves may have produced young in these States; however, based on extensive surveys and interagency
monitoring efforts (Service 1994), no wolf population presently persists in these States. 

3. 

Wolf Recovery Efforts: 

In the 1970's, the State of Montana led an interagency recovery team, established by the Service, that developed a
recovery plan for the Northern Rocky Mountain gray wolf. The 1980 recovery plan recommended a combination of natural
recovery and reintroduction be used to recover wolves in the area around Yellowstone National Park (the Park) north
to the Canadian border, including central Idaho. 

A revised recovery plan was approved by the Service in 1987 (Service 1987). It identified a recovered wolf population
as being at least 10 breeding pairs of wolves, for 3 consecutive years, in each of 3 recovery areas (northwestern Montana,
central Idaho, and Yellowstone). A population of this size would be comprised of about 300 wolves. The plan recommended
natural recovery in Montana and Idaho. However, if two wolf packs did not become established in central Idaho within
5 years, the plan recommended that conservation measures other than natural recovery be considered. The plan recommended
use of the Act's section 10(j) authority to reintroduce wolves into the Park and central Idaho. By establishing a nonessential
experimental population, more liberal management practices may be implemented to address potential negative impacts
or concerns regarding the reintroduction. 






