 

(i) The farm number, 
(ii) The commodity being stored, 
(iii) The date the commodity was weighed, and 
(iv) The signature or initials of the weigh person, and company name, if available. 
(2) The county committee shall determine that measurements indicating the weighed quantity of the commodity in the
bin is reasonable compared to the measured quantity of such commodity. 
(d) Subject to the county committee's approval, a producer may certify that a quantity of a commodity was used as seed
for personal use if such certification includes: 
(1) The production amount used for the commodity, 
(2) The seeding rate for the commodity, and 
(3) The number of acres that were planted using such commodity. 
(e) Producers may request to have a crop appraised for production evidence purposes. Such appraisals shall be performed
in accordance to 7 CFR 401.8. The county committee has the option of: 
(1) Accepting such appraisal's production estimates; or 
(2) Reducing the appraised yield to reflect yields based on 3 similar farms and recording such appraised yield as an
assigned yield, and notifying the producer of the reduction of the yield and the producer's right to appeal such yield.

(f)(1) Production that a producer intends to commingle with other production must be supported by acceptable production
evidence, which shall be provided by the producer by: 
(i) Having such production evidence measured, 
(ii) Having the current year's production appraised, and 
(iii) Establishing each producer's shares. 
(2) The county committee may also verify the evidence submitted by the producer with the warehouse, gin, or other entity
which received production. If the evidence is not furnished or the information provided on the report cannot be verified,
the county committee has the option to: 
(i) Disapprove the report of production; or 
(ii) Require additional evidence to be provided. 
(g) If production evidence is found to be unacceptable, false, or incorrect, the county committee shall make all determinations,
including determinations as to whether the producer acted in good faith or took an action defeating the purpose of
the program, as specified in accordance with part 791 of this title. If the county committee determines the producer
did not act in good faith or took action defeating the purpose of the program, the actual yield shall be considered zero.
If the county committee determines the producer acted in good faith, a yield shall be assigned for the crop year based
on yields established for 3 similar farms in the county. 


1413.20 

Reducing yields. 


(a) For the purpose of determining the amount of any deficiency payment as provided in 1413.104 or the amount
of any disaster payment as provided in 1413.122 and 1413.123, the farm program payment yield for a crop
for a farm shall be temporarily reduced for a farm for the applicable crop year when the county committee determines
that the producer planted or maintained the acreage of the crop in an unworkmanlike manner such that, under normal
conditions, it would not produce a yield comparable to the established yield for the crop for the farm. 
(b) The following farming practices will not be considered as unworkmanlike unless the county committee determines
that the actions are not an acceptable management practice for the crop and area: 
(1) Continuous cropping when the yield for the crop was established based on the crop normally being planted on summer-fallow
acreage on the farm; 
(2) Cultural practices normal to the area or introduced by Extension Service or Soil Conservation Service (SCS) to
improve conservation; 
(3) Double cropping 2 crops that are normally double cropped in the area; 
(4) Changes in irrigation practices, except for rice; 
(5) Minimum till and no till practices according to practices customary for the area; and 
(6) Introduction of new farm equipment into the area that was manufactured or built by an entity that normally builds
farm equipment. 




