 



Comment:

 The Council minority report opposing the regulatory amendment noted that: (1) No data were presented on the impact
of prohibiting the operators and crews on vessels operating as charter vessels or headboats from retaining red snapper,
and (2) the effect of this measure is unknown. 




Response:

 NMFS agrees with this comment. Review of the administrative record indicated inadequate justification or rationale
for the measure, and insufficient analysis supporting its implementation. The measure was disapproved for this
and other reasons stated in this rule. 




Comment:

 The Council minority report opposing the regulatory amendment claimed that the Council had no real data available
on the economic impacts of the bag limit reductions on the recreational fishing industry. Similar statements also
were included in many public comments. The minority report noted that the Council's Socioeconomic Panel (SEP) Report
included only a brief reference that the for-hire sector may be adversely affected by any bag limit reduction. 




Response:

 The Council had all available information on the socioeconomic impacts of the proposal before its vote. That information
included extensive public testimony and recommendations from industry representatives on the Reef Fish Advisory
Panel, as well as the report from the SEP Panel. The regulatory amendment provided additional socioeconomic analyses
that were fully considered before NMFS reached its decision. 




Comment:

 One public comment stated, as previously indicated in testimony to the Council, the proposed bag and size limit changes
are being made without consideration of social and economic factors. The comment cited 50 CFR 602.12 and suggested
that: (1) The stock assessment and fishery evaluation (SAFE Report) contained inadequate economic information,
and (2) economic and social studies are lacking and need to be considered before the management changes could be justified.





Response:

 NMFS fully considered all available scientific information and public comments before acting on the proposed rule.
This included testimony to the Council by the commenter and other fishery participants at its September and November
1994 meetings. NMFS agrees with the comment, however, on the need for additional economic and social studies such
that the results can be fully considered by the Council and NMFS before making additional management decisions. In
the interim, however, action for the 1995 season must be based on the best available scientific information including
the social and economic data currently accepted by NMFS and included in the SAFE Report. 




Comment:

 The Council's letter that requested a seven-fish bag limit referenced public testimony that a lower bag limit for
red snapper would increase pressure on various alternative species. Conversely, status quo (a seven-fish bag limit)
would eliminate any impacts from this shift.


