 

We calculated the benefit using our standard long-term loan methodology. We then divided the benefit allocated to
the POI by the sales of the Specialty Steels Division of ILVA. On this basis, we determine the estimated net subsidy
from this program to be 0.30 percent 

ad valorem 

for all manufacturers, producers, and exporters in Italy of the subject merchandise. 


3. Interest Contributions on IRI Loans/Bond Issues 




Under Law 675/77, IRI was allowed to issue bonds to finance restructuring measures of companies within the IRI Group.
The proceeds from the sale of the bonds were then re-lent to IRI companies. The effective interest rate on such loans
was reduced by interest contributions made by the GOI. Terni had two of these loans outstanding during the POI. Both
loans had variable interest rates. 
To determine whether these loans were countervailable, the Department used a long-term variable rate benchmark
as described in 355.44(B) of the Proposed Regulations. We compared this benchmark rate to the effective rates
paid by Terni in the years these loans were taken out and found that these loans were provided on terms inconsistent
with commercial considerations. 
To determine the benefit, we first calculated the difference between what was paid on these loans during the POI and
what would have been paid during the POI had the loans been provided on commercial terms. We divided the resulting difference
by the sales of the Specialty Steels Division of ILVA. On this basis, we determine the estimated net subsidy from this
program to be 0.26 percent 

ad valorem 

for all manufacturers, producers, and exporters in Italy of the subject merchandise. 


F. Urban Redevelopment Financing Under Law 181/89 


Law 181/89 was implemented to ease the impact of employment reductions in the steel crisis areas of Naples, Taranto,
Terni, and Genoa. The program had four main components: (1) reindustrialization projects; (2) job promotion; (3)
training; and (4) early retirement. (Early retirement under Law 181/89 was not used by ILVA and the job promotion component
has been found not countervailable (see relevant sections below). 
Because benefits under this program are limited to specific regions, we determine that assistance under this program
is limited to a group of industries in accordance with section 355.43(b)(3). 


1. Reindustrialization Under Law 181/89 


Under the reindustrialization component of Law 181/89, the GOI partially subsidized certain investments. ILVA
received payments under Law 181/89 for a training center to update the technical skills of its workers. Training also
took place at this center to improve workers' skills for employment outside the steel industry. 
Since the information provided to the Department indicates that the center supported the training of steel workers
who continued to be employed by ILVA, we determine that ILVA received a benefit from reindustrialization payments
under Law 181/89. 
In addition, we established that ILVA received payments under Law 181/89 for service centers. However, these service
centers were involved in steel processing unrelated to electrical steel. Therefore, payments to these service centers
were not included in our calculations. 
To calculate the benefit to ILVA during the POI, we used our standard grant methodology (see 355.49(b) of the
Proposed Regulations) and the discount rate described above. It is the Department's practice to treat training benefits
as recurring grants (see GIA at 37226). 

Accordingly, we divided the amount received in the POI by the 1992 sales of the ILVA. On this basis, we determine the
estimated net subsidy to be 0.00 percent 

ad valorem 

for all manufacturers, producers, and exporters on Italy of the subject merchandise. 


2. Worker Training 


Retraining grants were provided to ILVA under Law 181/89. These funds constituted the GOI's matching contribution
to ECSC Article 56(2)(b) training grants (see ECSC Article 56 Redeployment Aid section below). 




