 

The record indicates that training materials and 
courses for logging safety are widely available and that 
many logging establishments have implemented training 
programs (Ex. 4122, 4123, 4181, 520, 533, 91, 92, 95, 96,
36; Tr. W1 16364, W2 113, 115, 125, 199201, OR 87, 
25960, 393, 54647, 566). Trade associations such as AOL, 
APA and the Montana Logging Association have been providing 
training materials on an on-going basis (Ex. 527). APA 
expected to have completed a comprehensive training package 
for its members companies by 1989. In addition, state 
agricultural extension services are a source of training 
information (Ex. 4122, 4123). Several hearing 
participants submitted descriptions of their training 
programs and the actual training materials (Ex. 21, 22, 23, 
24, 26, 28, 29). 

OSHA is aware that many of the existing training 
programs are based on the training requirements of OSHA's 
pulpwood logging standard. Because the training 
requirements have been revised in this final rule, current 
training programs will have to be reviewed and upgraded, 
when necessary, to meet the revised requirements. In 
addition, the training provisions of the final rule vary to 
some degree from the proposed rule. As such, employers who 
made changes in their programs in response to the proposed 
rule will have to review their training materials to assure 
compliance with the final rule. 

OSHA is aware that employers, trade associations and 
other organizations that provide training will need time to 
prepare and/or update training programs to meet the 
requirements of the final rule and will need time to provide 
training to employees. However, the record also shows that 
many companies and organizations already have developed 
training programs that meet most of the requirements of the 
final rule (Ex. 520, 527, 552, 569, 92; Tr. OR 343). 
Many establishments, especially those in States that have 
logging standards, already are providing training (Ex. 21, 
22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29). Therefore, OSHA does not believe 
that a lengthy delay is necessary to meet the training 
requirements of the final rule. The Agency believes that 
extending the effective date of the standard for 120 days 
after publication of the final rule in the 

Federal Register

 
will be sufficient to allow employers and others to 
familiarize themselves with the final rule, to update 
training programs to meet the provisions of the final rule, 
and to conduct initial training. This phase-in period also 
will give employers time to determine whether current and 
new employees have received the training in all of the 
elements specified in this section or whether they will need 
additional training. 



b. Sufficiency of training. 

The second issue raised in the hearing notice concerned 
what training OSHA would consider sufficient to meet the 
training requirements in the final rule. Some commenters 
supported OSHA's preference for performance based training 
(Ex. 93, 915). Other commenters argued for detailed 
specifications to be included in the training requirements, 
including a minimum number of hours of training (Ex. 913, 
919). 

In general, the final rule contains training 
requirements in performance language to allow employer 
flexibility in tailoring training programs to the individual 
circumstances under which they operate. The final rule sets 
forth the basic elements that must be covered in the 
employer's training program, such as safe performance of 
assigned work tasks; safe use of tools; recognition and 
control of workplace hazards; prevention and control of 
general logging hazards; and the requirements of the final 
standard. The training provisions also require that 
employees initially work under supervision and that they 
demonstrate the ability to perform their work tasks safely 
before being released from supervision. 

As discussed elsewhere in this preamble, each logging 
establishment has unique conditions or hazards associated 
with its logging operations, that result in unique methods 
of operation. OSHA believes that the general elements of 
the training provisions allow employers to take into account 
those differences while still requiring the employer to 
assure through training that each employee is able to 
perform the job safely. 




