 

Comment 68 


Petitioners argue that the Department incorrectly entered a customer code in its computer program and urge the Department
to correct this error. Furthermore, petitioners contend that the Department should add that particular customer's
expense category to the movement expenses. 


DOC Position 


We agree with petitioners that an incorrect instruction in the computer program resulted in a erroneous customer
code and did not add this customer's expense category to the movement expenses. We have corrected this clerical error
in the final results. 



Comment 69 


Petitioners argue that in calculating PP, the Department treated certain expenses as indirect expenses. Petitioners
assert that, as presented by NZKMB, these costs are direct expenses and, therefore, should be treated as such. 



DOC Position 


We agree. We have treated these expenses as direct expenses in the final results. 

 


Comment 70 


Petitioners argue that the Department incorrectly calculated U.S. packing expense by excluding labelling and tagging
expenses in its sale-to-sale comparisons. Petitioners urge the Department to correct this clerical error by adding
labelling and tagging expense to export packing. 


DOC Position 


We agree. Accordingly, we have made the appropriate adjustments in the final results. 


Comment 71 


Respondent argues that in calculating CV, the Department inadvertently double-counted packing costs by using the
packing-inclusive cost of cultivation and then adding the packing costs again to the CV. 
Petitioners assert that the Department did not use the actual packing cost in its calculations. 



DOC Position 


We agree with both petitioners and respondent. Upon reviewing our calculations, we found that we had inadvertently
double-counted packing costs and did not use the actual packing costs. We have revised our calculations to reflect
these adjustments in the final results. 



Comment 72 


Respondent argues that the Department improperly deducted credit expenses in calculating the net home market price
to be compared to the COP. Additionally, respondent contends that the Department improperly included inventory
carrying costs in the calculation of COP. To support its argument, respondent cites

 Gray Portland Cement and Clinker from Japan; Final Results of Administrative Review 

(58 FR 48826, 48831, September 20, 1993), in which the Department did not take into account imputed credit expense
and inventory carrying costs when testing sales below the COP. 



DOC Position 


Upon reviewing our calculations, we found that we had inadvertently deducted credit expenses in calculating the
net price to be compared to COP. We also inadvertently included inventory carrying costs in calculating the COP. We
have corrected our calculations for the final results. 



Comment 73 


Respondent argues that the Department inadvertently double- counted pallet tagging and labelling expenses in the
CV margin calculation by including these expenses twice in its calculations. 



DOC Position 


We agree. We have corrected our calculations for the final results. 


Comment 74 


Respondent argues that in testing whether sales were made below cost, the Department inadvertently used a one-month
threshold, although the preliminary results indicated a threshold of ``more than two months.'' According to respondent,
the Department's practice in administrative reviews is to use a period of time greater than two months in implementing
19 CFR 353.51(a)(1), which allows the Department to disregard sales below cost in the calculation of FMV only if they
are made ``over an extended period'' of time. 



DOC Position 


We inadvertently relied on a one-month threshold of sales below cost instead of a ``more than two month'' threshold
in our preliminary COP analysis. We have corrected our calculations in the final results. 


Comment 75 


Petitioners argue that, in its CV calculations, the Department used a flawed formula for determining whether actual
SGA or the 10 percent of COM statutory minimum be used. 




