 

In April 1992, FWS applied for a modification to its scientific research permit in order to initiate a captive breeding
program using about 1,000 juveniles that remained from the hatchery propagation effort in 1991. A primary objective
of this program was to provide insurance against extinction or loss of unique genetic variability until the wild winter-run
chinook salmon population began to recover. The goal of the program is to produce about 200 mature broodstock for each
of three consecutive years beginning in 1994. 
The FWS transferred approximately 750 of the juveniles produced from adults captured during the 1991 spawning run
to the University of California's Bodega Marine Laboratory in September 1992 for extended captive rearing. A small
number of these juveniles (approximately 50) were subsequently transferred to Steinhart Aquarium in San Francisco
during March 1993 for further rearing and display. Additional juveniles produced from adults collected and spawned
in 1992 were transferred from the hatchery to Bodega Marine Laboratory for extended rearing in February 1993. As of
September 1993, the Bodega Marine Lab was rearing approximately 425 fish from the 1991 broodyear and approximately
640 fish from the 1992 broodyear. A portion of the surviving adults produced from the 1991 and 1992 broodyears may eventually
be returned to the hatchery for use as broodstock. However, these captively reared adults will not be used in any matings
nor can their progeny be released into the wild until after NMFS and FWS have concluded the ongoing section 7 consultation
that is addressing the potential adverse effects of the captive broodstock program on wild fish, and NMFS has amended
the FWS's existing ESA section 10 research and propagation permit. 


3. Disease or Predation



The magnitude and extent of predation on winter-run chinook salmon in the Sacramento River and Sacramento-San Joaquin
Delta are poorly known. However, studies by the FWS have found that predation at Red Bluff Diversion Dam, primarily
by squawfish, significantly contributes to the mortality of downstream winter-run chinook salmon migrants. The
FWS has undertaken periodic electrofishing below the dam which may be useful in developing a relative squawfish abundance
index. All of the fisheries agencies believe that before squawfish control is possible, more must be learned about
their life history. In 1992, the FWS conducted limited studies of predation at the fish bypass outfall as part of its
continuing evaluation of the dam and the new screens that were installed in 1990. 
NMFS has addressed this problem, in part, by requiring the Bureau, through the 1993 biological opinion on long-term
operations of the Central Valley Project, to maintain the Red Bluff Diversion Dam gates in the raised position during
most of the outmigration period. This action is expected to reduce substantially the adverse effects of predation
at the dam on juvenile winter-run chinook salmon. 
The potential for high levels of predation on juvenile winter-run chinook salmon also exist at the Glen-Colusa Irrigation
District (GCID) diversion facility and other manmade structures such as the California Department of Water Resource's
Suisun Marsh Salinity Control Structure and Clifton Court Forebay in the southern Delta. Predation studies conducted
by the CDFG in forebay indicate that the pre-screening mortality of marked salmonids, primarily due to predation
by striped bass, is approximately 75 percent. Squawfish and striped bass predation has also been observed on juvenile
salmonids released back into the Sacramento River from salvage operations conducted by the CDFG at State and Federal
fish protection facilities in the lower Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. 





