 




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93E0387]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Determination of Regulatory Review Period for Purposes of Patent Extension; Pirsue

TM

 Aqueous Gel</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has determined the regulatory review period for Pirsue

TM

 Aqueous Gel and is publishing this notice of that determination as required by law. FDA has made the determination
because of the submission of an application to the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, Department of Commerce,
for the extension of a patent which claims that animal drug product.


</SUMMARY>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Written comments and petitions should be directed to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug
Administration, rm. 123, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Brian J. Malkin, Office of Health Affairs (HFY20), Food and Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville,
MD 20857, 3014431382.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984 (Pub. L. 98417) and the Generic Animal Drug
and Patent Term Restoration Act (Pub. L. 100670) generally provide that a patent may be extended for a period
of up to 5 years so long as the patented item (human drug product, animal drug product, medical device, food additive,
or color additive) was subject to regulatory review by FDA before the item was marketed. Under these acts, a product's
regulatory review period forms the basis for determining the amount of extension an applicant may receive.


A regulatory review period consists of two periods of time: a testing phase and an approval phase. For animal drug products,
the testing phase begins on the earlier date when either a major environmental effects test was initiated for the drug
or when an exemption under section 512(j) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act became effective and runs until
the approval phase begins. The approval phase starts with the initial submission of an application to market the animal
drug product and continues until FDA grants permission to market the drug product. Although only a portion of a regulatory
review period may count toward the actual amount of extension that the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks may
award (for example, half the testing phase must be subtracted as well as any time that may have occurred before the patent
was issued), FDA's determination of the length of a regulatory review period for an animal drug product will include
all of the testing phase and approval phase as specified in 
35 U.S.C. 156(g)(4)(B).
FDA recently approved for marketing the animal drug product Pirsue

TM

 Aqueous Gel (pirlimycin hydrochloride). Pirsue

TM

 Aqueous Gel is indicated for lactating dairy cattle for treatment of clinical and subclinical mastitis. Subsequent
to this approval, the Patent and Trademark Office received a patent term restoration application for Pirsue

TM

 Aqueous Gel (U.S. Patent No. 4,278,789) from The Upjohn Co. and requested FDA's assistance in determining the patent's
eligibility for patent term restoration. In a letter dated November 14, 1993, FDA advised the Patent and Trademark
Office that this animal drug product had undergone a regulatory review period and that the approval of Pirsue

TM

 Aqueous Gel represented the first permitted commercial marketing or use of the product. Shortly thereafter, the
Patent and Trademark Office requested that FDA determine the product's regulatory review period.
FDA has determined that the applicable regulatory review period for Pirsue

TM

 Aqueous Gel is 3,860 days. Of this time, 3,778 days occurred during the testing phase of the regulatory review period,
while 82 days occurred during the approval phase. These periods of time were derived from the following dates:
1. 

The date an exemption under section 512(j) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act became effective

: February 17, 1983. The applicant claims March 8, 1983, as the date the investigational new animal drug application
(INAD) became effective. However, FDA records indicate that the date of FDA's official acknowledgment letter assigning
a number to the INAD was February 17, 1983, which is considered to be the effective date for the INAD.
2. 

The date the application was initially submitted with respect to the animal drug product under section 512(b) of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act

: June 21, 1993. The applicant claims June 17, 1993, as the date the new animal drug application (NADA) was initially
submitted. However, a review of FDA records reveals that the date of FDA's official acknowledgment letter assigning
a number to the NADA was June 21, 1993, which is considered to be the initial submission date for the NADA 141036.
3. 

The date the application was approved

: September 10, 1993. FDA has verified the applicant's claim that NADA 141036 was approved on September 10,
1993.
This determination of the regulatory review period establishes the maximum potential length of a patent extension.
However, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office applies several statutory limitations in its calculations of the actual
period for patent extension. In its application for patent extension, this applicant seeks 1,095 days of patent term
extension.
Anyone with knowledge that any of the dates as published is incorrect may, on or before May 2, 1994, submit to the Dockets
Management Branch (address above) written comments and ask for a redetermination. Furthermore, any interested
person may petition FDA, on or before August 30, 1994, for a determination regarding whether the applicant for extension
acted with due diligence during the regulatory review period. To meet its burden, the petition must contain sufficient
facts to merit an FDA investigation. (See H. Rept. 857, part 1, 98th Cong., 2d sess., pp. 4142, 1984.) Petitions
should be in the format specified in 21 CFR 10.30.
Comments and petitions should be submitted to the Dockets Management Branch (address above) in three copies (except
that individuals may submit single copies) and identified with the docket number found in brackets in the heading
of this document. Comments and petitions may be seen in the Dockets Management Branch between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday
through Friday.




Dated: January 24, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Stuart L. Nightingale,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Commissioner for Health Affairs.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 944801 Filed 3294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>





