 

234.223 

Gate arm. 



Each gate arm, when in the downward position, shall extend 
across each lane of approaching highway traffic and shall be 
maintained in a condition sufficient to be clearly viewed by 
approaching highway users. Each gate arm shall start its 
downward motion not less than three seconds after flashing lights 
begin to operate and shall assume the horizontal position at 
least five seconds before the arrival of any train at the 
crossing. At those crossings equipped with four quadrant gates, 
the timing requirements of this section apply to entrance gates 
only. 



234.225 

Activation of warning system. 



A highway-rail grade crossing warning system shall be 
maintained to activate in accordance with the design of the 
warning system, but in no event shall it provide less than 20 
seconds warning time before the grade crossing is occupied by 
rail traffic. 



234.227 

Train detection apparatus. 



(a) Train detection apparatus shall be maintained to detect 
a train or railcar in any part of a train detection circuit, in 
accordance with the design of the warning system. 

(b) If the presence of sand, rust, dirt, grease, or other 
foreign matter is known to prevent effective shunting, a railroad 
shall take appropriate action under 234.105, ``Activation 
failure,'' to safeguard highway users. 



234.229 

Shunting sensitivity. 



Each highway-rail grade crossing train detection circuit 
shall detect the application of a shunt of 0.06 ohm resistance 
when the shunt is connected across the track rails of any part of 
the circuit. 



234.231 

Fouling wires. 



Each set of fouling wires in a highway-rail grade crossing 
train detection circuit shall consist of at least two discrete 
conductors. Each conductor shall be of sufficient conductivity 
and shall be maintained in such condition to ensure proper 
operation of the train detection apparatus when the train 
detection circuit is shunted. 



234.233 

Rail joints. 



Each non-insulated rail joint located within the limits of a 
highway-rail grade crossing train detection circuit shall be 
bonded by means other than joint bars and the bonds shall be 
maintained in such condition to ensure electrical conductivity. 



234.235 

Insulated rail joints. 



Each insulated rail joint used to separate train detection 
circuits of a highway-rail grade crossing shall be maintained to 
prevent current from flowing between rails separated by the 
insulation in an amount sufficient to cause a failure of the 
train detection circuit. 



234.237 

Switch equipped with circuit controller. 



A switch, when equipped with a switch circuit controller 
connected to the point and interconnected with warning system 
circuitry, shall be maintained so that the warning system can 
only be cut out when the switch point is within one-half inch of 
full reverse position. 



234.239 

Tagging of wires and interference of wires or tags 
with signal apparatus. 



Each wire shall be tagged or otherwise so marked that it can 
be identified at each terminal. Tags and other marks of 
identification shall be made of insulating material and so 
arranged that tags and wires do not interfere with moving parts 
of the apparatus. 



234.241 

Protection of insulated wire; splice in underground 
wire. 



Insulated wire shall be protected from mechanical injury. 
The insulation shall not be punctured for test purposes. A 
splice in underground wire shall have insulation resistance at 
least equal to that of the wire spliced. 


