 

5. Databases Used To Calculate the APH Yield 





Comment: 

One comment noted that a four year history does not provide a balanced history in which an agent can accurately calculate
a producer's coverage. A one or two year drought would severely affect a producer's history. A ten year history would
provide more stability. 



Comment: 

One comment suggested that the base period be a minimum of five years. Four years are not sufficient. Approved yields
may fluctuate tremendously from year to year. The schedule for the percentage of the T-Yield used, based upon the years
records provided, should be as follows: zero years_80 percent; one year_85 percent; two years_90 percent; three
years_95 percent; four years_100 percent; and five or more years the T-Yield is not used. 



Comment: 

One comment noted that in 400.54(h), ``FCIC may use any production reports available under the provisions
of any crop insurance contract, whether continuous or not (emphasis added), which involve the interests of the insured
person in determining the approved APH yield.'' Current APH procedures allow new insureds (including insureds with
a break in continuity of insurance coverage of at least one year) to certify one or more crop years to establish the APH
yield. Since processing has already begun, implementation of yields that are not continuous will impose major difficulties.
In accordance with the proposed definition of crop year, this could require companies to maintain yield history indefinitely
(for example, a farmer may have had a policy five years ago with production history going back 30 or 40 years to accumulate
10 crop years). 



Response: 

The level at which the reduced T-Yield has been set for zero, one, or two years of records was established to offset disproportionate
losses as compared to insureds who have provided more years of actual records. Using higher levels of T-Yields is contrary
to that objective. The modified APH program encourages the insured to provide actual records by using reduced T-Yields
if the insured provides less than four years of actual yields. 

The proposed regulation does not limit insureds to providing only four years of actual yield. In fact, continuous
records up to ten years must be used if available. The more years of records used, the less the effect fewer actual yields
have. Insureds may submit one to ten years of continuous crop years of actual yields to be used in the APH yield calculation.


With data automation and reporting changes, actual yields will be retained until the database contains ten crop years
of actual yields. There is no need to expand the database to include calendar years that are not used to calculate the
APH yield. Data processing changes can be accomplished for the 1995 crop year. 



6. Why a Federal Regulation? 





Comment: 

One comment requested justification as to FCIC publishing in the 

Federal Register 

a program (APH) that has already been implemented by FCIC approved procedures. The comment went on to state that, as
introduced in the mid 1980's the APH program did not have its procedures published in the 

Federal Register. 

By implementing the program as a regulation, the comment stated that FCIC is limiting its ability to administer the
APH program as changes can no longer be handled administratively. Any changes will be required to be published in the


Federal Register 

prior to implementation. 



Response: 

The regulation provides a foundation on which the APH program and procedures will be based. The regulation will strengthen
FCIC's and reinsured companies' ability to defend the procedures used to determine APH yields if reconsideration,
appeal, or litigation proceedings relating to APH are pursued by insureds. The previous unpublished procedures
were not effective unless the insureds received actual notice of program changes prior to the contract change date.




7. Base Period Section 440.51(g) and Crop Year Section 400.51(i) 





Comment: 

400.51(g), (i)_Three objections to the definition of crop year and base period were stated. The base period
is defined at 10 consecutive crop years. Crop year is defined as any year in which the crop is planted. Under the regulation,
the base period is no longer 10 consecutive crop years beginning with the most recent year, but would vary from each
crop and policy, and possibly from each database within a policy. It is conceivable that a database may contain land
planted to the insured crop every other year, in such case, the base period could stretch back 20 

calendar 

years to obtain 10 

crop

 years. 



Response: 

Crop year as defined, benefits producers who rotate different crops, rotate the same crop on different units, or who
only occasionally plant the insured crop. For example, if an insured has three consecutive crop years of actual records
on a unit: 1984, 1988, and 1993, by using crop year as defined in the regulation, all three actual yields will be retained
in the database for the 1995 crop year. If the crop is not planted in 1994, 100 percent of the T-Yield will be used as the
fourth yield when calculating the APH yield. The more years of experience in the database, the more reliable a yield
determination can be made. Requiring only 10 consecutive calendar years of records may result in a yield determination
which does not adequately reflect the farm history. 



Comment: 

A comment was received recommending deleting the last sentence of 400.51 (i) which states, ``If the insured
is prevented from planting all of his acreage in the county due to flood and does not plant for harvest any other crop,
FCIC will assign a yield for that year.'' 



Response: 

FCIC agrees with this comment and has deleted the last sentence accordingly. 



8. Section 400.51(m)New Producer Definition 





Comment: 

Several comments noted that the definition of new producer is different in the rule than the definition implemented
by the 

ad hoc 

procedures for 1994 fall crop year. The definition in the procedures defines a new producer as a ``person who has not
been actively engaged in farming for a share of the insured crop's production in the county for more than two years.''
The rule defines the new producer as ``a person who has not been actively engaged in farming for a share of a crop for more
than two years.'' The rule deals with individuals who are new to farming while procedures deal with individuals who
are new to producing the crop they wish to insure. If the proposed definition of a ``new producer'' goes into effect,
very few producers will qualify as a new producer. 



Response: 

FCIC agrees that this definition may be too restrictive. For example, a producer who has never raised corn would NOT
be considered a ``new producer'' for corn if he or she has raised another crop (wheat for example) for more than two crop
years. Under the proposed regulation this producer's insurance yield for corn would be restricted to 65 percent of
the T-Yield because records are not available for corn. A producer who has no farming experience at all would fare much
better, because as a ``new producer'' he or she will qualify for an insurance yield based on 100 percent of the T-Yield
(for all insured crops). After further evaluation, FCIC agrees that the ``new producer'' provisions should apply
to new producers of an insured crop regardless of their production of other crops. 



9. Section 400.51Definitions





Comment: 

Several comments recommended technical corrections of definitions as follows: 

1. 

Actual Yield and Production Report

_reference is made to ``insurable acres for perennial crops'' instead of ``planted acres.'' 

2. 

Approved APH Yield_

the database may not always contain four consecutive crop years (actual yields). The definition needs clarity that
the total of the yields is divided by the 

number of years with yields. 

(Also see comments to definition of ``Crop Year.'') 

3. 

Assigned Yield

_suggest changing ``considered'' to ``handled in the same manner as.'' 

4. 

Master Yield

_indicate its availability is limited to certain crops and counties designated by FCIC. 

5. 

Production Report

_remove ``by us'' in the first sentence. Rewrite to include the possibility that production may be reported for more
than the one (most recent) crop year. 



Response: 

FCIC agrees with these comments and has revised the definitions accordingly. 



