 

UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 



April 9, 1993. 



David L. Crow, 


Executive Director/APCO, 
San Joaquin Valley, Unified Air Pollution Control District, 
1999 Tuolumne Street, Suite 200, 
Fresno, CA 93721.





Dear Mr. Crow: This letter responds to your request to EPA to rescind Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD)
permitting authority in Fresno and Kern counties. We recognize that the request, dated March 16, 1993, and received
by this office on March 19, 1993, is consistent with ongoing efforts to attain a more coordinated approach to air quality
management in the San Joaquin Valley. 


In September 1991, the State of California passed legislation that effectively required the formation of a single
air pollution control district in the Valley Air Basin. To that end, eight counties joined efforts in March 1992 to
form the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control District. The District comprises the counties of Fresno,
Kings, Madera, Merced, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Tulare counties, as well as that part of Kern County located in
the Valley Air Basin. By August 1992, the California Air Resources Board certified that the District met the requirements
stated in SB 124. 


EPA had specifically transferred PSD authority to Fresno County APCD by a delegation agreement, dated December 23,
1985. As mentioned in your letter, the District has chosen to defer to EPA the regulation of sources subject to PSD rules
at 40 CFR 52.21. Therefore, EPA hereby rescinds authority delegated to Fresno County APCD to regulate sources subject
to the federal PSD rules. Please note that no such agreement was made between EPA and Kern County, so that your request
to rescind PSD authority in that county requires no further action. 


Pursuant to grant conditions under 105 (Program Objective 5), the District shall continue to provide to EPA
notification, as soon as possible and prior to deeming the application complete, of all new major stationary sources
and major modifications that may be subject to the federal PSD regulation. Specifically, this affects major stationary
sources and major modifications to existing sources, as defined under part 52.21(b), that are located in areas designated
as attainment within the San Joaquin Valley Unified APCD. The District should also provide notification to sources
potentially affected by the federal PSD requirements. These sources must submit PSD permit applications to EPA and
may be subject to enforcement action if construction commences before EPA issues a final PSD permit. 


We look forward to continued cooperation with you and your staff, so that permits may be issued in a timely and effective
manner. If you have further questions regarding this matter, please contact Jessica Gaylord of my staff at (415) 7441256.




Sincerely, 


<SIGNER>


Carl C. Kohnert, Jr., 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting for David P. Howekamp, Director, Air  Toxic Division. 



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94803 Filed 11194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>


