 

(g) 

Withdrawal, Default and Disqualification Penalties. 

As specified below, when the Commission conducts a simultaneous multiple round auction pursuant to 1.2103,
the Commission will impose penalties on bidders who withdraw high bids during the course of an auction, or who default
on payments due after an auction closes or who are disqualified.

(1) Bid withdrawal prior to close of auction. A bidder who withdraws a high bid during the course of an auction will be
subject to a penalty equal to the difference between the amount bid and the amount of the winning bid the next time the
license is offered by the Commission. No withdrawal penalty would be assessed if the subsequent winning bid exceeds
the withdrawn bid. This penalty amount will be deducted from any upfront payments or down payments that the withdrawing
bidder has deposited with the Commission.

(2) Default or disqualification after close of auction. If a high bidder defaults or is disqualified after the close
of such an auction, the defaulting bidder will be subject to the penalty in paragraph (g)(1) plus an additional penalty
equal to 3 percent of the subsequent winning bid. If the subsequent winning bid exceeds the defaulting bidder's bid
amount, the 3 percent penalty will be calculated based on the defaulting bidder's bid amount. These amounts will be
deducted from any upfront payments or down payments that the defaulting or disqualified bidder has deposited with
the Commission. When the Commission conducts single round sealed bid auctions or sequential oral auctions, the Commission
may modify the penalties to be paid in the event of bid withdrawal, default or disqualification; provided, however,
that such penalties shall not exceed the penalties specified above.

(h) The Commission will generally release information concerning the identities of bidders before each auction
but may choose, on an auction-by-auction basis, to withhold the identity of the bidders associated with bidder identification
numbers.

(i) The Commission may delay, suspend, or cancel an auction in the event of a natural disaster, technical obstacle,
evidence of security breach, unlawful bidding activity, administrative necessity, or for any other reason that
affects the fair and efficient conduct of the competitive bidding. The Commission also has the authority, at its sole
discretion, to resume the competitive bidding starting from the beginning of the current or some previous round or
cancel the competitive bidding in its entirety.



1.2105



Bidding application and certification procedures; prohibition of collusion.



(a) 

Submission of Short Form Application (FCC Form 175). 

In order to be eligible to bid, an applicant must timely submit a short-form application (FCC Form 175), together with
any appropriate filing fee set forth by Public Notice. Unless otherwise provided by Public Notice, the Form 175 need
not be accompanied by an upfront payment (see 1.2106).

(1) All Form 175s will be due:

(i) On the date(s) specified by Public Notice; or

(ii) In the case of application filing dates which occur automatically by operation of law (

see, e.g.

, 47 CFR 22.902), on a date specified by Public Notice after the Commission has reviewed the applications that have
been filed on those dates and determined that mutual exclusivity exists.

(2) The Form 175 must contain the following information:

(i) Identification of each license on which the applicant wishes to bid;

(ii) The applicant's name, if the applicant is an individual. If the applicant is a corporation, then the short-form
application will require the name and address of the corporate office and the name and title of an officer or director.
If the applicant is a partnership, then the application will require the name, citizenship and address of all partners,
and, if a partner is not a natural person, then the name and title of a responsible person should be included as well.
If the applicant is a trust, then the name and address of the trustee will be required. If the applicant is none of the
above, then it must identify and describe itself and its principals or other responsible persons;

(iii) The identity of the person(s) authorized to make or withdraw a bid;

(iv) If the applicant applies as a designated entity pursuant to 1.2110, a statement to that effect and a declaration,
under penalty of perjury, that the applicant is qualified as a designated entity under 1.2110.

(v) Certification that the applicant is legally, technically, financially and otherwise qualified pursuant to
Section 308(b) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. The Commission will accept applications certifying
that a request for waiver or other relief from the requirements of Section 310 is pending;

(vi) Certification that the applicant is in compliance with the foreign ownership provisions of Section 310 of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended;

(vii) Certification that the applicant is and will, during the pendency of its application(s), remain in compliance
with any service-specific qualifications applicable to the licenses on which the applicant intends to bid including,
but not limited to, financial qualifications. The Commission may require certification in certain services that
the applicant will, following grant of a license, come into compliance with certain service-specific rules, including,
but not limited to, ownership eligibility limitations;

(viii) An exhibit, certified as truthful under penalty of perjury, identifying all parties with whom the applicant
has entered into partnerships, joint ventures, consortia or other agreements, arrangements or understandings
of any kind relating to the licenses being auctioned, including any such agreements relating to the post-auction
market structure.

(ix) Certification under penalty of perjury that it has not entered and will not enter into any explicit or implicit
agreements, arrangements or understandings of any kind with any parties other than those identified pursuant to
paragraph (a)(2)(viii) regarding the amount of their bids, bidding strategies or the particular licenses on which
they will or will not bid;






Note to paragraph (a): 

The Commission may also request applicants to submit additional information for informational purposes to aid in
its preparation of required reports to Congress.




(b) 

Modification and Dismissal of Form 175. 

(1) Any Form 175 that is not signed or otherwise does not contain all of the certifications required pursuant to this
section is unacceptable for filing and cannot be corrected subsequent to any applicable filing deadline. The application
will be dismissed with prejudice and the upfront payment, if paid, will be returned.



