 

H. State Labor Market Option 


In addition to the alternatives discussed above, we are 
also considering a State labor market option (SLMO) under 
which hospitals would be able to voluntarily design labor 
market areas within their own State boundaries. Although we 
are not formally proposing the SLMO at this time, we welcome 
comments on this option. Under the SLMO, an application to 
design labor market areas could be submitted by a group of 
hospitals or any entity that represents hospitals that would 
be affected under the SLMO (for example, a state hospital 
association, the Office of the Governor, etc.). The 
application would have to include a statement signed by each 
hospital's chief executive or chief financial officer 
supporting participation in the SLMO. 
The SLMO is being considered on the premise that 
hospitals within a State may, in some circumstances, have 
better information than HCFA concerning local labor market 
competition between hospitals. Accordingly, we are 
considering the SLMO along with the alternatives discussed 
above, which we believe would require legislative changes. 
Absent changes to the statute, we believe that the SLMO 
would offer opportunities for hospitals to design labor 
market areas that are more reflective of local wage 
conditions than the current system. 


1. Criteria for Participating in a SLMO 


Below we describe some of the criteria we would apply 
to determine whether labor market areas under the SLMO could 
be approved. (We have not fully designed or specified the 
limitations for creating labor market areas under the SLMO, 
and we are interested in any comments from the public for 
developing criteria under which a SLMO would be approved.) 
However, we envision that hospitals participating in a SLMO 
could design labor market areas under the following 
restrictions: 
&bull;We are considering limiting approval of labor market 
areas under the SLMO to cases in which there is unanimous 
support among hospitals. (We may also consider use of 
``overwhelming support'' as a criterion rather than unanimous 
support. We likely would specify a percentage of 
participating hospitals that must support the SLMO labor 
market areas (for example, 75 percent). Such a criterion 
may also specify that to be approved, the SLMO labor market 
area must be supported by each hospital that would lose more 
than 5 percent of payments relative to the current system.) 
&bull;Aggregate payments to hospitals participating in the 
SLMO could be no higher than they otherwise would have been 
in the absence of the SLMO. 
&bull;All hospitals that participate in the SLMO must sign an 
application for it to become effective. Although the 
application could come from a group of hospitals or its 
representatives, each participating hospital must sign the 
application and agree to its provisions. In addition, each 
participating hospital must indicate in the application (or 
a separate agreement) that: 
The participating hospital waives its rights to any 
wage index it would otherwise receive absent the SLMO, 
including a wage index it might receive through geographic 
reclassification. 
The hospital understands how its participation in the 
SLMO would affect its prospective payments, including an 
understanding that the hospital's wage index could be higher 
or lower under the SLMO in comparison to its wage index 
under labor market areas in the absence of the SLMO. (The 
SLMO application would only have to specify that the 
hospital understands the effect of HCFA regulations 
regarding SLMOs and that there may be a reduction of their 
wage index as a result of participation. The hospital would 
not have to indicate the precise level of its wage index in 
the SLMO application.) 
Labor market areas under the SLMO would be 
automatically renewed each year for the purpose of 
calculating the wage index until one or more participating 
hospitals withdraws its support for the SLMO. 
&bull;Labor market areas under the SLMO generally would be 
prohibited from crossing State boundaries. The only 
exception would be that hospitals from a bordering State may 
be included in a SLMO labor market area if they are 
currently located in an MSA that crosses a State boundary. 
In this case, the wage index would be calculated as if 
hospitals in the bordering State were included under the 
SLMO labor market area. For hospitals in the bordering 
State, the wage index would continue to be calculated as it 
is under the current system. 



