 




<DOCTITLE>Attestations Filed by Facilities Using Nonimmigrant Aliens as Registered Nurses</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Employment and Training Administration, Labor.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Department of Labor (DOL) is publishing, for public information, a list of the following health care facilities
which plan on employing nonimmigrant alien nurses. These organizations have attestations on file with DOL for that
purpose.



</SUMMARY>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Anyone interested in inspecting or reviewing the employer's attestation may do so at the employer's place of business.



Attestations and short supporting explanatory statements are also available for inspection in the Immigration
Nursing Relief Act Public Disclosure Room, U.S. Employment Service, Employment and Training Administration, Department
of Labor, room N4456, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210.

Any complaints regarding a particular attestation or a facility's activities under that attestation, shall be filed
with a local office of the Wage and Hour Division of the Employment Standards Administration, U.S. Department of Labor.
The address of such offices are found in many local telephone directories, or may be obtained by writing to the Wage
and Hour Division, Employment Standards Administration, Department of Labor, room S3502, 200 Constitution Avenue,
NW., Washington, DC 20210.



FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

Regarding the Attestation Process



Chief, Division of Foreign Labor Certifications, U.S. Employment Service. Telephone: 2022195263
(this is not a toll-free number).



Regarding the Complaint Process



Questions regarding the complaint process for the H1A nurse attestation program shall be made to the Chief,
Farm Labor Program, Wage and Hour Division. Telephone: 2022197605 (this is not a toll-free number).



</ADDRESS>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The Immigration and Nationality Act requires that a health care facility seeking to use nonimmigrant aliens as registered
nurses first attest to the Department of Labor (DOL) that it is taking significant steps to develop, recruit and retain
United States (U.S.) workers in the nursing profession. The law also requires that these foreign nurses will not adversely
affect U.S. nurses and that the foreign nurses will be treated fairly. The facility's attestation must be on file with
DOL before the Immigration and Naturalization Service will consider the facility's H1A visa petitions for
bringing nonimmigrant registered nurses to the United States. 26 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)(i)(a) and 1181(m). The
regulations implementing the nursing attestation program are at 20 CFR part 655 and 29 CFR part 504, 55 FR 50500 (December
6, 1990). The Employment and Training Administration, pursuant to 20 CFR 655.310(c), is publishing the following
list of facilities which have submitted attestations which have been accepted for filing.




The list of facilities is published so that U.S. registered nurses, and other persons and organizations can be aware
of health care facilities that have requested foreign nurses for their staffs. If U.S. registered nurses or other
persons wish to examine the attestation (on Form ETA 9029) and the supporting documentation, the facility is required
to make the attestation and documentation available. Telephone numbers of the facilities' chief executive officers
also are listed, to aid public inquiries. In addition, attestations and supporting short explanatory statements
(but not the full supporting documentation) are available for inspection at the address for the Employment and Training
Administration set forth in the 

ADDRESSES

 section of this notice.

If a person wishes to file a complaint regarding a particular attestation or a facility's activities under that attestation,
such complaint must be filed at the address for the Wage and Hour Division of the Employment Standards Administration
set forth in the 

ADDRESSES

 section of this notice.



</SUPPLEM>
