 

Executive Order 12866/Secretary's Memorandum 15121



This final rule is issued in conformance with Executive Order 12866. 



Executive Order 12372



The Food Stamp Program is listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance under No. 10.55l. For the reasons set
forth in the final rule and related notice to 7 CFR 3015, subpart V (48 FR 29115), this Program is excluded from the scope
of Executive Order 12372 which requires intergovernmental consultation with State and local officials. 



Executive Order 12778 



This rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. This rule is intended to have preemptive
effect with respect to any state or local laws, regulations or policies which conflict with its provisions or which
would otherwise impede its full implementation. This rule is not intended to have retroactive effect unless so specified
in the ``Effective Date'' section of this preamble. Prior to any judicial challenge to the provisions of this rule
or the application of its provisions, all applicable administrative procedures must be exhausted.



Regulatory Flexibility Act 



This action has been reviewed with regard to the requirements of the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96354,
94 Stat. 1164, September 19, 1980). George Braley, Acting Administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service, has certified
that this rule does not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. This rule will
affect recipients who must elect a repayment method for IPV claims. State and local agencies which administer the
Food Stamp Program will be affected by the change in retention rates on food stamp recipient claims and the reduction
in the enhanced funding rate for development of ADP system. 



Paperwork Reduction Act 



In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3507), the reporting and recordkeeping burden associated
with the Notice of Adverse Action and the demand letter for recipient claims is approved by the Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) under OMB number 05840064. The reporting and recordkeeping burdens associated with the collection
of claims assessed against food stamp households have been approved by OMB under OMB number 05840069. Information
collection requirements relating to automated data processing and information retrieval systems have been approved
by OMB Approval No. 05840083. The provisions of this rule do not contain any additional reporting and/or recordkeeping
requirements subject to OMB approval.



Background 



On September 10, 1991, the Department published in the 

Federal Register

 (56 FR 46127) a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) which proposed changes to Food Stamp Program recipient claims
and ADP funding requirements as required by the Mickey Le Lano Memorial Hunger Relief Act, Pub. L. 101624, (hereinafter
``Pub. L. 101624''). The Department received 21 comment letters which addressed provisions of the proposed
rule. FNS has given careful consideration to all comments received. The major concerns of the commenters are discussed
below. 



Recipient Claims 



Repayment Decision Timeframe 



The proposed rule would have shortened the time for participating households to choose how they would repay inadvertent
household error (IHE) and intentional Program violation (IPV) claims in order to forestall involuntary reduction
of their allotments. The timeframe for such elections would have been shortened from 30 days to the day of receipt of
the demand letter for repayment unless the adverse action period for the claim had not elapsed or the household had
timely requested a fair hearing and continued benefits. Public Law 101624 mandates the shortened timeframe
for IPV claims. The proposed rule would have also applied this timeframe to IHE claims. The preamble to the proposed
rule should be consulted for the complete discussion of the background of this decision.

We received 13 comments on this part of the proposed rule, 10 from State agencies, one from the welfare department of
a large city, and two from public interest groups. Five State agencies supported the proposal; most other commenters
objected to it, primarily because it applied the shortened timeframe to IHE claims. 

One commenter stated that since the statute spoke only to IPV claims, applying the ``same day'' decision timeframe
to IHE claims was against the law. Several commenters objected to the proposal on the grounds that the shortened decision
timeframe for IHE claims would cause hardship on households, especially those in rural areas, and was in any event
too short to allow adequate time for due process. Two commenters objected to our statement that the proposal would
enhance conformity with Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) rules on claims management. Several commenters
stated that if it were established for either IHE or IPV claims, the ``same day'' standard would impose significant
operational problems on State agencies, and that a 10-day minimum should be adopted for both types of claims. One of
the operational difficulties cited was the need to track responses due at varying intervals because of the consideration
of such circumstances as geography. One commenter believed that the proposed rule required a fair hearing on IPV claims
in addition to an administrative disqualification hearing or comparable action establishing such claims. 




