 

Criteria and Decision 



In evaluating the designation of critical habitat to determine 
whether or not to exclude areas because of concerns over economic 
effects, the Service used the following process: 

(1) Based upon the criteria described in this document, the 
geographical area essential to the conservation of the species was 
identified; and 

(2) An economic analysis was conducted to ascertain the anticipated 
economic consequences of designating areas as critical habitat, using 
agricultural and urban sectors as the primary level of economic 
analysis. 

(3) The Service balanced the costs and other impacts of designation 
with the benefits of designation. 



Exclusion 



Using the above described process, the Service has determined that 
no exclusions to critical habitat are appropriate. The entire 
geographic area designated as critical habitat is essential to conserve 
the delta smelt. Delta smelt are restricted to a limited geographic 
area, and retaining land and water areas contained within Suisun Bay and 
river reaches within the Delta and Montezuma, Goodyear, Suisun, Cutoff, 
and First Mallard (Spring Branch) sloughs is necessary to recover this 
annual species. These areas provide habitat necessary for each life 
stage of the species. 

The economic consequences of designating the entire area as critical 
habitat are relatively small. Most economic costs can be avoided by 
project proponents by using timing and construction restrictions, and by 
using best management practices. Designation of critical habitat will 
reduce the need in the future to list fish and wildlife species 
currently in decline, and will improve the overall health of the 
Estuary. The benefits of designating the entire area outweigh the 
benefits of excluding any of the area from the designation. 



Available Conservation Measures 



The purpose of the Act, as stated in section 2(b), is to provide a 
means to conserve the ecosystems upon which endangered and threatened 
species depend and to provide a program for the conservation of listed 
species. Section 2(c)(1) of the Act declares that ''*** all Federal 
departments and agencies shall seek to conserve endangered and 
threatened species and shall utilize their authorities in furtherance of 
the purposes of this Act. 

The Act mandates the conservation of listed species through 
different mechanisms, such as: Section 7 (requiring Federal agencies to 
further the purposes of the Act by carrying out conservation programs 
and insuring that Federal actions will not likely jeopardize the 
continued existence of the listed species or result in the destruction 
or adverse modification of critical habitat); section 9 (wildlife 
research permits and habitat conservation planning on non-Federal 
lands); section 6 (cooperative State and Federal grants), land 
acquisition, and research. Other Federal laws also require conservation 
of endangered and threatened species, such as the National Forest 
Management Act and the National Environmental Policy Act, and various 
other State and Federal laws and regulations. 

Critical habitat is not intended as a management or conservation 
plan. Critical habitat is primarily intended to identify the habitat 
that meets the criteria for the primary constituent elements. However, 
there are benefits that result from the designation. Designation will 
help retain recovery options and reduce the near-term risk until a long-term conservation plan is implemented. 

Designation of critical habitat does not offer specific direction 
for managing delta smelt habitat. That type of direction, as well as 
any change in direction, will come through the administration of other 
facets of the Act (e.g., section 7, section 10 HCP process, and recovery 
planning). 



Recovery Planning 



Recovery planning under section 4(f) of the Act is the ``umbrella''
that eventually guides all the Act's activities and promotes a species' 
conservation and eventual delisting. Recovery plans provide guidance, 
which may include population goals and identification of areas in need 
of protection or special management. Recovery plans usually include 
management recommendations for areas proposed or designated as critical 
habitat. 

The delta smelt and six other fish species that depend on the 
Estuary for a significant segment of their life history are included in 
the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Native Fishes Recovery Plan. The 
recovery plan is currently in draft form. The recovery plan will 
include recovery criteria based on population abundance and geographic 
distribution. Designation of critical habitat, along with the 
biological opinion evaluating the effects of the Federal and State water 
projects on the delta smelt, is consistent with the plan's objective to 
recover these fish species. 



Section 7 Consultation 



Section 7(a)(2) of the Act requires Federal agencies to ensure that 
activities they authorize, fund, or carry out are not likely to destroy 
or adversely modify critical habitat. This Federal responsibility 
accompanies, and is in addition to, the requirement in section 7(a)(2) 
of the Act that Federal agencies ensure that their actions do not 
jeopardize the continued existence of any listed species. 

Jeopardy is defined at 50 CFR 402.02 as any action that would be 
expected to appreciably reduce the likelihood of both the survival and 
recovery of a species. Destruction or adverse modification of critical 
habitat defined at 50 CFR 402.02 as a direct or indirect alteration that 
appreciably diminishes the value of critical habitat for both the 
survival and recovery of a listed species. The regulations also clearly 
state that such alterations include, but are not limited to, alterations 
adversely modifying any of those physical or biological features that 
were the basis for determining the habitat to be critical. 

Survival and recovery, mentioned in both the definition of adverse 
modification and jeopardy, are directly related. Survival may be viewed 
as a linear continuum between recovery and extinction of the species. 
The closer one is to recovery, the greater the certainty in the species 
continued survival. The terms ``survival and recovery'' are, thus, 
related by the degree of certainty that the species will persist over a 
given period of time. Survival relates to viability. Factors that 
influence a species' viability include population numbers, distribution 
throughout the range, stochasticity, expected duration, and reproductive 
success. A species may be considered recovered when there is a high 
degree of certainty for the species' continued viability. 

The Act's definition of critical habitat indicates that the purpose 
of critical habitat is to contribute to a species' conservation, which 
by definition equates to recovery. Section 7 prohibitions against the 
destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat apply to actions 
that would impair survival and recovery of a listed species, thus 
providing a regulatory means of ensuring that Federal actions within 
critical habitat are considered in relation to the goals and 
recommendations of a recovery plan. As a result of the link between 
critical habitat and recovery, the prohibition against destruction or 
adverse modification of the critical habitat should provide for the 
protection of the critical habitat's ability to contribute to a species' 
recovery. 




