 

The California poolco proposals represent an interesting alternative approach to achieving operating efficiency
and competition in hourly electricity markets. However, the proposals are in an early stage of development and a number
of significant transmission issues apparently have not yet been resolved (for example, how transmission owners
would be compensated for the existing facilities, how to determine priorities for use of the transmission grid, how
to allocate expansion costs and how to induce appropriate expansion). Since the California poolco proposals raise
several questions and issues that need additional consideration, we have included a list of questions in section
III.C of this Notice on which we seek comments from interested persons. 



B. Other Alternative Power Pooling Institutions 



There may be other alternative pooling proposals of which the Commission is not aware. The above discussion is not
intended to limit the scope of this inquiry. The Commission is interested in all innovative pooling proposals intended
to capture the benefits of competitive bulk power markets while preserving those coordination benefits that are
consistent with competition. 

The issue of alternative power pooling arrangements, and the California poolco proposal in particular, is part of
a larger discussion concerning the future structure of the electric power industry in the United States. In addition
to the California poolco concept, other innovative institutions have been proposed which, as the Commission comprehends
them, might either work in tandem with a poolco, or separately from a poolco to facilitate the development of a more
competitive bulk power market. For example, some have suggested that the electric power industry could be restructured
to include: (1) generating companies, known as ``gencos,'' which are groupings of generators that may or may not be
affiliated with utilities that compete to sell electricity in the wholesale spot and contract markets; (2) transmitters,
known as ``transcos'' or ``gridcos,'' which are companies that would separately own and maintain a regional transmission
grid; and (3) distributors, known as ``discos,'' which are utilities that would operate the local distribution systems
and purchase energy in the competitive wholesale market for resale to ultimate customers. 

In such a restructured market, the poolco could be a fourth player that could control the operation of the generation
and transmission facilities owned by gencos and gridcos; 

i.e.

, the poolco could dispatch the system based on buy/sell offers from individual gencos and discos. In addition, the
poolco could provide any necessary ancillary services (

e.g.

, load following, spinning reserves, and reactive power) at cost. 

In addition to proposals to restructure the electric power industry along functional lines, there may be other alternative
institutional structures for the industry that warrant consideration in this inquiry. The Commission is interested
in expanding its appreciation of any such proposals for alternative institutional structures. In particular, the
Commission is interested in the extent to which such alternative institutional structures might facilitate the
achievement of a more competitive bulk power market in a way that the current institutional structure of the industry
may not. We have included several questions in this regard as part of section IV. of this notice. 



III. Existing Power Pools 



In order to fully understand the issues presented by alternative power pooling institutions, it is necessary to understand
existing power pools. In addition, given the competitive changes in the industry and the fact that new pooling alternatives
are emerging, it is appropriate to consider whether existing power pools are functioning appropriately and, if not,
to consider what changes are necessary. 









