 

(k) Place a stone crab trap in a closed area or during a closed season, as specified in 654.24, or as may be implemented
under 654.25(b). 
(l) Interfere with fishing or obstruct or damage fishing gear or the fishing vessel of another, as specified in 654.25(a).

(m) Make any false statement, oral or written, to an authorized officer concerning the taking, catching, harvesting,
landing, purchase, sale, possession, or transfer of stone crab. 
(n) Interfere with, obstruct, delay, or prevent by any means an investigation, search, seizure, or disposition of
seized property in connection with enforcement of the Magnuson Act. 


654.8 

Facilitation of enforcement. 


See 620.8 of this chapter. 


654.9 

Penalties. 


See 620.9 of this chapter. 


Subpart B_Management Measures 


654.20 

Seasons. 


(a) 

Closed season. 

No person may possess a stone crab in the management area from 12:01 a.m., local time, May 16, through 12:00 midnight,
local time, October 14, each year. Holding a stone crab in a trap in the water during a soak period or 
during a removal period (see paragraph (b) of this section), or during any extension thereto, is not deemed possession,
provided that, if the trap is removed from the water during such period, such crab is returned immediately to the water
with its claws unharvested. 
(b) 

Placement of traps. 

(1) Prior to the fishing season, the period of October 5 through October 14 is established as a trap soak period. A stone
crab trap may be placed in the management area not earlier than 1 hour before sunrise on October 5. 
(2) After the fishing season, the period of May 16 through May 20 is established as a trap removal period. A stone crab
trap must be removed from the management area not later than 1 hour after sunset on May 20, unless an extension to the
removal period is granted by Florida in accordance with Rule 4613.002(2)(b), Florida Administrative Code.
This incorporation by reference was approved by the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)
and 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be obtained from the Florida Marine Fisheries Commission, 2540 Executive Center Circle,
West, Suite 106, Tallahassee, FL 32301; telephone 9044870554. Copies may be inspected at the Southeast
Regional Office, NMFS, 9721 Executive Center Drive N., St. Petersburg, FL 33702, or the Office of the Federal Register,
800 North Capitol Street, NW., Room 700, Washington, DC 20002. The extension authorization must be carried aboard
the fishing vessel. The operator of a fishing vessel must present the authorization for inspection upon request of
an authorized officer. 
(c) 

Possession of stone crab traps. 

A stone crab trap may not be possessed in the management area from the end of the trap removal period, or an extension
thereto, to the beginning of the trap soak period, as specified in paragraph (b) of this section. A stone crab trap,
float, or rope in the management area during this period will be considered unclaimed or abandoned property and may
be disposed of in any manner considered appropriate by the Secretary or an authorized officer. An owner of such trap,
float, or rope remains subject to appropriate civil penalties. 


654.21 

Harvest limitations. 


(a) 

Claw size. 

No person may remove from a stone crab in or from the management area, or possess in the management area, a claw with a
propodus measuring less than 2.75 inches (7.0 cm), measured in a straight line from the elbow to the tip of the lower
immovable finger. The propodus is the largest section of the claw assembly that has both a movable and immovable finger
and is located farthest from the body when the entire appendage is extended. (See Appendix A, Figure 1.) 
(b) 

Egg-bearing stone crabs. 

An egg-bearing stone crab in or from the management area must be returned immediately to the water unharmed_without
removal of a claw. An egg-bearing stone crab may not be stripped of its eggs or otherwise molested. 
(c) 

Holding stone crabs. 

A live stone crab in or from the management area may be held aboard a vessel until such time as a legal-sized claw is removed,
provided it is held in a container that is shaded from direct sunlight and it is wet with sea water as necessary to keep
it in a damp condition. Containers holding stone crabs must be stacked in a manner that does not compress the crabs.
A stone crab body from which a legal-sized claw has been removed must be returned to the sea before the vessel reaches
shore or a port or dock. 





