 

Under the new ISTEA provision, States must also certify that they are enforcing and complying with the ISTEA freeze
on the use of LCV's and other multi-unit vehicles. Failure to certify would subject a State to the penalties provided
in 23 U.S.C. 141(c)(2). 
The ISTEA, however, effectively replaced the FAP with the NHS, and eliminated the FAU and FAS Systems, without providing
a conforming amendment to 23 U.S.C. 141(b). Until 23 U.S.C. 141 is amended to reflect changes in system nomenclature,
the FHWA will require the States to certify size and weight enforcement on those routes which, prior to October 1, 1991,
were designated as part of the FAP, FAS, or FAU Systems. 
The State of Alaska objected to the certification statement proposed in the SNPRM. That statement would require the
State to certify that it is enforcing the freeze provisions of 23 U.S.C. 127(d) and that its State laws are consistent
with 23 U.S.C. 127 (a) and (b). Alaska asserts that section 127 does not apply to the State because the State does not
have any Interstate System mileage as defined in 23 U.S.C. 103, 139(a) or 139(b). The FHWA agrees with this comment.

The same situation with respect to highway system also exists in Puerto Rico, which is considered a ``State'' for the
purposes of title 23, United States Code. 
The certification language proposed by the SNPRM has been retained, except that language to recognize the situations
in Alaska and Puerto Rico has also been included. 
Language describing size and weight enforcement coverage in urban areas has also been clarified in this final rule.

Since its initial publication in 1980 (45 FR 52365), 657.15 has required that ``Urban areas not subject to State
jurisdiction shall be identified and the statement shall address total (Federal-aid) mileage involved and an analysis
of enforcement efforts in such areas.'' In practice, the FHWA's interpretation of this requirement over the years
has been to focus on those areas over 50,000 population, also called urbanized areas (as determined by the Bureau of
the Census). The FHWA recognizes an area as ``urban'' when the population is 5,000 or more. It is not now, nor has it ever
been, the intent of the FHWA to require extensive size and weight enforcement activities, or an analysis thereof,
in areas with a population between 5,000 and 50,000. The intent of this requirement has always been to ensure that an
adequate size and weight enforcement effort be conducted by larger cities, i.e., over 50,000 population, where the
State weight enforcement agency does not have legal jurisdiction. Substitution of the word ``urbanized'' for ``urban''
(both terms as defined in 23 U.S.C. 101) in the second sentence of 657.15(b) accomplishes this clarification.

What, prior to October 1, 1991, was Federal-aid system mileage in urban areas of less than 50,000 population, should
continue to be covered by the State's overall weight enforcement program. This change in wording does not preclude,
nor should it discourage, weight enforcement activity by local jurisdictions. Such activity is encouraged with
results to be reported as part of the overall enforcement activity in the State. 


Conforming Amendment 


ISTEA section 4006(c) consisted of a conforming amendment as follows:

 

Section 411(e)(1) of such Act (the STAA of 1982) is amended by striking ``those Primary System highways'' and inserting
``those highways of the Federal-aid primary system in existence on June 1, 1991 ***.''

 

Section 411(e)(1) of the STAA describes the type of highways that the Secretary shall designate as open to the vehicles
described by the STAA. These designated highways, in combination with the Interstate System, have come to be known
as the NN. The ISTEA effectively replaced what had been known as the FAP System with the NHS. This conforming amendment
corrects the technical problem of designating segments of a highway system (the FAP) which no longer exists. The necessary
corrections to the definitions of ``Federal-aid Primary System'' and ``National Network,'' both found in 23 CFR
658.5, have been made by this final rule. 



