 

C. Information and Records Management


The Information and Records Management program provides a variety of services critical to the adjudications and
naturalization processes. These services include: Creating, updating, storing, retrieving, and tracking alien
files; responding to inquiries on application status; providing information to the public, both in-person and by
telephone, on immigration-related matters; printing and distributing application forms and instructions and
providing them to the public.


D. Data and Communications


The Data and Communications program develops and operates INS automated information systems which support the adjudications
and naturalization program, and operates the identification card production facility. Adjudications and naturalization
support systems are currently being integrated and consolidated into the Computer Linked Application Information
Management System (CLAIMS), which provides adjudication support to service centers, district offices, and ports
of entry. The system, which is operating in the service centers and is being installed in other field offices, reduces
application processing time and response time to inquiries.


IV. Fee Setting Procedures


This section provides a description of INS fee-setting procedures, including an explanation of the cost bases for
setting fees. Descriptions of the examinations fees and their cost components and an explanation of the procedures
employed by INS to calculate the costs are included.


A. History of Current Examinations Fees


Policies pertaining to the assessment of INS user fees and their underlying costs have evolved over 25 years, beginning
in 1968. The Examinations Fee Account itself has a more recent history, starting in 1989. Prior to 1989, all examinations
fee revenues were treated as general revenues of the Federal Government. They are now credited to the Examinations
Fee Account and used to fund related services.
Procedures to compute examinations fees involve the development and summation of three cost components: direct
costs, indirect costs, and a surcharge to recover the costs of the Refugees and Overseas program. These three cost
components are described more fully below.
Salient developments preceding the analyses that led to this proposed rule include the issuance in December 1992
of an audit report prepared by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) of the Department of Justice. That report,
entitled ``Controls Over Established User Fee Accounts in the Immigration and Naturalization Service'' (DOJ OIG
Audit Report No. 933), stated that INS's accounting system did not identify properly all costs that ought to
be recovered from user fee accounts. This view is summarized below:



The review of actual program costs disclosed that all identified costs were charged to the proper user fee accounts.
However, the INS accounting system does not provide usable cost data applicable to the user fee program and INS program
managers had not identified all the direct program costs that should have been reimbursed from the user fee accounts.
In addition, various INS units providing indirect support of personnel and services were not receiving user fee reimbursement
commensurate with the level of resources expended *** Since valid direct and indirect program costs
went unidentified, appropriated funds essentially subsidized user fee related program costs that should have been
reimbursed from user fee revenue.




DOJ OIG Audit Report No. 933, at p. i.


The finding that all program costs were not being recovered from user fee accounts triggered several actions by INS
that culminated in the current proposed rule. At the same time that the OIG was conducting its audit, a senior Justice
Department official reviewed the fee-setting process and proposed changes. As a result, the OIG deferred additional
work in this area. According to the audit report:



A plan was developed and approved and the same Justice official was detailed to compile user fee costs, revise fee schedules
as necessary to collect revenues sufficient to make each account self-sustaining, and obtain Congressional approval
to reprogram INS appropriations accordingly. This project was initiated in March 1992 and is scheduled to be completed
by the end of FY 1992. Since the project covered most of the problem areas disclosed by our audit, we deferred additional
audit work in this area.



DOJ OIG Audit Report No. 933, at p. ii.


The review of the process conducted during 1992 consisted of a detailed survey and extensive consultations with all
INS program offices to review the extent to which they provide services to fee account activities, whether they were
commensurately reimbursed for those services, and whether specific service improvement investments would be appropriate
if additional fee account revenues were available.
An initial reallocation (reprogramming) of program costs proposed earlier by the Attorney General was approved
by Congress, with the effect of properly assigning some costs of user fee activities to the fee accounts. The budget
enacted by Congress for fiscal year 1993 reflected these reallocations.
The 1992 review found that the Attorney General's reprogramming had substantially corrected the assignment of costs
identifiable at that point as related to fee account activities, with two exceptions: The costs of legal proceedings
and the costs of management and administration. In the case of these two programs, some costs are being charged to fee
accounts, but not enough to cover the substantial work associated with the fee account activities.
The review also concluded that although a number of investments were recommended by review participants, the recommendations
generally anticipated actions that were planned in future budget cycles. Therefore the investments would generally
be addressed as part of INS's normal budget review process, rather than as a part of the current fee adjustment process.
This proposed fee increase incorporates the results of this extensive review of INS programs, inflationary cost
increases since the last general fee increase in April 1991, and the projected costs of presently budgeted program
investments to improve services to INS's customers.


