 

Several parties also mentioned that current piston travel requirements are no longer necessary due to the use of automatic
slack adjusters, which are designed to keep piston travel within certain tolerances. Some commenters felt that if
slack adjusters were required, noting that most cars operating today are already equipped with them, the need to constantly
measure piston travel would be eliminated. 

Several commenters also suggested that railroads have the option of performing a thorough inbound inspection together
with a set-and-release departure inspection in lieu of performing an initial terminal inspection, since initial
terminal inspections can be an obstacle to moving goods quickly because the removal of bad ordered cars once the train
is assembled can cost considerable time. These parties also recommended that cars found with sticking brakes during
the departure inspection be cut out and tagged and allowed to continue to destination as long as the tonnage per operable
brakes did not exceed a specified amount. One railroad also requested revision 232.12(i) to allow the yard
test device to be placed at any location in the train, rather than at the end of the train nearest the hauling road locomotive,
since the results of such a test are not affected by location of the device. 

The AAR and several railroads also suggested that the 85 percent requirement contained at 232.1 should be changed
to a performance standard based on tonnage per operative brakes. These parties stated that it is almost impossible
to remake a train while enroute to disassociate those cars with inoperative brakes from the rest of the train. However,
none of these commenters had any major problem with the 85 percent requirement, and all of them stated that retaining
the standard is acceptable. 

One air brake manufacturer agreed with the railroads that the problem of excessive piston travel has been addressed
by the development of slack adjusters. This commenter stated that slack adjusters automatically adjust piston travel
to prevent excessive travel and that if slack adjusters are reliable there is no need to measure for piston travel.
The commenter suggested that new technology is being developed to monitor the brake cylinder and that any new regulation
needs to allow for technology that may do away with measuring piston travel. 

Labor organization representatives and several individual members believed that FRA should specify how inspections
are to be performed. Several members of the BRC commented that the only proper inspection is a walking inspection on
both sides of the train with a set and release. However, these commenters suggested that if a walking inspection is
performed on both sides of a train during a set, then a roll-by inspection for the release would be acceptable. Several
commenters stated that on some cars an adequate inspection could be made from one side of the train but that on other
cars such as multilevel stack cars only 50 percent of the brake equipment can be observed from any one side of the cars.
Members of both the BRC and the UTU strenuously recommended that inspection of five-pack cars not be performed from
moving vehicles because it is very difficult to observe the brake equipment on these cars. A BRC representative also
stated that if slack adjusters have eliminated the need to measure piston travel then the railroads should have no
problem complying with a seven-to nine-inch piston travel limit. This commenter also stated that unless there are
regulations governing the proper setting and operation of slack adjusters, piston travel must continue to be monitored
and measured. 

Several labor organizations and their individual members stated that train crews are not qualified to perform initial
terminal inspections. Various individual carmen commented that many of the initial terminal inspections that are
currently being performed are inadequate because the employees performing the inspections are not adequately trained.
The BRC maintained that the initial terminal inspection could not be separated from the pre-departure inspection
required under Part 215 and both must be performed by carmen. The BRC also mentioned that because the initial terminal
inspections are not being performed by qualified individuals trains are departing without 100 percent operable
brakes, and thus, believes that the 85 percent rule contained at 232.1 should be increased to 90 or 100 percent. This
party also supported an increase in the 85 percent requirement based on the fact that heavier and longer trains are
being run today, and therefore, better braking is needed. The BLE commented that they do not see a problem on today's
railroads regarding inoperative brakes and felt that unless there was some technical evidence that the requirement
should be reduced, the 85 percent requirement should remain. 



FRA Conclusions. 

FRA agrees with several of the railroad commenters that it would be practically impossible and far too intrusive for
FRA to mandate the specific methods for performing various inspections on various equipment. FRA feels that each
individual railroad is in the best position to determine the best method for performing the various required inspections
based on their operating conditions and equipment. However, the method of inspection that is chosen by a railroad
should ensure that all required equipment is properly inspected and is functioning as required by the regulations.
FRA will continue to allow the use of roll-by inspections of the brake release if train speed does not exceed 10 mph.
FRA feels that roll-by inspections made at greater speeds would not permit sufficient visual inspection of the brake
equipment. 







