 

United States of America and State of Florida, Plaintiffs v. Morton Plant Health System, Inc. and Trustees of Mease
Hospital, Inc., Defendants. Civil No. 94748CIVT23E, Judge Steven D. Merryday, Filed:
June 17, 1994.


Final Consent Judgment


Plaintiffs, the United States of America and the State of Florida, having filed their Verified Complaint on May 5,
1994, and Plaintiffs and Morton Plant Health System, Inc. and Trustees of Mease Hospital, Inc., by their respective
attorneys, having consented to the entry of this Final Consent Judgment without trial or adjudication of any issue
of fact or law, and without this Final Consent Judgment constituting evidence against or admission by any party with
respect to any issue of fact or law;
NOW, therefore, before the taking of any testimony and without trial or adjudication of any issue of fact or law, it
is hereby ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED:


I


Jurisdiction


This Court has jurisdiction of the subject matter and each of the parties to this action. The Verified Complaint states
a claim upon which relief may be granted against Morton Plant Health System, Inc. and Trustees of Mease Hospital, Inc.
under Section 7 of the Clayton Act, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 18.


II


Definitions


As used in this Final Consent Judgment:
(A) 

Eligible Partnership Patient Care Services 

means the following patient care services that Morton Plant and Mease may elect to own, manage, operate or provide
by the Partnership described herein:
(1) all patient care services provided by Morton Plant or Mease on an outpatient basis that are generally capable of
being provided outside of a general acute care hospital;
(2) open-heart surgery and/or services or procedures that require the immediate availability of an open-heart surgery
unit;
(3) robotically assisted prosthetic implantation and special spinal instrumentation procedures involving the
insertion of multiple rods in the spinal cord;
(4) stem cell procedures, advanced linear accelerator equipment and procedures, and HDR brachy therapy;
(5) stereotactic radio therapy;
(6) inpatient and outpatient diagnostic and therapeutic radiology services (e.g., CAT scans, MRI, X-ray, ultrasound,
nuclear angiography);
(7) inpatient and outpatient laboratory services;
(8) neonatal level III services;
(9) inpatient and outpatient mental health services; and
(10) home health care, home infusion services, durable medical equipment, rehabilitative services, skilled nursing,
retirement facilities and long-term care.
(B) 

Eligible Partnership Administrative Services 

means the following administrative services that Morton Plant and Mease may elect to own, manage, operate or provide
by the Partnership described herein:
(1) human resources (except management positions at the hospital level with responsibility for management, marketing,
planning, pricing or managed care contracting);
(2) medical staff organization and development, including medical staff development and recruitment, physician
organization structure, advising on practice acquisition, governance and credentialing;
(3) information services;
(4) telephone and other communication services;
(5) accounting, billing and collection;


