 




<RINDOCK>[Announcement Number 465]</RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN 0905ZA67</RINDOCK>


Neighborhood-Based Childhood Lead; Primary Prevention Program; Availability of Funds for Fiscal Year 1994


Introduction


The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announces the availability of grant funds in fiscal year (FY)
1994 for the initiation of primary prevention activities that demonstrate a neighborhood-based approach to preventing
and eliminating lead exposure for children living in high-risk housing. This primary prevention program is funded
by CDC with support from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Office of Lead-Based Paint Abatement
and Poisoning Prevention (OLBPAPP).
The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention objectives
of Healthy People 2000, a PHS-led national activity to reduce morbidity and mortality and improve the quality of life.
This announcement is related to the priority area of Environmental Health. (For ordering a copy of Healthy People
2000, see 

WHERE TO OBTAIN ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

 section.)


Authority


This program is authorized under sections 301(a) (42 U.S.C. 241(a)) and 317A (42 U.S.C. 247b1) of the Public
Health Service Act, as amended, and section 1011(af) of Title X (42 U.S.C. 4851 

et seq.

) of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act. Program regulations are set forth in Title 42, Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 51b.


Smoke-Free Workplace


The Public Health Service strongly encourages all grant recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace and promote
the non-use of all tobacco products. This is consistent with the PHS mission to protect and advance the physical and
mental health of the American people.


Eligible Applicants


Eligible applicants are the 37 current recipients of CDC grant funds for State and Community-based Childhood Lead
Poisoning Prevention Programs that meet both of the following requirements (prior to the grant award being made):
1. At the time of the grant application, an applicant must have an approved Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
(CHAS) under section 105 of the National Affordable Housing Act (NAHA), (42 U.S.C. 12705) that includes a lead-hazard
control element. Current CHAS regulations are set forth in title 24, Code of Federal Regulations, 576.31.
(Applicants are permitted to use an abbreviated housing strategy, as set forth in 91.25 of the CHAS regulations.)
2. By September 1, 1994, applicants must have State enabling legislation and promulgated regulations in place to
establish a State Certification and Accreditation Program for contractors, inspectors, workers, and others engaged
in lead hazard control activities. The State Certification Program shall be consistent with the currently identified
elements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Model State Plan being developed under Title IV, sections
402 and 404, of the Toxic Substances Control Act (see Appendix E of the HUD NOFA). (For ordering a copy of the HUD NOFA,
see 

WHERE TO OBTAIN ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

 section.)
The applicant must furnish copies of the enabling legislation and/or promulgated regulations, as well as other appropriate
documentation, as proof of the program.


Availability of Funds


Approximately $2,500,000 will be available to fund up to two neighborhood-based childhood lead poisoning primary
prevention programs. Awards for the first budget year will range from $750,000 to $1,250,000 each. Awards are expected
to begin on or about September 1, 1994, and will be made for a 12-month budget period within project periods not to exceed
3 years. Funding estimates may vary and are subject to change based on the actual availability of funds.
These grants are intended to develop, expand, or improve collaboration among childhood lead poisoning prevention
programs, community housing agencies, and neighborhood groups to ensure the identification and reduction of lead
hazards in neighborhoods with a large proportion of demonstrated high-risk housing, and with a high percentage of
young children living in these houses. Grant awards cannot supplant existing funding for childhood lead poisoning
prevention programs or hazard reduction activities. Eligible applicants may enter into contracts, including consortia
agreements, as necessary, to meet the requirements of the program and strengthen the overall application.


Note


&bull;Not more than 10 percent of any grant may be obligated for administrative costs.
&bull;HUD funds under this announcement should target ``priority housing''_defined as housing that qualifies
as affordable housing under section 215 (appendix G of HUD NOFA) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing
Act (42 U.S.C. 12745). Priority housing does not include public housing (whether Federal or locally supported),
federally owned housing, or any federally assisted housing except tenant-based housing that receives assistance
under sections 8(b) or 8(o) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(b) or (o)).
&bull;Applicants are advised that an operational State Certification and Accreditation Program is an essential
prerequisite for implementing lead hazard reduction activities.


Purpose


Historically, most approaches to childhood lead poisoning have been reactive. After a child has been identified
as poisoned, action may be taken to investigate the home environment to identify and address lead hazards. This approach
provides epidemiologic and some preventive benefits by identifying and providing for the control of demonstrated,
immediate hazards to which the same children, their siblings, and playmates might subsequently be exposed. However,
relying solely on the presence of poisoned children to identify housing that contains lead hazards is considered
to be ``secondary prevention,'' in that it postpones action until after a child is exposed to lead. Moreover, the reactive,
child-by-child and house-by-house approach is an inefficient use of resources in the long run. A ``primary prevention''
approach emphasizes identifying and correcting lead hazards in the neighborhood 

before children are poisoned,

 shifting the focus from the poisoned child to the environmental exposure source_most often, the child's home.


