 

In the proposed rule, OSM also proposed to renumber certain provisions of the then current 30 CFR 773.20 such that paragraph
(b)(2) would become (b)(1)(ii), paragraph (b)(2)(i) would become (b)(1)(ii)(A), paragraph (b)(2)(ii) would become
(b)(1)(ii)(B), and paragraph (b)(3) would become (b)(1)(iii). In the final rule, such renumbering is also adopted.

OSM also proposed to amend the then current 30 CFR 773.20 by inserting a new paragraph (b)(2), which would have made
the provisions of proposed 773.26, standards for challenging ownership or control links and the status of
violations, applicable when a regulatory authority makes determinations with respect to improvidently issued
permits. Proposed 773.26 would have been applicable when a regulatory authority determines whether a violation,
penalty, or fee remains unabated or delinquent, has been corrected, is in the process of being corrected, or is the
subject of a good faith appeal, and whether any ownership or control link between the permittee and the person responsible
for the violation, penalty, or fee existed, still exists, or has been severed.

The proposed insertion of the language referring to 773.26 would have had the effect of assuring that the standards,
responsibilities, and procedures created by proposed 773.26 were consistently applied to permit issuance
and to determinations regarding improvident permit issuance. OSM took such an approach in the belief that this would
enhance the fairness of the permitting process and the prospect for the uniform enforcement of nationwide minimum
standards.

In the final rule, this approach is adopted. The reference to 773.26 is changed, however, to 773.25 to
reflect the renumbering of that section. Also, as has been indicated previously, OSM has inserted language in paragraph
(b)(2) of final 773.20 to clarify that a challenge as to the existence of a violation at the time it was cited may
be made within the context of the improvident permit issuance process.

OSM further proposed to renumber provisions of the regulation at 30 CFR 773.20(c), which relate to remedial measures
for improvidently issued permits, so that then current paragraph (c) would become (c)(1), then current paragraph
(c)(1) would become (c)(1)(i), then current paragraph (c)(2) would become (c)(1)(ii), then current paragraph (c)(3)
would become (c)(1)(iii), and then current paragraph (c)(4) would become (c)(1)(iv). In the final rule, such renumbering
is adopted.

Further, proposed renumbered paragraph (c)(1)(iv), which would authorize the regulatory authority to use rescission
as one of the remedial measures for improvident permit issuance, would have deleted a specific reference contained
in the former 30 CFR 773.20(c)(4) to the rescission procedures of 30 CFR 773.21.

The reason for such proposed deletion was that OSM sought to establish a prior notice and common appeal procedure for
both permit suspensions and permit rescissions with respect to improvidently issued permits. The then current regulation
governing permit suspensions at 30 CFR 773.20(c)(3) did not impose any specific requirements for prior notice, opportunity
to be heard, or right of appeal for the permittee whose permit is to be suspended. See 54 FR 18450 (1989). In contrast
to this, then current regulations governing permit rescissions at 30 CFR 773.21 contained specific requirements
for prior notice to a permittee and an explicit right of appeal. Accordingly, through its proposed rule, OSM sought
to provide for greater consistency in its procedures governing suspension and rescission of permits. In the final
rule, the proposed change has been adopted.

OSM further proposed to amend 30 CFR 773.20 to add a new paragraph (c)(2) which would have required that a regulatory
authority which decides to suspend a permit must provide at least 30 days' prior written notice to the permittee. The
proposed rule would have provided that, in the event that the regulatory authority decides to rescind a permit, it
would provide notice in accordance with the provisions of 30 CFR 773.21. The proposed amendment further provided
that a permittee would be given the opportunity to request administrative review of the notice under proposed OHA
rules 43 CFR 4.1370 

et seq.

, where OSM is the regulatory authority, or under the State program equivalent, where the State is the regulatory authority.
In the absence of such temporary relief, the regulatory authority's decision would have remained in effect during
the pendency of appeal.

OSM's proposed rule amendments made no change in the requirement contained at 30 CFR 773.20(b) that a regulatory authority
analyze a potentially improvidently issued permit ``[U]nder the violations review criteria of the regulatory program
at the time that the permit was issued.''

