 

Other railroads that have some experience with the devices stated that the current two-way EOT devices have many optional
features to provide information from the rear to the front units, such as the distance from front to rear units, monitoring
of end- car brake-pipe pressure, motion status, marker light status, battery status, loss-of-communication alarm,
automatic and manual communication test, and rear-of-train emergency braking. The AAR as well as seven of its railroad
members commented that these additional features should not be required, but that each individual railroad should
be allowed to determine which options are best suited for its particular operations. These parties also stated that
the statute merely requires that the rear end of a train be able to initiate an emergency brake application when activated
from the front and that there is no evidence available to support the need of requiring the transmission of other information.
Several railroads expressed concern over requiring these additional features noting that such features reduce
the battery life of the device, create additional enroute failure problems, add to the cost of the device, and may be
eliminated or relocated as technology advances. One railroad recommended that failure of any optional feature,
other than the ability to initiate an emergency brake application, should not be treated as an enroute failure. This
same railroad also recommended that FRA consider replacing the ``flashing lights on EOT devices'' with retro-reflectorized
material such as that used in Canada. The railroad suggested that such a change could significantly alter the cost
of two-way devices, reduce battery requirements, and reduce failure rates. One railroad commented on the battery
life of current two-way devices, indicating that it is about 80 percent that of one-way devices. This party also indicated
that inspection of the battery must be made at initial terminal brake inspections. The AAR commented that the telemetry
battery life of EOT devices operating in conditions from 40 degrees below zero to 150 degrees above zero is about 100
hours for one-way devices and 80 hours for two-way devices. The AAR also stated that the light flasher battery life
is about 50 hours. 

Several railroad representatives commented that two-way EOT devices need to be ``secured system'' types, which
means that an emergency application should be obtainable only by someone in the cab of the locomotive on that train.
These commenters stated that current devices are designed so that the front and rear units can be linked together by
use of a specific code which prevents outside tampering. Once the two units are linked, no other front unit will communicate
with the rear unit. One commenter stated that it would require 38 hours of constant contact to get the proper code needed
to obtain access to the device. 

Individual members of the Brotherhood of Railway Carmen (BRC) commented that the current one-way devices are unreliable
and are not receiving proper maintenance. These individuals stated that the gauges used to calibrate the devices
need to be tested. Several carmen commented that transmissions from current one-way devices have been affected by
high tension wires, bridges, and foggy conditions. Labor representatives as well as individual members stated that
they would like to see as many of the additional features now available with two-way devices required. These commenters
felt that any additional information that could be made available to train crews regarding the condition of the train
would be beneficial. One individual conductor suggested that the batteries on EOT devices should be checked at all
brake tests and at all crew change points. This individual also felt it should be required that batteries have at least
a 75-percent charge before the train departs a terminal and that the devices be operational at all crew change points.


A conductor for BN provided information on a new safety device invention that would address the problem of trainline
blockage and turned angle cocks and would be used in connection with EOT devices. The device is coupled to the end of
the brake pipe and would continuously exhaust air at a predetermined rate, which would be compensated for by the locomotive
air source. Thus, if the trainline is blocked, the locomotive air source will not replenish the depleted air, and a
brake application will take place. The engineer will be warned of the loss in pressure at the rear of the train by the
EOT device and will be able to take corrective action. One manufacturer of EOT devices commented that the EOT devices
are limited to two watts of power by the Federal Communications Commission and that depending on the site, such as when
a train is half in a tunnel and half out of a tunnel, trains may experience brownouts or complete blackouts. The manufacturer
stated that many of these problems can be eliminated with installation of a repeater feature that continuously repeats
the transmitted message every few seconds. In addition, the manufacturer noted that when an emergency application
is requested the transmission signal is increased to 8 watts, which probably will overcome any site interference.
Another manufacturer of the devices commented that it did not know of any interference due to power lines, but stated
that it has received comments about losing transmissions in mountainous areas. 


