 

Based on this record, OSHA believes that employees 
who burnish and/or buff floors using high speed floor machines will be exposed to minimal asbestos fiber concentrations
if the floor machines are used to polish finished or polished floors, and if the pad does not contact the unpolished
floor. Industry also claims that the use of high speed buffing will increase the intervals where stripping is required,
and thus, may reduce risk to employees who perform floor maintenance, but OSHA is not relying on this speculative benefit.



(13) Medical Surveillance


Paragraph (l) General Industry Standard. Paragraph (m) Construction and Shipyard Employment Standards. 
No changes were made to this section. The medical surveillance provisions in the 1986 construction standard are now
also included in the shipyard employment standard. 


(14) Recordkeeping


Paragraph (m) General Industry Standard. Paragraph (n) Construction and Shipyard Employment Standards. The recordkeeping
provisions now include provisions (n)(5) and (n)(6) which require maintenance of data used to rebut the presumption
that a contains asbestos, i.e., the building owner/employer who relies on data to demonstrate that PACM is not asbestos-containing
must maintain the data upon which he relied for as long as they are used to rebut the presumption. In addition, where
the building owner has received or provided information concerning the location, amount and identify of ACM and PACM,
he must maintain written records of them and their content for the duration of ownership and must transfer them to successive
owners. 


(15) Competent Person


Paragraph (o) Construction and Shipyard Employment Standards. 
OSHA is adopting as final provisions most of the proposed changes to the 1986 construction standard's requirements
concerning the designation of a ``competent person'' on certain construction worksites. The term ``competent person''
is derived from the generic construction standard's provisions. Under these, employers must designate a ``competent
person'' on all construction worksites to conduct ``frequent and regular inspections of the job sites, materials,
and equipment'' as part of required safety and health programs (1926.20). At the suggestion of SESAC, OSHA
has designated that the person who performs the shipyard duties analogous to the competent person in the construction
standard will be termed a ``qualified person.'' For the purposes of the present discussion these terms are equivalent
and will be discussed as ``competent person.'' The 1986 asbestos construction standard appeared to limit this requirement.
``Competent person'' supervision was required only at removal, demolition, and renovation operations which were
not ``small-scale, short-duration,'' but under the asbestos standard, the competent person was to be specially
trained in asbestos hazards, and perform various duties mainly involving the setting up and control of the NPE, and
the supervision of workers within the enclosure (formerly 1926.58(e)(6)(ii)). 
The Court of Appeals, agreeing with BCTD, instructed OSHA to either expand the ``competent person'' requirement
or explain more persuasively why it refused to do so. OSHA agrees that for all construction work involving asbestos
exposure under this standard, a ``competent person'' who is specially trained in asbestos related work conditions,
should either be available to employees or be present on the work site. Like other provisions in this standard, the
more risky asbestos work deserves a more protective provision; so employees performing Class I and II work will have
the benefit of a ``competent person'' on the worksite, to the extent necessary to perform his duties as set out in paragraph
(o). Employees performing Class III and IV work, will be entitled to access to a ``competent person'' as needed. 
Two issues regarding the ``competent person'' were discussed during the rulemaking. One was the training required;
and two, whether or not the competent person needs to be present throughout the operation. 
As to the second issue, the standard requires in paragraph (o) (2) and (3), that the competent person must perform the
``frequent and regular inspections of the job sites, material and equipment'' to accomplish ``health and safety
programs,'' which are otherwise required by the general construction provision in 1926.20(b)(2). Although
no elaboration of this provision is provided, OSHA intends that in all work covered by this standard, including Class
IV work and work not included in a ``Class,'' a competent person insures, by inspecting the worksite, that workers
exposed to asbestos are protected by the relevant provisions of this standard, and that they are informed pursuant
to paragraph (k) of this standard about the presence and location of ACM and PACM. Additionally, paragraph (o)(3)
requires that in Class I operations the ``competent person'' must make on-site inspections at least once during the
workshift and any time at employee request. In addition, the list of specific duties of the ``competent person'' in
paragraph (o)(3)(i) for Class I and II work includes specific language requiring the required supervision of various
controls and work practices to be made through ``on-site inspection.'' 



