 

II. Implementing a Personal Respiratory Protection Program 



If personal respiratory protection is used in a health-care setting, OSHA requires that an effective personal respiratory
protection program be developed, implemented, administered, and periodically reevaluated (

54,55

). 

All HCWs who need to use respirators for protection against infection with 

M. tuberculosis 

should be included in the respiratory protection program. Visitors to TB patients should be given respirators to
wear while in isolation rooms, and they should be given general instructions on how to use their respirators. 

The number of HCWs included in the respiratory protection program in each facility will vary depending on (a) the number
of potentially infectious TB patients, (b) the number of rooms or areas to which patients with suspected or confirmed
infectious TB are admitted, and (c) the number of HCWs needed in these rooms or areas. Where respiratory protection
programs are required, they should include enough HCWs to provide adequate care for a patient with known or suspected
TB should such a patient be admitted to the facility. However, administrative measures should be used to limit the
number of HCWs who need to enter these rooms or areas, thus limiting the number of HCWs who need to be included in the respiratory
protection program.
 
Information regarding the development and management of a respiratory protection program is available in technical
training courses that cover the basics of personal respiratory protection. Such courses are offered by various organizations,
such as NIOSH, OSHA, and the American Industrial Hygiene Association. Similar courses are available from private
contractors and universities. 

To be effective and reliable, respiratory protection programs must contain at least the following elements (

55,154

): 

1. 

Assignment of responsibility. 

Supervisory responsibility for the respiratory protection program should be assigned to designated persons who
have expertise in issues relevant to the program, including infectious diseases and occupational health. 

2. 

Standard operating procedures. 

Written standard operating procedures should contain information concerning all aspects of the respiratory protection
program. 

3. 

Medical screening. 

HCWs should not be assigned a task requiring use of respirators unless they are physically able to perform the task
while wearing the respirator. HCWs should be screened for pertinent medical conditions at the time they are hired,
then rescreened periodically (

55

). The screening could occur as infrequently as every 5 years. The screening process should begin with a general screening
(e.g., a questionnaire) for pertinent medical conditions, and the results of the screening should then be used to
identify HCWs who need further evaluation. Routine physical examination or testing with chest radiographs or spirometry
is not necessary or required. 

Few medical conditions preclude the use of most negative-pressure particulate respirators. HCWs who have mild pulmonary
or cardiac conditions may report discomfort with breathing when wearing negative-pressure particulate respirators,
but these respirators are unlikely to have adverse health effects on the HCWs. Those HCWs who have more severe cardiac
or pulmonary conditions may have more difficulty than HCWs with similar but milder conditions if performing duties
while wearing negative-pressure respirators. Furthermore, these HCWs may be unable to use some PAPRs because of
the added weight of these respirators. 

4. 

Training. 

HCWs who wear respirators and the persons who supervise them should be informed about the necessity for wearing respirators
and the potential risks associated with not doing so. This training should also include at a minimum: 

&bull;The nature, extent, and specific hazards of 

M. tuberculosis

 transmission in their respective health-care facility. 

&bull;A description of specific risks for TB infection among persons exposed to 

M. tuberculosis, 

of any subsequent treatment with INH or other chemoprophylactic agents, and of the possibility of active TB disease.


&bull;A description of engineering controls and work practices and the reasons why they do not eliminate the need
for personal respiratory protection. 

&bull;An explanation for selecting a particular type of respirator, how the respirator is properly maintained and
stored, and the operation, capabilities, and limitations of the respirator provided. 

&bull;Instruction in how the HCW wearing the respirator should inspect, put on, fit check, and correctly wear the
provided respirator (i.e., achieve and maintain proper face-seal fit on the HCW's face). 

&bull;An opportunity to handle the provided respirator and learn how to put it on, wear it properly, and check the important
parts. 

&bull;Instruction in how to recognize an inadequately functioning respirator. 

5. 

Face-seal fit testing and fit checking. 

HCWs should undergo fit testing to identify a respirator that adequately fits each individual HCW. The HCW should
receive fitting instructions that include demonstrations and practice in how the respirator should be worn, how
it should be adjusted, and how to determine if it fits properly. The HCW should be taught to check the facepiece fit before
each use. 

6. 

Respirator inspection, cleaning, maintenance, and storage. 

Conscientious respirator maintenance should be an integral part of an overall respirator program. This maintenance
applies both to respirators with replaceable filters and respirators that are classified as disposable but that
are reused. Manufacturers' instructions for inspecting, cleaning, and maintaining respirators should be followed
to ensure that the respirator continues to function properly (

55

). 

7. 

Periodic evaluation of the personal respiratory protection program. 

The program should be evaluated completely at least once a year, and both the written operating procedures and program
administration should be revised as necessary based on the results of the evaluation. Elements of the program that
should be evaluated include work practices and employee acceptance of respirator use (i.e., subjective comments
made by employees concerning comfort during use and interference with duties). 




