 

Appendix II to the Preamble_Determination of Historical Conditions 


Appendix II summarizes the methodology used in developing the historical conditions data presented in Table 1, above.




1. Calculating Delta Outflow Over Historical Period 


Net Delta outflow at Chipps Island is estimated by performing a water balance at the boundary of the Delta. The water
balance involves adding the total Delta inflow and Delta precipitation runoff, then subtracting Delta channel depletions
and exports. 

See

 Equation 1, below. DWR has estimated net Delta outflow for water years 1956present with their flow accounting
model, DAYFLOW. A similar model, using a smaller number of measured flows, was used to estimate Delta outflow from
19291962. In the years of overlap the two models yield very similar results. 







Equation 1

: Delta outflow = river inflows + precipitation 
^ channel depletions_exports 





The four components used to calculate net Delta outflow are based on a variety of measurements. Most of the river inflows
are gaged or directly measured at some point before they enter the Delta. Local precipitation is derived by multiplying
the surface area of the Delta by the rainfall recorded at Stockton. Local precipitation is usually a trivial amount
of flow but within-Delta uses (called channel depletions) can be substantial. Prior to construction of Shasta Dam
and its regulation of Sacramento River flow, net Delta outflow was often negative during summer months because channel
depletions exceeded Delta outflow. The level of channel depletions in DAYFLOW are based on average monthly crop demands
for the acreage of each crop grown on Delta islands. Exports are directly measured at the point of diversion. 


Because of the arithmetic nature of these estimates of Delta outflow, the estimated flows cannot reflect the impacts
of such factors as the spring/neap tidal cycles, wind, etc. that would affect the actual mean daily flow velocities
in the western Delta. 




2. Calculation of Historical Occurrence of 2 ppt Isohaline Position 



The daily estimates of net Delta outflow from October 1, 1939 to September 30, 1975 were used to calculate the frequency
with which the 2 ppt isohaline was downstream of each of the specified positions in each year. Isohaline position is
a function of net Delta outflow on a particular day and the isohaline position on the previous day, as specified in Eq.
2. (Kimmerer and Monismith 1993). 






Equation 2:

 Mean daily position of 2 ppt near-bottom isohaline (X2) on day t: 
X2

(t)

 = 10.16 + (0.945 times X2

(t-1)

) 
^ (1.487 times log

10

(Delta outflow)) 



3. Adjustment for Water Year Type 




The proposed criteria were developed to reflect the average position of the 2 ppt isohaline in different water year
types, according to the classification adopted by the State Board (SWRCB 1991). First, for each year from 1940 to 1975,
the number of days on which the 2 ppt level was attained at each target location was tabulated. These totals were then
averaged across each water year type. Because no critical years were available for comparison during this historical
period, the average position of the 2 ppt isohaline in critical years was extrapolated from the other year types. The
extrapolation was performed by fitting a curvilinear model to the averages for the other year types. These extrapolations
are shown in Figures 1 and 2, above. The results of average number of days for each year type, along with the extrapolated
values for critical years, are presented in Table 1, above. 




4. Sensitivity to Starting Assumptions 



No estimate of the location of the 2 ppt isohaline on October 1, 1939 was available, so the starting position in October
1939 was assumed to be 75 km. However, sensitivity analysis showed that the calculated isohaline position on February
1 was largely independent of the assumed isohaline position on the preceding October 1. This sensitivity analysis
was performed as follows: for each of the ten years from 1940 to 1949, the February 1 isohaline position was calculated
under two assumptions: (1) that the October 1 starting position was at the Golden Gate (km 0), and (2) that the October
1 starting position was 100 km upstream of the Golden Gate. The historical delta outflow patterns and volumes differed
greatly among these years and the calculated February 1 isohaline positions ranged from 49 km above the Golden Gate
after wet winters to as much as 72 km above the Golden Gate during dry winters. However, by February 1 the difference
in calculated positions based on the two different starting positions varied by no more than 0.1 km in any year. 





