 

In response, the Department notes that many of the demand curves used in 
the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model were derived from 
those that were empirically estimated by Oak Ridge National Laboratory in 
1976.
<FOOTCITE>10</FOOTCITE>
 The Department recognizes that a project to update the demand curves could be useful, considering the age of the data
currently being used. The Department does not believe that such data exist. However, the Department 
requests that if such data does exist that it be submitted as comment on 
today's proposed rule. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
10

</FOOTNAME>
Lin, Hirst, and Colon, Fuel Choices in the Household Sector, ORNL Report Con-3 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 1976.

</FOOTNOTE>


2. 

Product mix. 

The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers stated that the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact
Model should, but does not, take into account the effect that standards have on the relative 
prices among product classes, which in turn will change the product mix 
demanded by the market. (Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, No. 61A 
at 67). 

The Department did take cross-elasticity effects into account in the 
analysis of water heaters (between electric and gas fuels) where they were 
particularly important, and will continue to look for instances where such 
effects may arise in order to take those effects into account as warranted. 
(See Technical Support Document, Volume F, Appendix B). 

3. 

Market power. 

The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers was 
critical of the way the Department models marketplace monopsony power, i.e., 
the market power of purchasers. In its critique, the Association of Home 
Appliance Manufacturers stated that the ability of manufacturers to pass on 
increased costs to the consumer is limited because their customers are 
primarily a group of large and sophisticated retailers who have significant 
and increasing power in the marketplace, and who exert downward pressure on 
the retail prices of appliances. It further stated that the Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model attempts to model the situation by 
modeling a larger number of manufacturers than actually exist in the 
marketplace. The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers said that no 
theoretical underpinnings were given for this assertion and that there is no 
reason why the predictions of this ``false model'' should have any resemblance 
to what actually transpires in the real world. (Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers, No. 61A at 6768). 

The Department believes that oligopsony power itself could probably be 
modeled analogously to oligopoly power. There is, however, no accepted theory 
on the modeling of an industry characterized by both oligopoly and oligopsony. 
Thus, DOE detailed the assumptions and relevant mathematical derivations of 
the approach in the aforementioned Technical Support Document for the final 
rule for dishwashers, clothes washers, and clothes dryers. The approach is to 
increase the number of firms input into the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory- 
Manufacturer Impact Model until the markups that are actually observed in the 
marketplace are achieved; this is also an obvious implication of The 
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers's comments that manufacturers' 
ability to pass on costs is limited. In fact, the most prominent comments 
from a review panel on the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact 
Model indicated a concern that the modeling assumptions had gone too far in 
the direction of reduced markups.
<FOOTCITE>11</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
11

</FOOTNAME>
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Manufacturers Impact Model (MIM) External Review Panel Meeting, January 11, 1990.

</FOOTNOTE>


4. 

Individual firm. 

There were also three comments critical of the 
Department's modeling of an individual firm. It was argued that the use of a 
``typical firm'' does not address the differential impacts of standards on 
companies, e.g., sizes, costs, niche markets. The Association of Home 
Appliance Manufacturers insisted that the Department could address the lack of 
data in performing this type of analysis by researching the economic 
literature or by developing an economic theory of how different classes of 
manufacturers would be affected by standards. Whirlpool Corporation suggested 
addressing the data problem by putting a range on the cost and margin data. 
(Advance Transformer, No. 25 at 3; Whirlpool Corporation, No. 31 at 1; 
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, No. 61A at 6869). 

The problem is essentially a lack of data. The Department's review of 
the economic literature offered no solution to this problem. The Department 
does analyze the cost and margin data (in addition to other parameters) by 
performing a sensitivity analysis where the Department changes those 
parameters (and others) in the model, and tests the sensitivity of the model's 
results. 

During interviews conducted with manufacturers, the Department asked a 
series of questions covering the effects of firm size and specialization. To 
date, DOE has not been given information by the industry to draw conclusions 
about probable effects. 






