 

FSIS believes that the costs associated with this proposed rule will be negligible and indistinguishable from the
costs associated with the voluntary nutrition labeling program because the same point-of-purchase materials can
serve both needs. FSIS's final regulation on nutrition labeling specifies that retail stores voluntarily provide
quantitative nutrition information for these products, and that the nutrition information may be supplied by point-of-purchase
material. Also, FSIS will survey retailers to ascertain whether there is significant participation in the program.
If FSIS determines that significant participation does not exist, it will initiate rulemaking to determine whether
it would be beneficial to require nutrition labeling on these products. 

FSIS has not assessed whether multiple uses of the term ``percent lean'' on USDA-regulated foods might result in any
misunderstanding among consumers, or whether any such misunderstanding might limit informed consumer choice.




Executive Order 12778 



This proposed rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. States and local jurisdictions
are preempted under the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) from imposing any marking, labeling, packaging, or ingredient
requirements on federally inspected meat products that are in addition to, or different than, those imposed under
the FMIA. States and local jurisdictions may, however, exercise concurrent jurisdiction over meat products that
are outside official establishments for the purpose of preventing the distribution of meat products that are misbranded
or adulterated under the FMIA, or, in the case of imported articles, which are not at such an establishment, after their
entry into the United States. Under the FMIA, States that maintain meat inspection programs must impose requirements
that are at least equal to those required 
under the FMIA. The States may, however, impose more stringent requirements on such State inspected products and
establishments. 

No retroactive effect will be given to this rule. The administrative procedures specified in 9 CFR 306.5 must be exhausted
prior to any judicial challenge of the application of the provisions of this rule, if the challenge involves any decision
of an inspector relating to inspection services provided under the FMIA. The administrative procedures specified
in 9 CFR part 335 must be exhausted prior to any judicial challenge of the application of the provisions of this rule
with respect to labeling decisions. 



Effect on Small Entities 



The Administrator has determined that this proposed rule would not have a significant effect on small entities, as
defined by the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601). The Agency finds that this proposed rule would result in
positive net benefits because it would allow for increased flexibility in labeling rules. Small meat establishments
are exempt from nutrition labeling, provided the labeling of their products bears no nutrition claims or nutrition
information. Therefore, most small establishments would not be affected by this proposed rule. 



Comments 



Interested persons are invited to submit written comments concerning this proposed rule. Written comments should
be sent to the Policy Office at the address shown above and should refer to Docket Number 93030P. All comments
submitted in response to this proposal will be available for public inspection in the Policy Office from 9 a.m. to 12:30
p.m. and from 1:30 p.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. 



Background 



FSIS published a final rule entitled ``Nutrition Labeling of Meat and Poultry Products'' in the 

Federal Register

 on January 6, 1993 (58 FR 632) (corrected at 58 FR 43787, August 18, 1993, and amended at 58 FR 47624, September 10, 1993).
The final rule amends the Federal meat and poultry products inspection regulations by permitting voluntary nutrition
labeling on single-ingredient, raw meat and poultry products and by establishing mandatory nutrition labeling
for all other meat and poultry products, with certain exceptions. It provides definitions at 9 CFR 317.362 and 381.462
for specific nutrient content claims, including the terms ``lean'' and ``extra lean.'' The definitions include
fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol criteria that take into consideration the inherent presence of these nutrients
in meat and poultry products. The use of the terms ``lean'' and ``extra lean'' provide meat and poultry products with
unique descriptive terms that allow consumers to readily identify and compare products with distinctive levels
of fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol within the meat and poultry product category. 

Under the final nutrition labeling regulations, ground beef and hamburger may be labeled ``lean'' if they contain
less than 10 
grams of fat, 4.5 or less grams of saturated fat, and less than 95 milligrams of cholesterol, per 100 grams and Reference
Amount Customarily Consumed (RACC) for individual foods. Ground beef and hamburger may be labeled ``extra lean''
if they contain less than 5 grams of fat, less than 2 grams of saturated fat, and less than 95 milligrams of cholesterol,
per 100 grams and RACC for individual foods. Ground beef and hamburger, however, seldom meet these criteria, and are
virtually precluded from using these terms. 

FSIS's correction to the final nutrition labeling regulations (58 FR 43788) at 9 CFR 317.362(a)(2) and 381.462(a)(2)
defined the term ``

XX

 percent lean'' as a synonym for the term ``

XX

 percent fat free.'' To qualify for a ``

XX

 percent lean'' claim, the product must meet the definition for ``low fat.'' The ``low fat'' definition allows 3 grams
or less fat per RACC for individual foods. Since the final nutrition labeling regulations did not provide an exemption
for ground beef and hamburger, these products must meet the definition of ``low fat'' to be labeled with a lean percentage.
This restriction virtually precludes the use of ``

XX

 percent lean'' labeling on ground beef and hamburger. 






