 

Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 1401


(Date)


Announcing the Standard for Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules


Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS) are issued by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to Section 111(d) of the Federal Property
and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100235.
1. 

Name of Standard.

 Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules (FIPS PUB 1401).
2. 

Category of Standard.

 Computer Security.
3. 

Explanation.

 This standard specifies the security requirements that are to be satisfied by a cryptographic module utilized within
a security system protecting unclassified information within computer and telecommunication systems (including
voice systems). The standard provides four increasing, qualitative levels of security: Level 1, Level 2, Level 3,
and Level 4. These levels are intended to cover the wide range of potential applications and environments in which
cryptographic modules may be employed. The security requirements cover areas related to the secure design and implementation
of a cryptographic module. These areas include basic design and documentation, module interfaces, authorized roles
and services, physical security, software security, operating system security, key management, cryptographic
algorithms, electromagnetic interference/electromagnetic compatibility (EMI/EMC), and self-testing. This
standard supersedes FIPS 140, General Security Requirements for Equipment Using the Data Encryption Standard,
in its entirety.
4. 

Approving Authority.

 Secretary of Commerce.
5. 

Maintenance Agency.

 Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology, (Computer Systems Laboratory).
6. 

Cross Index.
a. FIPS PUB 461, Data Encryption Standard.
b. FIPS PUB 48, Guidelines on Evaluation of Techniques for Automated Personal Identification.
c. FIPS PUB 74, Guidelines for Implementing and Using the NBS Data Encryption Standard.
d. FIPS PUB 81, DES Modes of Operation.


