 







<USDEPT>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</USDEPT>



<CFRNO>40 CFR Part 228</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[FRL48379]</RINDOCK>


Ocean Dumping; Proposed Designation of Site


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 EPA proposes to designate a deep ocean disposal site (proposed SF-DODS) located off San Francisco, California, for
the disposal of suitable dredged material removed from the San Francisco Bay and other nearby harbors or dredging
sites. EPA has tentatively determined that the site designated in the Final EIS as the preferred site will be the site
designated as SF-DODS in this proposed rule. The center of the proposed SF-DODS is located approximately 49 nautical
miles (91 kilometers) west of the Golden Gate and occupies an area of approximately 6.5 square nautical miles (22 square
kilometers). Water depths within the area range between 8,200 to 9,840 feet (2,500 to 3,000 meters). The center coordinates
of the oval-shaped site are: 37
&cir; 39.0' North latitude by 123
&cir; 29.0' West longitude (North American Datum from 1983), with length (north-south axis) and width (west-east
axis) dimensions of approximately 4 nautical miles (7.5 kilometers) and 2.5 nautical miles (4.5 kilometers), respectively.
This action is necessary to provide an acceptable ocean dumping site for disposal of suitable dredged material, as
determined by appropriate sediment testing protocols. The proposed designation of SF-DODS is for a period of 50 years,
and a maximum of 6 million cubic yards of dredged material per year. Disposal operations will be prohibited if resources
for implementing the site management and monitoring program are not available.

</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Comments must be received on or before March 21, 1994.




</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Send comments to: Mr. Allan Ota, Ocean Disposal Coordinator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX (W73),
75 Hawthorne Street, San Francisco, California 94105, telephone (415) 7441980. 



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Contact Mr. Allan Ota, Ocean Disposal Coordinator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX (W73),
75 Hawthorne Street, San Francisco, California 94105, telephone (415) 7441980.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 


The supporting document for this proposed designation is the 

Final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for Designation of a Deep Water Ocean Dredged Material Disposal Site
off San Francisco, California, August 1993

, which is available for public inspection at the following locations:



EPA, Public Information Reference Unit (PIRU), Room 2904 (rear), 401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC.
EPA Region IX, Library, 75 Hawthorne Street, 13th Floor, San Francisco, California. 
ABAG/MTC Library, 101 8th Street, Oakland, California.
Alameda County Library, 3121 Diablo Avenue, Hayward, California.
Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, California.
Berkeley Public Library, 2090 Kittredge Street, Berkeley, California.
Daly City Public Library, 40 Wembley Drive, Daly City, California.

Environmental Information Center, San Jose State University, 125 South 7th Street, San Jose, California.
Half Moon Bay Library, 620 Correas Street, Half Moon Bay, California.
Marin County Library, Civic Center, 3501 Civic Center Drive, San Rafael, California.
North Bay Cooperative Library, 725 Third Street, Santa Rosa, California.
Oakland Public Library, 125 14th Street, Oakland, California.
Richmond Public Library, 325 Civic Center Plaza, Richmond, California.
San Francisco Public Library, Civic Center, Larkin  McAllister, San Francisco, California.
San Francisco State University Library, 1630 Holloway Avenue, San Francisco, California.
San Mateo County Library, 25 Tower Road, San Mateo, California.
Santa Clara County Free Library, 1095 N. Seventh Street, San Jose, California.
Santa Cruz Public Library, 224 Church Street, Santa Cruz, California.
Sausalito Public Library, 420 Litho Street, Sausalito, California.
Stanford University Library, Stanford, California.


A. Background 


Section 102(c) of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (MPRSA) of 1972, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1401


et seq.

, gives the Administrator of EPA authority to designate sites where ocean dumping may be permitted. On October 1, 1986
the Administrator delegated authority to designate ocean dredged material disposal sites (ODMDS) to the Regional
Administrator of the EPA Region in which the sites are located. The proposed SF-DODS designation action is being made
pursuant to that authority.
The EPA Ocean Dumping Regulations (40 CFR 228.4) state that ocean dumping sites will be designated by publication
pursuant to 40 CFR part 228. This
proposed site designation is being published as a proposed rulemaking in accordance with 228.4(e) of the Ocean
Dumping Regulations, which permits the designation of ocean disposal sites for dredged material. Interested persons
may participate in this proposed rulemaking by submitting written comments within 30 days of the date of this publication
to the address given above. 
The center of the proposed SF-DODS is located approximately 49 nautical miles (91 kilometers) west of the Golden Gate
and occupies an area of approximately 6.5 square nautical miles (22 square kilometers). Water depths within the area
range between approximately 8,200 to 9,840 feet (2,500 to 3,000 meters). The center coordinates of the oval-shaped
site are: 37
&cir; 39.0' North latitude by 123
&cir; 29.0' West longitude (North American Datum from 1983), with length (north-south axis) and width (west-east
axis) dimensions of approximately 4 nautical miles (7.5 kilometers) and 2.5 nautical miles (4.5 kilometers), respectively.
EPA Region IX now proposes to designate SF-DODS as an ocean dredged material disposal site for continued use for a period
of 50 years and not to exceed 6 million cubic yards of dredged material in any one year period. Site use is subject to a
Site Management and Monitoring Plan (SMMP), of which the goals and objectives are described in the Final EIS and summarized
in Section G below. A draft SMMP will be made available for public review through a separate Public Notice process.
The draft SMMP, currently under development, incorporates a tiered site monitoring structure and MPRSA section
103 permit review. The SMMP will available from the EPA Region IX office address given above.


B. EIS Development


Section 102(c) of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969, 42 U.S.C. 4321 

et seq.

, requires that Federal agencies prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) on proposals for major Federal
actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment. The object of NEPA is to build into the Agency
decision-making process careful consideration of all environmental aspects of proposed actions.
A notice of availability of the Draft EIS was published in the 

Federal Register

 on December 11, 1992 discussing EPA Region IX's intent to designate a deep water ocean dredged material disposal site
off San Francisco (57 FR 58805). EPA Region IX prepared a Draft EIS titled: Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
for San Francisco Bay Deep Water Dredged Material Disposal Site Designation. The comment period ended on January
25, 1993. EPA Region IX received 35 comment letters on the Draft EIS and incorporated changes where appropriate. On
September 10, 1993, notice of availability for public review and comment on the Final EIS was published in the 

Federal Register

 (58 FR 47741). The comment period for the Final EIS ended on October 29, 1993. Anyone desiring a copy of the proposed
rule or the Final EIS may obtain them from the EPA Region IX office address given above.


C. Responses to Final EIS Comments 


During the public comment period on the Final EIS, which closed on October 29, 1993, EPA Region IX received 9 comment
letters. The following substantive comments were discussed in these letters.



1. Fisheries Valuation


The National marine sanctuaries (Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary, Cordell Bank National Marine
Sanctuary, and Monterey National Marine Sanctuary/North) commented that the values presented in the Final EIS for
fisheries valuation were inaccurate. 

Response:

 These fisheries values, extracted from published documents, represented total estimated values for the different
fisheries. EPA Region IX recognizes that calculated values for these fisheries will vary according to the methods
used. However, the comparison of the alternative sites and selection of the preferred alternative site with respect
to fisheries was based on landings (abundance) of all important commercial and recreational fish and did not require
the use of assigned fisheries values. EPA Region IX, with concurrence by the California Department of Fish and Game
(CDFG), determined that the existing and potential fisheries resources within Alternative Site 5 are minimal and
the site is removed from more important fishing grounds located near Alternative Sites 3 and 4.


2. Beneficial Use of Dredged Material


The Department of Water Resources (DWR) commented on the importance of beneficial use of dredged material as an option
acknowledged in the Final EIS. DWR elaborated on the successes of demonstration projects for levee maintenance which
showed no adverse impacts on soil and water quality resulting from the placement of marine sediments. 


Response:

 EPA Region IX acknowledges these and other successes and expects that all beneficial use options will be evaluated
further by the Long Term Management Strategy (LTMS) through the development of the Policy and Programmatic EIS/EIR.
The availability of specific opportunities for beneficial use of dredged material will be evaluated on a case-by-case
(permit-by-permit) basis before an ocean disposal permit is issued.


3. Incorporation of the Site Management and Monitoring Plan (SMMP) into the Final EIS


The CDFG commented that the SMMP ``be joined to the Final EIS through either the Federal rule-making process or supplemental
(NEPA) process.'' 


Response:

 The purpose of the Final EIS is to analyze alternative disposal sites. EPA Region IX shares the concerns that CDFG,
the National Marine Sanctuaries, and other public interest/environmental groups have about adequate management
and monitoring of the proposed SF-DODS during disposal activities. It is Region IX's intent to implement a site management
and monitoring plan for the life of proposed SF-DODS. EPA Region IX will commit to implementing an adequate SMMP in
the rule-making and the Record of Decision.


4. Piecemealing of Project


Coastal Advocates commented that by designating an ocean disposal option in advance of the LTMS completing work on
the other disposal alternatives, EPA and the LTMS program have effectively eliminated upland disposal and other
options in the near-term. Response: EPA Region IX recognizes that the LTMS continues to evaluate other disposal options,
including upland disposal. Nothing in the proposed ocean disposal site designation affects those efforts, or existing
disposal sites within San Francisco Bay managed under provisions of the Clean Water Act. In addition, it should be
noted that designation of an ocean site does not constitute a permit to dispose any dredged material at that site. Each
project will be evaluated for compliance with the Ocean Dumping criteria (40 CFR part 227) before any disposal can
occur at the proposed SF-DODS. Furthermore, it is EPA's intent to encourage beneficial use of material wherever possible
and approve ocean disposal of suitable material only when necessary.


5. Need for Ocean Dumping


Coastal Advocates commented that the analysis in the Final EIS for the need for ocean dumping was faulty ``because
it does not take into account the recent military base closures in the Bay Area.''


Response:

 EPA Region IX recognizes that base closures could have a long-term effect on the need for dredging and ocean disposal.
However, even if the long-term need for ocean dumping is substantially reduced by base closures, which is speculative,
presently available information appears to indicate that the proposed SF-DODS will still be needed. It appears reasonably
certain that there will be substantial dredging projects at the various Bay area commercial ports, among other facilities,
in the next fifty years which will generate large amounts of dredged material. Present information indicates that
a substantial portion of these dredged sediments would be expected to be suitable for ocean disposal. The end result
is the overall need for ocean dumping presented in the Final EIS may or may not be significantly affected in the short-term
or long-term. In any event, the actual need for ocean dumping is determined on a project-by-project basis at the time
of permitting.


6. Current Navy Project Classified as Historical Dumping


Coastal Advocates commented that the Navy's use of the disposal site concurrent with EPA's site designation prejudices
the decision process and is a violation of NEPA. 

Response:

 It should be noted that the Navy's use of their disposal site is permitted under section 103 of MPRSA following a NEPA
process which included an EIS and Supplemental EIS for their project-specific use only, separate from EPA's site
designation activities. Following extensive field studies of the region, the preferred site for long-term use (section
102 of MPRSA) was selected by EPA for several reasons, including the determinations of: a depositional environment
and local topographic containment features; no expected significant impacts to other resources or amenity areas,
such as national marine sanctuaries; minimal existing and potential fisheries relative to more important fishing
grounds located in or near the other alternative sites; lower abundances and biomass of demersal fishes, megafaunal
invertebrates, and infaunal invertebrates; no expected significant impacts to surface and midwater dwelling organisms,
including seabirds, mammals, and midwater fishes; and previous degradation of the environment within the preferred
alternative site as a result of historical disposal of low-level radioactive wastes and chemical and conventional
munitions in the vicinity of the preferred alternative site. In accordance with EPA's ocean site selection criteria
(40 CFR 228.5(e)), EPA Region IX classified the preferred dredged material disposal site as a historically-used
site based in part on the aforementioned historical dumping activities in the vicinity of the preferred site. The
proposed selection of the preferred alternative site coincides with the Navy's decision to identify this site as
its Preferred Alternative for dredged material disposal. Finally, it is important to note that EPA's proposed Preferred
Alternative was presented to the LTMS Ocean Studies Work Group (OSWG) and received the consensus approval of this
work group. The OSWG, which has been an integral part of the site designation process, is comprised of Federal and State
agencies, and numerous public interest groups, including local recreational and commercial fishing associations
and environmental groups. All of these groups have an active interest in the potential impacts of dredged material
management within the San Francisco Bay area.


7. Specific Ocean Dumping Criteria


Coastal Advocates commented that EPA did not satisfy specific criteria of the Ocean Dumping Regulations (40 CFR 228.6),
including: an inadequate assessment of impacts to recreational tuna fishing (228.6(a)(2)]; an inadequate
assessment of radioactivity in San Francisco Bay sediments (228.6(a)(4)); inadequate modeling of dredged
material disposal plumes 228.6(a)(2) and 228.6(a)(8); a flawed assessment of biological effects
of dumping of contaminated dredged material (228.6(a)(9); and a lack of consideration of adverse impacts
to the microlayer (228.6(a)(9)). 


Response:

 Region IX has carefully considered in the Final EIS the important factors required to satisfy the specific site selection
criteria. Site designation does not constitute a permit to dispose of any dredged material. The Corps is the permitting
agency for dredged material disposal applications and EPA has a joint approval role in determining the suitability
of dredged material proposed for ocean disposal. Proposed dredged sediments are evaluated on a project-by-project
basis with a rigorous suite of physical, chemical, and bioassay tests, involving statistical comparisons to an appropriate
uncontaminated reference site. Sediments that fail the testing criteria are deemed unsuitable and are prohibited
from ocean disposal. With respect to impacts to recreational tuna fishing, EPA Region IX determined that the impacts
of disposal plumes would be transient and insignificant to these highly mobile pelagic fish which usually are abundant
in the area only in the fall. The U.S. Navy performed project-midpoint monitoring activities in the vicinity of the
Preferred Alternative as required by their MPRSA section 103 permit which confirmed the transient nature of the disposal
plumes. Although radioactivity has not routinely been assessed, if historical information or other evidence suggests
such contamination, certain radioactive isotope measurements can be required by EPA in addition to the other aforementioned
tests to determine suitability of the proposed dredged material. With respect to modelling of the disposal plume
and sediment footprint on the seafloor, EPA Region IX used conservative values for model parameters to obtain results
under worst case (highly dispersive) conditions. Water column modelling showed that concentrations of sediments
in the water column would be within background levels at the boundaries of the marine sanctuaries, while the footprint
modelling showed that any deposits of sediment in the marine sanctuaries would be at the limits of detection at best
under optimal conditions. Furthermore, the footprint model does not account for biological activity which would
mix the deposited sediment into the native seafloor sediments. The Navy's project-midpoint monitoring studies
have largely confirmed the predictions of the fate of the plume and footprint. EPA has performed an extensive evaluation
of available information on potential impacts to sea surface microlayer (including an experts' workshop), and concluded
that the environmental significance of microlayer contamination has not been clearly established even for enclosed
waters. The concern for microlayer effects is largely based on theoretical arguments, laboratory bioassays, and
limited field studies. The potential for microlayer effects depends largely on: contaminant concentrations, lack
of surface turbulence, degree to which the water body is enclosed or restricted, and proximity to important areas
containing neustonic populations that may be exposed. Because the potential significance of microlayer contamination
has not been clearly established in relatively enclosed water bodies such as Puget Sound, the potential effects are
expected to be much less for disposal activities in the more turbulent and unrestricted offshore oceanic environment.
In addition, highly contaminated material will not be approved for disposal in ocean waters.


8. Requirements of the Endangered Species Act (ESA)


Coastal Advocates commented that the documents prepared for the ESA coordination in the Final EIS did not comply with
section 7(a)(2) of the ESA, 16 U.S.C. 1536(a)(2). 

Response:

 In accordance with the aforementioned ESA, EPA Region IX formally consulted with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
the National Marine Fisheries Service, and California Department of Fish and Game to identify any threatened, endangered,
or special status species that may be affected by the proposed designation of the SF-DODS. Reviewing all available
data, including information from the Final EIS requested by these agencies, concurrence was received from the three
agencies that there would be no adverse impacts to local endangered species from the designation of the proposed SF-DODS.


9. Proposed Selection of Preferred Site


Ocean Advocates commented that the preferred alternative is not acceptable for ocean dumping of contaminated material
because of: the highly dispersive nature of the waters at the site; its use as a spawning, nursery, feeding and passage
area for living resources; its close proximity to three marine sanctuaries; the infeasibility of monitoring; and
lack of adequate baseline data.


Response:

 Site designation does not constitute a permit to dispose of any dredged material. Each project will be evaluated on
a case-by-case basis. Rigorous testing of the proposed dredged sediments as described in the response to comment
#7 above, will ensure that toxic or highly contaminated dredged materials will not be disposed at the designated disposal
site. Although oceanic environments tend to be more dispersive than enclosed water bodies, conservative modeling
indicates that there would be insignificant impacts from dredged material disposal, as described in the response
to comment #7. EPA's water column modeling predicted that concentrations of dredged materials following disposal
would decrease rapidly to background levels and that overall impacts to the local environment would be insignificant.
More recent Navy mid-project monitoring has confirmed these expectations of intermittent and short-term impacts.
Therefore, impacts to spawning, nursery, feeding and passage areas for living resources are expected to be minor
and temporary. The preferred alternative site is located north of the other alternative sites and is the closest to
GFNMS and CBNMS. Despite the proximity to the marine sanctuaries, physical oceanographic studies indicate that
the predominant currents are north-northwest and are weaker than the currents in the vicinity of the other alternative
sites. These oceanographic conditions would be expected to prevent any movement of suspended sediments into the
National marine sanctuaries. As described in the response to comment #7, modelling results indicate that suspended
sediment transport is insignificant. The recent Navy mid-project monitoring efforts clearly shows that monitoring
of the site is feasible, particularly with respect to the most difficult technical tasks related to the deep water
depths such as identification of the sediment footprint on the seafloor. With regard to baseline data, EPA Region
IX carefully evaluated all of the important relevant data for the region and identified data gaps. An Ocean Studies
Plan (OSP) was developed jointly with the regional scientists of the OSWG, and approved by the LTMS Policy Review Committee.
The OSP described appropriate field studies necessary to fill those data gaps. The results of these field studies
and previous studies in the region provide the most comprehensive collection of data characterizing the Gulf of the
Farallones region to date.


D. Alternatives Analysis


The action discussed in this Proposed Rule is the proposed designation of the Preferred Alterative selected in the
Final EIS (proposed SF-DODS) for disposal of suitable dredged material from the San Francisco Bay region over 50 years.
The LTMS planning estimate is that up to 400 million cubic yards will be dredged in this period; however, the proposed
SF-DODS will be limited to a maximum disposal volume of 6 million cubic yards of dredged material in any one year period.
The purpose of the designation is to provide an environmentally acceptable location for ocean disposal, as part of
the Long Term Management Strategy (LTMS) for dredged material from this region. Approval of specific ocean dredged
material disposal permit applications is a completely separate process from site designation. MPRSA section 103
permit applications are reviewed on a case-by-case basis to determine whether the proposed dredged materials are
suitable for disposal at proposed SF-DODS.
The Final EIS discussed the need for the site designation and examined a range of alternatives to the proposed action,
including 3 alternative deepwater ocean disposal sites. All disposal options, including upland, in-bay, and ocean
disposal alternatives, and LTMS management policies are being evaluated in a separate LTMS Policy EIS/EIR. The upland
and in-bay sites are limited in capacity relative to the ocean site for disposal of large volumes of suitable dredged
material. Disposal alternatives for individual projects will be evaluated by EPA Region IX and the Corps' San Francisco
District on a case-by-case basis during the permitting process. The following ocean disposal alternatives were
evaluated in the Final EIS:

 

1. No ActionSelection of this alternative would prevent final designation of the proposed SF-DODS site. Failure
to designate a permanent ocean disposal site pursuant to section 102 of the MPRSA would have significant negative
consequences. First, the continued foreseeable need to have some place to dispose of sediments from various San Francisco
Bay dredging projects would place pressure on the Corps and EPA to approve on a project-by-project basis the use of
temporary in-Bay or ocean dumping location pursuant to either Clean Water Act section 404 or MPRSA section 103. Approval
of dredged material disposal via these mechanisms would be less desirable in that dump site selection would not be
made in the context of long-term comprehensive planning. The advantages of the latter, the limiting of dumping to
a single location and the consideration of cumulative impacts and cumulative needs for dumping could be lost if dump
site are selected piecemeal on a project-by-project basis. The LTMS mission is to provide long-term options, including
ocean disposal, to accommodate the dredged material volumes and compositions anticipated for the 50-year planning
period. Second, the Water Resources Act of 1992 prohibits the continued use of ocean dump sites which have not been
designated by EPA as section 102 dump sites by the end of 1997. If EPA fails to designate the proposed SF-DODS by that
date, then ocean disposal of dredged materials taken from San Francisco Bay projects will be effectively precluded.
It appears from current information that there is a substantial probability that there will not be sufficient capacity
available in alternative disposal options to accommodate sediments from currently contemplated dredging projects.
Accordingly, the lack of an ocean disposal site could delay or preclude several economically important dredging
projects.
2. Alternatives Not Considered for Further Analysis (Study Area 1 and Study Area 2)Study Area 1, corresponding
to the Channel Bar ODMDS is only designated for disposal of sandy material from the San Francisco Bay entrance channel.
The LTMS considered changing the designation of this ODMDS to accept sand from other dredging projects in the Bay,
but decided that the amount of potentially suitable material would be too small to warrant redesignating the site.
Based on this decision, EPA proposes to eliminate Study Area 1 from further consideration. Study Area 2 originally
was included as a candidate location on the continental shelf, and was subjected to considerable study effort. Nevertheless,
based on its location within the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary (MBNMS) and because dredged material disposal
at a new ODMDS within the MBNMS is prohibited, EPA proposes to eliminate Study Area 2 from further consideration as
an alternative.
3. Deepwater Alternative Site 3This site is located approximately 47 nautical miles (87 kilometers) from
the Golden Gate in an area where depths range approximately 4,590 to 6,230 feet (1,400 to 1,900 meters). EPA proposes
to eliminate this site from further consideration, primarily because of its proximity to Pioneer Canyon and associated
hardbottom areas.
4. Deepwater Alternative Site 4This site is located approximately 50 nautical miles (93 kilometers) from
the Golden Gate in an area where depths range approximately from 6,230 to 6,900 feet (1,900 to 2,100 meters). EPA proposes
to eliminate this site from further consideration, primarily because of its proximity to Half Moon Bay and its high
usage as commercial fishing grounds as compared to Alternative Site 5.
5. Deepwater Alternative Site 5 (Preferred Alternative)EPA proposes to select this site (proposed SF-DODS)
as the preferred alternative based on comparisons of the alternative sites to the specific selection criteria. Alternative
Site 5 is located furthest from the coast (approximately 49 nautical miles west of the Golden Gate) and in the deepest
depth range (approximately 8,200 to 9840 feet, or 2,500 to 3,000 meters). Bathymetric and sediment surveys indicate
Alternative Site 5 is located in a depositional area which, because of existing topographic containment features,
is likely to retain dredged material which reaches the sea floor. No significant impacts to other resources or amenity
areas, such as marine sanctuaries, are expected to result from designation of Alternative Site 5. Existing and potential
fisheries resources within Alternative Site 5 are minimal and the site is removed from more important fishing grounds
located closer to the other alternative sites. Abundances and biomass of demersal fishes and megafaunal invertebrates,
as well as abundances and diversity of infaunal invertebrates, at Alternative Site 5 are lower than those at the other
alternative sites. Potential impacts to surface and mid-water dwelling organisms, such as seabirds, mammals, and
midwater fishes, are expected to be insignificant. Finally, disposal of low-level radioactive wastes and chemical
and conventional munitions occurred historically in the vicinity of Alternative Site 5. Disposal within the site
has also occurred as part of a Navy MPRSA section 103 permit approved for up to 1.2 million cubic yards of suitable dredged
material.
The Final EIS presents the information needed to evaluate the suitability of ocean disposal areas for final designation
of proposed SF-DODS and is based on a disposal site environmental study. The proposed rule is being promulgated in
accordance with MPRSA, the EPA Ocean Dumping Regulations, and other applicable Federal environmental legislation.
A separate Record of Decision (ROD) will be prepared prior to or as part of the issuance of the Final Rule for this site
designation.


E. Site Designation


Today EPA Region IX proposes to designate SF-DODS as a deepwater ocean dredged material disposal site. The center
of the proposed SF-DODS is located approximately 49 nautical miles (91 kilometers) west of the Golden Gate and occupies
an area of approximately 6.5 square nautical miles (22 square kilometers). Water depths within the area range between
8,200 to 9,840 feet (2,500 to 3,000 meters). The center coordinates of the oval-shaped site are: 37
&cir; 39.0' North latitude by 123
&cir; 29.0' West longitude (North American Datum from 1983), with length (north-south axis) and width (west-east
axis) dimensions of approximately 4 nautical miles (7.5 kilometers) and 2.5 nautical miles (4.5 kilometers), respectively.
Designation of the proposed SF-DODS is for use over a 50-year period and not to exceed 6 million cubic yards of dredged
material in any one year period, subject to a Site Management and Monitoring Plan, which will be issued through a separate
Public Notice. Annual reports will be prepared on the results of site monitoring. If disposal operations at the site
are shown to cause unacceptable adverse environmental impacts, further use of the site will be restricted or terminated.
A suitable alternative disposal site may be designated by EPA in this event. Disposal operations will be prohibited
if funds and equipment for implementing the site management and monitoring program are not available.


F. Regulatory Requirements


Five general criteria are used in the selection and approval of ocean disposal sites for continuing use (40 CFR 228.5).
Sites are selected to minimize interference with other marine activities, to keep any temporary perturbations from
causing impacts outside the disposal site, and to permit effective monitoring which is designed to evaluate specific
areas of concern, such as water quality impacts, significant movement of sediment outside the site and unacceptable
impacts to the marine environment or human health. Where feasible, locations off the continental shelf and historical
sites are chosen. The 11 specific site selection criteria are listed in 40 CFR 228.6(a) of the EPA Ocean Dumping Regulations.
These specific factors are used to evaluate all candidate disposal sites.
The proposed SF-DODS site, as discussed below under the 11 specific factors, is acceptable under the 5 general criteria
(40 CFR 228.5). The 5 general criteria and the 11 specific criteria overlap such that if a site meets the latter it necessarily
meets the former. Historical disposal in the vicinity of the preferred site has not resulted in significantly adverse
effects on fisheries, living resources of the ocean, or other uses of the marine environment.


1. Geographical Position, Depth of Water, Bottom Topography and Distance from Coast (40 CFR 228.6(a)(1))


The center of the proposed SF-DODS is located approximately 49 nautical miles (91 kilometers) west of the Golden Gate
and occupies an area of 6.5 square nautical miles (22 square kilometers). Water depths within the area range between
8,200 to 9,840 feet (2,500 to 3,000 meters). The center coordinates of the oval-shaped site are: 37
&cir; 39.0' North latitude by 123
&cir; 29.0' West longitude (North American Datum from 1983), with length (north-south axis) and width (west-east
axis) dimensions of approximately 4 nautical miles (7.5 kilometers) and 2.5 nautical miles (4.5 kilometers), respectively.


2. Location in Relation to Breeding, Spawning, Nursery, Feeding, or Passage Areas of Living Resources in Adult or
Juvenile Phases (40 CFR 228.6(a)(2))


The proposed SF-DODS site provides feeding and breeding areas for common resident benthic species. Floating larvae
and eggs of various species are expected to be found at and near the water surface at the site as well as the other sites.
Designation of the site will not affect any geographically limited habitats, breeding sites or critical areas that
are essential to commercially important species or rare or endangered species.


3. Location in Relation to Beaches and Other Amenity Areas (40 CFR 228.6(a)(3) 


The proposed SF-DODS site is approximately 49 nautical miles (91 kilometers) west of the Golden Gate, 30 nautical
miles (56 kilometers) from Pioneer Canyon, 10 nautical miles (19 kilometers) from the Gulf of the Farallones National
Marine Sanctuary boundary, and 30 (56 kilometers) nautical miles from the Farallon Islands. EPA Region IX and the
Corps' San Francisco District have determined that aesthetic impacts of plumes, transport of dredged material to
any shoreline and alteration of any habitat of special biological significance or marine sanctuary will not occur
if this site is designated. 
Ocean currents flow primarily to the northwest in the upper 2,600 to 3,000 feet (800 to 900 meters) of the water column,
although periodic reversals in flow occur. Currents below 3,000 feet (900 meters) are generally weaker than near-surface
currents. Therefore, any residual suspended solids from the proposed SF-DODS site will move primarily in the north-northwest
direction. Initial water column modeling results using a conservative approach and assuming disposal of 6 million
cubic yards of dredged sediments per year indicate that suspended solid levels would decrease to background levels
by the time the plume reaches the nearest amenity area (GFNMS boundary). Initial footprint modeling using a conservative
approach and assuming disposal of 6 million cubic yards of dredged sediments per year indicates that the majority
of the disposed material would be deposited within the disposal site. 


4. Types and Quantities of Wastes Proposed to be Disposed of, and Proposed Methods of Release, Including Methods of
Packing the Waste if Any (40 CFR 228.6(a)(4))


Site use over a 50-year period is not to exceed 6 million cubic yards of suitable dredged material per year. The projected
volumes are based on historical annual maintenance dredging volumes and projected new work projects in the San Francisco
Bay region which could be considered for disposal at the ocean site if the material is determined to suitable for ocean
disposal. The anticipated military base closures may reduce the LTMS planning estimates for the total volume of material
expected to be dredged over a 50-year period. However, the overall impact of base closures may be offset by other new
projects, such as expansion of commercial port facilities in areas vacated by the military. Composition of dredged
material is expected to range between two types: predominantly ``clay-silt'' (e.g., 74% clay, 5% silt, 21% sand)
versus ``mostly sand'' (e.g., 3% silt, 21% clay, 76% sand). These material types are based on data from historical
projects from the San Francisco Bay region. The expected disposal method would involve split-hull barges, with capacities
ranging between 1,000 to 6,000 cubic yards, which would be towed by ocean-going tugboats. The actual amount of disposal
may vary from the annual average for any given year. EPA Region IX and the Corps' San Francisco District will evaluate
and manage the amount of dredged material proposed for disposal at proposed SF-DODS through the MPRSA section 103
permit process.
All dredged material proposed for disposal at the site must be suitable for ocean disposal. This determination will
be made by EPA Region IX and the Corps' San Francisco District based upon the results of physical, chemical and biological
tests before a MPRSA section 103 permit can be issued. Certain dredged material may be exempted from chemical and biological
testing based upon the physical characteristics of the sediments and their location in relation to sources of contamination
(40 CFR 227.13(b)(1)). Dumping of prohibited materials or other industrial or municipal wastes will not be permitted
at the site (40 CFR 227.5 and 227.6(a)).


5. Feasibility of Surveillance and Monitoring (40 CFR 228.6(a)(5))


Surveillance and monitoring of the dredged material disposal site involves several agencies. The U.S. Coast Guard
(U.S.C.G) is the Federal agency with authority to conduct onsite surveillance and monitoring of vessels involved
in disposal activities at sea. For dredged material disposal, this monitoring would be to determine that the vessels
dump the material at the designated disposal site. EPA Region IX and the Corps' San Francisco District share the responsibilities
of managing and monitoring the disposal site, and, with the onsite assistance of the U.S.C.G, to enforce permit conditions
within the limits of their jurisdiction. Recent Navy mid-project monitoring activities have clearly confirmed
the feasibility of surveillance and monitoring at the proposed SF-DODS. A Site Management and Monitoring Plan (SMMP)
is under development by EPA Region IX and the Corps' South Pacific Division and San Francisco District. The goals and
objectives of the SMMP are summarized in Section G. below. The SMMP will be issued through a separate Public Notice.


6. Dispersal, Horizontal Transport and Vertical Mixing Characteristics of the Area, Including Prevailing Current
Direction and Velocity, if Any (40 CFR 228.6(a)(6))


Ocean currents flow primarily to the northwest in the upper 2,600 to 3,000 feet (800 to 900 meters) of the water column,
although periodic reversals in flow occur. Currents below 3,000 feet (900 meters) are generally weaker than near-surface
currents. Therefore, any residual suspended solids from the proposed SF-DODS will move primarily in the north-northwest
direction. Near-bottom flows may be enhanced by tidal influences and bottom topography. However, sediment resuspension
from the seafloor within the preferred site is expected to be minimal. Initial water column modeling results, as indicated
in the Final EIS, using a conservative approach (e.g., modeling parameters adjusted for worst case conditions) and
assuming disposal of 6 million cubic yards of dredged sediments per year, indicate that suspended solid levels would
decrease to background levels when the plume reached the nearest amenity area (GFNMS boundary). Initial footprint
modeling using a conservative approach and assuming disposal of 6 million cubic yards of dredged sediments per year
indicate that the majority of the disposed material would be deposited within the disposal site. 


7. Existence and Effects of Current and Previous Discharges and Dumping in the Area (Including Cumulative Effects)
(40 CFR 228.6(a)(7)


Under an MPRSA section 103 permit, the Navy is discharging up to 1.2 million cubic yards of dredged material at their
Navy disposal site which is contained within the EPA-preferred Alternative Site 5. No other documented disposal
of dredged material has occurred within the site. However, disposal of radioactive waste containers was conducted
in the vicinity of Alternative Site 5 from 19511954. Likewise, chemical and conventional munitions were disposed
from approximately 1958 to the late 1960's at the Chemical Munitions Disposal Area. There was no evidence during the
site designation field studies of residual contamination. Therefore, potentials for cumulative impacts are considered
unlikely.
The associated municipal discharge effects from the San Francisco Southwest Ocean Outfall (5.4 nautical miles or
10.2 kilometers from shore), City of Pacifica Outfall (0.4 nautical miles or 0.8 kilometers from shore), and Northern
San Mateo County Outfall (0.4 nautical miles or 0.8 kilometers from shore) are limited to local areas near the outfalls
and do not extend to the vicinity of the dredged material disposal site. Discharges of dredged material at the Channel
Bar ODMDS (3.0 nautical miles or 5.6 kilometers from shore) are also limited to local areas and not expected to result
in farfield impacts. Ocean disposal of acid waste, cannery waste, and refinery waste was discontinued approximately
20 years ago (in 19711972), and presence of residual waste which could interact with discharged dredged material
to produce cumulative, adverse, environmental effects has not been detected.


8. Interference with Shipping, Fishing, Recreation, Mineral Extraction, Desalination, Fish and Shellfish Culture,
Areas of Special Scientific Importance and Other Legitimate Uses of the Ocean (40 CFR 288.6(a)(8))


Interference with shipping, fishing, recreation, mineral extraction, desalination, fish and shellfish culture,
areas of special scientific importance and other uses of the ocean as a result of disposal operations is expected to
be minimal because of the already high volume of ship traffic through the region. From 19801991, the total vessel
transits in the San Francisco Bay region ranged from approximately 61,000 to 91,000. As an example of a worst case scenario,
assuming around-the-clock disposal operations (assuming 3 trips in a 24-hour period), disposal operations would
augment the vessel traffic by less than 2 percent. Compared to Alternative Sites 3 and 4, Site 5 is less utilized as a
fisheries resource area. In addition, the potential interferences with recreational and scientific boat traffic
and marine resources (e.g., birds and mammals) near the Farallon Islands will be minimized by requirements that barges
remain at least 3 nautical miles from the Islands. Under normal conditions, no interference with areas of special
importance is expected. However, accidents resulting in releases of material near the Farallones may be a concern.
This will also be mitigated by requiring barges to remain 3 nautical miles from the Islands and by requiring appropriate
load limits based on sea conditions.


9. The Existing Water Quality and Ecology of the Site as Determined by Available Data or by Trend Assessment or Baseline
Surveys (40 CFR 228.6(a)(9))


Regional studies described in the Final EIS provide the following determinations. Water quality at the proposed
SF-DODS is indistinguishable from the water quality of nearby areas. Sediments contain background levels or low
concentrations of trace metal and organic contaminants. The demersal fish community within Alternative Site 5 have
lower numbers of species and abundances (rattails, eelpouts, finescale codling) than the other alternative sites.
Alternative Site 5 contain moderate numbers of megafaunal invertebrate species but lower overall abundances (sea
cucumbers, brittlestars, sea pens) compared to the other alternative sites. Infaunal invertebrates within Alternative
Site 5 show lower diversity and abundance (polychaetes, amphipods, isopods, tanaids) compared to Alternative Sites
3 and 4. There have been higher numbers of sightings of marine birds and mammals within Alternative Site 5 relative
to the other alternative sites. Mid-water organisms, including juvenile rockfishes, are abundant seasonally within
Alternative Site 5 relative to Alternative Sites 3 and 4.


10. Potentiality for the Development or Recruitment of Nuisance Species in the Disposal Site (40 CFR 228.6(a)(10))


It is unlikely to see recruitment of nuisance species from the disposal of dredged material due to significant differences
in water depth and environment at the disposal site as compared to the relatively shallow dredging sites in the San
Francisco Bay region. Local opportunistic benthic species characteristic of disturbed conditions are expected
to be present and abundant at any ODMDS in response to physical deposition of sediments. Opportunistic polychaetes,
such as 

Capitella

, may colonize the disposal site. These worms can become food items for bottom-feeding fish and are not directly harmful
to other species. No recruitment of species capable of harming human health or the marine ecosystem is expected.


11. Existence at or in Close Proximity to the Site of Any Significant Natural or Cultural Feature of Historical Importance
(40 CFR 228.6(a)(11))


The California State Historic Preservation Officer has determined there are no known historic shipwrecks nor any
known aboriginal artifacts at the proposed SF-DODS or in the vicinity.


G. Site Management and Monitoring Plan


A Site Management and Monitoring Plan for the proposed SF-DODS is under development by EPA Region IX and the Corps'
South Pacific Division and San Francisco District with input from the OSWG. The practicability of implementing a
SMMP at the proposed SF-DODS has been confirmed by the recent mid-project MPRSA section 103 permit monitoring activities
performed by the Navy at the Navy disposal site which is contained within the proposed SF-DODS. The completed document
will be made available for public review through a separate Public Notice process and will available upon request
from EPA Region IX. For this Proposed Rule, the major components of the SMMP (including goals, objectives, and criteria)
are summarized below.
a. Data for site management will be provided by a tiered site monitoring program which consists of three interdependent
modules: a Physical Monitoring Module, a Biological Monitoring Module, and a Chemical Monitoring Module. The Physical
Monitoring Module will provide information about the plume behavior in the water column and dredged material footprint
on the sea floor. The Biological Monitoring Module provides information about any detectable effects of the water
column plume on sea birds, marine mammals, and mid-water fishes. In the event that significant amounts of dredged
material (i.e., greater than 5 centimeters) extends outside of the designated site, any detectable impacts on the
benthos shall be investigated. The Chemical Monitoring Module provides data on sediment quality and will evaluate
any potential bioaccumulation of contaminants in benthic organisms if monitoring indicates that substantially
elevated concentrations of contaminants exist in the sediments. Tier 1 monitoring studies shall be performed annually
if dredged material disposal occurs at the proposed SF-DODS and will include portions of each module. Initiation
of subsequent studies under Tiers 2 and 3 shall be based on exceedances of parameters in Tier 1, as specified in the SMMP.
(1) Annual Tier 1 monitoring activities shall involve physical, chemical, and biological assessments. These activities
shall be initiated after a period of one year of disposal activities or disposal of 6 million cubic yards of dredged
materials, whichever comes first. A minimum volume of dredged material disposed in any one year period may be established
as a trigger for conducting the annual surveys of the footprint, based on ability to identify the dredged material
layer within the disposal site. A physical survey of the disposal site shall be conducted to determine whether disposed
dredged material is remaining at the proposed SF-DODS site. Sediment mapping techniques (utilizing appropriate
technology, such as sediment profile photography) shall be used to determine the areal extent and thickness of the
dredged material deposit footprint relative to the disposal site boundaries. Following the physical mapping of
the sediment footprint, boxcore samples for sediment chemistry and benthos shall be taken within the footprint and
in unaffected areas surrounding the footprint. If a ecologically significant thickness of dredged material (5 centimeters)
is not identified outside the boundary of the disposal site, then no management actions (relating to physical monitoring)
will be necessary. On the other hand, if significant thicknesses of dredged material are detected outside the site
boundary, then management actions (e.g., reevaluation of the site boundary, or restricting or stopping disposal)
and/or additional field studies (Tier 2) shall be implemented to evaluate potential impacts of the dredged material
deposits outside of the disposal site. The sediment chemistry samples shall be analyzed as a conservative measure
to assess any long-term accumulation of contaminants as a result of dredged material disposal. If contaminant trigger
levels are not exceeded, then no management actions (relating to chemical monitoring) will be necessary. If contaminant
trigger levels are exceeded, then management actions (e.g., restricting or stopping disposal) and additional field
studies (Tier 2) shall be implemented to evaluate the potential impacts. Biological monitoring will be based primarily
on continued collection and assessment of trends of time-series data for marine birds and mammals and midwater fishes
in the Gulf of the Farallones region. Periodic shipboard observations (which could be required in the permit, as appropriate)
taken from the vessels involved in disposal operations will provide additional data on any potential impacts to these
organisms. If no significant negative trends are detected and shipboard observations do not indicate that adverse
impacts are occurring as a result of disposal activities, then no management actions (relating to biological monitoring)
will be necessary. If statistically significant negative trends are detected or shipboard observations indicate
that adverse impacts are occurring as a result of disposal activities, then management actions (e.g., restricting
or stopping disposal) and additional field studies (Tier 2) shall be implemented to assess potential impacts. 
(2) Tier 2 monitoring shall occur based on management decisions in Tier 1 as described above with consideration of
study options, including collection of additional data to further evaluate the potential physical, chemical, and
biological impacts of dredged material dispersed in the water column and deposited outside of the proposed SF-DODS
on sensitive water column and benthic biological resources of concern. If warranted, additional physical oceanographic
studies shall be conducted to improve the models used to predict the dispersion and deposition of dredged material
at the disposal site. These additional studies may include: the collection of additional current meter data, deployment
of sediment traps, and deployment of Lagrangian drifters. If the additional data indicate that no detectable (above
background) concentrations of material are entering the sanctuaries, then no management actions would be necessary.
If the data do indicate significant elevated concentrations of sediments are entering the sanctuaries, then management
actions (e.g., restricting or stopping disposal) shall be implemented. The benthic resources of concern include
infauna, epifauna and demersal fishes identified in the Final EIS and in the 1985 to 1987 fish block data from the California
Department of Fish and Game. The benthic community within the sediment footprint will be compared to benthic communities
in adjacent areas outside of the footprint. Additional monitoring activities in a higher tier (Tier 3) may not be necessary
if a management decision can be made with the data obtained from the benthic community comparisons. If more data are
needed to make a management decision, Tier 3 monitoring shall be initiated with consideration of options, including
testing for bioaccumulation of contaminants in tissues of appropriate benthic and/or epifaunal organisms. EPA
and the Corps, in consultation with the OSWG, will determine the appropriate sampling methodologies for marine birds
and mammals based on results of the Physical Monitoring Module in Tiers 1 and 2.
(3) Tier 3 monitoring shall be conducted if chemical and/or biological triggers are exceeded in Tier 2. This tier involves
the assessment of benthic body burdens of contaminants and correlation with comparison of the benthic communities
inside and outside of the sediment footprint. EPA Region IX will determine whether the proposed SF-DODS is a source
of significant bioaccumulation in the tissues of benthic species collected at the proposed SF-DODS compared to adjacent
unimpacted areas. These data will be used to determine: the continuing use of the proposed SF-DODS; the management
options to further limit disposal times, quantities or characteristics of the dredged material; or the possible
closure of the site after another site is designated.
b. Guidelines for site use included in the Site Management and Monitoring Plan are:



(1) Use of the site shall be restricted to disposal of dredged sediments only, regulated under section 103 of MPRSA.
(2) All sediments proposed for dredging must be determined to be suitable for ocean disposal by EPA Region IX and the
Corps' San Francisco District in accordance with the 1991 EPA/Corps Green Book and Region Implementation Manual.
Suitability for ocean disposal will be determined after review of the results of physical, chemical and biological
testing of the sediments, except those sediments specifically exempted under the regulations (40 CFR 227.13(b)(1,2,3))
from such testing. When the material does not qualify for an exemption, testing and reporting procedures shall be
conducted as described in procedures approved by EPA Region IX and the Corps' San Francisco District.
(3) No dredged material will be disposed at the proposed SF-DODS without a MPRSA section 103 permit issued by the Corps'
San Francisco District, or as authorized in a Corps' Civil Works project. All such permits or Corps' Civil Works projects
are subject to the approval of EPA Region IX. All disposal operations shall be carried out according to special conditions
and other procedures set out in the MPRSA section 103 permits or specifications of the Corps' Civil Works project.
(4) If the dredged material is shown to form significant surface plumes, the timing of disposal operations may be restricted
in any 24-hour period.
(5) The maximum allowable volume of disposal is 6 million cubic yards per year. However, it is expected that lower volumes
of sediment would be disposed as a result of either unsuitability (as determined by sediment tests) or selection of
other disposal options such as beneficial use.
(6) All sediments shall be discharged within a 3,200-foot radius circle centered at the center coordinates of the
disposal site, unless otherwise directed.
(7) There are no restrictions on the type of disposal equipment that can be used; however, it is anticipated that most
of the dredged material will be excavated with clamshell dredges and disposed from towed split-hull scows or barges;
or excavated by hopper dredges and disposed from the hopper dredge or a towed barge.
(8) The U.S.C.G is responsible for surveillance of vessels disposing of dredged material at the site. As staff and
equipment availability permit, EPA Region IX, the Corps' San Francisco District or the U.S.C.G may provide an on-board
observer, an escort, or impose other requirements to confirm that disposal occurs within the central dumping zone.
(9) The following reporting requirements shall be incorporated into all MPRSA section 103 permits for use of the proposed
SF-DODS:



(a) The permittee shall notify EPA Region IX, the Corps' San Francisco District and the U.S.C.G Marine Safety Office
in Alameda at least two weeks before the start of the disposal activity.
(b) Each permittee shall provide EPA Region IX, and the Regulatory Branch of the Corps' San Francisco District, with
the following information within 30 days following the end of the disposal operation:


Project Information:

 Project name; permittee; permit number; project beginning and ending dates; project description, including map
of area dredged, depth of dredging, side slopes and tolerance dredging (overdredging depth); and type of dredging,
either construction or maintenance. 


Disposal Information (For each trip to the disposal site):

 Date; hopper dredge or towing vessel and scow or barge name, number and owner; master of the hopper dredge or towing
vessel; capacity of disposal vessel, hopper dredge, scow or barge (in cubic yards and cubic meters); volume discharged
(actual volume, not pay volume); a certified plot of all hopper dredge, barge or scow disposal tracks once inside the
boundaries of the proposed SF-DODS, including the time and coordinates for the beginning and ending of disposal;
and any unusual conditions affecting disposal on any trip (i.e., heavy seas, equipment malfunction, etc.).


Post-Dredging Information:

 A post-dredging hydrographic survey compared to a pre-dredging hydrographic survey taken at the dredging site shortly
before dredging began; number of disposal trips; total amount of dredged material dumped at the proposed SF-DODS
in cubic yards and cubic meters, and dredged quantity calculations necessary to determine the extent of dredging
at the project site; and if the dredged material is not exempt from testing, the mass loading of materials disposed
at the proposed SF-DODS should be calculated based on chemical analyses used to characterize the dredged material
before the permit was issued.
c. Monitoring shall occur as specified in the SMMP. If funds to implement the necessary monitoring are not available,
disposal operations will not be allowed to continue for that time period. If monitoring identifies that significant
adverse impacts are occurring at or beyond the site boundary, site use or designation can be modified or terminated
by EPA Region IX to reduce adverse environmental impacts. These modifications will be governed by the following criteria:



(1) Exceedance of Federal water quality criteria after disposal within the site or beyond the proposed SF-DODS boundary
as specified in the Ocean Dumping Regulations (40 CFR 227.29(a)). 
(2) Movement of disposed material toward significant biological resource areas or marine sanctuaries.
(3) Significant adverse changes in the structure of the benthic community outside the disposal site boundary.
(4) Significant adverse bioaccumulation in organisms collected from the disposal site or areas adjacent to the proposed
SF-DODS boundary compared to the reference site.
(5) Significant adverse impacts upon commercial or recreational fisheries resources near the site.
 

H. Action


EPA Region IX has concluded that the proposed SF-DODS may appropriately be designated for use over a period of 50 years
and not to exceed 6 million cubic yards of suitable dredged material per year. Designation of the proposed SF-DODS
complies with the general and specific criteria used for site evaluation. The proposed designation of the proposed
SF-DODS as an EPA-approved Ocean Dumping Site is being published as proposed rulemaking. Management of this site
will be the responsibility of the Regional Administrator of EPA Region IX in cooperation with the Corps' South Pacific
Division Engineer and the San Francisco District Engineer, based on objectives defined in the Site Management and
Monitoring Plan for the proposed SF-DODS. This Site Management and Monitoring Plan will be issued through a separate
Public Notice.
It should be emphasized, if an ocean dumping site is designated, such a site designation does not constitute or imply
EPA Region IX's or the Corps' San Francisco District's approval of actual ocean disposal of dredged materials. Before
ocean dumping of dredged material at the site may begin, EPA Region IX and the Corps' San Francisco District must evaluate
permit applications according to EPA's Ocean Dumping Criteria. EPA Region IX or the Corps' San Francisco District
have the right to deny permits if either agency determines that the Ocean Dumping Criteria of MPRSA have not been met.


I. Regulatory Assessments


Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, EPA is required to perform a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis for all rules
which may have a significant impact on a substantial number of small entities. EPA has determined that this action
will not have a significant impact on small entities since the site designation will only have the effect of providing
a disposal option for dredged material. Consequently, this rule does not necessitate preparation of a Regulatory
Flexibility Analysis. 
This action will not result in an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or cause any of the other effects
which would result in its being classified by the Executive Order as a major rule. Consequently, this action does not
necessitate preparation of a Regulatory Impact Analysis.
This action does not contain any information collection requirements subject to Office of Management and Budget
review under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.




List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 228


Environmental protection, Water pollution control. 



Dated: February 7, 1994.


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Felicia A. Marcus,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Regional Administrator, EPA Region IX.




In consideration of the foregoing, part 228 of chapter I of title 40 is amended as set forth below.


PART 228[AMENDED]
 

1. The authority citation for part 228 continues to read as follows:





Authority:

 33 U.S.C. 1412 and 1418.


 
2. Section 228.12 is amended by adding paragraph (b)(70) to read as follows: 


228.12 

Delegation of management authority for ocean dumping sites.
 

* * * * * 
 

(b) ***
 (70) Proposed San Francisco Deepwater Ocean Site (proposed SF-DODS) Ocean Dredged Material Disposal Site_Region
IX. 


Location: Center coordinates of the oval-shaped site are: 37
&cir; 39.0' North latitude by
123
&cir; 29.0' West longitude (North American Datum from 1983), with length (north-south axis) and width (west-east
axis) dimensions of approximately 4 nautical miles (7.5 kilometers) and 2.5 nautical miles (4.5 kilometers), respectively.
 Size: 6.5 square nautical miles (22 square kilometers). 
 Depth: 8,200 to 9,840 feet (2,500 to 3,000 meters). 
 Primary Use: Ocean dredged material disposal. 
 Period of Use: Continuing use over 50 years from date of site designation and not to exceed 6 million cubic yards of suitable
dredged material per year, subject to a detailed Site Management and Monitoring Plan (SMMP) issued through a separate
Public Notice. 
 Restrictions: Use of the site shall be subject to management decisions based on results of monitoring as prescribed
in the SMMP, which will be issued through a separate Public Notice. Resources for implementing the SMMP must be available
in order for disposal operations to occur. Disposal shall be limited to dredged sediments that comply with EPA's Ocean
Dumping Regulations. Disposal operations shall be conducted in accordance with permit conditions specific to each
approved project. 



* * * * *
 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 943536 Filed 21694; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>




