 

This sanction action is being proposed under USEPA's discretionary authority contained in section 110(m) of the
Act. The predicate findings and types of sanctions are in section 179. The two sanctions available to USEPA for application
under section 110(m), as provided in section 179(b), are: (1) A prohibition on the funding of certain highway projects;
and (2) an increase in the emission offset requirement for new and modified major stationary sources. The highway
funding sanction prohibits the approval by the Secretary of Transportation of any projects or the awarding by the
Secretary of any grants, under Title 23 of the U.S. Code, other than projects or grants for safety and certain other
categories of projects listed in section 179(b)(1). The offset sanction requires that, when states apply the emission
offset requirement of section 173 to new or modified sources, the ratio of emission reductions to increased emissions
must be at least 2 to 1. 

Section 179(a) of the Act sets forth the findings
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 which provide USEPA with discretion under section 110(m) to impose one or both of the sanctions specified under section
179(b). The four findings are: (1) A state has failed, for a nonattainment area, to submit a SIP or an element of the SIP,
or that the SIP or SIP element submitted fails to meet the completeness criteria of section 110(k); (2) USEPA disapproves
a SIP submission for a nonattainment area based on the submission's failure to meet one or more plan elements required
by the Act; (3) a state has not made any other submission required by the Act or has made a submission that does not meet
the completeness criteria or has made a required submission that is disapproved by USEPA for not meeting the Act's
requirements; or (4) a requirement of an approved plan is not being implemented. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Section 179(a) refers to Agency findings, disapprovals, and determinations. These will all be referred to by the
one term ``findings.'' 

</FOOTNOTE>


Under section 179(a), unless the state corrects the deficiency, one of the two sanctions listed in section 179(b)
must be imposed 18 months after a finding is made, and the second must be imposed 6 months after the first sanction is
imposed, if the deficiency remains uncorrected.
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>
 In addition, USEPA may apply both sanctions after 18 months if the Administrator finds a lack of good faith on the part
of the state. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
On October 1, 1993, U.S. EPA proposed a rule governing the order in which the sanctions shall apply under section 179
of the Act. 58 FR 51270. The rule proposes that the offset sanction apply first and the highway funding sanction apply
second. According to the proposed rule, U.S. EPA may change this sequence of sanctions through individual notice-and-comment
rulemaking. This proposed sequencing applies only to mandatory sanctions that apply under section 179(a) and does
not govern sanctions imposed under section 110(m). 

</FOOTNOTE>


Although section 179(a) establishes mandatory deadlines for the application of sanctions at certain points after
a finding of deficiency, section 110(m) provides USEPA with the discretion to impose section 179(b) sanctions at
any time (or at any time after) a section 179(a) finding. Likewise, although mandatory sanctions under section 179
are limited to the area with the deficiency, section 110(m) authorizes USEPA to apply discretionary sanctions to
any portion of the state that USEPA deems reasonable and appropriate to ensure that the requirements of the Act are
met. See 57 FR 44534, 4453644537. However, the Act requires USEPA to establish by rule criteria to ensure that
such sanctions are not applied on a statewide basis where one or more political subdivisions covered by the applicable
implementation plan are principally responsible for the deficiency. 

On September 28, 1992, USEPA proposed criteria under section 110(m) that it would use when proposing statewide sanctions
to determine if one or more political subdivisions is principally responsible for a SIP deficiency. 57 FR 44534. These
proposed criteria are discussed later in this notice. 

With regard to Indiana, EPA is using its discretionary authority under section 110(m) to propose early sanctions
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 based on Indiana's failure to submit a complete SIP to improve its I/M program. EPA is taking this action for two reasons:
(1) Congress required timely submittal of enhanced I/M programs as a measure the State's metropolitan areas to meet
CAA deadlines, and any legislative delay threatens the State's ability to meet those deadlines, and (2) enhanced
I/M is the single most effective air pollution control measure available. Delayed legislative approval of an acceptable
I/M program places a disproportionate burden for cleaning the air on the State's major industrial sources. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
U.S. EPA issued a letter on December 30, 1993, finding that the State's proposed SIP revision was a failure to submit
a SIP revision as required by the Act. Mandatory sanctions under section 179(a) were triggered by issuance of the letter
notifying the State of the finding of the deficiency. 

</FOOTNOTE>


III. Proposed Sanctions 



A. Finding Under Section 179(a) 



As stated previously on December 30, 1993, USEPA Region 5 issued a letter notifying the State of its failure to submit
a complete SIP revision on November 15, 1993, as required by the Act. USEPA's letter constitutes a finding under section
179(a) that triggers USEPA's discretionary authority to impose the sanctions proposed in this notice under section
110(m). Further, on November 29, 1993, USEPA disapproved Indiana's committal SIP revision because the State had
failed to meet its commitment. 





