 

In a letter dated April 8, 1994, Drs. Sobol and Royston submitted a revised protocol to the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee for formal review and approval.



II. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Dr. Curiel



In a letter dated April 13, 1994, Dr. David Curiel of the University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama, submitted the
human gene transfer protocol entitled: Phase I Trial of a Polynucleotide Vaccine to Human Carcinoembryonic Antigen
in Patients with Metastatic Colorectal Cancer to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for formal review and approval.



III. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Drs. Evans and Robbins



In a letter dated April 13, 1994, Drs. C. H. Evans and Paul Robbins of the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
submitted the human gene transfer protocol entitled: Clinical Trial to Assess the Safety, Feasibility, and Efficacy
of Transferring a Potentially Anti-arthritic Cytokine Gene to Human Joints with Rheumatoid Arthritis to the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee for formal review and approval.



IV. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Drs. Heslop, Brenner, and
Krance



In a letter dated April 6, 1994, Drs. Helen Heslop, Malcolm Brenner, and Robert Krance of the St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, submitted the human gene transfer protocol entitled: Use of Double Marking with Retroviral
Vectors to Determine Rate of Reconstitution of Untreated and Cytokine Expanded CD34(+) Selected Marrow Cells in
Patients Undergoing Autologous Bone Marrow Transplantation to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for formal
review and approval.



V. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Dr. Lyerly



In a letter dated April 12, 1994, Dr. H. Kim Lyerly of Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, submitted
the human gene transfer protocol entitled: A Pilot Study of Autologous Human Interleukin-2 Gene Modified Tumor Cells
in Patients with Refractory or Recurrent Metastatic Breast Cancer to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for
formal review and approval.



VI. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Drs. Economou, Glaspy,
and McBride



In a letter dated April 11, 1994, Drs. James Economou, John Glaspy, and William McBride of the University of California,
Los Angeles, California, submitted a human gene transfer protocol entitled: A Phase I Testing of Genetically Engineered
Interleukin-7 Melanoma Vaccines to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for formal review and approval.



VII. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Dr. Freedman



In a letter dated March 22, 1993, Dr. Ralph Freedman of M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, submitted the
human gene transfer protocol entitled: Use of a Retroviral Vector to Study the Trafficking Patterns of Purified Ovarian
Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocyte (TIL) Populations Used in Intraperitoneal Adoptive Immunotherapy of Ovarian Cancer
Patients: A Pilot Study to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for formal review and approval. At its June 78,
1993, meeting the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee deferred the protocol until the investigators return to the
full Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee with the following: 

(1) Data demonstrating efficient transduction of TIL,

(2) Sufficient information regarding demonstration of selectivity, i.e., specific trafficking of TIL to tumor,


(3) Complete statistical analysis,

(4) Revised Informed Consent document in simplified language, and 

(5) Address concerns about patient responsibility for research-related costs. The motion to defer the protocol
pending full Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee review of additional information passed by a vote of 18 in favor,
0 opposed, and no abstentions.

In a letter dated January 5, 1994, Dr. Freedman submitted a revised protocol to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
for formal review and approval. At its March 34, 1994, meeting, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee deferred
the protocol until the investigator returns to the full Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee with:

(1) A modified protocol, which includes a revised treatment schema that will provide statistically significant
information, and 

(2) A revised Informed Consent document that adequately describes the procedures that will be performed in language
understandable to lay persons. The motion to defer the protocol pending full Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
review of the additional information passed by a vote of 12 in favor, 1 opposed, and no abstentions.

In a letter dated April 13, 1994, Dr. Freedman submitted a revised protocol to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
for formal review and approval.



VIII. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Drs. Deisseroth, Hortobagyi,
and Champlin



In a letter dated April 12, 1994, Drs. Albert Deisseroth, Gabriel Hortobagyi, and Richard Champlin of the M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, submitted the human gene transfer protocol entitled: Use of Safety-Modified Retroviruses
to Introduce Chemotherapy Resistance Sequences into Normal Hematopoietic Cells for Chemoprotection During the
Therapy of Breast Cancer: A Pilot Trial to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for formal review and approval.



IX. Addition to Appendix D of the NIH Guidelines Regarding a Human Gene Transfer Protocol/Dr. Roth


