 

(1) In addition to the responsibilities outlined in 
the 

ACH Rules, 

the RDFI shall verify the entry by examining the Receiver's account number and at least one other identifying data
element. An example of an identifying data element is the authorizing Receiver's name. 
(2) RDFIs that fail to act upon proper and timely Government Prenotifications, and RDFIs that fail to fully verify
the identity of the Receiver, shall be held liable to the Government. This liability shall be the lesser of the Government's
loss or the amount of the credit or debit transaction(s) in question. 
(d) 

Financial institution is not designated a Government depositary. 

 RDFIs to which a Government ACH entry is sent do not become, by such action, a Government depositary and shall not advertise
themselves as Government depositaries. 
(e) 

Financial institution liabilities. 

Financial institution liabilities are as follows: 
(1) A financial institution shall be liable to the Government for losses sustained by the Government if the Government
has correctly handled the entry(ies). This liability is limited to the amount of the entry(ies). 
(2) ODFIs shall be liable for all unauthorized debits to the Treasury General Account regardless of timeliness of
the return entry. As a remedy, 
the Service may instruct the Federal Reserve Bank to debit the account utilized by the financial institution. 
(3) Financial institutions will be held harmless for the Government's losses if the financial institution notifies
the Government Originator of erroneous entries originated by the Government. Such notification shall be by Notification
of Change entry. This relief from liability only applies to credits and debits received by the financial institution
10 or more business days after a Notification of Change is provided to the Government Originator. 


210.7 

Fraud. 




Identification of Receivers. 

An RDFI that executes an authorization in which the Receiver's signature is forged or in which other information is
falsified, shall be liable to the Government for all payments or collections made in reliance on the authorization.
The provisions of 210.3(a) also apply. 


Subpart B_Reclamations 


210.8 

General terms of reclamations. 


(a) 

General. 

Credits originated by Government participants 
subsequently may be determined to be erroneous because of the death or legal incapacity of the Receiver or death of
the beneficiary. The Government reserves the right to recover these credits and hold the RDFI liable for these funds.
The terms ``reclamation'' and ``reclaim'' refer to the Government's action to recover these benefit payments. Reclamation
actions are strictly limited to circumstances that meet the following criteria: 
(1) The credit being reclaimed was a benefit payment to a Receiver or beneficiary; and, 
(2) The Receiver was deceased or legally incapacitated, or the beneficiary was deceased, on or before the last day
of the entitlement period to which the credit applies; and, 
(3) The Government participant that originated the entry has requested reclamation; and, 



