 

The PCC recommended these revised container marking requirements for peaches after a comprehensive review of the
appropriate size pack-count relationships between the tray-pack containers and loose-filled or tight-filled
containers for all peach varieties. The revised provisions more precisely reflect the characteristics of different
varieties of fruit during the course of the season. 

This rule also revises 917.442 by adding a proviso to paragraph (a)(4)(iv), and revises 917.459 by redesignating
current paragraph (d) as (e) and adding a new paragraph (d) to that section. These revisions specify the procedure
to be used in determining whether peaches meet the minimum size requirements specified for each size category in this
section when applying the 16-pound sample requirement. Under this procedure a sample consisting of one-half of the
number of fruit specified for a 16-pound sample for a particular size category shall be used, provided such sample
weighs at least 8 pounds. When one-half the specified number of fruit in a sample results in a number ending with one-half
a fruit, the smaller full number of fruit is used to determine the sample weight. If a sample fails with respect to minimum
size requirements on the basis of an 8-pound sample, a full 16-pound sample must be used to determine if the fruit meets
the minimum size requirements. 

The PCC recommended this sampling procedure change after determining that the size of peaches could be adequately
determined by using an 8-pound sample in most instances, and finding that application of this procedure would reduce
inspection time and inspection costs. 



Grade Requirements (Peaches) 



Section 917.459 specifies grade requirements for peaches in paragraph (a)(1), requiring peaches shipped fresh
to meet the requirements of the U.S. No. 1 grade. This rule revises paragraph (a)(1) of 917.459 to provide an
additional 25 percent tolerance for fruit damaged by open sutures, but not seriously damaged, in addition to the 
10 percent general lot tolerance currently permitted under the U.S. No. 1 grade. 

The PCC recommended this change to permit handlers to ship peaches with additional amounts of open sutures. Open sutures
are not considered to be a serious grade defect since they affect only the appearance of the fruit. The open suture condition
occurs infrequently in peaches and is most likely due to unusual weather and climatic conditions. However, this condition
can cause considerable economic loss to growers when it does occur, because it sometimes affects a large portion of
their crop. 



Maturity Requirements (Peaches) 



Section 917.459 specifies maturity guides for fresh peaches in paragraph (a)(1)(i), including TABLE I, for fruit
being inspected and certified as meeting the maturity requirements for ``well matured'' fruit. Such maturity guides
(e.g., color chips) are specified in Table 1 of 917.459 for peaches. This rule revises Table 1 of paragraph (a)(1)(i)
of 917.459 for peaches to add maturity guides for 19 peach varieties and to change the maturity guide for one
peach variety. 

The PCC recommended these maturity guide changes for these peach varieties based on a continuing review of their individual
maturity characteristics, and the identification of the appropriate color chip corresponding to the ``well matured''
level of maturity for such varieties. 



Size Requirements (Peaches) 



Section 917.459 specifies size requirements for fresh peaches in paragraphs (a)(2) through (a)(6), and paragraphs
(b) and (c). This rule revises 917.459 by redesignating current paragraph (a)(6) as paragraph (a)(3) and current
paragraphs (a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) as paragraphs (a)(4), (a)(5), and (a)(6), respectively, so that the size regulations
are in sequential order. This rule also revises 917.459 to establish variety-specific size requirements
for five peach varieties that were produced in commercially significant quantities of more than 10,000 packages
for the first time during the 1993 season. In 917.459 redesignated paragraph (a)(5) is revised to include the
Crimson Lady and Rich May peach varieties; and redesignated paragraph (a)(6) is revised to include the Fancy Lady,
Snow Ball, and Sugar Lady peach varieties. 





