 

Research has shown that passive exposure to tobacco smoke damages endothelial cells and increases the number of circulating
anuclear carcasses of endothelial cells [Ex. 480]. ETS appears to alter cardiac cellular metabolism in such
a way that renders the myocyte less capable of producing adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Reduced oxidative phosphorylation
in cardiac mitochondrial fractions taken from rabbits exposed to ETS has been demonstrated [Ex. 4130]. Studies
have indicated that the reduction in mitochondrial respiration secondary to ETS exposure is likely due to decreased
cytochrome oxidase activity [Exs. 4130, 4131]. 
Nicotine, a component of tobacco smoke, has been shown in in 

vitro 

studies, to inhibit the release of prostacyclin, through inhibition of cyclooxygenase, from the rings of rabbit
or rat aorta. Nicotine could also affect platelets by releasing catecholamines which lead to increased thromboxane
A2 [Ex. 425]. Passive smoke also increases blood viscosity and hematocrit due to relative hypoxia induced
by chronic carbon monoxide exposure [Ex. 425]. Nicotine, contained in cigarette smoke can lead to catecholamine
release, which enhances platelet adhesiveness and decreases the ventricular fibrillation threshold. This threshold
is also affected by carbon monoxide levels [Exs. 425, 4196]. Cigarette smoke also increases the lipolysis
that increases levels of plasma free fatty acids, which result in enhanced synthesis of LDL [Ex. 4234]. 
In conclusion, there are multiple pathways by which ETS may damage the heart. ETS exposure has been demonstrated to
both increase myocardial oxygen demand and decrease myocardial oxygen supply. If oxygen demand exceeds supply for
a long enough period of time, then myocardial cell injury or even cell death can occur. In addition, ETS exposure may
cause platelets to become less sensitive to the anti-clotting regulatory substances in the blood and therefore increase
the tendency of the blood to clot. An increased tendency for the blood to clot may lead to an increased susceptibility
to heart attacks. 
ETS exposure may also contribute to the chronic formation of arterial wall plaques which are implicated in the event
of an acute myocardial infarction. The two mechanisms described by which ETS exposure may stimulate plaque formation
are endothelial cell injury and increased platelet activation. Different people will have different abilities
to deal with the increased stress on the heart and the increased tendency of the blood to clot as a result of ETS exposure.
For example, a young, otherwise healthy individual may be able to tolerate short-term ETS exposure without apparent
difficulty, although asymptomatic arterial wall injury may occur which can contribute to cardiac injury in the future.
However, an older person with pre-existing coronary artery disease and therefore minimum cardiac reserve may not
be able to tolerate short-term ETS exposure, due to the increased stress on the heart. 


5. Reproductive Effects 


Data on the reproductive effects due to the exposure of nonsmoking pregnant women to ETS has been presented in many
studies [Exs. 3438, 492, 4132, 4174, 4208, 4273, 4285, 4287,
4299]. This is important since many nonsmoking women continue to work throughout their pregnancies. Pregnant
women working in indoor environments without tobacco smoking restrictions, as in restaurants, comprise one of the
most heavily ETS-exposed groups [Exs. 4151, 4287]. 
Low birthweight has also been shown to be associated with paternal smoking, implying passive exposure to tobacco
smoke by the nonsmoking mother [Exs. 492, 4273]. Passive exposure to tobacco smoke is estimated to double
the risk of low birthweight in a full-term baby [Ex. 4208]. Nonsmoking pregnant women who are exposed to ETS
have been reported to deliver neonates that range 24 to 120 grams lighter in weight than those babies delivered by nonexposed
pregnant women [Exs. 4132, 4174, 4208, 4273]. This relationship between passive smoking
and low birthweight remains statistically significant even after accounting for mother's age, parity, social class,
sex of baby, and alcohol consumption. This effect is more apparent in neonates born to actively smoking women who deliver
babies that weigh, on average, 200 grams less than those of nonsmoking women [Ex. 4101]. The reduction in birthweight
is clinically significant at the low end of the birthweight distribution. These infants have higher perinatal mortality
[Ex. 4239]. 
Other reproductive effects that have been ascribed to maternal ETS exposure include miscarriage, an increase in
congenital abnormalities [Exs. 4239, 4299], and numerous other physiological effects [Ex. 4297].
It was reported that these effects may be part of a general immunosuppressive condition associated with the occurrence
of low birthweight [Ex. 4299]. This effect may predispose the baby to respiratory tract infections. 
The effects of environmental smoke exposure on the fetus may have long-term sequelae into childhood and adulthood
[Exs. 453, 4181, 4213, 4225, 4239, 451, 4297]. There is limited evidence
which suggests that growth retardation observed in the fetus is reflected in the growing child as reductions in lung
development [3438]. This is especially relevant if that child continues to be exposed to ETS throughout childhood
and into adulthood [Exs. 4177, 4297]. Prenatal exposure to ETS and exposure to ETS as a child may also
increase an individual's cancer risk, perhaps by a factor of two (2) [Exs. 465, 4164, 4252]. 
Experimental research on the adverse reproductive effects associated with ETS exposure in animals is limited. However,
one study [Ex. 46] demonstrated such effects. Sciatic nerve tissue taken from the offspring of ETS-exposed
female mice revealed definite toxic effects on the neonatal tissue [Ex. 46]. Pregnant female mice (C57BL/KsJ)
were exposed to low-tar cigarette smoke in a special smoking chamber. Cigarette smoke was blown into the chamber for
4 minutes, 5 times daily, except on weekends when this was done 3 times daily. At 18 days of gestation, blood samples
were taken and carbon monoxide levels were measured. Ultrastructural abnormalities of fetal tissue revealed swollen
mitochondria with distorted cristae, some indication of deformed mitochondria, darkened nuclei with condensations
of nuclear material, lamellar bodies, granules and myelin bodies similar to those found in human toxicity studies.
The blood samples from pregnant mice revealed a mean carbon monoxide saturation in the hemoglobin of 9% which is equivalent
to that found in humans who actively smoke 1020 cigarettes per day. 


6. Cancer 




