 

<TABLE>




1

1




Medicaid average covered expense amount 
$2,296.00 
National average factor 
&times;1.3
n,s
The health plan cost 
$2,984.00 

</TABLE>






Step 5_Adjustment for Coinsurance and Deductible Amounts. 


The health plan cost (amount from step 4) is multiplied by 
an average employer health insurance payment rate to obtain 
the employer recognized covered expense amount. Derive the 
average employer health insurance payment rate from State 
specific tables, national tables, or group health plan 
specific information. Assume the number is 75 percent for 
the purpose of this example. This average payment rate 
number will vary in relation to the amount of average 
employer recognized covered expense. 


<TABLE>





1

1




Costs to health plan for services 
$2,984.80 
Average employer payment rate (75%) 
&times;.75
n,s
Employer recognized amount 
$2,238.60 

</TABLE>





Step 6_Administrative Costs. 

Account for any additional 
Medicaid administrative costs incurred in processing the 
group health information by determining the average increase 
in cost per recipient. These costs may include all up-front 
administrative costs associated with the implementation of 
this provision. These costs must be amortized over a 5-year 
period. 


<TABLE>




1

1



Increased cost to process information 
$50.00 
Number of recipients 
&times;.2
n,s
Additional administrative costs 
$100.00

</TABLE>
 



Step 7_Cost-Effectiveness Calculation. 

Compare the costs 
under the group health plan to those costs under Medicaid.


<TABLE>






1

1



Group health plan cost (step 4) 
$2,984.80 
Employer recognized covered expense 
(step 5) 
^2,238.60 
n,s
Proxy for deductible, coinsurance and limitations within types of services covered under the group 
health plan 
$746.20
Employee's premiums (step 1) 
840.00 
Additional admin. costs (step 6) 
+100.00 
n,s


Total State costs 
$1,686.20 

</TABLE>


Cost-effectiveness is achieved if the State's 
additional expenditures under the group health plan are 
likely to be lower than the State's expenditures for 
services under Medicaid. 




<TABLE>





1

1



Medicaid average covered expense 
amount (step 3) 
$2,296.00 
Total State costs 
^1,686.20 
n,s


Savings from group health plan 
$609.80 

</TABLE>


3. Condition of Eligibility 


Under section 1906(a)(2) of the Act, an otherwise 
Medicaid eligible individual who is also eligible to enroll 
in an employer-based group health plan, which the State 
determines under the Secretary's guidelines to be cost-effective, must enroll in the group health plan as a 
condition of his or her continued eligibility for Medicaid. 
We interpret this requirement to mean that if a Medicaid 
recipient is currently enrolled in a non-employer-based 
health plan and is also eligible to enroll in a cost- 
effective employer-based group health plan, the recipient 
must enroll in the cost-effective group health plan to 
maintain his or her Medicaid eligibility. However, 
continued enrollment in the non-employer-based plan is not 
mandatory. This requirement must be met at the time of 
determination of initial eligibility or, for current 
Medicaid recipients, at the time of an eligibility 
redetermination with certain exceptions as provided by the 
statute. If more than one cost-effective group health plan 
is identified by the State, the individual has the option of 
enrolling in the cost-effective plan of his or her choice.

 



Note: 

If an individual meets the plan enrollment 
requirements and the request is denied by the plan, he or 
she will have met the conditions of this provision. 




Under section 1906(b)(1) of the Act, the Secretary 
(and, consequently, States) must take into account that an 
individual may only be eligible to enroll in group health 
plans at limited times (open season) and only if other 
individuals (not necessarily eligible for nor entitled to 
medical assistance under the State plan) are also enrolled 
in the group health plan simultaneously. 
If the availability for enrollment in the group health 
plan and eligibility to Medicaid benefits do not coincide, 
the State should have a procedure in place for recontacting 
individuals prior to the next enrollment period. The 
Medicaid recipient will be entitled to receive Medicaid 
services pending that recipient's application to enroll in 
the group health plan during the next open season. 
Although enrollment in a cost-effective group health 
plan is a condition of Medicaid eligibility, an individual's 
disenrollment from a group health plan is permissible under 
these circumstances: (1) The State reevaluates the cost-
effectiveness of the group health plan during the State's 
redetermination of the individual's eligibility, (2) the 
group health plan is no longer available, for example, due 
to the individual leaving employment or changing jobs, or 
(3) the individual was enrolled through a spouse who is no 
longer willing to enroll the individual. 



