 



Federal Aviation Administration



<USBUREAU>14 CFR Part 39</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 94NM32AD; Amendment 399069; AD 942307]</RINDOCK>


Airworthiness Directives; Lockheed Model L1011385 Series Airplanes


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration, DOT.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This amendment adopts a new airworthiness directive (AD), applicable to certain Lockheed Model L1011385
series airplanes, that requires various modifications and inspections of the flight controls, doors, and horizontal
stabilizers. This amendment is prompted by a recommendation by the Systems Review Task Force (SRTF) for accomplishment
of certain modifications and inspections that will enhance the controllability of these airplanes in the unlikely
event of flight control malfunction or failure. The actions specified by this AD are intended to ensure airplane survivability
in the event of damage to fully powered flight control systems.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Effective December 21, 1994.


The incorporation by reference of certain publications listed in the regulations is approved by the Director of the
Federal Register as of December 21, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

The service information referenced in this AD may be obtained from Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Support Company,
Field Support Department, Dept. 693, Zone 0755, 2251 Lake Park Drive, Smyrna, Georgia 30080. This information may
be examined at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Transport Airplane Directorate, Rules Docket, 1601 Lind
Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington; or at the FAA, Small Airplane Directorate, Atlanta Aircraft Certification Office,
Suite 210C, 1669 Phoenix Parkway, Atlanta, Georgia; or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol Street,
NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:


Thomas Peters, Aerospace Engineer, Flight Test Branch, ACE160A, FAA, Small Airplane Directorate, Atlanta
Aircraft Certification Office, Suite 210C, 1669 Phoenix Parkway, Atlanta, Georgia 30349; telephone (404) 9913915;
fax (404) 9913606.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

A proposal to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) to include an airworthiness directive
(AD) that is applicable to certain Lockheed Model L1011385 series airplanes was published in the 

Federal Register

 on June 9, 1994 (59 FR 29745). That action proposed to require various modifications and inspections of the flight
controls, doors, and horizontal stabilizers.


Interested persons have been afforded an opportunity to participate in the making of this amendment. Due consideration
has been given to the comments received.
One commenter supports the proposed rule.
One commenter suggests that reworking and changing the part number of the cross-tie interlock bungees on the servo
of the stabilizer, as described in Lockheed Service Bulletin 09327280, should be considered terminating
action for reworking the bungee, as described in Lockheed Service Bulletin 09327279. The FAA recognizes
that accomplishment of the actions in Lockheed Service Bulletin 09327280 is an acceptable means of
compliance for accomplishment of the inspection and modification described in Lockheed Service Bulletin 09327279.
The FAA finds that no change to the final rule is necessary, since this provision was included in NOTE 2 under paragraph
(a) of the proposed rule.
One commenter requests that the compliance time of four years, as specified in paragraph(a) of the proposal, be revised
to coincide with parts availability. The commenter suggests a compliance time of four years after all required parts
kits are available or five years after the effective date of the AD. The FAA does not concur. In developing an appropriate
compliance time for this action, the FAA considered not only the degree of urgency associated with addressing the
subject unsafe condition, but the availability of required parts and the practical aspect of installing the required
modifications within a maximum interval of time allowable for all affected airplanes to continue to operate without
compromising safety. The FAA is not aware of any parts availability problem at this time and, therefore, assumes that
an ample number of required parts will be available for modification of the U.S. fleet within the proposed compliance
period. However, under the provisions of paragraph (b) of the final rule, the FAA may approve requests for adjustments
to the compliance time if data are submitted to substantiate that such an adjustment would provide an acceptable level
of safety.
The same commenter requests that the compliance time for accomplishment of Lockheed Service Bulletin 09355030
be extended. This commenter performs work in the area addressed by the service bulletin at heavy maintenance checks,
which occur at intervals of 27,000 flight hours. The commenter suggests that even a five-year compliance time would
be inadequate for accomplishment of this service bulletin. However, the commenter does not request a specific compliance
time. The FAA does not concur with the commenter's request to extend the compliance time. The actions described in
Lockheed Service Bulletin 09355030 should take only five work hours to complete. The FAA has determined
that these actions can be accomplished during regularly scheduled maintenance visits (other than heavy maintenance
checks) or inspection activities without having a significant adverse effect on airplane scheduling. However,
paragraph (b) of the final rule does provide affected operators the opportunity to apply for an adjustment of the compliance
time if data are presented to justify such an adjustment.
After careful review of the available data, including the comments noted above, the FAA has determined that air safety
and the public interest require the adoption of the rule as proposed.
There are approximately 236 Model L1011385 series airplanes of the affected design in the worldwide
fleet. The FAA estimates that 117 airplanes of U.S. registry will be affected by this AD, that it will take approximately
87 work hours per airplane to accomplish the required actions, and that the average labor rate is $55 per work hour.
Required parts for certain modifications will be supplied by the manufacturer at no cost to operators. Required parts
for certain other modifications will be minimal in cost. Based on these figures, the total cost impact of the AD on U.S.
operators is estimated to be $559,845 or $4,785 per airplane.
</SUPPLEM>
