 

(c) Exceptions. 

(1) The regulations contained in this part do 
not govern the disposal of residential or agricultural solid 
wastes in a site by a person who can show that he or she: 

(i) Resides within the boundaries of the unit; 

(ii) Generates the residential or agricultural solid 
waste within the boundaries of the unit; 

(iii) Disposes of the solid waste only on lands 
that the person owns or leases within the unit; 

(iv) Does not engage in a solid waste disposal practice 
that poses a reasonable probability of adverse effects on health 
or the environment, as described by the criteria in 40 CFR part 
257, Criteria For Classification Of Solid Waste Disposal 
Facilities and Practices found at 40 CFR 257.31 to 257.38; and 

(v) Is not required to possess a State or local permit 
or license for the disposal of solid waste. 

(2) The exemption in paragraph (c)(1) of this section 
does not apply to agricultural solid waste consisting of a chemical 
used as a pesticide, an item used to apply, or a container used to 
store, a pesticide. 

(3) Manure and crop residue returned to the soil as a 
fertilizer or soil conditioner are not solid wastes for 
purposes of this part, and do not require a request, 
environmental report, financial assurance or permit issued under 
this part. 

(d) The conditions in 6.4(a) govern the establishment of 
new, or the expansion of existing, solid waste disposal sites 
operated by the National Park Service. The conditions in 6.5(c) 
govern the continued use of existing solid waste disposal sites 
operated by the National Park Service. However, the permit, 
financial assurance, administrative and penalty provisions of this 
part do not apply to any solid waste disposal site operated by the 
National Park Service. 



6.3 

Definitions. 



The following definitions apply to this part: 



Agricultural solid waste 

means solid waste that is 
generated by the rearing or harvesting of animals, or the 
producing or harvesting of crops or trees. 



Boundaries 

means the limits of lands or waters that 
constitute a unit of the National Park System as specified by 
Congress, denoted by Presidential Proclamation, recorded in the 
records of a State or political subdivision in accordance with 
applicable law, published pursuant to law, or otherwise published 
or posted by the National Park Service. 


Closure and Post-closure care 

means all of 
the requirements prescribed by 40 CFR part 258, Criteria For 
Municipal Solid Waste Landfills at 40 CFR 258.60 and 258.61. 


Compostible materials 

means organic substances that decay 
under natural and/or human-assisted conditions within relatively 
short time intervals, generally not in excess of ninety days. 




Degrade 

means to lessen or diminish in quantity, quality 
or value. 


Hazardous waste 

means a waste defined by 40 CFR 
part 261, Identification And Listing Of Hazardous Waste. 
Hazardous waste does not include any solid waste listed 
under 40 CFR 261.4(b). 


Leachate 

means liquid that has percolated through solid 
waste and has extracted, dissolved or suspended materials in it. 


Mining overburden 

means material overlying a mineral 
deposit that is removed to gain access to that deposit. 



Mining wastes 

means residues that result from the 
extraction of raw materials from the earth. 



National Park Service activities 

means operations 
conducted by the National Park Service or a National Park Service 
contractor, concessionaire or commercial use licensee. 



National Park System 

means any area of land or water now 
or hereafter administered by the Secretary of the Interior 
through the National Park Service for park, monument, historic, 
parkway, recreational or other purposes. 



Natural resource 

means the components of a park, both 
biotic and abiotic, including but not limited to, vegetation, 
wildlife, fish, water, including surface and ground water, air, 
soils, geological features, including subsurface strata, the 
natural processes and interrelationships that perpetuate such 
resources, and attributes that contribute to visitor enjoyment. 



Operator 

means a person conducting or proposing to 
conduct the disposal of solid waste. 




