 



(b) Workers' Compensation. 

The Workers' Compensation system is a result of the perceived inadequacies in liability or insurance systems to compel
employers to prevent occupational disease or compensate workers fully for their losses. The system was designed
to internalize some of the social costs of production, but in reality it has fallen short of compensating workers adequately
for occupationally related disease. Thus, society shares the burden of occupationally related health effects,
premature mortality, excess morbidity, and disability through taxpayer support of social programs such as welfare,
Social Security disability payments, and Medicare.

Compensation tends to be inadequate especially in permanent disability cases, in view of the expiration of benefit
entitlement and the failure to adjust benefits for changes in a worker's expected earnings over time. As of January
1987, eight states restricted permanent disability benefits either by specifying a maximum number of weeks for which
benefits could be paid or by imposing a ceiling on dollar payments [Ex. 4302].

At present, time and dollar restrictions on benefit payments are even more prevalent in the area of survivor benefits.
The duration of survivor benefits is often restricted to 10 years, and dollar maximums on survivor payments range
from $7,000 to $60,000. In addition, it should be noted that if the employee dies quickly from the occupational illness
and has no dependents, the employer need pay only nominal damages under Workers' Compensation (e.g., a $1,000 death
benefit).

Finally, in spite of current statutory protection, disability from occupational diseases represents a continuing,
complex problem for Workers' Compensation programs. Occupational diseases may take years to develop, and more than
one causal agent may be involved in their onset. Consequently, disabilities resulting from occupationally induced
illness often are less clearly defined than those from occupationally induced injury. As a result, Workers' Compensation
is often a weak remedy in the case of occupational disease. Indeed, there is some evidence indicating that the great
majority of occupationally induced illnesses are never reported or compensated [Ex. 484].

The insurance premiums paid by a firm under the Workers' Compensation system are generally not experience rated;
that is, they do not reflect the individual firm's job safety and health record. About 80 percent of all firms are ineligible
for experience rating because of their small size. Such firms are class rated, and rate reductions are granted only
if the experience of the entire class improves. Even when firms have an experience rating, the premiums paid may not
accurately reflect the true economic losses. Segregation of loss experience into classes is somewhat arbitrary,
and an individual firm may be classified with other firms that have substantially different normal accident rates.
An experience rating is generally based on the benefits paid to workers, not on the firm's safety record. Thus, employers
may have a greater incentive to reduce premiums by contesting claims than by initiating safety measures.

In summary, the Workers' Compensation system suffers from several shortcomings that seriously reduce its effectiveness
in providing incentives for firms to create safe and healthful workplaces. The scheduled benefits are significantly
less than the actual losses to the injured workers, and recovery is often very difficult in the case of occupational
diseases. Thus, the existence of a Workers' Compensation system limits an employer's liability significantly below
the actual costs of the injury. In addition, premiums for individual firms are unlikely to be specifically related
to that firm's risk environment. The firm, therefore, does not receive the proper economic signals and consequently
fails to invest sufficient resources in reducing workplace injuries and illnesses. The economic costs not borne
by the employer are borne by the employee or, as is often the case, by society through public insurance and welfare programs.



(4) Conclusion


OSHA believes that there are no nonregulatory alternatives that adequately protect workers from the adverse health
effects associated with exposure to indoor air pollution. Tort liability laws and Workers' Compensation provide
some protection, but due to market imperfections they have not been sufficient. Some employers have not complied
voluntarily with standards recommended by professional organizations. The deleterious health effects resulting
from continued exposure to hazardous substances require a regulatory solution.



D. Benefits


In this chapter, OSHA presents its preliminary estimates of the expected reduction in fatalities and illnesses among
the employees affected by the proposed IAQ standard. A qualitative description of the non-quantifiable additional
cost savings to employers, is also provided.



1. Indoor Air Quality


Health effects typically caused by poor IAQ have been categorized as Sick Building Syndrome (SBS) or Building-Related
Illness (BRI). Some of the symptoms that characterize SBS include: irritation of eyes, nose and throat, dry mucous
membranes and skin and coughs, hoarseness of voice and wheezing, hypersensitivity reaction, nausea and dizziness.




