 

United States of America, Plaintiff, v. S.C. Johnson  Son, Inc. and Bayer A.G., Defendants, Civil No. 94C50249.



Competitive Impact Statement



Pursuant to Section 2(b) of the Antitrust Procedures and Penalties Act, 15 U.S.C. 16(b)(h), the United
States submits this Competitive Impact Statement relating to the proposed Final Judgment (or ``the Judgment'')
submitted for entry against S.C. John  Son. Inc. (``Johnson'') and Bayer A.G. (``Bayer'') in this civil antitrust
proceeding.



I



Nature and Purpose of the Proceeding



The United States of America, acting under the direction of its Attorney General, filed this civil antitrust suit
on August 4, 1994, alleging that defendants violated Section 1 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. 1, by entering into
an agreement and understanding that unreasonably restrained interstate trade in the manufacture and sale of household
insecticides. The agreement featured an exclusive license arrangement and the transfer by Bayer to Johnson of the
assets assembled by a Bayer subsidiary, Miles,Inc., to compete in the sale of household insecticides in the United
States with a new product, called Laser. Laser's chief active ingredient was Cyfluthrin, which Bayer developed and
patented. Specifically, the Complaint alleges that defendants engaged in the following activities:

(a) Bayer licensed Johnson to use Clyfluthrin in household insecticides in the United States, and granted Johnson
a right of first refusal for exclusive rights for the United States on future active ingredients developed by Bayer
for household insecticides;

(b) Bayer refrained from licensing Johnson's competitors to use or sell Cyflutrhin; and

(c) Bayer ended its plans to market Laser and compete with Johnson in the United States household insecticides market.




The Complaint alleges that the appropriate product market in which to access the competitive effect of the Cyfluthrin
license and transfer of assets is the market for the manufacture and sale of household insecticides. This is the appropriate
market because other types of insect killers, such as agricultural pesticides, are not good substitutes for household
insecticides used to kill ants, roaches, and other insects that typically infest dwellings. The Complaint alleges
that the entire United States is the relevant geographic market. In this market, the Complaint alleges, Johnson is
the largest firm, and the licensing arrangement helped it to maintain its commanding position.


