 

Summary 


This Guideline sets forth the proposed programmatic, financial, and administrative requirements of grants, cooperative
agreements, and contracts awarded by the State Justice Institute. The Institute, a private, nonprofit corporation
established by an Act of Congress, is authorized to award grants, cooperative agreements, and contracts to improve
the administration and quality of justice in the State courts. 

Grants may be awarded to State and local courts and their agencies; national nonprofit organizations controlled
by, operating in conjunction with, and serving the judicial branch of State governments; and national nonprofit
organizations for the education and training of judges and support personnel of the judicial branch of State governments.
The Institute may also award grants to other nonprofit organizations with expertise in judicial administration;
institutions of higher education; individuals, partnerships, firms, or corporations; and private agencies with
expertise in judicial administration if the objectives of the funded program can be better served by such an entity.
Funds may be awarded, as well, to Federal, State or local agencies and institutions other than courts for services
that cannot be provided adequately through nongovernmental arrangements. In addition, the Institute may provide
financial assistance in the form of interagency agreements with other grantors. 

The Institute will consider applications for funding support that address any of the areas specified in its enabling
legislation as amended. However, the Board of Directors of the Institute has designated certain program categories
as being of special interest. 

The Institute has established one round of competition for FY 1995 funds. The concept paper submission deadline for
all but two funding categories is November 23, 1994. Concept papers proposing projects that follow up on the November
1994 National Conference on the Management of Mass Tort Cases must be mailed by March 10, 1995. Concept papers to implement
the plans developed at the March 1995 National Conference on Eliminating Race and Ethnic Bias in the Courts must be
mailed by October 6, 1995. 

It is anticipated that between $11 million and $11.5 million will be available for award. This Guideline applies to
all concept papers and applications submitted, as well as grants awarded in FY 1995. 

The awards made by the State Justice Institute are governed by the requirements of this Guideline and the authority
conferred by Pub. L. 98620, Title II, 42 U.S.C. 10701, 

et seq

., as amended. 





