 

The nine functional areas of responsibility for carriers under Part B are: 


&bull;Claim Payment; 
&bull;Review and Hearing; 
&bull;Beneficiary or Physician Inquiry; 
&bull;Provider (physician/supplier) Education and Training; 
&bull;Medical Review and Utilization Review; 
&bull;Medicare Secondary Payer; 
&bull;Participating Physicians; 
&bull;Productivity Investments; and 
&bull;Benefits Integrity. 
These functions are funded from the Hospital Insurance and Supplementary Medical Insurance trust funds. The data,
standards, and methodology used in these functional areas are discussed in section IV. of this notice. In the following
national budget summary, we have combined the discussion of functional areas that are common to fiscal intermediaries
and carriers. However, data specific to Part A or Part B are provided under each heading. Workload estimates are provided
for all functional areas where the development of the budget is predominantly workload driven. Workload estimates
are not provided for functional areas that are not predominantly workload driven, or for which a workload is uncertain
until final negotiations with the Medicare contractors are complete. 


1. Bill and Claim Payment (Part A and Part B) 


We currently estimate the Part A processed workload to be 129.2 million bills in FY 1995. The Part B processed workload
is currently projected at 655.6 million claims and is based on the current funding available. 


2. Reconsideration (Review Under Part B) and Hearing (Part A and Part B) 


This function includes all activities related to guaranteeing due process of law as a result of contractor action,
for example, disallowances on bills and claims. The estimated workload volume is expected to total approximately
10.9 million for FY 1995. 
In FY 1995, we expect to maintain efficiencies achieved in prior years through the use of shorter decision letters
and the experimental use of the telephone to conduct reviews and reconsiderations. 


3. Medicare Secondary Payer (Part A and Part B) 


The Medicare Secondary Payer (MSP) function is the first of four initiatives (Medicare Secondary Payer, Medical
Review and Utilization Review, Benefits Integrity, and Provider Audit) we developed as ``Payment Safeguards''
to safeguard the Medicare program against improper payments. The focus of the MSP initiative is to ensure that the
Medicare program pays for covered care only to the extent required after payment by the primary insurer. 
Medicare contractors are responsible for identifying MSP situations and aggressively pursuing the recovery of
improper payments from the appropriate party. The standard for determining the amount of MSP funding a contractor
will receive in FY 1995 is based on workload volumes, required systems changes, and any special projects that may be
assigned to contractors. 
Based on actuarial analysis, we develop specific savings goals for each contractor. The goals are developed on estimates
of savings to be achieved by contractors for the MSP categories of working aged, disabled, workers' compensation,
end-stage renal disease, and liability or no-fault insurance. After assigning goals to contractors, funds are allocated
based on the various MSP activities a contractor must perform such as processing prepayment claims, postpayment
claims, inquiries, outreach, and hospital reviews. 
In FY 1995, the Initial Enrollment Questionnaire (IEQ) will be operational. The IEQ eliminates the need for first
claim development on approximately 85 percent of the new enrollees. This initiative will improve service to beneficiaries
on a national basis by providing detailed information on the MSP program at the time a beneficiary enrolls in Medicare.

We have also included funding to process the workloads based on the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)/Social Security
Administration (SSA)/HCFA data match project created by section 6202 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of
1989 (OBRA '89), Public Law 101239. The funds are allocated on the basis of the number of report identification
numbers a contractor will process. 
In addition to the IRS/SSA/HCFA data match, we will continue to pursue other data matches with State Motor Vehicle
Administrations, Workers' Compensation, and Medicaid Agencies, and the Departments of Defense, Labor, and Veterans
Affairs. 


4. Medical Review and Utilization Review (Parts A and B) 


In addition to processing and paying claims from providers of services and Medicare beneficiaries, contractors
perform medical and utilization reviews of claims to determine whether services are covered under the program and
are medically necessary. The distribution of Medicare contractor funding is based on each contractor's proportion
of the workload and individual contractor medical review/utilization review projects. 

