 

g. Applicants should be able to demonstrate on the basis of past or current experience that they have the capability
to implement the project and achieve the goals and objectives of the project.





h. Describe the intake procedures, individualized assessment, and case management approach to be used by the project.


i. Discuss the performance measures to be used that may include: Youth returning to school, high school completion
or equivalency; youth entering postsecondary institutions, apprenticeships, or other advanced training programs;
youth placed in jobs; or youth participating in education, training and employment services. They may also include,
reduced number of drug-related arrest, teenage pregnancies, greater involvement in community activities, such
as recreation and sports, study groups, cultural and theater activities, etc.







F. Rating Criteria for Award for Both Single and Multi-Site Grants





Applicants are advised that the selection of grantees for awards is to be made after careful review by a panel of specialists.
Applicants are advised that discussions may be necessary in order to clarify any inconsistencies in their application.
The panel results are advisory in nature to help establish a competitive range. The Grant Officer will make final awards
based on what is in the best interests of the Government.






1. Quality of Program Model To Be Pilot-Tested






Proposals will be evaluated based on the applicant's justification that the proposed model can have a long-term difference
in the lives of out-of-school youth. The model should be intensive and comprehensive enough to turn around the lives
of youth. If the model is already in existence, discuss its effectiveness in serving youth. (30 points).





2. Quality of Implementation Plan for Pilot-Testing the Model





The plan should be structured for pilot-testing the program model. For single site pilot-tests under part II(E),
the proposed site should be identified, and plans in place to implement the program. Matching funds should be committed,
and the program operator identified. Coordination with other agencies should also be identified.




For multi-site pilots under Part II(E), the pilot sites do not need to be identified, but a structured plan needs to
be presented as to how sites will be selected, and what coordination with other agencies will be sought. Coordination
with other agencies should also be identified. (30 points).




3. Experience of Grant Applicant






Applicants should describe the experience both of the organization and of the staff that will be involved in the pilot
program in dealing with out-of-school youth. An applicant should describe the success rate of the organization with
such programs. (20 points).









4. Evaluation Approach and Planned Outcomes






The pilot project is intended to result in a measurable increase in outcomes for out-of-school, economically disadvantaged
youth in the grantee's area. The discussion must include a clear description of the project performance goals and
accomplishments and what outcome measures and planned evaluation approach will be used to assess how well the program
has met its objectives. (15 points).







5. Need for Project in Pilot Sites





An applicant should describe the level of need for this project in the proposed pilot sites. It should discuss the population,
such as age, gender, educational level, the project will serve. It should describe the economic and social dynamics,
such as poverty, crime, school-drop-out, and teenage pregnancy rates, of the geographic area to be served. (5 points).




