 

GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE 




<CFRNO>4 CFR Parts 28 and 29 </CFRNO>



Personnel Appeals Board; Procedural Regulations 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 General Accounting Office Personnel Appeals Board.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Interim rule with request for comments. 






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The jurisdiction of the General Accounting Office Personnel Appeals Board has recently been expanded by the Architect
of the Capitol Human Resources Act, which became effective on July 22, 1994. Under this new legislation, employees
of the Architect of the Capitol may file appeals with the Board alleging discrimination in employment based on race,
color, sex, national origin, religion, age, or disability. They may also file appeals alleging retaliation for exercising
rights under the new law. The Board is issuing procedural regulations to implement this new authority. The regulations
below also include a few conforming amendments to the procedures governing claims filed by employees of the General
Accounting Office, and a change to the procedures for obtaining judicial review of Board decisions necessitated
by a recent decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Because of the need
to have procedures in place to implement the Board's new jurisdiction, these regulations are being made effective
immediately, on an interim basis. The Board is, however, very interested in receiving comments from the public before
it finalizes these regulations.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 These interim regulations are effective on November 16, 1994. Comments on these regulations must be received by the
Board on or before February 24, 1995.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Comments should be addressed to: Patricia Reardon, Clerk of the Board, General Accounting Office Personnel Appeals
Board, Suite 830, Union Center Plaza II, 441 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20548.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Barbara Lipsky, Attorney, Personnel Appeals Board, 2025126137.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The Architect of the Capitol Human Resources Act, Pub. L. 103283, sec. 312, 108 Stat. 1443, went into effect
on July 22, 1994. Under this new legislation, the Architect of the Capitol is required to ``establish and maintain
a personnel management system that incorporates fundamental principles that exist in other modern personnel systems.''


Id. 

at sec. 312(b)(2). One important part of the Act requires that all personnel actions affecting employees of the Architect
of the Capitol be taken free from discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability.


Id. 

at sec. 312(e)(2)(A). The Act also bans intimidation of or reprisal against employees who exercise their rights under
the Act. 

Id. 

at sec. 312(e)(2)(B). In order to ensure enforcement of these rights, the Act authorizes employees of the Architect
of the Capitol to file charges alleging discrimination or retaliation with the General Accounting Office Personnel
Appeals Board. 

Id. 

at sec. 312(e)(3)(A). 



The regulations set forth in Part 29 below provide the procedures that will govern this new area of the Board's jurisdiction.
Because the Board needs to have procedures in place to address any charge that is filed by an Architect of the Capitol
employee, these regulations are being made effective immediately, on an interim basis. At the same time, however,
the Board is soliciting comments on the regulations from the Architect of the Capitol and its employees, the General
Accounting Office and its employees, and the public. These comments will be considered fully before final regulations
are adopted. 

In drafting these regulations, the Board has attempted, wherever possible, to adopt the same procedures that are
applicable to cases brought before the Board by employees of the General Accounting Office (GAO). In the Architect
of the Capitol Human Resources Act, Congress stated that employees of the Architect of the Capitol may file a charge
with the Board ``in accordance with the General Accounting Office Personnel Act of 1980 [GAOPA] (31 U.S.C. 75155).''


Id. 

at sec. 312(e)(3)(A). The referenced sections of the GAOPA establish both the Board and its General Counsel. The Board
is authorized to hear and to adjudicate certain personnel appeals by GAO employees, and the General Counsel is empowered
to investigate prohibited personnel practices (including prohibited discrimination) and other matters within
the Board's jurisdiction. 31 U.S.C. 752753. Pursuant to its authority under 31 U.S.C. 753(d), the Board has
long had published regulations which define the role of the General Counsel and the procedures to be followed in pursuing
an appeal before the Board. See, 4 CFR Part 28. The Board concludes that, by selecting the PAB to hear appeals from employees
of the Architect of the Capitol and by stating that such appeals should be filed ``in accordance with'' the GAOPA, Congress
intended the Board to follow the same enforcement scheme for Architect of the Capitol employees as it does for GAO employees.






</SUPPLEM>
