 

III. Economic Impact 


FDA has examined the economic impact of the proposed rule as required by Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility
Act. Executive Order 12866 directs agencies to assess all costs and benefits of available regulatory alternatives
and, when regulation is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits (including potential
economic, environmental, public health and safety effects, distributive impacts, and equity). The Regulatory
Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96354) requires agencies to analyze options for regulatory relief for small businesses.
The agency finds that the only significant economic effect of this rule is the benefit that it creates by reducing labeling
costs for newly exempted companies. This benefit is the result of statutory provisions and not FDA discretion. However,
because this benefit is large and affects small businesses, we are providing the following voluntary economic impact
analysis and regulatory flexibility analysis that meet the requirements of Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory
Flexibility Act. 

There are two types of costs in this regulation: (1) Costs to comply with the notification requirement, and (2) costs
of lost nutrition benefits. FDA estimates that the volume of food products produced by manufacturers, packers, or
distributors eligible for the exemption being proposed in 101.9(j)(18) and 101.36(f)(2) constitutes
less than 1 percent of the U.S. diet. Thus, any lost nutrition benefits are likely to be small. The 1993 amendments require
that any small firm (except for very small firms with very low-volume food products) that has low-volume food products
that are eligible for exemption from nutrition labeling notify FDA of the volume of sales of such products and the number
of its full-time equivalent employees if the product is to be exempt. 

Some firms will not have products that are eligible for the new small business exemption, and some will not take advantage
of the exemption from nutrition labeling for one of the following reasons: (1) They make nutrient content claims,
(2) they make health claims, (3) they decide to label to be competitive with other labeled products, or (4) retailers
they sell to insist on nutrition labeling. 


Assuming that 50 percent of all firms that could claim the small business exemption will decide not to do so for one of
the reasons listed above and will, as a result, provide nutrition labeling for their products, it is estimated that
approximately 4,500 firms will remain that have products that are eligible for exemption and not label their products
with nutrition labeling in the first 2 years during which nutrition labeling is required by 101.9 and
101.36. The agency further estimates that this figure will reduce to 4,000 firms for the third year during which nutrition
labeling is required and to 3,200 firms for subsequent years. Those firms that choose not to label will be responsible
for annually gathering sales and employee data and notifying FDA of their claim for exemption. 


First, firms will have to read and analyze the regulation. Second, they will have to determine the average number of
full-time equivalent employees they employed in the previous year. Because most firms keep payroll records of expenses
only, this will require some conversion. Third, firms will have to determine which of their products qualify for exemption.
Again, records of dollar sales are normally kept and, as prices may have changed throughout the year, some analysis
may be required for each product that the firm believes to be exempt. This activity may be reasonably expected to take
an average of 8 hours per firm although FDA solicits comment on this figure. If costs to perform this activity (plus
overhead) average approximately $46 per hour (the value used by FDA in calculating costs for reporting under the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1980), then the first year costs to firms that decide to file a notice of exception are expected to be
approximately $1,656,000. This cost will drop to approximately $1,472,000 and $1,177,640 in subsequent years as
the number of firms filing a notice decreases as discussed above. The proposed rule reflects the statute's removal
of coverage for manufacturers, packers, and distributors under the exemption based on gross value of sales or business
done after May 8, 1995. The agency believes that this will result in minimal cost to industry because almost all firms
that might have been covered by that exemption will be covered by the new exemption provisions. 


Federal costs for implementing the notification system in terms of setting up the system, handling mail, recording
firms and products, and providing information concerning exempted firms will approximate $207,000. Thus, it is
reasonable to expect that total costs of the notification provision will be less than $2 million for the first year
and decrease substantially in subsequent years. 


The benefits of this regulation are likely to be very large. First, many small manufacturers noted the impossibility
of labeling their low-volume products in comments to the rule. 

Assuming that the costs of labeling are about $3,000 per product and that there is an average of 20 products per firm,
cost savings from not labeling the products that are exempt are estimated to be between $275 million and $360 million.
In addition, this law and regulation prevent both the lost value to consumers of products that would no longer be available
and the costs of losing many small businesses. 





