 

Another example would involve bulk potato loads which enter the order's production area from another State such as
Nevada, and are repacked in Idaho. If the repacked containers did not show that the potatoes were grown in Nevada, but
showed potatoes were packed or distributed in Idaho, any buyer or consumer could be misled into believing they had
purchased Idaho-grown potatoes. Section 945.65 Inspection and certification specifies that potatoes must be inspected
and be covered by a valid inspection certificate and that repacking any lot of potatoes invalidates any prior inspection
certificate. When non-production area potatoes are repacked in production area facilities, those potatoes must
meet the order's requirements unless the Federal-State Inspection Service representative in the facility is satisfied
that those potatoes were not commingled with production area potatoes. Procedures for safeguarding such repacking
of bulk loads within the production area would be specified in rules and regulations recommended by the committee
and approved by the Secretary through informal rulemaking. Damage to the industry would be eliminated by authorizing
requirements for accurate markings on containers. 

In addition to accurate markings on containers, the committee should also have authority, with the approval of the
Secretary, to require accurate and adequate labeling, including the identification of the variety of potato. With
more new and different varieties being marketed each season, consumers would benefit from being apprised of the variety
in the container. Although variety labeling and use of the Idaho logo are currently a State program requirement of
the Idaho Potato Commission (Commission), this would not preclude the committee from issuing regulations concerning
marking and labeling for different varieties of potatoes. Such labeling would complement the Commission's potato
promotion program. In addition, the committee should have the option of issuing regulations for potatoes grown in
the Oregon portion of the production area. Such marking requirements could require the containers to be clearly marked
and identified with the variety of potatoes; net weight; count and/or volume; name and address of the packer or shipper;
origin of the potatoes; grade and size if applicable; and any other information on quality and pack of the potatoes
as may be recommended by the committee and approved by the Secretary through informal rulemaking. 

Clear markings also would enable the committee to more easily determine whether the potatoes have been inspected
and certified as required under the order. Comparison with inspection documents would be easier. This action is needed
to provide flexibility to meet current and future marketing problems. It is hereby recommended that 945.52(a)
be amended by adding authority for container marking and labeling. 

(8) Section 945.80 Reports should be amended, as proposed by the Fruit and Vegetable Division, AMS, by adding new paragraphs
(b) through (d) to assure confidentiality of information provided by handlers and to expressly state in the order
the right of the Secretary, and confer such right on the committee, to verify the accuracy of reports filed by handlers
and to check handler compliance with recordkeeping requirements. 

A new 945.80 (b) should be added to specify that confidential information provided to the committee would be
protected from disclosure. The section should specify that all data or other information constituting a trade secret
or disclosing a trade position or business condition shall be received by, and kept in the custody of, one or more designated
employees of the committee. Information which would reveal the circumstances of a single handler shall be disclosed
to no person other than the Secretary, except as provided by law. Under certain circumstances, the release of composite
information compiled from data and information submitted by handlers may be helpful to the committee in planning
operations under the order. Such composite information would not disclose the identities of the individual handlers
or their separate business operations. 



