 



Comment: 

Some commenters were concerned that under this proposal an individual's eligibility or ineligibility depends on
when a doctor mails the bills or on the arbitrary order in which an eligibility worker itemizes medical bills. 



Response: 

Eligibility does not depend on when a doctor mails bills but on the date the service was furnished; an individual can
document this date without a bill. In addition, eligibility workers are not allowed to choose an arbitrary order but
must itemize bills in the manner prescribed by regulations. 



Comment: 

Commenters suggested that the result of this proposed provision may be that individuals will defer medical care for
services covered under the State plan if they know that the State will pay for those expenses once they are eligible
for Medicaid. 



Response: 

We have no evidence that indicates that individuals will manipulate the proposed system as suggested by the commenters.
On the contrary, we believe that medical needs will continue to determine utilization of medical services. 



Comment: 

Commenters requested that we clarify the proposed regulations by specifying that there is no change in the existing
policy that medical expenses which will satisfy the spenddown include those expenses incurred by the individual,
the family or financially responsible relatives. 



Response: 

This regulation does not change the existing regulations requiring the use of family members' medical expenses in
the spenddown (except by recodifying at 435.831(e) and 436.831(e) in the final rule, to take into account
other changes made by this regulation). By making these changes, we do not mean to reaffirm the validity of this facet
of the existing regulations in cases where the courts have set it aside. Numerous Courts of Appeals decisions have
not upheld the underlying assumption of the existing regulations in the context of the standard filing unit cases.
These courts' interpretation of section 1902(a)(17)(D) preclude States from counting medical expenses of family
members (other than a spouse for a spouse and parents for their minor children). Nevertheless, the United States District
Court for the Northern District of California has held that States in the Ninth Circuit must continue to deduct the
medical expenses of family members in determining the spenddown, as long as the present regulations remain extant.
States outside of the Ninth Circuit should assess the continuing validity of the existing regulations for spenddown
purposes in light of any applicable court order invalidating the use of the AFDC standard filing unit rule for purposes
of Medicaid eligibility. The existing regulations would continue to apply to the extent that they do not explicitly
conflict with the court order. 



Comment: 

We received a suggestion that States establish a limit on deduction of projected medical expenses incurred by ineligible
family members that are not covered under the State plan. If actual bills exceed this limit, the State could credit
the excess amount in the current or the next spenddown period. 



Response: 

This suggestion goes beyond the scope of the proposal. 



Provision E_Allow States to Limit Deductible Medical Expenses to Services Covered Under the State Plan 





Comment: 

Commenters questioned our legal authority for making this proposal. They believe that the Act does not authorize
us to permit States to exclude bills for services that are not paid for under the State plan. 

A large number of commenters were not in favor of this proposal because, in their view, it might have a negative impact
on individuals, since many individuals require noncovered services. A variety of concerns were expressed. Some
commenters were concerned that this proposal would delay eligibility for some individuals if noncovered medical
expenses could not be deducted. Other commenters predicted that the proposal would cause individuals to pay a greater
share of their medical bills. 



Response: 

Except in States that determine eligibility under section 1902(f) of the Act, we believe adequate legal authority
exists in section 1902(a)(17) of the Act, which delegates to the Secretary of HHS the authority to prescribe the extent
to which incurred expenses will be taken into account in determining eligibility for Medicaid under the medically
needy option. However, we have decided to withdraw the option and continue the current policy (with respect to expenses
incurred in the current budget period and the 3-month retroactive eligibility period) because the option would have
a potentially severe negative impact on applicants and recipients. We now believe that offering States this administrative
option would reduce a person's Medicaid eligibility or the amount of medical assistance provided. Further, Congress
passed legislation in 1988 amending the Social Security Act (section 1902(r)(1)) to override a similar option we
provided States in the post-eligibility process. We believe it would be inconsistent with the direction taken by
Congress in the post-eligibility process to allow a similar limitation in the spenddown process. 




