 

Substances Consumed at Decreased Levels 


FSIS is proposing to adopt FDA's policy that, when a health claim is made about the effects of consuming a substance
at decreased dietary levels, the substance must be a nutrient that meets ``low'' requirements in the food to justify
the claim. To meet ``low'' requirements, FDA requires that the nutrient must meet a regulatory definition for ``low,''
or a specific level established for the nutrient in the regulation authorizing the claim. Of the eight health claims,
FSIS is proposing to authorize six concern effects of consuming nutrients at decreased levels, i.e., the claim related
to hypertension, the three claims related to cancer, and the two claims related to coronary heart disease. 
Scientific evidence discussed previously shows that dietary sodium is associated with hypertension, and that total
fat intake provides the strongest dietary association with cancer. Also, saturated fat and cholesterol in diets
are the major dietary risk factors for heart disease, while total fat in diets affects the risk indirectly through
effects on obesity and reduction of intake of saturated fat and cholesterol. FSIS is proposing that health claims
associating diets with risk of hypertension, cancer, and coronary heart disease may only be made on the labeling of
meat and poultry products that meet the following requirements: 
(1) To bear the proposed claim about hypertension, a product must meet the nutrient content requirements for a ``low
sodium'' claim at 9 CFR 317.361 and 381.461; 
(2) To bear the proposed claims about cancer, a product must meet the nutrient content requirements for a ``low fat''
claim at 9 CFR 317.362 and 381.462; and 
(3) To bear the proposed claims about coronary heart disease, a product must meet the nutrient content requirements
for claims for ``low fat,'' ``low saturated fat,'' and ``low cholesterol'' at 9 CFR 317.362 and 381.462. 
In response to comments on its proposed rules about lipids and cancer and lipids and cardiovascular disease, FDA provides
in its final regulations on dietary lipids and cancer and on dietary saturated fat and cholesterol and risk of coronary
heart disease that these claims may be made on fish and game meats that meet the requirements for ``extra lean'' in 21
CFR 101.62. FSIS agrees with FDA that, without such alternative qualifying criteria, many meat, poultry, and fish
products would be prohibited from bearing health claims. 
FSIS has examined the nutritional values for meat and poultry products reported in USDA's Agriculture Handbook No.
8 and concludes that no single-ingredient cut of beef, pork, or lamb can meet the criteria for ``low fat'' or ``low saturated
fat'' or the disqualifying level for cholesterol. While skinless chicken breast meat does meet ``low fat'' and ``low
saturated fat'' criteria, its cholesterol content exceeds the disqualifying level. Of the products examined, only
skinless light meat turkey meets all three requirements. Meat and poultry products that are individual foods and
that meet the ``low fat'' and ``low saturated fat'' criteria, as well as the disqualifying level for cholesterol,
tend to be those that contain lesser amounts of meat or poultry, such as soups, or have 55-gram reference amounts and
are cured or have added water or other ingredients, such as certain luncheon products. 
Many recommendations from public health organizations and authorities and the Dietary Guidelines for Americans
advise choosing lean meats, fish, and poultry without skin as a means of achieving nutritious diets low in fat, saturated
fat, and cholesterol. To preclude health claims on many of these products may obstruct the dietary guidance goals
of encouraging consumption of a variety of foods and increased selection of lean meats and poultry by consumers. Meat
and poultry products play an important role in the U.S. dietary pattern because they are consumed by most Americans
on a daily basis and provide protein, B-vitamins, and essential minerals, such as iron and zinc. 
The FSIS regulatory definition for ``extra lean'' may be used on the label or in labeling of a meat or poultry product
when the product contains less than 5 g of fat, less than 2 g of saturated fat, and less than 95 mg of cholesterol per 100
g and reference amount customarily consumed for individual foods and per 100 g and labeled serving size for meal-type
products. For individual foods, the 100-gram density criterion controls qualification for the claim when reference
amounts are below 100 g. For example, products such as cooked meat or poultry cuts with a reference amount of 85 g meet
``extra lean'' requirements only when 85 g of the products contain less than 4.3 g of fat, 1.7 g of saturated fat, and
81 mg of cholesterol. Products such as luncheon meats or poultry lunch products with a reference amount of 55 g meet
the requirements only when 55 g of the products contain less than 2.8 g of fat, 1.1 g of saturated fat, and 52 mg of cholesterol.

Individual foods with reference amounts exceeding 100 g such as mixed dishes not measurable with a cup having a reference
amount of 140 g may not contain more than 5 g of fat, 2 g of saturated fat, and 95 mg of cholesterol in 140 g of the products
to use ``extra lean'' claims. Meal-type products are restricted to no more than 5 g of fat, 2 g of saturated fat, and 95
mg of cholesterol in the entire serving (container) to carry the claim. FSIS concludes that only individual food products
with reference amounts over about 2 ounces (56 g) would be subject to somewhat less stringent requirements than permitted
by ``low fat'' and ``low saturated fat'' criteria and the disqualifying level for cholesterol if permitted to qualify
for health claims based on requirements for ``extra lean'' claims. FSIS also believes, as stated in its proposed rule
on nutrition labeling, that the ``extra lean'' criteria recognize the practice of dietary planning in which a person
consumes servings of a variety of foods that contain different levels of fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol, and
allow for a diet that will meet the dietary guidelines. 






