 

In addition to estimating organic emissions and cancer risk parameters, the national impacts model provides an estimate
of the total nationwide capital costs and annual costs to the TSDF owners and operators to install and operate the air
emission controls specified by each control option. For these nationwide cost estimates, the EPA assumed that, at
every TSDF location, treatment of all hazardous wastes to remove or destroy the organics in the waste occurs as the
last step prior to disposal of the waste. In actuality, the EPA expects that, at many TSDF, the owner or operator (after
becoming aware of the air standards) will elect to treat waste at an earlier step in the waste management sequence.
By treating organics in compliance with one of the waste treatment alternatives provided in final rule, the owner
or operator could avoid the costs of installing and operating control equipment on the downstream tanks, surface
impoundments, and containers.

Capital investment cost represents the cost to TSDF owners and operators to purchase and install the air emission
control equipment. The estimated nationwide capital costs in 1986 dollars to implement the control options are:
$520 million for Option A, $290 million for Option B, $240 million for Option C, $200 million for Option D, and $140 million
for Option E. Annual cost represents the total cost to TSDF owners and operators each year to pay for operating and maintaining
the air emission controls as well as to repay the capital investment for the air emission controls. The capital recovery
was estimated using an interest rate of 10 percent applied over a period ranging from 10 to 20 years depending on the
expected service life for each type of air emission control equipment. The estimated nationwide annual costs to implement
the control options are: $190 million/yr for Option A, $110 million/yr for Option B, $90 million/yr for Option C, $80
million/yr for Option D, and $60 million/yr for Option E.



C. Selection Rationale



From Options A through E, the EPA selected one control option to serve as the basis for today's final rule. The EPA applied
the same decision rationale used at proposal for this rulemaking (56 FR 3351533516, July 22, 1991) as well as
for RCRA air standards promulgated under subparts AA and BB to 40 CFR parts 264 and 265 (refer to 55 FR 25470, June 21,
1990). This decision rationale requires the EPA to select, whenever possible, the level of control that provides
an acceptable degree of protection of human health and the environment. If no control option is available to achieve
acceptable levels of protection, the EPA's approach historically has considered cost under RCRA only for equally
protective control options.

All five of the control options considered for the final rule are estimated to achieve similar levels of substantial
reductions in nationwide organic emissions from TSDF. The nationwide organic emission reductions for the control
options are estimated to be approximately 970,000 Mg/yr for Option A, 960,000 Mg/yr for Option B, 950,000 Mg/yr for
Option C, 950,000 Mg/yr for Option D, and 910,000 Mg/yr for Option E.

Both Options A and B are estimated to achieve the lowest cancer MIR and greatest reduction in annual cancer incidence
of the five options. However, none of the control options reduces MIR to the target cancer risk levels used for other
promulgated RCRA standards, which have been in the range of 1&times;10

^4

 to 1&times;10

^6

. The estimated MIR is an order-of-magnitude higher for Options C, D, and E (2&times;10

^2

 for Option C, 3&times;10

^2

 for Options C and D) compared to Options A and B (4&times;10

^3

). Annual cancer incidence reductions estimated for Option C (44 cases per year), Option D (43 cases per year), and
Option E (39 cases per year) are lower than the annual cancer incidence reductions estimated for Options A and B (46
cases per year).

On the basis of the estimated annual cancer incidence and MIR, the EPA concluded that Options A and B are more protective
of human health than Options C, D, or E. Therefore, the EPA eliminated Options C, D, and E from further consideration
as the basis for the final rule.

