 

&bull;Review of diet and fluid intake for indiscretions as reflected by hyperkalemia and elevated blood pressure
secondary to volume overload. 

&bull;Review of medications for adequate provision of supplemental iron. 

&bull;Evaluation of hematocrit and measures of iron stores. 


 




Response: 

We agree with these comments and have revised 405.2137(b)(7) (i)(iii) to include the suggested content.




C. Other Concerns 





Comment:

 One commenter asked for clarification of the effective date. 



Response:

 The law (section 4201(c) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990) that set the payment rate at $11 per 1,000
units was effective January 1, 1991. However, under section 4201(d) of that Act, coverage of EPO self-administered
at home by home dialysis patients is effective July 1, 1991. Thus, Medicare payment is available for services that
are furnished on or after that date and that also meet the requirements of the interim final rule published on September
4, 1991. 



Comment:

 Two commenters felt that an initial 2-month EPO supply might be too much since (1) patients who receive the drug from
a renal facility must be seen by their physician monthly and (2) a 2-month supply might discourage patients from maintaining
blood pressure and hematocrit monitoring. The commenters were also concerned that the supplier or renal facility
may be requested to take back unused portions of EPO, if the home dialysis patient received a kidney transplant or died
soon after receiving the supply. They suggested that a smaller quantity would alleviate the beneficiary's coinsurance
responsibility. 



Response:

 First, we note that the provision sets the 2-month initial supply as a maximum limit, to be used when circumstances
make a 2-month supply appropriate. We recognize that patients who obtain their supplies directly must be monitored
monthly, and we would expect a physician to prescribe a lesser amount for some patients. In 405.2163, we have
added a paragraph (h) to highlight the responsibilities of the physician and the dialysis facility. Paragraph (h)(3)
makes clear that the 2-month supply is a maximum. 



Comment:

 One commenter stated that billing procedures instructing an initial billing of up to a 2-month supply followed by
subsequent billings limited to a 1-month supply are inconsistent with our proposed regulations which appear to intend
that the beneficiary maintain a 2-month supply at all times. 



Response: 

The commenter has misinterpreted the intent of the policy. The intent is not to require a ``minimum'' 2-month supply,
but rather to ensure that the patient has at least a 1-month supply. As stated above, the physician may initially prescribe
``up to'' a 2-month supply. When half of the initial 2-month supply is used, the next 1-month supply may be ordered,
and so on. 



Comment:

 In response to our specific request for comments on whether it is necessary to impose special storage requirements
for safe-keeping of EPO, two commenters stated that storage and home safety issues need to be more specifically addressed
and documented. They recommended that we require, as part of the assessment, assurance that the patient has the ability
to store EPO under refrigeration, secure from tampering and out of the reach of children. 



Response:

 We agree with the commenters and have revised 405.2163(g) to add the suggested language. 



Comment: 

One commenter questioned whether HCFA will establish regional intermediaries to process home EPO claims. 



Response:

 EPO claims from home dialysis patients who obtain their dialysis supplies directly from suppliers will be processed
by four regional carriers that were designated under a final rule published on June 18, 1992 (at 57 FR 27290), and that
also process claims for durable medical equipment, prosthetics, orthotics and other items covered under Medicare
Part B. 

However, claims for items furnished incident to a physician's service as defined in 42 CFR 410.10(b) will continue
to be processed under the current carrier configuration, and regional intermediaries will continue to process claims
from facilities. 



Comment:

 One commenter stated that at least one 8-hour day should be allocated to train a patient in proper techniques of self-administration.
The commenter also asked whether a training fee can be charged for this training time or whether any additional reimbursement
can be obtained since this added monitoring activity expands physician activities under the monthly capitation
plan. 



Response:

 We agree that patients need to be properly trained in the self-administration of EPO; however, we do not believe that
we should set a specific minimum time limit for training as suggested by the commenter. We believe there should be sufficient
flexibility to allow for differences in individual patients' learning ability. 

There is no separate payment for training or retraining in, and monitoring of, home use of EPO. A patient should be trained
to self-administer EPO as part of the home dialysis training program that is paid for at the home dialysis training
composite rate in accordance with 413.170 of the HCFA rules. With respect to monitoring self-administration
of EPO, we believe the additional physician's time and effort are minimal and should be subsumed within the physician's
monthly capitation payment under 414.314 of those rules. 



Comment:

 Two commenters asked whether reimbursement can be expected for home supplies needed to self-administer EPO, e.g.,
syringe, needle, alcohol wipes. 



Response:

 Payment for the medical supplies needed for administration of EPO, whether in the home or in a facility, is included
in the Medicare payment rate for EPO. Both before OBRA '90 and since the implementation of those provisions, HCFA has
always included the cost of supplies as part of the Medicare payment for EPO. We see no basis for different treatment
of supplies for self-administration of EPO in the home. 

The payment rate for EPO is $11.00 per 1,000 units and, we believe, is more than adequate to cover the minimal cost of
supplies (less than 20 cents per administration). The manufacturer of EPO is protected from competition for seven
years by the Orphan Drug Act. The company reports substantial profits and gives rebates to facilities depending upon
usage. It appears that facilities pay considerably less for EPO than the Medicare rate, providing sufficient payment
for supplies needed for administration. 

