 

Other Program Considerations




Consultation with the participating USIS posts in the development of the project proposal is encouraged. Letters
of commitment from participating U.S. institutions would enhance a proposal.


USIA also encourages the development of specialized written materials to enhance this professional development
program. In developing written materials, consideration should be given to their wider use in Africa, beyond the
immediate training at hand. USIA is interested in organizations' ideas on how to ``reuse'' specialized materials
by providing them to universities and libraries or other institutions for use by a larger audience. If not already
available, glossaries of specialized terms should be developed. However, please note that, according to current
USIA regulations, materials developed with USIA funds may not be distributed in the United States.




Funding




Competition for USIA funding support is keen. Selection of a grantee institution is based on the substantive nature
of the program proposal; the applicant's professional capability to carry the program through to a successful conclusion;
and cost effectiveness, including in-kind contributions and the ability to keep overhead costs at a minimum. USIA
will consider providing funding up to approximately $160,000, but organizations with less than four years of successful
experience in managing international exchange programs are limited to $60,000, and their budget submissions should
correspond to this limitation. USIA will consider funding the following costs:


1. International and domestic air fares; visas; transit costs (e.g., airport fees); ground transportation costs;


2. 

Per diem: 

For foreign participants during activities in the United States, organizations have the option of using a flat rate
of $140/day or the published Federal Travel Regulations (FTR) per diem rates of individual American cities.







Note: 

U.S. institutional staff must use the published FTR per diem rates, not the flat rate.




For activities overseas, standard Federal Travel Regulations per diem rates must be used.


3. 

Escort-interpreters: 

Interpretation for U.S.-based programs is provided by the State Department's Language Services Division. Typically,
delegations ranging from 812 participants require two simultaneous interpreters and one escort officer.
Grant proposal budgets should contain a flat $140/day per diem rate for each State Department escort/interpreter,
as well as home-program-home air fare of $400 per interpreter and any U.S. travel expenses during the program itself.
Salary expenses are covered centrally and are not part of the applicant's budget proposal. USIA grants do not pay for
foreign interpreters to accompany delegations during travel to or from their home country. Interpreters are not
available for U.S.-based internship activities.


4. 

Book and cultural allowances: 

Participants are entitled to a one-time book allowance of $50 plus a cultural allowance of $150 per person during programs
taking place in the United States. U.S. staff do not receive these benefits. Escort interpreters are reimbursed for
actual cultural expenses up to $150.00.


5. 

Consultants: 

Consultants may be used to provide specialized expertise or to make presentations. Honoraria generally should not
exceed $250/day. Subcontracting organizations may also be used, in which case the written contract(s) should be
included in the proposal.


