 

(1) In accordance with the Food Security Act of 1985 (Pub. L. 99198), after December 23, 1985, if an individual
or any member, stockholder, partner, or joint operator of an entity is convicted under Federal or State law of planting,
cultivating, growing, producing, harvesting, or storing a controlled substance (see 21 CFR part 1308, which is exhibit
C of subpart A of part 1941 of this chapter (available in any FmHA office) for the definition of ``controlled substance'')
prior to loan approval in any crop year, the individual or entity shall be ineligible for a loan for the crop year in which
the individual or member, stockholder, partner, or joint operator of the entity was convicted and the four succeeding
crop years. Applicants will attest on Form FmHA 4101, ``Application for FmHA Services,'' that as individuals
or that its members, if an entity, have not been convicted of such crimes after December 23, 1985.

(2) An outstanding judgment obtained by the United States in a Federal Court (other than the United States Tax Court),
which has been recorded, shall cause the applicant to be ineligible for any Farmer Program loan until the judgment
is paid in full or otherwise satisfied. FmHA loan funds may not be used to satisfy the judgment. Questions about whether
or not a judgment is still outstanding should be directed to the Office of the General Counsel. The Administrator may
waive this restriction upon specific determination that it is in the best interest of the Government to do so.



Subpart B_Insured Soil and Water Loan Policies, Procedures, and Authorizations



18. Section 1943.62 is amended in paragraphs (a)(1) and (b)(3) in the fourth sentence by changing the reference from
``INS Form G641, `Application for Verification of Information from Immigration and Naturalization Records,'''
to ``INS Form G639, `Verification Request Form,''' and in the seventh sentence by changing the reference from
``INS Form G641'' to ``INS Form G639,'' by revising the introductory text and paragraphs (a)(4) and
(b)(1), and by adding paragraph (c) to read as follows:



1943.62

 Soil and water loan eligibility requirements.



Subject to the restrictions listed in paragraph (d) of this section, an applicant is eligible for loan assistance
if the following requirements are met:

(a) ***

(4) Have the character (emphasizing credit history, past record of debt repayment and reliability), and industry
necessary to carry out the proposed operation. Past record of debt repayment will not be cause for a determination
that the applicant/borrower is not eligible if an honest attempt has been made to make the payment(s). If an applicant
is delinquent on a Federal debt (other than a Farmer Program debt, in accordance with 1941.14 of subpart A of
part 1941 of this chapter), it is automatically ineligible for loan assistance.

(i) The County Office will use Form FmHA 19103, ``Record of Credit Alert Interactive Voice Response System
(CAIVRS) Inquiry,'' to check the Department of Housing and Urban Development's CAIVRS to determine if the applicant
is delinquent on a Federal debt. No decision to deny credit can be based solely on the results of the CAIVRS inquiry.
If CAIVRS identifies a delinquent Federal debt, the County Office will immediately suspend processing of the application.
The applicant will be notified that processing has been suspended and will be asked to contact the appropriate Federal
agency, at the telephone number provided by CAIVRS, to resolve the delinquency. When the applicant provides FmHA
with official documentation that the delinquency has been paid in full or otherwise resolved, processing of the application
will be continued.

(ii) If the applicant is delinquent on a Federal debt (other than a Farmer Program debt), and is unable to resolve the
delinquency, the application will be rejected and the applicant will be notified of its right for an appeal in accordance
with subpart B of part 1900 of this chapter. The Administrator may waive this restriction upon specific determination
that it is in the best interest of the Government to do so.



* * * * *



(b) ***

(1) Have the character (emphasizing credit history, past record of debt repayment and reliability), and industry
necessary to carry out the proposed operation. This requirement also must be met by the individual members, stockholders,
partners, or joint operators. Past record of debt repayment will not be cause for a determination that the applicant/borrower
is not eligible if an honest attempt has been made to make the payment(s). If the applicant (the entity or any of its members)
is delinquent on a Federal debt (other than a Farmer Program debt, in accordance with 1941.14 of subpart A or
part 1941 of this chapter), the entity is automatically ineligible for loan assistance.






