 

880.612a


Preference for occupancy by elderly families. 



(a) 

Election of preference for occupancy by elderly families

_(1) 

Election by owners of eligible projects. 

(i) An owner of a project assisted under this part (including a partially assisted project) that was originally designed
primarily for occupancy by elderly families (an ``eligible project'') may elect to give preference to elderly families
in selecting tenants for assisted, vacant units in the project, subject to the requirements of this section. 

(ii) For purposes of this section, a project eligible for the preference provided by this section, and for which the
owner makes an election to give preference in occupancy to elderly families is referred to as an ``elderly project.''
``Elderly families'' refers to families whose heads of household, their spouses or sole members are 62 years or older.


(2) 

HUD approval of election not required. 

(i) An owner is not required to solicit or obtain the approval of HUD before exercising the election of preference for
occupancy provided in paragraph (a)(1) of this section. The owner, however, if challenged on the issue of eligibility
of the project for the election provided in paragraph (a)(1) of this section must be able to support the project's eligibility
through the production of supporting evidence as provided in paragraph (b) of this section. 

(ii) The Department reserves the right at any time to review and make determinations regarding the accuracy of the
identification of the project as an elderly project. The Department can make such determinations as a result of ongoing
monitoring activities, or the conduct of complaint investigations and compliance reviews required under the Fair
Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 through 19), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and other applicable
statutes.

(b) 

Determining projects eligible for preference for occupancy by elderly families_

(1) 

Evidence supporting project eligibility. 

Evidence that a project assisted under this part (or portion of a project) was originally designed primarily for occupancy
by elderly families, and is therefore eligible for the election of occupancy preference provided by this section,
shall consist of at least one item from the sources (``primary'' sources) listed in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section,
or at least two items from the sources (``secondary'' sources) listed in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section: 

(i) 

Primary sources. 

Identification of the project (or portion of a project) as serving elderly (seniors) families in at least one primary
source such as: the application in response to the notice of funding availability; the terms of the notice of funding
availability under which the application was solicited; the regulatory agreement; the loan commitment; the bid
invitation; the owner's management plan, or any other underwriting or financial document collected at or before
loan closing; 

or 

(ii) Secondary sources.

 Two or more sources of evidence such as: 
lease records from the earliest two years of occupancy for which records are available showing that occupancy has
been restricted primarily to households where the head, spouse or sole member is 62 years of age or older; evidence
that services for elderly persons have been provided, such as services funded by the Older Americans Act, transportation
to senior citizen centers, or programs coordinated with the Area Agency on Aging; project unit mix with a higher percentage
of efficiency and one-bedroom units [a secondary source particularly relevant to distinguishing elderly projects
under the previous section 3(b) definition (in which disabled families were included in the definition of ``elderly
families'') from non-elderly projects and which in combination with other factors (such as the number of accessible
units) may be useful in distinguishing projects for seniors from those serving the broader definition of ``elderly
families'' which includes disabled families]; or any other relevant type of historical data, unless clearly contradicted
by other comparable evidence. 



(2) 

Sources in conflict.

 If a primary source establishes a design contrary to that established by the primary source upon which the owner would
base support that the project is an eligible project (as defined in this section), the owner cannot make the election
of preferences for elderly families as provided by this section based upon primary sources alone. In any case where
the primary sources do not provide clear evidence of original design of the project for occupancy primarily by elderly
families, including those cases where primary documents conflict, secondary sources may be used to establish the
use for which the project was originally designed. 

(c) 

Reservation of units in elderly projects for non-elderly disabled families. 

The owner of an elderly project is required to reserve, at a minimum, the number of units specified in paragraph (c)(1)
of this section for occupancy by disabled families who are not elderly or near-elderly families (hereafter, collectively
referred to ``non-elderly disabled families''). 

(1) 

Minimum number of units to be reserved for non-elderly disabled families. 

The number of units in an elderly project required to be reserved for occupancy by non-elderly disabled families,
shall be, at a minimum, the lesser of: 

(i) The number of units equivalent to the higher of; 

(A) The percentage of units assisted under this part in the elderly project that were occupied by non-elderly disabled
families on October 28, 1992; and 

(B) The percentage of units assisted under this part in the elderly project that were occupied by non-elderly disabled
families upon January 1, 1992; 

or 

(ii) 10 percent of the number of units assisted under this part in the eligible project. 


