 

Section 160.07715Deflation Mechanism


(d)(3) This paragraph will be changed by replacing the word ``can'' with ``may'' to clarify that the oral inflation
mechanism is an option in meeting the deflation mechanism requirement.


Section 160.07719Inflated Flotation Stability


(b)(3)(iii) The Coast Guard proposes to approve hybrid PFD's as Types I, II, III, and V for adult and youth sizes, and
Type I and Type II for small child sizes for use on recreational boats, commercial vessels, or both if they perform accordingly
and the applicable requirements are met. A requirement to test for Type I performance in accordance with the requirements
specified under 160.17613(d)(2) will be added if the device is to be so labeled.
In response to the suggested approval Types and sizes, the requirements for inflated flotation stability need revision.
The proposed method of change is to adopt revisions to Underwriters Laboratories ``Standard for Safety'', UL 1517,
section 15 ``Inflated Flotation Stability Test.''
In addition, this paragraph will be revised by specifying that the reference vest used must be the appropriate size
device.


Section 160.07721Righting Action


(c)(4)(ii) As presently written in UL 1517, section S8, one inflation chamber must be deflated during the Righting
Action Test. The Coast Guard proposes to change to one chamber the current requirement for two chambers on commercial
hybrid PFD's to reduce costs. This paragraph will be changed to clarify that one inflation chamber has to be deflated
only if there is more than one chamber.


Section 160.07723Facilities and Equipment


(g)(3)(x) This section requires manufacturers to provide the required test equipment for performance of production
tests. However, the equipment necessary to perform the required Inflation Chamber Materials production tests was
not included in the interim final rule. This paragraph will be added to require manufacturers to provide the Inflation
Chamber Materials production test equipment.


Section 160.07729Manual


(f)(5) As discussed in 160.07713(d) and 160.07717(b)(9) under 

``Changes to make use of hybrids more attractive'',

 the USCG proposes to drop the requirement for commercial hybrid PFDs to be provided with an approved PFD light at the
time of manufacture. Former paragraph (c) of this section is redesignated (f) and this paragraph will be added to include
a requirement that the manual must specify the recommended type of PFD light to be used if a light is not provided by the
manufacturer. Paragraph references in this section are revised to agree with the other revisions to this section
discussed earlier in this preamble.


Section 160.07730Temporary Marking


(b)(1) The original paragraph (b) will be renumbered (b)(1) in conjunction with the addition of paragraph (b)(2)
to this section. This paragraph defines the temporary marking requirements when a hybrid PFD is sold in a ready-to-use
condition. Paragraph (b)(2) is proposed to define the temporary marking requirements when a hybrid PFD is not sold
in a ready-to-use condition.
(b)(2) Section 160.07730(a)(1) (i) and (ii) will be amended to clarify that a total of three inflation medium
cartridges and three water sensitive elements must be provided with the hybrid device when sold. Additionally, a
cartridge and element may or may not be pre-loaded at the time of sale. This paragraph will be added to refer to the marking
requirement specified in 160.07715(c)(3)(ii) which will be used when the device is sold without either
an inflation medium cartridge, or a water sensitive element or both pre-loaded into the inflation mechanism.


Section 160.07733Approval Procedures


(a)(3)(vi) This section will be redesignated 160.0776 and this paragraph is proposed to indicate that
the intended size range of wearers must be included with the application package.


Reorganization


A number of the sections within the subpart have been moved to be consistent with the organization of the inflatable
lifejacket regulation at 46 CFR 160.176. The new organization with the old section numbers where applicable, and
the section titles, is as follows:


