 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 


Agricultural Marketing Service


<CFRNO>7 CFR Part 1210 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>RIN: 0581AB21 </RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>[FV93706PRA] </RINDOCK>


Watermelon Research and Promotion Plan; Proposed Amendments to the Plan, Rules and Regulations, and Rules of Practice
for Petitions; Order Directing That a Referendum be Conducted 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed rule and referendum order.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This proposed rule would amend the Watermelon Research and Promotion Plan (Plan) to exempt from assessments producers
with less than 10 acres of watermelons rather than 5 acres and importers of less than 150,000 pounds, cover all 50 States
by the Plan, and revise the criteria for determining the eligibility of producers to serve on the Board. In addition,
conforming changes would be made to the rules and regulations issued under the Plan and the rules of practice for petitions.
Furthermore, the Department is announcing that a referendum will be conducted among eligible producers, handlers,
and importers to determine whether they favor the elimination of refunds of assessments and (2) whether they favor
the assessment of watermelon imports and the addition of importer members to the National Watermelon Promotion Board
(Board).


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 In order to be eligible to vote, watermelon producers, handlers, and importers must have produced, handled or imported
watermelons during the period from January 1, 1993, to December 31, 1993 (representative period). The referendum
will be conducted from November 1 through November 30, 1994.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Sonia N. Jimenez, Research and Promotion Branch, Fruit and Vegetable Division, AMS, USDA, P.O. Box 96456, Room 2535S,
Washington, DC 200906456; telephone (202) 7209916.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 This proposed rule would amend the Watermelon Research and Promotion Plan [7 CFR 1210], hereinafter referred as the
Plan. The Plan is effective under the Watermelon Research and Promotion Act, as amended by the Watermelon Research
and Promotion Improvement Act of 1993 [7 U.S.C. 49014916], hereinafter referred to as the Act. 



This rule has been determined to be not significant for the purposes of Executive Order 12866 and therefore has not
been reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 

This rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. It is not intended to have retroactive
effect. This rule would not preempt any State or local laws, regulations, or policies, unless they present an irreconcilable
conflict with this rule. 

The Act provides that administrative proceedings must be exhausted before parties may file suit in court. Under 1650
of the Act, a person subject to the Plan may file a petition with the Secretary stating that the Plan or any provision
of the Plan, or any obligation imposed in connection with the Plan, is not in accordance with law and requesting a modification
of the Plan or an exemption from the Plan. The petitioner is afforded the opportunity for a hearing on the petition.
After such hearing, the Secretary will make a ruling on the petition. The Act provides that the district courts of the
United States in any district in which a person who is a petitioner resides or carries on business are vested with jurisdiction
to review the Secretary's ruling on the petition, if a complaint for that purpose is filed within 20 days after the date
of the entry of the ruling. 



Regulatory Flexibility Act 



Pursuant to requirements set forth in the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA), the Administrator of the Agricultural
Marketing Service (AMS) has considered the economic impact of this rule on small entities. 

The purpose of the RFA is to fit regulatory actions to the scale of business subject to such actions in order that small
businesses will not be unduly or disproportionately burdened. 

There are approximately 750 watermelon handlers and 
5,000 watermelon producers in the contiguous 48 States of the United States who are subject to the Plan. There are approximately
140 importers of watermelons. Small agricultural service firms are defined by the Small Business Administration
[13 CFR 121.601] as those having annual receipts of less than $5 million and small agricultural producers are defined
as those having annual receipts of less than $500,000. The majority of watermelon handlers, producers, and importers
may be classified as small entities. 

The changes in the Plan, rules and regulations, and rules of practice for petitions reflect amendments to the Act.
The overall economic impact of these proposed changes is not expected to be significant. Including all 50 States and
the District of Columbia under the Plan will have little impact. The producer exemption from assessments would be
increased from 5 acres to 10 acres. This change would benefit small producers because it would increase the exemption
level, and small producers would not have to pay the assessment. The eligibility criteria for determining if a person
is a handler or a producer would not have any economic impact. The elimination of refunds may have some impact on a small
amount of producers and handlers who are currently entitled to refunds. There will also be a new burden on importers
caused by the assessment of imports, but importers are currently benefiting from the activities which promote watermelons
without paying assessments. The research and promotion program is expected to continue to benefit producers, handlers,
and importers subject to the Plan by expanding and maintaining new and existing markets. Accordingly, the Administrator
of AMS has determined that this proposed rule would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number
of small entities. 



Paperwork Reduction 



In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 
[40 U.S.C. chapter 35], the information collection requirements contained in the Plan have previously been approved
by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and assigned OMB number 05810093. There would be a new reporting
burden on importers but the burden has been already approved by the OMB and assigned OMB control number 05810093.
This action adds no additional reporting burden. It has been estimated that it will take an average of 10 minutes for
each producer, handler, and importer of watermelons to participate in the voluntary referendum balloting. 



Background 



Under the Plan, the National Watermelon Promotion Board (Board) administers a nationally coordinated program of
research, development, advertising, and promotion designed to strengthen the watermelon's position in the market
place and to establish, maintain, and expand markets for domestic watermelons. This program is financed by assessments
on all producers, except those persons engaged in the growing of less than five acres of watermelons, and handlers
of watermelons. The Plan specifies that handlers are responsible for collecting and submitting both the producer
and handler assessments to the Board, reporting their handling of watermelons, and maintaining records necessary
to verify their reporting. 

U.S. production of watermelons is estimated through the use of U.S. shipment statistics. Shipments of U.S.-produced
watermelons totaled about 1,895.6 million pounds in 1993, 
7 percent less than in 1992. Imports of watermelons in 1993 totalled 343.5 million pounds, an increase of 12 percent.
Therefore, domestic production is about six times as great as the volume of imports. 

A proposed rule was published in the 

Federal Register

 on April 14, 1994 [59 FR 17739]. The rule published in April contained the proposed amendments to the Plan, rules and
regulations, rules of practice for petitions, and referendum procedures. In order to have the referendum procedures
in place for the referendum, the Department decided to separately make final the referendum procedures. Therefore,
this proposed rule contains the proposed amendments to the Plan, rules and regulations, and rules of practice for
petitions. A final rule published separately in this issue of the 

Federal Register

 contains the referendum procedures which will be used in the referendum. 

The deadline for comments on the proposed amendments published on April 14 was May 16, 1994. Twenty-one comments were
received. 

Eighteen comments related to this proposed rule. Sixteen commentors stated their support of the proposed amendments
to the Plan. They stated that per capita consumption of watermelons is on the increase again and that the National Watermelon
Promotion Board (Board) has achieved many successes. 

Two commentors stated that they are not in favor of the Plan and that they were not aware that a refund provision was available.




</SUPPLEM>
