 

14. Under the guidelines, the Account will be required to be primarily invested in fixed income securities, while
maintaining a level of liquidity sufficient to provide for anticipated benefit payments by investing partly in traditional
money market securities. As a means of achieving a higher guaranteed return than would be possible by investing exclusively
in fixed income and money market securities, the guidelines will allow limited and properly hedged investment in
riskier securities such as common stocks, but they will not permit direct investment in real estate. The applicants
represent that limited investment in riskier securities will benefit the Plan by allowing Hartford Life to offer
a slightly higher Guaranteed Rate of Return than would be possible if the Account supporting the Synthetic GIC were
invested exclusively in fixed income and money market investments. Any investment in employer securities (within
the meaning of section 407(d) of the Act) will be subject to guidelines established by the Plan. 


15. Distributions prior to the Scheduled Account Termination Date which are subject to Hartford Life's guarantee
as to principal and interest (Scheduled Account Distributions) will occur on Scheduled Account Distribution Dates
(see rep. 10, above) and in amounts which will be agreed upon between a Plan and Hartford Life prior to the execution
of a Synthetic GIC and will be specified in writing. On each Scheduled Account Distribution date, HIMCO will be required
to liquidate securities sufficient to meet the Scheduled Account Distribution. In most instances, the assets will
be liquidated by a sale in the open market. However, Hartford Life reserves the right to purchase the assets to be liquidated.
When it elects to do so, Hartford Life must pay the fair market value of the asset as of the close of business on the date
of the sale, determined as set forth in rep. 21, below. Hartford Life will then distribute to the Plan an amount equal
to the Adjusted Book Value of the Scheduled Account Distribution. The Adjusted Book Value of the Account will then
be reduced by the amount of the Scheduled Account Distribution. To the extent that the market value of the assets liquidated
on a Scheduled Account Distribution Date exceeds the amount of the Scheduled Account Distribution, the excess will
be retained in the Account and reinvested. 


16. On the Scheduled Account Termination Date, the Bank will distribute to Hartford Life all of the assets in the Account,
and Hartford Life will simultaneously distribute to the Plan an amount which will not be less than the aggregate Adjusted
Book Value of the Account. As noted above, (see rep. 10, above), the Adjusted Book Value will generally be equal to contributions
plus the applicable Guaranteed Rate of Interest, with adjustments for previous withdrawals. If the aggregate market
value of the assets in the Account (determined as described in rep. 21, below) exceeds their Adjusted Book Value on
the Scheduled Account Termination Date, Hartford Life will be entitled to a portion of such excess, the amount of which
will be determined as a specified percentage of the Adjusted Book Value of the Account determined by agreement between
the Plan and Hartford Life and specified in the Synthetic GIC (the Book Value Assurance Charge), and will be required
to pay the remaining balance to the Plan. The Book Value Assurance Charge will be equal to a specified percentage of
the Adjusted Book Value of the Account, but will not exceed the market value of the Account less the Adjusted Book Value
of the Account, or be less than zero. To summarize, if the proceeds of the liquidated assets exceed the sum of the Adjusted
Book Value of the Account on that date and the Book Value Assurance Charge, such remainder will be distributed to the
Plan, thus allowing the Plan to receive a rate of return which is in excess of the Guaranteed Rate of Interest. 


17. Hartford Life's guarantee will be implemented on Scheduled Account Distribution Dates and on Scheduled Account
Termination Dates in the following manner: (1) On Scheduled Account Distribution Dates, HIMCO will liquidate assets
in the Account with a fair market value equal to the Scheduled Account Distribution. The assets liquidated will be
sold either on the securities market or to Hartford Life (the asset liquidation procedure is described in detail in
rep. 18, below). The proceeds will then be distributed to the Plan; and (2) On the Scheduled Account Termination Date,
HIMCO will liquidate the remaining assets in the Account. The assets liquidated will again be sold either on the securities
market or to Hartford Life. The Adjusted Book Value of the Account will be distributed from the Account to the Plan.
To the extent that the proceeds of the assets in the Account exceed the Adjusted Book Value of the Account, Hartford
Life will be entitled to the Book Value Assurance Charge (see rep. 16, above). The balance, if any, of the proceeds of
the asset liquidation will be paid to the Plan. HIMCO will select the assets that are sold to Hartford Life (instead
of being sold on the open market) on those dates (see reps 18 and 19, below). 


As a result, some of the investments in the Account may end up in Hartford Life's hands. The applicants represent that
this is an essential feature of the Synthetic GICs that will materially (and favorably) affect the Guaranteed Rate
of Interest that Hartford Life will be able to offer to a Plan. If assets trading at a discount from their face amount
on the Scheduled Account Termination Date had to be disposed of or simply distributed to the Plan from the Account on
that date, Hartford Life would be compelled to realize an immediate loss with respect to those assets in meeting its
contractual guarantee. By allowing these assets to be transferred to Hartford Life on the Scheduled Account Distribution
Dates and the Scheduled Account Termination Date, the foregoing procedures for implementing the contractual guarantees
will make it possible for Hartford Life to hold such assets to maturity or until market conditions warrant disposing
of them. This in turn will enable Hartford Life to guarantee a higher rate of return than it would otherwise be able to
guarantee.






