 

Section 101(a)(15) requires that States conduct continuing statewide studies of the needs of individuals with disabilities
and how these needs may be most effectively met, including outreach to minorities and those who have been unserved
or underserved. Vocational rehabilitation services are provided under section 130 of the Act to American Indians
residing on reservations. Under the Act, the term American Indians includes Eskimos and Aleuts. 
American Indians have one of the highest disability rates of all population groups. Yet, according to recent RSA statistical
data on the vocational rehabilitation program, when American Indians with disabilities receive vocational rehabilitation
services, they have a low rehabilitation success rate. 
Some of the major problems in providing services to American Indians include_(1) Lack of outreach efforts to rural
and isolated areas where many American Indians live; (2) Cultural differences that make use of standard rehabilitation
practices or methods less effective and may lead to lack of mutual understanding and trust between the provider and
recipient of services; (3) Language and communication barriers; and (4) Limited employment opportunities in rural
areas and on reservations. 
These problems are being addressed, in part, through the American Indian vocational rehabilitation services (section
130) discretionary grants. Increased cooperative efforts and sharing of information have occurred as a result of
linkages between the discretionary projects and State rehabilitation agencies. There is a great need, however,
for training methods and materials to improve the provision of services to American Indians with disabilities. Rehabilitation
counselors and other staff who work in State rehabilitation agencies that serve significant populations of American
Indians need training on how to work effectively with this population. In addition, institutions of higher education,
which prepare individuals to provide vocational rehabilitation services to American Indians with disabilities,
have a need for culturally appropriate materials. 
The Secretary intends to make an award with a project period of up to 36 months. 


Priority


The project must_

&bull;Develop, with the active participation of American Indians, culturally sensitive rehabilitation training
materials that address the use of appropriate rehabilitation methods, cultural differences, and development of
mutual understanding and trust between service provider and recipient; 
&bull;Use a ``train-the-trainer'' approach to train State rehabilitation unit in-service training educators
and rehabilitation educators on all materials developed in order to improve the skills and knowledge of personnel
providing vocational rehabilitation services to American Indians with disabilities; 





