 

(2) Handled by two or more third parties. Each time custody of the property changes hands, the inventory will be annotated
to show any overage, shortage, and damage found. In the case of pickup by a carrier from a NTS contractor, an exception
sheet must be prepared and be acknowledged by the warehouse firm to reflect any changes in the condition of the goods.


536.189 

Payment to the claimant beyond the statutory limit.


When payment of the statutory limit is made on a claim determined to be meritorious in a greater amount after the application
of individual and category maximum allowances, USARCS will apply amounts recovered from a carrier or contractor
to compensate the claimant to the extent of the difference between the statutory limit and the amount that would have
been paid but for the statutory limit. However, when an insurer has paid any portion of the value of the items involved,
USARCS will apply the procedure in 536.190(b). Any additional recovery monies available will be paid out under
536.190(b), if applicable.


536.190 

Reimbursements to claimants and insurers from money received.


USARCS is responsible for pursuing recovery on all claims paid under this subpart that involve payment of the statutory
limit, increased released valuation purchased by the member, replacement cost protection, and/or private insurance.
When forwarding these files to USARCS, the field office should identify them by writing in red on the front upper left
corner of the file, ``IRV,'' ``RCP,'' or ``STATUTORY LIMIT.''
(a) Reimbursement to a claimant. Only USARCS may reimburse claimants on files which are required to be forwarded to
USARCS for centralized recovery. In cases where a JA/claims attorney allowed payment of a claim before settling with
private insurance, a command claims service, area claims office, or claims processing office with approval authority
may always make a supplemental payment to a claimant when the claimant's private insurer paid more on an item than did
the Government. If a claimant has not been fully compensated, he or she can receive a supplemental payment up to the
adjudicated value of the claimant's loss under the following circumstances:
(1) When the adjudicated value of the loss on an item exceeds an item or category maximum and the amount collected exceeds
the amount paid on the claim, the claimant will be paid the adjudicated value to the extent that the amount recovered
exceeds the amount paid.
(2) When the adjudicated value of the loss on an item exceeds an item or category maximum and the claimant has purchased
increased valuation protection or other depreciated value coverage, the claimant will be paid up to the amount of
the additional coverage to the extent that this does not exceed the adjudicated value on that item or category.
(3) When the value of the loss on an item exceeds DA's payment and the claimant has purchased RCP, the claimant will be
paid up to the amount of the additional coverage to the extent that this does not exceed the value determined for that
item.
(b) Reimbursement to insurers by USARCS only. When a claimant has purchased an insurance policy covering the shipmentor
storage of property and the insurance company pays any portion of the value of items lost or damaged, the insurance
company is entitled, to the extent of its payment, to reimbursement of a pro rata share of the amount recovered on such
items.
(c) Reimbursement of recovery money to a carrier, warehouse or contractor. If a claims office or contracting office
determines that recovery or offset against a carrier, contractor or warehouse was improper, the claims office will
forward a request (with appropriate justification) to the Chief, Personnel Claims and Recovery Division, USARCS,
who will authorize a refund as necessary.


536.191 

Recovery action against a claimant.


A claimant is entitled to the benefit of any additional coverage purchased (such as private insurance, excess valuation,
or RCP) on an item-by-item basis as described in DA Pam 27162, paragraph 250. If a claimant is compensated
by a third party on an item and is also compensated by DA pursuant to this subpart, the claimant is entitled to retain
only the portion of the payment that represents the total adjudicated value of the item, without regard to a limitation
on payment due to application of a maximum allowance. If a claimant is compensated twice and the total exceeds the amount
the claimant is entitled to retain, prompt action to recover the excess will be taken in accordance with DA Pam 27162,
paragraph 255m.


536.192 

Claims arising from packing and containerization contract shipments.


Field claims offices will process to completion recovery actions on all packing and containerization contract shipments
against the delivering contractor unless private insurance is involved. (See 536.190.)


536.193 

Claims caused by stevedoring contractors.


(a) The ``Liability and Insurance'' clause used in stevedoring and related services contracts provides in pertinent
part that the contractor is liable to the Government for loss or damage to personal property (including POV's), caused
in whole or in part, by his or her negligence or fault and that the amount determined by the contracting officer will
be withheld from payments otherwise due the contractor.
(b) Claims offices processing claims against the Government under this paragraph for loss, damage, or destruction
of personal property of any kind (including POV's) caused in whole or in part by the negligence of a contractor will,
when final recovery action is complete, forward the claim file directly to the Commander, USARCS. Claims offices
processing a claim involving a POV will obtain an affirmative statement from the claimant as to whether settlement
is also being processed directly with the contractor or has already been received from the contractor. Normally,
a settlement with the contractor bars further claim against the Government. (But see 536.186(b).) The procedures
for processing POV recovery actions against stevedores are in 536.195.


536.194 

Claims arising from intra-theater shipments.


Unless private insurance or payment of the statutory limit is involved (see 536.190)_
(a) Recovery action under a European intra-theater tender or a delivering direct procurement method contract will
be assembled and forwarded to U.S. Army Claims Service, Europe, APO AE 091665346.
(b) Recovery action under a Korean intra-theater tender or a delivering direct procurement method contract will
be assembled and forwarded to U.S. Armed Forces Claims Service, Korea, APO SF 96301 AP 962050084.
(c) Other recovery action against a delivering third party not involving shipment under a Through Government Bill
of Lading will be processed by the field claims office to completion in accordance with DA Pam 27162, chapter
3.


536.195 

Claims against ocean carriers.


No demand will be made directly on an ocean carrier operating under a Military Sealift Command contract by individual
claimants or by field claims offices.
(a) POVs.
(1) Payment less than $100. A POV shipment file will be closed and no recovery action taken when the amount paid for the
damage is less than $100. However any file involving loss of items from vehicles will continue to be processed regardless
of the amount paid.


