 

1. Are not necessary for HUD review under selection criteria/ranking factors; and 

2. Would not improve the substantive quality of the proposal. 



V. Other Matters 



Prohibition Against Lobbying Activities 



The use of funds awarded under this NOFA is subject to the disclosure requirements and prohibitions of section 319
of the Department of Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 1990 (31 U.S.C. 1352) (the ``Byrd
Amendment'') and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 87. These authorities prohibit recipients of Federal
contracts, grants, or loans from using appropriated funds for lobbying the Executive or Legislative branches of
the Federal government in connection with a specific contract, grant, or loan. The prohibition also covers the awarding
of contracts, grants, cooperative agreements, or loans unless the recipient has made an acceptable certification
regarding lobbying. Under 24 CFR part 87, applicants, recipients and sub-recipients of assistance exceeding $100,000
must certify that no Federal funds have been or will be spent on lobbying activities in connection with the assistance.




Environmental Impact 



A Finding of No Significant Impact with respect to the environment has been made in accordance with the Department's
regulations at 24 CFR part 50 which implement section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42
U.S.C. 4332). The Finding of No Significant Impact is available for public inspection between 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
weekdays at the Office of the Rules Docket Clerk, room 10276, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410. 



Executive Order 12606, The Family 



The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under Executive Order 12606, The Family, has determined that the
policies announced in this Notice would not have a significant impact on the formation, maintenance, and general
well-being of families except indirectly to the extent of the social and other benefits expected from this program
of assistance. 



Executive Order 12612, Federalism 



The General Counsel has determined, as the Designated Official for HUD under section 6(a) of Executive Order 12612,
Federalism, that the policies contained in this Notice will not have federalism implications and, thus, are not subject
to review under the Order. The promotion of fair housing policies is a recognized goal of general benefit without direct
implications on the relationship between the national government and the states or on the distribution of power and
responsibilities among various levels of government. 



