 

Historical records exist for localities throughout the small whorled pogonia's range. The habitat of many of these
known historical sites has been destroyed; for example, sites in Vermont, Maryland, New Jersey, and the District
of Columbia were lost to habitat destruction, primarily from development. Recent intensive efforts to relocate
historical sites in eastern Pennsylvania, New York, Vermont, and Missouri have been unsuccessful (U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service 1992). 
Since the listing of 

Isotria medeoloides, 

New Hampshire has seen the destruction of a large, viable population by the construction of summer housing and the
potential destruction of a second, recently discovered (1992) population. This second population of over 30 stems
will most likely be severely impacted, if not destroyed, within the next few years as the habitat is developed for a
subdivision. In Virginia, one of the larger sites will most likely be destroyed within the next few years as its habitat,
and adjoining suitable habitat, is developed for housing. Without voluntary landowner protection, many more 

I. medeoloides

 populations could be destroyed as development pressures increase. 
Development in areas surrounding 

Isotria medeoloides 

habitat could indirectly be responsible for habitat destruction as roads, power lines and sewer mains are designed
to connect settled areas. In addition, housing developments, though not necessarily directly destroying habitat,
may cause the alteration of habitat parameters by creating large, permanent openings in the canopy that in turn encourage
denser understory growth. Disturbance to populations through increased visitation (however unintentional) from
people and pets might also cause direct damage to plants, and eventually a decline in affected populations. 
This plant primarily appears to reproduce sexually, though little is known at this time regarding seed dispersal
and seed banking. The formation of barriers to seed dispersal, either through development of adjacent habitat or
from logging or land clearing, may prevent the recolonization of suitable habitat by naturally declining populations.
Careful and selective logging may not be harmful to a population; however, heavy timbering and clear-cutting may
have long-term impacts on 

Isotria medeoloides 

populations and their habitat. The creation of logging roads and use of heavy machinery that severely alters soil
composition could significantly modify the habitat and cause the direct loss of plants. 
B. 

Overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes. 

The 1982 final listing identified the collecting for scientific purposes as contributing to the loss of 

Isotria medeoloides

 in the past. Since the listing and the release of both recovery plans, collecting for these purposes is no longer considered
to be a threat to the species. However, the potential collecting by wildflower garden enthusiasts for transplanting
is still great due to the rarity of this orchid. One landowner in North Carolina was literally harassed by orchid and
wildflower enthusiasts when a local garden club publicized the location of his 

I. medeoloides

 population (Nora Murdock, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 

in litt.

 1993). Furthermore, vandalism of populations (either out of capriciousness or for private collections) whose locations
were publicized continue to be documented (Rawinski 1986b). 
Significant commercial trade in the species is not known or expected in the future, nor is any significant import or
export of this species expected. Therefore, taking of 

I. medeoloides

 for these purposes is not considered to be a factor in its decline. 



