 

A large processor commented that the Agency did not include in its cost estimate many of the significant costs associated
with label redesign. The analysis did recognize that the cost of revising a label varies widely and that variation
is included in the estimate of a one-time cost for processors of $50 to $100 million. The Agency is aware that some firms
spend several thousand dollars on label revisions. Other firms spend far less. The Department considers an average
cost of $1,000 per label to be a reasonable estimate for an average cost for a label revision of this type.

A supermarket chain from a large urban area submitted a detailed estimate of its costs using a labor rate of $24.00 per
hour. The cost analysis used a labor rate of approximately $10.00 per hour. The Department recognizes that wages will
vary widely. Aggregate cost and benefit analyses must, however, be based on national averages.



Executive Order 12778



This final rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. States and local jurisdictions
are preempted under the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) and the Poultry Products Inspection Act (PPIA) from imposing
any marking, labeling, packaging, or ingredient requirement on federally inspected meat and poultry products that
are in addition to, or different than, those imposed under the FMIA or PPIA. States and local jurisdictions may, however,
exercise concurrent jurisdiction over meat and poultry products that are outside official establishments for the
purpose of preventing the distribution of meat and poultry products that are misbranded or adulterated under the
FMIA or PPIA, or, in the case of imported articles, which are not at such an establishment, after their entry into the
United States. Under the FMIA and PPIA, States that maintain meat and poultry inspection programs must impose requirements
that are at least equal to those required under the FMIA and PPIA. The States may, however, impose more stringent requirements
on such State inspected products and establishments.

No retroactive effect will be given to this rule. The administrative procedures specified in 9 CFR 306.5 and 381.35
must be exhausted prior to any judicial challenge of the application of the provisions of this rule, if the challenge
involves any decision of an inspector relating to inspection services provided under the FMIA or PPIA. The administrative
procedures specified in 9 CFR 335 and 381, Subpart W, must be exhausted prior to any judicial challenge of the application
of the provisions of this rule with respect to labeling decisions.



Effect on Small Entities



The Administrator has determined that this final rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities, as defined by the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601). The rule will affect a substantial
number of small entities, but the economic impact on such small entities will not be significant.

The final rule affects both retail stores and inspected establishments. In 1991, USDA estimated there were 253,000
foodstores in the United States. These stores are categorized as follows:





<TABLE>





1

1





Supermarkets 
23,813


(Sales >$2.5 million each)



Superettes 
94,647


(Sales &lt;$2.5 million each)



Convenience Stores 
51,700

Specialty stores 
82,895



Total 
253,055


</TABLE>



Most of the small businesses affected would be superettes and specialty stores, such as meat markets, butcher shops,
and locker plants. The specialty store category includes a large number of small businesses that do not sell meat and
poultry products, e.g., confectionery stores. Most convenience stores do not sell raw or partially cooked meat and
poultry products.

The Department recognizes that small retail firms would experience the greatest relative ongoing costs because
they may not be able to afford new or modified equipment that can minimize costs. However, the public health risks do
not allow for alternative small business considerations. At least one of the recent foodborne illness incidents
described in the interim rule referred to earlier involved ground beef sold through a small market in a small community.



Background



Introduction



The Secretary of Agriculture has statutory authority to require meat and poultry products to bear labels including
such ``information as the Secretary may require *** to assure that *** the public
will be informed of the manner of handling required to maintain the article in a wholesome condition.'' Federal Meat
Inspection Act, 21 U.S.C. 601 (n) (12); Poultry Products Inspection Act, 21 U.S.C. 453 (h) (12). The Secretary issued
an interim final rule on August 16, 1993, requiring raw and partially cooked meat and poultry products to carry safe
handling instructions, effective October 15, 1993 (58 FR 43478), and solicited comments for 30 days. In light of these
comments, the Secretary issued a final rule on October 12, 1993, which made significant changes in response to the
comments (58 FR 52856). Due to continued outbreaks of foodborne illness involving meat and poultry products which
resulted in serious illness and death, the Secretary invoked the ``good cause'' exception to the notice and comment
requirement of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) (5 U.S.C. 553(b)(13)(B)).


