 



Response: 

Section 11.80(b) of the March 25, 1994, final rule provides that trustee officials have the discretion to include
all or a portion of compensable value in their natural resource damage assessments. 59 FR 14283. 

Ohio 

v. 

Interior 

held that the Department's type B rule should allow for the recovery of all reliably calculated lost values of injured
resources, including lost nonuse values. 880 F.2d at 464. Therefore, the focus of this notice is not whether lost nonuse
values per se are an appropriate component of a natural resource damage assessment. This notice addresses whether
lost nonuse values can be reliably calculated and, if so, under what conditions. 

The Department acknowledges that a poorly designed or administered CV study, like any poorly designed or administered
valuation study, can produce unreliable results. However, based on the evidence received to date, the Department
does not believe that CV is a fundamentally flawed methodology. The Department believes that a properly 
designed and administered CV study can produce reliable estimates of lost nonuse values. 

The Department also believes that the results of a CV study of lost nonuse values performed in accordance with whatever
standards are ultimately included in the type B rule should receive a rebuttable presumption. CERCLA provides that
the natural resource damage assessment regulations are to identify the best available procedures and that assessments
performed in accordance with the regulations receive a rebuttable presumption. 

Ohio 

v. 

Interior 

further instructed the Department to consider a rule that would permit trustee officials to include all reliably
calculated lost values in their damage assessments. The Department believes that a properly designed and administered
CV study is a best available procedure and can produce reliable estimates of lost nonuse values. 



Comment: 

There were numerous comments on possible guidance for the conduct of CV studies. A few commenters thought that guidance
was unnecessary. Most commenters, though, thought that some guidance was advisable. A number of commenters, noting
that NOAA is developing standards based on the NOAA panel report, suggested that the Department postpone development
of guidance until NOAA evaluates the report and issues a proposed rule. Some commenters thought that the Department
should incorporate NOAA's rulemaking record before deciding on guidance. Other commenters urged the Department
to make any proposed guidance available for public review and comment before issuing a final rule. 



Response: 

The Department believes that standards for the use of CV should be included in the type B rule to improve reliability.
The Department does not think it is advisable to incorporate NOAA's rulemaking record because that record covers
a wide range of issues beyond CV. However, the Department did consider the NOAA panel report. Also, numerous commenters
on the Department's July 22, 1993, 

Federal Register

 notice submitted copies of comments they had provided to NOAA on its rulemaking. The Department agrees that commenters
should have an adequate opportunity to review and comment on the standards being considered for the use of CV; therefore,
the Department has issued this notice. The Department invites commenters on NOAA's proposed rule to submit comments
to the Department on this proposed rule as well. 



Comment: 

A number of commenters responded to the Department's request for suggestions on the content of possible guidance
on the use of CV to estimate lost nonuse values. Several commenters suggested that the Department adopt some or all
of the standards contained in the NOAA panel report. Some commenters thought that the Department should include both
the standards in the NOAA panel report and additional standards. Other commenters offered their own standards. The
suggested standards covered six major areas: restrictions on the type of resource for which lost nonuse values could
be assessed; restrictions on the relevant population; protection against the influence of improper motives; standards
for ensuring that respondents consider all relevant factors when estimating their WTP; standards for determining
whether CV results are consistent with basic tenets of rationality; and methods of calibrating CV results. 

Some commenters thought that assessment of lost nonuse values should be limited to cases where there have been long-lasting
injuries to resources with few substitutes. These commenters stated that such a limitation was necessary to prevent
speculative claims. These commenters also agreed with the Department's statement in the July 22, 1993, 

Federal Register

 notice that in cases where injuries are of short duration and where the injured resources have many substitutes, nonuse
losses are likely to be minimal. Other commenters objected to such a limitation noting that there is no empirical evidence
that there cannot be a loss of nonuse values in cases where injuries are of short duration or where there are many substitutes
for the injured resources. These commenters also noted that such a restriction is unrelated to reliability. Some
commenters stated that such a limitation might prevent assessment of lost nonuse values where individual animals
had been killed but overall population levels were unaffected. These commenters stated that the public may well experience
nonuse losses for the death of the individual animals since each individual animal is, in some sense, irreplaceable.






