 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Fish and Wildlife Service</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>50 CFR Part 17</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>RIN 1018AC44</RINDOCK>



Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Proposed Rule To List the Saint Francis' Satyr as Endangered



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Proposed rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) proposes to list a butterfly, the Saint Francis' satyr (

Neonympha mitchellii francisci

) as an endangered species pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Act), as amended. This butterfly is known
from a single locality in North Carolina. Recent heavy collecting pressure has resulted in a reduction of the only
known population of this subspecies and is believed to pose an imminent threat to the species' survival. Due to the
need to reduce or eliminate the likelihood of further collection, an emergency rule is published elsewhere in today's


Federal Register

 to provide this butterfly with immediate protection under the Act for a period of 240 days. Proposed listing, if made
final, would implement long-term Federal protection and allow for recovery measures in accordance with the Act's
provisions.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments from all interested parties must be received by June 17, 1994. Public hearing requests must be received by
June 2, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Comments and material concerning this proposal should be sent to the Field Supervisor, Asheville Field Office, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, 330 Ridgefield Court, Asheville, North Carolina 28806. Comments and material received
will be available for public inspection, by appointment, during normal business hours at the above address.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Ms. Nora Murdock at the above address (704/6651195, Ext. 231).



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Background



Saint Francis' satyr (

Neonympha mitchellii francisci

), one of the rarest butterflies in eastern North America, was described by Parshall and Kral (1989) from materials
collected in North Carolina.

The authors estimate that the single known population probably produces less than 100 adults annually. Shortly after
its discovery in 1989, Saint Francis' Satyr was reported to have been collected to extinction (Refsnider 1991, Schweitzer
1989). In 1992, the subspecies was rediscovered at its type locality during the course of a Service-funded status
survey. The Act defines ``species'' to include any subspecies of fish or wildlife or plants, and any distinct population
segment of any species of vertebrate fish and wildlife. Although 

N. m. francisci

 is recognized taxonomically as a subspecies, it will be referred to as a ``species'' throughout the remainder of this
rule.

Saint Francis' satyr is a fairly small, dark brown butterfly of the subfamily 

Satyrinae

 and the family Nymphalidae, which include many species of butterflies commonly called satyrs and wood nymphs. 

Neonympha m. francisci

 and 

N. m. mitchellii,

 the northern subspecies which is listed as endangered (May 20, 1992: 57 FR 21569), are nearly identical in size and
show only a slight degree of sexual size dimorphism (Hall 1993, Parshall and Kral 1989). Saint Francis' satyr has conspicuous
``eyespots'' (like most members in the wood nymph group) on the lower surfaces of the wings, and these eyespots are
a dark maroon brown in the center_reflecting a silver cast in certain light. The border of the eyespots is straw yellow
with an outermost border of dark brown. These eyespots, usually round to slightly oval, are well developed on the fore
and hind wings. The spots are accentuated by two bright orange bands along the edges of the posterior wing and by two
darker brown bands across the central portion of each wing. Saint Francis' satyr, as well as the nominate subspecies


mitchellii,

 can be distinguished from its congener, 

N. areolata

, by the latter's well-marked eyespots on the upper wings and brighter orange bands on the hinds wings (Refsnider 1991,
McAlpine 

et al

. 1960. Wilsman and Schweitzer 1991, Hall 1993).

Saint Francis' satyr is extremely restricted geographically and it is presently known to exist only from a single
population in North Carolina. The annul life cycle of 

francisci

 unlike that of its northern relative 

mitchellii,

 is bivoltine. It has two adult flights or generations annually. Little is known about its life history, and larval
host plants are thought to be graminoids such as grasses, sedges, and rushes. The habitat occupied by 

francisci

 consists primarily of wide, wet meadows dominated by sedges and other wetland graminoids. In the North Carolina sandhills,
these wet meadows are often relicts of beaver activity. These boggy areas are quite acidic and ephemeral, succeeding
to either pocosin or swamp forest if not kept open by frequent fires or beaver activity.

The sandhills were once covered with an open type of woodland, dominated by longleaf pine, wire grass, and other fire-tolerant
species. The type of forest that presently exists along the creek inhabited by 

francisci

 can only mature under a long period of fire suppression. Parshall and Kral (1988) speculate that 

francisci

 is a relict from a more widespread southern distribution, and its current limited distribution could also be a result
of the enormous environment changes that have taken place in the past 100 years within the southern coastal plain.
Extensive searches of other suitable habitat in North Carolina and South Carolina have turned up no additional populations
of this butterfly (Hall 1993, Schweitzer 1989).

Federal actions on this species began on November 21, 1991 when it was included as a Category 2 species in the Animal
Notice of Review (56 FR 58804). Category 2 species are those species for which the Service believes that Federal listing
as endangered or threatened is possibly appropriate, but for which conclusive data on biological vulnerability
and threat are currently not available to support a proposed rule. Based on recent surveys conducted by Service and
State personnel, the Service now concludes that sufficient information exists to propose listing 

Neonympha mitchellii francisci

 as endangered.



Summary of Factors Affecting the Species



Section 4(a)(1) of the Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq.

) and regulations (50 CFR part 424) promulgated to implement the listing provisions of the Act set forth the procedures
for adding species to the Federal list. A species may be determined to be an endangered or threatened species due to
one or more of the five factors described in section 4(a)(1). These factors and their application to Saint Francis'
satyr (

Neonympha mitchellii francisci

) are as follows:


</SUPPLEM>
