 

Section 4603(a)(2) of OBRA '90 further amended section 
1902(e)(6) to require States to provide continuous coverage 
to any pregnant woman eligible under section 1902(a)(10) of 
the Act who would otherwise lose her eligibility due to a 
change in income. The pregnant woman must be ``deemed to 
continue to be'' a mandatory categorically needy individual 
described under sections 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IV) and 
1902(1)(1)(A) through the end of the postpartum period. The 
OBRA '90 amendment also stated that this mandatory coverage 
would not apply in the case of a woman who has received 
ambulatory prenatal care under section 1920 of the Act 
during a presumptive eligibility period and is then 
determined to be ineligible for regular Medicaid. 
Although section 1902(e)(6) purports to cover all 
pregnant women who, because of a change in family income, 
would not otherwise continue to be eligible for Medicaid, we 
believe that it does not automatically cover all pregnant 
women who must meet a spenddown. Most pregnant women 
seeking to meet a spenddown would be attempting to establish 
eligibility as medically needy. Section 1902(e)(6) now 
requires that a State deem a pregnant woman (who has 
established eligibility under any eligibility group) to 
continue to be a pregnant woman under sections 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IV) and 1902(1)(1)(A) if that woman would 
otherwise cease to be eligible due to a change in income. 
A medically needy woman can establish her eligibility 
during a given budget period by spending down her excess 
income. However, if she has the excess income in the 
following budget period and is ineligible because she cannot 
spend it down, we do not believe that her ineligibility has 
resulted from a ``change'' in income. In fact, her income is 
unchanged for eligibility purposes if it remains in excess 
of the medically needy income level by the same amount as in 
the previous budget period; she has simply not been able to 
spend down to the medically needy income level. We believe 
that under the statute, a medically needy pregnant woman 
whose family income does not change and who cannot meet her 
spenddown does not qualify as having the ``change'' in income 
contemplated by section 1902(e)(6). 
We are uncertain how to apply section 1902(e)(6) in the 
context of pregnant women who have a spenddown, and whose 
family incomes increase, causing this spenddown amount to 
increase. We propose to cover under this provision any 
pregnant woman who was eligible (either as categorically 
needy, medically needy without a spenddown, or medically 
needy after meeting a spenddown) at any time during her 
pregnancy, who then experiences a change in family income 
which either would cause her to lose categorically needy 
Medicaid, medically needy Medicaid without a spenddown, or 
to lose eligibility (be unable to meet the increased 
spenddown although she would have met the earlier spenddown) 
by virtue of an increased spenddown amount. 
We would interpret section 1902(e)(6) so that it will 
not relieve pregnant women who qualify under section 
1902(e)(6) of their obligation to satisfy their original 
spenddown amount in each budget period while in section 
1902(e)(6) status. 
If a pregnant woman who has in the previous budget 
period met a spenddown has an increase in income and 
qualifies under section 1902(e)(6), she must be ``deemed to 
continue to be'' a pregnant woman under sections 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IV) and 1902(1)(1)(A). These provisions 
describe categorically needy eligibility groups with respect 
to whom the limited Medicaid benefit is available. We 
believe that the phrase ``deemed to continue to be'' is 
ambiguous. The phrase can mean that the woman is to be 
regarded for all purposes as if she were actually 
categorically needy, or only that she is to be considered as 
categorically needy for the purpose of receiving the 
restricted service package that applies to pregnant women 
described in section 1902(1) without regard to the change in 
her family's income. If we were to regard the woman as 
though she were actually categorically needy, she would no 
longer have to meet any spenddown, and any subsequent 
changes of income would not affect her eligibility. This 
would place the medically needy pregnant woman whose income 
has increased in a better position than any other medically 
needy pregnant woman with a spenddown who has had no 
increase in income. 
In order to avoid the anomalous result of only pregnant 
women with higher incomes being relieved of their total 
spenddown obligations, we propose not to interpret section 
1902(e)(6) as requiring that a medically needy woman be 
considered as though she were categorically needy for all 
purposes. We propose instead to interpret the phrase 
``deemed to continue to be'' in section 1902(e)(6) to require 
only that a woman who meets her original spenddown amount, 
but cannot meet the increased amount, be deemed to be 
eligible for the limited service package provided to the 
section 1902(1) pregnant women. The woman can maintain this 
deemed status without having to pay any increased spenddown 
amounts which result from increases in family income. She 
will, however, be required to continue to meet her original 
spenddown while in section 1902(e)(6) status. 
We propose to revise redesignated 435.918 relating to 
redetermination of eligibility, to provide that the agency 
must consider a pregnant woman eligible under any Medicaid 
eligibility group as an individual who is eligible to 
receive the services available to the mandatory 
categorically needy low-income group throughout the 
pregnancy and for the specific postpartum period after the 
pregnancy ends without regard to changes in the family 
income. 


C. Qualified Children 


Section 4601(a)(2) of OBRA '90 amended the definition 
of a qualified child in section 1905(n)(2) of the Act, 
effective July 1, 1991. Under section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(III) of the Act, a State must provide 
Medicaid coverage to the mandatory group of qualified 
children. Effective July 1, 1991, under the new definition 
of qualified child added by OBRA '90, a State must provide 
Medicaid coverage to children under the age of 19 who were 
born after September 30, 1983, and who meet the income and 
resource requirements of the State plan under title IVA. 
The option in section 1905(n)(2) for a State to include as 
qualified children those children born after an earlier date 
than September 30, 1983 (as chosen by the State) was 
retained. As a result, effective July 1, 1991, States have 
the option to provide Medicaid coverage to children under 
the age of 19 who were born after any date prior to 
September 30, 1983 (as chosen by the State) who meet the 
income and resource requirements of title IVA. 






