 

Effect on Small Entities


The Administrator has determined that this proposed rule would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities, as defined by the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601). This rule does not require either
large or small establishments to use meat/bone separation machinery and meat recovery systems. Although there are
initial costs involved with the purchase of machinery and establishing quality control programs, there are no apparent
direct competitive advantages that large establishments would have over small establishments.



Paperwork Requirements



Manufacturers producing ``meat'' resulting from advances in meat/bone separation machinery that does not grind,
crush, or pulverize bone in order to remove skeletal muscle tissues (i.e., meat) adhering to livestock bones would
be required to develop and maintain a quality control program that provides the controls and information necessary
to assure that the product will meet the requirements established for such product as proposed. The paperwork requirements
contained in this proposed rule have been submitted to the Office of Management and Budget for approval under the Paperwork
Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

).



Comments



Interested persons are invited to submit comments concerning this proposal. Written comments should be sent to the
Policy Office and refer to Docket No. 94003P. All written comments submitted in response to this proposal will
be available for public inspection in the Policy Office from 9 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. and from 1:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.



Background



Introduction 



The FMIA (21 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

) requires that the Secretary of Agriculture administer an inspection program that assures consumers that meat and
meat food products distributed in commerce and within designated States
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 are wholesome, not adulterated, and are properly marked, labeled, and packaged. Under the FMIA and regulations promulgated
thereunder, FSIS provides mandatory inspection, except for certain exceptions, of meat and meat food products prepared
for distribution in interstate and foreign commerce, as well as for distribution within designated States.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Designated States are States that have failed to develop or are not effectively enforcing requirements at establishments,
within their jurisdiction, for the slaughter of livestock and/or the preparation of products thereof, that are at
least equal to those of subchapters I and IV of the FMIA. Once a State is designated, the provisions of subchapters I
and IV of the FMIA apply to the operations and transactions of establishments that operate solely within the State.

</FOOTNOTE>


The Federal meat inspection regulations define meat in 9 CFR 301.2(rr) as follows:




The part of the muscle of any cattle, sheep, swine, or goats, which is skeletal or which is found in the tongue, in the
diaphragm, in the heart, or in the esophagus, with or without the accompanying and overlying fat, and the portions
of bone, skin, sinew, nerve, and blood vessels which normally accompany the muscle tissue and which are not separated
from it in the process of dressing. It does not include the muscle found in the lips, snout, or ears. This term, as applied
to products of equines, shall have a meaning comparable to that provided in this paragraph with respect to cattle,
sheep, swine, and goats.




The Federal meat inspection regulations also establish a definition and standard of identity for a meat food product
called ``mechanically separated (species)'' (MS(S)) in 9 CFR 319.5. ``Species'' refers to the species of livestock,
e.g., beef or pork. At various times, this product has also been called mechanically deboned meat and mechanically
processed (species) product. This meat food product is defined as ``any finely comminuted product resulting from
the mechanical separation and removal of most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle of livestock carcasses and
parts of carcasses'' and meeting the other provisions specified in 9 CFR 319.5. This provision and other provisions
in the Federal meat inspection regulations provide, among other things, for: (1) A definition and standard that classifies
MS(S) as a meat food product, (2) limitations on the amount of MS(S) that can be used in permitted products (viz., 20
percent of the livestock and poultry product portion of the product), (3) prohibitions on the use of MS(S) in certain
products (e.g., baby food), (4) limitations on certain components of MS(S), e.g., bone particle size, bone content
(measured as calcium content), protein quality, and a maximum fat content and minimum protein content, (5) requirements
for handling and for the production of MS(S) under an approved quality control program, and (6) a requirement that
MS(S) be separately identified in the ingredients statement of a meat food product (9 CFR 317.2 (c) and (f), 318.18,
319.5, and 319.6). FSIS's 1982 final rulemaking on MS(S) (47 FR 28214) indicates that the Agency determined that material
differences in the consistency and the composition of MS(S) place it outside the scope of product traditionally defined
as meat (9 CFR 301.2(rr)), and that its differences are such that it should be defined as a distinctive standardized
product. As such, it should be identified by a name that adequately differentiates it from meat, viz., MS(S). When
MS(S) is used in meat food products, it must be separately listed in the ingredients statement by its standardized
name, e.g., ``mechanically separated beef (or pork).''


