 

(3) Alternative Non-regulatory Options


Based on the above evidence, OSHA has concluded that the private market has failed to provide optimal levels of safety
to employees. Consequently, some form of intervention that fosters safer work environments must be used to reduce
occupational exposure. Because such intervention need not occur through government regulation, OSHA has considered
the effectiveness of other non-regulatory options: (1) relying on tort litigation and (2) relying on workers' compensation
programs.


(a) Tort Liability. 

The use of liability under tort law is one nonregulatory alternative that has been increasingly used in litigation
concerning occupationally related illnesses. Prosser [Ex. 4256] describes a tort, in part, as a ``civil wrong,
other than a breach of contract, for which the court will provide a remedy in the form of an action for damages''.
If the tort system applies, it would allow a worker whose health has been adversely affected by occupational exposure
to a hazardous substance to sue and recover damages from the employer. Thus, if the tort system is effectively applied,
it might shift the liability of direct costs of occupational disease from the worker to the firm under certain specific
circumstances.

With very limited exceptions, however, the tort system is not a viable alternative in dealings between employees
and employers. All states have legislation providing that Workers' Compensation is either the exclusive or principal
remedy available to employees against their employers. Thus, under tort law, workers with an occupational disease
caused by exposure to a hazardous substance can only file a product liability suit against a third party manufacturer,
processor, distributor, sales firm, or contractor. It is often difficult, however, to demonstrate a direct link
between an exposure to a hazardous substance and the illness.

In order to pursue litigation successfully, there must be specific knowledge of the magnitude and duration of a worker's
exposure to a hazardous substance, as well as the causal link between the disease and the occupational exposure. Usually,
it is extremely difficult to isolate the role of occupational exposures in causing the disease, especially if workers
are exposed to many toxic substances and the exposure is not necessarily limited to the workplace such as the case for
ETS. This difficulty is further compounded by the long latency periods that are frequently involved. In addition,
the liable party must be identifiable, but workers may have several employers over a working lifetime. The burden
of proof that an occupational exposure to a hazardous substance occurred, that a specific employer is the liable party,
and that the exposure level was significant may prohibit the individual from initiating the suit.

There are an increasing number of lawsuits that are related to health effects to building occupants from poor indoor
air quality. These lawsuits are typically filed after the illness or health effect has been diagnosed. In this sense,
increasing pressure is being placed on businesses. However, the legal pressure currently does not relate to the implementation
of a clean indoor air policy (e.g., legal action is not currently being taken just because a company does not have a clean
indoor air policy. These actions are event related as opposed to being policy related). IAQ litigation is growing
rapidly and the focus is shifting from residential to commercial facilities. Examples to emphasize that are the recent
$12.5 million claims against the Social Security Administration for the Richmond, California episode of Legionnaire's
disease, the Call versus Prudential case in which building tenants settled with the defendants in what may have been
the first jury trial in sick building litigation, and a suit by Hamilton, Ohio, county employees against their office
building owners alleging exposure to fumes, bacteria, fungi, dust and irritants [Ex. 3575].

Legal proceedings do not internalize occupational illness costs because they involve substantial legal fees associated
with bringing about court action. In deciding whether to sue, the tort victim must be sure that the size of the claim
will be large enough to cover legal expenses. In effect, the plaintiff is likely to face substantial transaction costs
in the form of a contingency fee, commonly 33 percent, plus additional legal expenses. The accused firm must also pay
for its defense. The high costs and uncertainties associated with tort law make it an inefficient mechanism for ensuring
adequate protection of workers' health.

Insurance and liability costs are not borne in full by the specific employer responsible for the risk involved. For
firms that are insured, the premium determination process is such that premiums only partially reflect changes in
risk associated with changes in exposure to hazardous substances. This lack of complete adjustment is the so-called
``moral hazard'' problem, which is the risk that arises from the possible imprudence of the insured. As the insured
firm has paid an insurance company to assume some of the risks, that firm has less reason to exercise the diligence necessary
to avoid losses. Transfer of risk is a fundamental source of imperfection in markets.

There is a growing number of state and local laws and ordinances controlling smoking. Armed with new data that show
health effects from indoor air pollutants, plaintiffs who believe that they have been injured by the air inside their
workplaces are beginning to take the offensive. They are lobbying on the local, state and federal levels for protective
legislation, and in the absence of such legislation, they are suing for damages to their health. These cases are complex
not only in the nature of the technical proof that must be developed and presented, but also in the number of parties
involved. Suits have been filed against architects, builders, contractors, building product manufacturers and
realtors [Ex. 3662].




