 

* * * * *


(2) With landing gear and flaps extended, power off, and the airplane as nearly as possible in trim at 1.3 V

SO

, quickly apply takeoff power and retract the flaps as rapidly as possible to the recommended go around setting and
allow the airspeed to transition from 1.3 V

SO

 to 1.3 V

S1

. Retract the gear when a positive rate of climb is established.
(3) With landing gear and flaps extended, in level flight, power necessary to attain level flight at 1.1 V

SO

, and the airplane as nearly as possible in trim, it must be possible to maintain approximately level flight while retracting
the flaps as rapidly as possible with simultaneous application of not more than maximum continuous power. If gated
flap positions are provided, the flap retraction may be demonstrated in stages with power and trim reset for level
flight at 1.1 V

S1

 in the initial configuration for each stage_
(i) From the fully extended position to the most extended gated position;
(ii) Between intermediate gated positions, if applicable; and
(iii) From the least extended gated position to the fully retracted position.
(4) With power off, flaps and landing gear retracted and the airplane as nearly as possible in trim at 1.4 V

S1

, apply takeoff power rapidly while maintaining the same airspeed.
(5) With power off, landing gear and flaps extended, and the airplane as nearly as possible in trim at V

REF

, obtain and maintain airspeeds between 1.1. V

SO

 and either 1.7 V

SO

 or V

FE

, whichever is lower without requiring the application of two-handed control forces exceeding those specified in
23.143(c).
(6) With maximum takeoff power, landing gear retracted, flaps in the takeoff position, and the airplane as nearly
as possible in trim at V

FE

 appropriate to the takeoff flap position, retract the flaps as rapidly as possible while maintaining constant speed.
(c) At speeds above V

MO

/M

MO

, and up to the maximum speed shown under 23.251, a maneuvering capability of 1.5 g must be demonstrated to provide
a margin to recover from upset or inadvertent speed increase.
(d) It must be possible, with a pilot control force of not more than 10 pounds, to maintain a speed of not more than V

REF

 during a power-off glide with landing gear and wing flaps extended, for any weight of the airplane, up to and including
the maximum weight.


* * * * *


25. Section 23.147 is revised to read as follows:


23.147 

Directional and lateral control.


(a) For each multiengine airplane, it must be possible, while holding the wings level within five degrees, to make
sudden changes in heading safely in both directions. This ability must be shown at 1.4 V

S1

 with heading changes up to 15 degrees, except that the heading change at which the rudder force corresponds to the limits
specified in 23.143 need not be exceeded, with the_
(1) Critical engine inoperative and its propeller in the minimum drag position;
(2) Remaining engines at maximum continuous power;
(3) Landing gear_
(i) Retracted; and
(ii) Extended; and
(4) Flaps retracted.
(b) For each multiengine airplane, it must be possible to regain full control of the airplane without exceeding a bank
angle of 45 degrees, reaching a dangerous attitude or encountering dangerous characteristics, in the event of a sudden
and complete failure of the critical engine, making allowance for a delay of two seconds in the initiation of recovery
action appropriate to the situation, with the airplane initially in trim, in the following conditions:
(1) Maximum continuous power on each engine;
(2) The wing flaps retracted;
(3) The landing gear retracted;
(4) A speed equal to that at which compliance with 23.69(a) has been shown; and
(5) All propeller controls in the position at which compliance with 23.69(a) has been shown.
(c) For all airplanes, it must be shown that the airplane is safely controllable without the use of the primary lateral
control system in any all-engine configuration(s) and at any speed or altitude within the approved operating envelope.
It must also be shown that the airplane's flight characteristics are not impaired below a level needed to permit continued
safe flight and the ability to maintain attitudes suitable for a controlled landing without exceeding the operational
and structural limitations of the airplane. If a single failure of any one connecting or transmitting link in the lateral
control system would also cause the loss of additional control system(s), the above requirement is equally applicable
with those additional systems also assumed to be inoperative.



26. Section 23.149 is revised to read as follows:


23.149 

Minimum control speed.



(a) V

MC

 is the calibrated airspeed at which, when the critical engine is suddenly made inoperative, it is possible to maintain
control of the airplane with that engine still inoperative, and thereafter maintain straight flight at the same speed
with an angle of bank of not more than 5 degrees. The method used to simulate critical engine failure must represent
the most critical mode of powerplant failure with respect to controllability expected in service.
(b) V

MC

 for takeoff must not exceed 1.2 V

S1

, where V

S1

 is determined at the maximum takeoff weight. V

MC

 must be determined with the most unfavorable weight and center of gravity position and with the airplane airborne
and the ground effect negligible, for the takeoff configuration(s) with_
(1) Maximum available takeoff power initially on each engine;
(2) The airplane trimmed for takeoff;


