 

(2) WSR88D Radar System





Purpose:

 Successful commissioning for full operational use requires a demonstration, by tests and other means, that the WSR88D
radar system, as installed in the field office, meets its technical requirements; that the prescribed operating,
maintenance, and logistic support elements are in place; that operations have been properly staffed with trained
personnel; and that the equipment can be operated with all other installed mating elements of the modernized NWS system.






Note:

 It may be necessary to incorporate work-arounds to complete some of the items listed below in a timely and cost-effective
manner. A work-around provides for an alternative method of meeting a commissioning criteria through the application
for a pre-approved operational procedure implemented on a temporary basis. The WSR88D Plan referenced below
includes a process for recommending, approving, and documenting work arounds and requires that they be tracked as
open items until they can be eliminated by implementation of the originally intended capability.






Reference:

 The criteria and evaluation elements for commissioning are set forth and further detailed in the NWS-Sponsored WSR88D
Site Component Commissioning Plan (the 88D Plan) and an Attachment to that Plan, called the WSR88D Site Component
Commissioning Evaluation Package (the WSR88D Package).



Criteria:

 a. WSR88D Radar Acceptance Test: The site component acceptance test, which includes objective tests to demonstrate
that the WSR88D radar, as installed at the given site, meets its technical specifications, has been successfully
completed in accordance with items 1af, p. A2 of Appendix A of the WSR88D Package.

b. Availability of Trained Operations and Maintenance Personnel: Adequate operations and maintenance staffs are
available, training materials are available, and required training has been completed in accordance with items
2ah, pp. A3  A4 of Appendix A of the WSR88D Package.

c. Satisfactory Operation of System Interfaces: The system can be operated in all of its required modes and in conjunction
with all of its interfacing equipment in accordance with items 3ae, p. A5 of Appendix A of the WSR88D
Package.

d. Satisfactory Support of Associated NWS Forecasting and Warning Services: The system provides proper support
of NWS forecasting and warning services, including at least 96 percent availability of the radar coded message for
a period of 30 consecutive days prior to commissioning in accordance with items 4akk, pp. A6 to A17
of Appendix A of the WSR88D Package.

e. Service Backup Capabilities: Service backup capabilities function properly when the primary system is inoperable
in accordance with items 5ae, p. A18 of Appendix A of the WSR88D Package.

f. Documentation for Operations and Maintenance: A full set of operations and maintenance documentation is available
in accordance with items 6an, pp. A19 to A25 of Appendix A of the WSR88D Package.

g. Spare Parts and Test Equipment: A full complement of spare parts and test equipment is available on site in accordance
with items 7ae, p. A26, of Appendix A of the WSR88D Package.



(B) Decommissioning an Outdated NWS Radar





Purpose:

 Successful decomissioning of an old radar requires assurance that the existing radar is no longer needed to support
delivery of services and products and local office operations.



References:

 The criteria and evaluation elements for decommissioning are set forth and further detailed in the NWS-Sponsored
Network and Local Warning Radars (Including Adjunct Equipment) Site Component Decommissioning Plan (the Plan),
more specifically in Appendix B to that Plan, called the Site Component Decommissioning Evaluating Package, and
in Section 3.3 of the Internal and External Communication and Coordination Plan for the Modernization and Associated
Restructuring of the Weather Service.


