 

The range of dumping margins of seamless pipe from Argentina based on a comparison of USP to FMV alleged by petitioner
is 66.57 percent to 108.13 percent. 



Brazil 



For Brazil, petitioner based USP on U.S. price quotes to a distributor. Petitioner made adjustments for freight and
insurance, port and handling charges and U.S. duties paid. Petitioner adjusted USP to account for the tax levied on
seamless pipe in the home market. Petitioner also calculated the amount of the tax adjustment that was due solely to
the inclusion of price deductions in the original tax base. Finally, petitioner adjusted USP to account for the difference
in level of trade between the home market and U.S. market. 

Petitioner based FMV on home market price quotes to an end-user. Petitioner adjusted the prices for home market taxes
not included in the prices. Petitioner made a tax offset for the amount of tax that was due solely to the inclusion of
price deductions in the original tax base. 

The range of dumping margins of seamless pipe from Brazil based on a comparison of USP to FMV alleged by petitioner is
79.83 percent to 130.08 percent. 



Germany 



For Germany, petitioner based USP on U.S. price quotes to an end-user. Petitioner made adjustments for distributor
mark-up, freight and insurance, port and handling charges and U.S. duties paid. 

Petitioner was unable to obtain home market prices. Moreover, petitioner was unable to develop a meaningful constructed
value as petitioner claims it operates a substantially different production process than the German manufacturer
of the subject merchandise. Therefore, petitioner based FMV on third country prices in Britain, which was the only
information reasonably available to it. Petitioner obtained ex-warehouse and delivered prices from three British
distributors of subject merchandise from Germany. Petitioner made adjustments for the distributor mark-up, delivery
charges, where appropriate, and transportation charges. 

The range of dumping margins of seamless pipe from Germany based on a comparison of USP to FMV alleged by petitioner
is 11.67 percent to 57.72 percent. 



Italy 



For Italy, petitioner based USP on U.S. price quotes to an end-user. Petitioner made adjustments for distributor
mark-up, transportation and insurance charges, port and handling charges, and U.S. duties paid. Petitioner adjusted
the prices for home market taxes. Petitioner made a tax offset for the amount of tax that was due solely to the inclusion
of price deductions in the original tax base. 

Petitioner based FMV on home market price quotes to an end-user. Petitioner made adjustments for discounts on cash
sales, distributor mark-up and freight charges. Petitioner adjusted the prices for home market taxes and made a tax
offset for the amount of tax that was due solely to the inclusion of price deductions in the original tax base. 

The range of dumping margins of seamless pipe from Italy based on a comparison of USP to FMV alleged by petitioner is
4.57 percent to 11.26 percent. 



Initiation of Investigations 



We have examined the petitions on seamless pipe from Argentina, Brazil, Germany and Italy, and have found that these
petitions meet the requirements of section 732(b) of the Act and 19 C.F.R. 353.12. Therefore, we are initiating antidumping
duty investigations to determine whether imports of seamless pipe from Argentina, Brazil, Germany and Italy are
being, or are likely to be, sold in the United States at less than fair value. 



Preliminary Determination by the International Trade Commission 



The International Trade Commission (ITC) will determine by August 8, 1994, whether there is a reasonable indication
that imports of seamless pipe from Argentina, Brazil, Germany and Italy are materially injuring, or threaten material
injury to, a U.S. industry. A negative ITC determination will result in the investigations being terminated; otherwise,
the investigations will proceed according to statutory and regulatory time limits. 

This notice is published pursuant to section 732(c)(2) of the Act and 19 CFR 353.13(b).




Dated: July 13, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
Barbara R. Stafford, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Assistant Secretary 
for Investigations. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9417680 Filed 71994; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3510DS-P 
</BILLING>



