 

(7) The degree to which the applicant proposes to attract, retain and graduate minority and financially needy students.



Funding Factors



Statutory General Preference: As provided in section 860(e)(1) of the PHS Act, preference will be given to any qualified
applicant that_ 

(A) Has a high rate for placing graduates in practice settings having the principal focus of serving residents of medically
underserved communities; or

(B) During the 2-year period preceding the fiscal year for which such an award is sought, has achieved a significant
increase in the rate of placing graduates in such settings. 

This preference will only be applied to applications that rank above the 20th percentile of proposals recommended
for approval by the peer review group. 

Minimum Percentages for ``High Rate'' and ``Significant Increase in the Rate'': ``High rate'' is defined as a minimum
of 30 percent of graduates in academic year 199293 or academic year 199394, whichever is greater, who
spend at least 50 percent of their worktime in clinical practice in the specified settings. Public health nurse graduates
can be counted if they identify a primary work affiliation at one of the qualified work sites. Graduates who are providing
care in a medically underserved community as a part of a fellowship or other educational experience can be counted.


``Significant increase in the rate'' means that, between academic years 199293 and 199394, the rate
of placing graduates in the specified settings has increased by a minimum of 50 percent and that not less than 15 percent
of graduates from the most recent year are working in these settings. 

Established Funding Priorities: The following funding priority was established in FY 1989 after public comment
(54 FR 11570, dated March 21, 1989) and the Secretary is extending this priority in FY 1995. 

A funding priority will be given to applications which develop, expand or implement courses concerning ambulatory,
home health care and/or inpatient case management services for individuals with HIV disease. 

The following funding priority was established in FY 1993 after public comment (58 FR 32710, dated June 11, 1993) and
the Administration is extending this funding priority in FY 1995. In determining the order of funding of approved
applications a funding priority will be given to applicant institutions which demonstrate either substantial progress
over the last three years or a significant experience of ten or more years in enrolling and graduating trainees from
those minority or low-income populations identified as at risk of poor health outcomes. 



Nurse Practitioner and Nurse-Midwifery Programs 





Purpose: 

Section 822 of the Public Health Service Act, as amended, authorizes grants to meet the costs of projects to: 

(1) Plan, develop and operate new programs; or 

(2) Maintain or significantly expand existing programs for the training of nurse practitioners and/or nurse-midwives
who will, upon completion of their studies, be qualified to effectively provide primary health care, including primary
health care in homes and in ambulatory care facilities, long-term care facilities and other health care institutions.


The period of Federal support should not exceed 3 years. 



Eligibility: 

Eligible applicants are public and nonprofit private schools of nursing or other public and nonprofit private entities.
Eligible applicants must be located in a State. 



Review Criteria: 

The review of applications will take into consideration the following criteria: 

1. The degree to which the project plan adequately provides for meeting the requirements set forth in Section 57.2405
of the program regulations and the Appendix; 

2. The potential effectiveness of the proposed project in carrying out the education purposes of section 822 of the
Act and 42 CFR part 57, subpart Y; 

3. The capability of the applicant to carry out the proposed project; 


