 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
I. Background 


A. Introduction 


Administration of the Medicare program is governed by the Medicare statute, title XVIII of the Social Security Act
(the Act). The Congress intended, at the time Medicare was enacted in 1965, that Medicare provide health insurance
to protect the elderly (and later, the disabled) from the substantial costs of health care services. The Medicare
law provides coverage for broad categories of benefits, including inpatient and outpatient hospital care, skilled
nursing facility (SNF) care, home health care, and physicians' services. 
The Medicare program consists of two separate but complementary health insurance programs, a Hospital Insurance
(HI) program (known as Part A) and a Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI) program (known as Part B). Although Part
A is called Hospital Insurance, covered benefits also include medical services furnished in SNFs or by home health
agencies (HHAs) and hospices. For purposes of the Medicare program, we refer to these entities as ``providers.''
These providers must be certified as qualified providers of services and must sign an agreement to participate in
the program. Part B covers a wide range of medical services and supplies such as those furnished by physicians, providers,
or others in connection with physicians' services, outpatient hospital services, outpatient physical therapy
and occupational therapy services, and home health services. Physicians' services covered under Part B include
visits to patients in the home, office, hospital, and other institutions. Part B also covers certain drugs and biologicals,
diagnostic x-ray and laboratory tests, purchase or rental of durable medical equipment (DME), ambulance services,
prosthetic devices, and certain medical supplies. 
While the Medicare law provides coverage for the broad categories of benefits described above, it also places categorical
limitations on the coverage of the services furnished by certain health care practitioners, such as dentists, chiropractors,
and podiatrists, and it specifically excludes some categories of services from coverage, such as cosmetic surgery,
personal comfort items, custodial care, and routine physical checkups. The statute also provides direction as to
the manner in which payment is made for Medicare services, the rules governing eligibility for services, and the health,
safety, and quality standards to be met by providers and some types of suppliers that furnish services to Medicare
beneficiaries. 
The Medicare law does not, however, provide an all-inclusive list of specific items, services, treatments, procedures,
or technologies covered by Medicare. Thus, except for the examples of DME in section 1861(n) of the Act, some of the
medical and other health services listed in section 1861(s) of the Act, and exclusions from coverage listed in section
1862(a) of the Act, the statute does not specify medical devices, surgical procedures, or diagnostic and therapeutic
services that should be covered or excluded from coverage. 
The Congress understood that questions about coverage for specific services would arise and would require us to make
specific decisions about coverage. Thus, it gave the Secretary the authority to make those decisions. Section 1862(a)(1)(A)
of the Act prohibits payment for items or services that ``are not reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment
of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member.'' 
We have interpreted this statutory provision to exclude from Medicare coverage those medical and other health care
services that are not demonstrated to be safe or effective. Effectiveness in this context is the probability of benefit
to individuals from a medical item, service, or procedure for a given medical problem under average conditions of
use; that is, day-to-day medical practice. In day-to-day medical practice, physicians diagnose and treat clinical
conditions following inquiry into an individual's medical history, performance of a physical examination, and
interpretations of a variety of diagnostic tests and procedures. To be of value to the physician, the information
obtained from any diagnostic test or procedure must be sufficiently accurate to provide a reasonably reliable measure
for establishing or ruling out the presence of a given disease. Payment may not be made under Medicare for any diagnostic
test or procedure that does not produce accurate results when properly performed, since that test cannot be considered
``reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury.'' 

</SUPPLEM>
