 

PART 352_DISABILITY AND REHABILITATION RESEARCH: REHABILITATION RESEARCH AND TRAINING CENTERS 



14. The authority citation for Part 352 continues to read as follows: 






Authority:

 29 U.S.C. 760762, unless otherwise noted. 




15. Section 352.1 is revised to read as follows: 



352.1 

What is the Rehabilitation Research and Training Centers program? 



This program supports Rehabilitation Research and Training Centers for the purpose of_

(a) Conducting coordinated and advanced programs of research on disability and rehabilitation that will produce
new knowledge that will improve rehabilitation methods and service delivery systems, alleviate or stabilize disabling
conditions, and promote maximum social and economic independence for individuals with disabilities; 

(b) Providing training to service providers at the preservice, inservice, undergraduate, and graduate levels,
to improve the quality and effectiveness of rehabilitation services; 

(c) Providing advanced research training to individuals, including individuals with disabilities and those from
minority backgrounds, engaged in research on disability and rehabilitation; and 

(d) Serving as national and regional technical assistance resources, and providing training for, service providers,

individuals with disabilities and their families and representatives, and rehabilitation researchers. 




(Authority: Sec. 204(b)(2); 29 U.S.C. 762(b)(2)) 




16. Section 352.2 is revised to read as follows: 



352.2 

Who is eligible for assistance under this program? 



Under this program, awards may be made to public and private organizations, including institutions of higher education
and Indian tribes or tribal organizations, that_

(a) Are of sufficient size, scope and quality to carry out effectively the activities in an efficient manner consistent
with appropriate State and Federal law; 

(b) Demonstrate the ability to carry out the training activities, either directly or through another entity that
can provide that training; and 

(c) Demonstrate that the Center will be operated in collaboration with an institution of higher education or provider
of rehabilitation or other appropriate services. 





(Authority: Secs. 204(a) and 204(b)(2)(A)(i) and (K); 29 U.S.C. 762(a) and 762(b)(2)(A)(i) and (K)) 




17. Section 352.10 is revised to read as follows: 



352.10 

What activities are authorized under this program? 



(a) Rehabilitation Research and Training Centers shall conduct research activities, which must be accessible to
and usable by individuals with disabilities, that may include the following: 

(1) Basic or applied medical rehabilitation research. 

(2) Research regarding the psychological and social aspects of rehabilitation. 

(3) Research regarding disability policy. 

(4) Research related to vocational rehabilitation. 

(5) Research that promotes the social, emotional, functional, and educational growth of children who have disabilities.


(6) Research to develop and evaluate interventions, policies, and services that support families of children and
adults who have disabilities. 

(7) Research that will support the improvement of services and policies to foster the productivity, independence,
and social integration of individuals with disabilities of all types, to live in their communities. 

(b) Rehabilitation Research and Training Centers shall conduct training activities, which must be accessible to
and usable by individuals with disabilities, that may include the following: 

(1) Training of students preparing to be rehabilitation personnel. 

(2) Training at the preservice, inservice, and graduate levels to assist individuals to provide rehabilitation
services more effectively. 

(3) Training at graduate, preservice, and inservice levels for rehabilitation research personnel. 








