 

BRI describes specific medical conditions of known etiology such as: Respiratory allergies, legionellosis, humidifier
fever, nosocomial infections, sensory irritation when caused by known agents and the symptoms and signs characteristic
of exposure to chemical or biologic substances such as carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, pesticides, endotoxins or
mycotoxins. BRIs do not disappear when the person leaves the building. 

The Centers for Disease Control Prevention estimate that over 25,000 cases of the pneumonia caused by 

Legionella

 occur each year with more than 4,000 deaths. It has been suggested that a large number of these cases occur as the result
of workplace exposure [Exs. 433, 4318]. However, specific data on the occurrence of 

Legionella

-related cases due to workplace exposure were not available. 

Some of the reductions attributable to the proposed standard, such as decreases in the number of upper respiratory
symptoms (nose, throat and eye symptoms) and severe headaches have been estimated. Other reductions, however, have
not been quantified at this time. 

OSHA's estimates are based upon the exposure profile (presented in Table VI5) and OSHA's quantitative risk
assessment discussed in detail in the preamble to the proposal). OSHA preliminarily estimates the risk of working
in mechanically ventilated workplaces to be 57 severe headaches and 85 upper respiratory symptoms per 1,000 employees
over a 45 year work lifetime. By applying these rates to the affected population at risk, OSHA estimates that 3.8 million
severe headaches and 5.6 million upper respiratory symptoms will develop in employees over the next 45 years who work
in buildings with mechanical ventilation (with the worker population held constant). 

A common theme that runs through the literature and the OSHA docket indicates that the principal factor associated
with indoor air quality complaints is inadequate ventilation. However, information available does not quantify
the effectiveness of ventilation improvements. NEMI reports that: ``ventilation system modifications and improvements
are key elements of solving existing IAQ problems and reducing IAQ complaints. In every case where recommended ventilation
system modifications and improvements are implemented, the frequency and severity of complaints are reduced significantly''
[Ex. 31183]. 

Some of the submissions base the effectiveness of ventilation improvements on the NIOSH analysis of indoor air quality
investigations [Exs. 31183, 31090]. In approximately 500 indoor air quality investigations, NIOSH
found that the primary causes of indoor air quality problems were inadequate ventilation (52%), contamination from
outside the building (10%), microbial contamination (5%), contamination from building fabric (4%), and unknown
sources (13%). Excluding contamination from building fabric and unknown sources, this suggests that 83 percent
of complaints related to IAQ problems would be eliminated by the proposed OSHA standard. For purposes of this analysis,
OSHA assumes that the overall effectiveness is, therefore, 80 percent. As shown in Table VI5, OSHA estimates
that the proposed standard will prevent 3.0 million severe headaches and 4.5 million upper respiratory symptoms
over the next 45 years. This is, approximately, 69,000 severe headaches and 105,000 upper respiratory symptoms per
year. These estimates understate the prevalence of building-related symptoms since they only reflect excess risk
in only air conditioned buildings. OSHA believes that the standard will also prevent severe headaches and upper respiratory
symptoms in heated (but not air conditioned) buildings, and that it will prevent various other adverse health effects.
OSHA is seeking additional information upon which to base quantifiable estimates of the other known adverse health
effects. 

OSHA requests comment on the methodology of estimating the benefits for the IAQ portion of the proposal. Specifically,
OSHA requests any studies which document (in quantitative terms) the effectiveness of HVAC maintenance on the decline
of indoor air related ailments. 



2. Environmental Tobacco Smoke 



Tobacco smoke has been classified as a carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer, the Surgeon
General, NIOSH, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The National Health Interview Survey of Cancer Epidemiology
and Control (NHIS-CEC) shows that the prevalence of cigarette smoking continues to decline in smoking among adults
by approximately 0.50 percent per year. Despite these declines, smoking is responsible for an estimated 390,000
deaths. Exposure to ETS has been associated with the occurrence of many diseases, such as lung cancer and heart disease
in nonsmokers and low birthweight in the offspring of nonsmokers. 



