 

The memorandum recommending certification considered and responded to all public comments received on the proposed
certification during the 60-day comment period. These comments and responses are set forth here for reference:



Comment:

 Both of the negative comments received centered on the belief that, if the Weather Forecast Office (WFO) is not located
in the San Francisco Bay area, services to that area could be degraded. Related to this point, these commentors focussed
on the distance of the move and argued that services would be degraded because the forecasters would not be able to ``see''
the conditions in the San Francisco Bay area.



Response:

 First of all, these comments ignore the fact that this WSFO is responsible for weather services to all of northern California,
not just the San Francisco Bay area. The NWS is convinced that the relocation to Monterey will enhance weather forecasting
for the entire northern California service area. The logical conclusion of this comment is that each WFO must be located
in close proximity to the population center of its particular service area. Such a result obviously is not reasonable.

Furthermore, there will be no degradation of weather services to the San Francisco Bay Area itself. The services are
dependant on a variety of information which includes surface observations, weather radars, upper air soundings,
weather satellite data, spotter networks, aircraft reports, and numerical guidance from the National Meteorological
Center. The collection of this data and information is dependant on communications, not the exact location of that
office, and will be equally available to the Monterey office as it was in Redwood City.

One commentor's concern, that the loss of personal contact between NWS personnel and the media and agencies might
degrade the overall quality of services, also is unfounded. The commentor is correct that ``the NWS depends heavily
on the media to get its warnings out.'' However, the primary means by which NWS warnings are disseminated is by telecommunications
systems such as NOAA Weather Wire, not by personal contacts. The commentor claims that television reporters in the
San Francisco area ``regularly visit and report from the office in Redwood City during weather emergencies, and that
appearances on camera by NWS forecasters add immediacy to developing weather stories and allow the public to receive
information directly from the source.'' There are network television affiliates in the Monterey area that could
provide on camera interviews with the forecasting staff from the office in Monterey. With modern day telecommunications,
these interviews can easily be broadcast over television stations located in the San Francisco Bay area.

Contact with cooperating and user agencies such as FEMA and emergency managers in the San Francisco Bay area will continue
even if the WSFO is relocated to Monterey. There is no reason to assume these contacts, that are currently done face-to-face,
will be less effective in the future if they are done mostly via telephone, as is done now for users in the WSFO's service
area that are outside the immediate San Francisco Bay area. Moreover, contact with cooperators and users will be enhanced
by the addition of a dedicated Warning Coordination Meteorologist to the staff at Monterey.



Comment:

 The two commentors opposed to the relocation also argued that, if the WFO is not located in the San Francisco Bay area,
services would be degraded because of the climatological differences.



Response:

 This comment is related to that above but requires some additional elaboration. There are numerous climatological
zones located in central and northern California. A primary goal of the NWS modernization is to enable each future
WFO to provide consistent weather services to its entire area of responsibility which includes the numerous climatological
regimes. To accomplish this the NWS will employ advanced computers which will greatly improve the numerical guidance
available to forecasters. Advanced weather satellites will make higher resolution imagery available allowing
forecasters to see in detail what is occurring over their area of responsibility. The number and frequency of surface
observations will be increased through the deployment of ASOS. A national network of WSR88D Doppler radars
is already halfway completed. This will provide forecasters in Monterey the ability to view the atmosphere in more
detail than ever before possible. Not just over the San Francisco Bay area, but over all of northern and central California.
Any attempt to compare services as they exist today with those that will be available in the future is a disservice to
all the users of weather services in northern and central California.



Comment:

 The two commentors opposed to the relocation believe that a number of experienced forecasters will elect to retire
instead of relocate and the result will be degradation of services.



Response:

 Clearly, the ability of the NWS to relocate an office (or to take a number of other modernization actions) cannot be
contingent upon the number of employees that happen to retire during the process. Planning for these actions begins
years in advance whereas the actual number of employees who will retire is not known for certain until the day the move
takes place. Therefore, the NWS has to be prepared to deal with whatever vacancies occur in the same way it deals with
vacancies at any office which occur all the time, when employees retire or transfer to other jobs. In this situation,
even in the worst case scenario, a loss of 7 employees, the potential for any short term effects is negligible in view
of the fact that the office will retain 4 out of 5 lead forecasters; that it has already recruited 3 experienced forecasters
and has identified 2 additional experienced forecasters that could be detailed to Monterey during the transition;
and that the office will be able to field experienced personnel on each shift.



Comment:

 Three commentors stated that with the new technologies the proposed relocation of the NWS forecast office would not
degrade services that, in fact, they expect an enhancement of weather services. Two of the commentors stated that
collocating with the Naval Post Graduate School would be beneficial to the NWS and create new opportunities for collaborative
research activities.



Response:

 The NWS agrees. Improved warning and forecast capabilities are expected to result from this collocation. Improved
access to Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center data sources including satellite imagery from the Defense Meteorological
Satellite System as well as global, regional, and wave numerical forecast models will enable improved weather services.



Comment:

 One commentor believed that the relocation would be more costly.



Response:

 The issue of cost associated with the office move is not relevant to certification. However, an Economic Analysis
(EA) was completed on May 20, 1992, by the Special Engineering Program Office which concluded that the relocation
to Monterey was the most economical. In July, 1993, the Department of Commerce Office of Inspector General validated
that EA and determined the Monterey location to be the most economical to the Government.




Dated: August 5, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Louis J. Boezi,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Assistant Administrator for Modernization.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9419519 Filed 8994; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 351012M
</BILLING>




