 

Within sixty days of notification by EPA

5

 that the Missoula CO nonattainment area has failed to attain the CO NAAQS, the MCCHD will implement the contingency
measure, Rule 1428(5)(d), immediately. This portion of the Missoula Solid Fuel Burning Devices regulations states
that Rule 1428 (5)(a) and (7)(d) will be modified to delete Class I and Dealer Demonstrated permitted devices, and
Rule 1428(5)(c) is void. In other words, if the area has failed to attain the CO NAAQS, then the exemption for burning
during an air pollution alert for permitted Class I and dealer demonstrated woodburning devices will not be allowed.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
The actual wording of Missoula's CO contingency measure regulation is ``[w]ithin sixty (60) days of notification
by the MDHES and the U.S. EPA ***'' However, in a November 3, 1994 letter from Jeffrey T. Chaffee, MDHES,
to Douglas M. Skie, EPA, the State indicated that the word ``and'' is not intended to imply that EPA cannot make an independent
finding of Missoula's failure to attain the standard. Therefore, EPA is approving this regulation based on the expectation
that all actions needed to effect full implementation of the contingency measure will occur within 60 days after EPA
notifies the State of Missoula's failure to attain the CO standard, 

i.e., 

the State need not provide notification as well. 
</FOOTNOTE>


C. Effectiveness of the Contingency Measures 


1. Re-entrained Road Dust Contingency Measure for PM

10




If the re-entrained road dust contingency measure is implemented, the control efficiency of the re-entrained road
dust measures will be 76% in the 24-hour attainment demonstration (an increase of 14% over the control efficiency
of the re-entrained road dust measures in the original SIP attainment demonstration). This calculation takes into
account the expanded area for using washed sand, the existing areas for using washed sand and liquid de-icer, and the
existing street sweeping measures (see the TSD for the Missoula PM

10

 SIP for further details on the existing re-entrained road dust strategies). Total reduction from the contingency
measure is calculated to be 4073 pounds of PM

10

 per day. 


2. Residential Woodburning Contingency Measure for PM

10




Since no credit was taken for the residential woodburning measures in the original SIP attainment demonstration,
control efficiency from the residential woodburning contingency measure increases in the 24-hour attainment demonstration.
See the TSD for the Missoula PM

10

 SIP for further details on the existing residential woodburning strategies (available at the EPA Region VIII address
listed at the beginning of this notice). Total reduction from the contingency measure would be 12.6 pounds of PM

10

 per day. 
EPA believes this contingency measure is adequate for several reasons. First, the existing Missoula solid fuel burning
device regulation (Rule 1428) is already a very stringent mandatory curtailment program. Any further emissions
reductions through this program are very difficult to achieve. Second, the emissions inventory for the Missoula
area indicates that re-entrained road dust contributes a somewhat higher portion of the PM

10

 emissions than residential woodburning. Therefore, the analysis necessary for the contingency measure selection
process most likely will indicate that residential woodburning is not the major contributing source to Missoula's
failure to attain the PM

10

 NAAQS or make RFP, and that the re-entrained road dust contingency measure should be implemented instead of the woodburning
measure. Finally, the control measures implemented in the PM

10

 SIP achieve more emissions reductions than needed to demonstrate attainment of the PM

10

10 NAAQS, as indicated by the State's predicted 24-hour attainment concentration of 143.8 

m

g/m

3

 (see 58 FR 4834148342, 59 FR 2538, and the related TSD). Since the 24-hour PM

10

 NAAQS is 150 

m

g/m

3

, this established safety margin further supports the reasonableness of the contingency measure. 


3. Residential Woodburning Contingency Measure for CO 


With the implementation of the residential woodburning contingency measure, Class I devices will not be allowed
to burn during an alert. Assuming a conservative 60% compliance rate, 7,915 pounds of CO per day will be reduced. Since
the estimated one-year growth of vehicle miles travelled (VMT) is 1%, and the CO emissions inventory report has determined
that 140,786 pounds of CO per day are emitted from automobiles, approximately 1,409 pounds of CO per day are needed
for a sufficient amount of reduction from the contingency measure. Therefore, emissions reductions are adequately
met with the implementation of this contingency measure. 


D. Early Implementation 


Subchapter 3, Contingency Measure Selection Process, of the Missoula City-County Air Pollution Control Program's
Chapter IX_Regulations, Standards,  Permits_sets out its early implementation policy as follows. For either
the PM

10

 or CO contingency measures, early implementation of the measures will not result in the requirement to implement
additional moderate area contingency measures if the area fails to attain the NAAQS or make reasonable further progress
in reducing emissions. However, if Missoula is reclassified to a serious nonattainment area, additional planning
requirements, including, but not limited to, serious area contingency measures, would be necessary. (See 59 FR 41998,
August 16, 1994.) 


E. PM

10

 SIP Commitments and Variance Provision 


In a letter dated August 20, 1991, the Governor of Montana submitted to EPA the Missoula City-County Air Pollution
Control Program as a revision to the Montana SIP. EPA's review identified numerous deficiencies, including inconsistencies
with the State regulations, as well as deficiencies similar to those EPA identified in the State regulations. In a
December 4, 1991 letter from the EPA Region VIII Administrator to the Governor of Montana, the deficiencies in the
Missoula regulations were outlined in detail (this letter is available for public inspection at the EPA Region VIII
address listed at the beginning of this notice). The problem areas included rules involving emergency procedures,
permitting, open burning, wood-waste burners, National standards of performance for new stationary sources (NSPS),
National emission standards for hazardous air pollutants (NESHAPs), and variances. 



