 

(iv) In the case of a structure constructed or substantially rehabilitated before 1978, if the recipient is presented
with test results that indicate that the family purchasing a home under the program includes a child less than six years
of age who has an elevated blood lead level (EBL), the recipient must cause the unit to be tested for lead-based paint
on chewable surfaces. Testing must be conducted by a State or local health or housing agency, by an inspector certified
by a State or local health or housing agency, or by an association recognized by HUD. Lead content shall be tested by
using an X-ray fluorescence analyzer (XRF) or by laboratory analysis of paint samples. Test readings of 1.0 mg/cm2
or higher shall be considered positive for the presence of lead-based paint. If the laboratory reports the results
in percent by weight, the standard shall be 0.5 percent or 5000 parts per million (ppm). Where lead-based paint on chewable
surfaces is identified, covering or removal of the paint surface in accordance with 35.24(b)(4) of this title
is required. 

(v) In lieu of the procedures set forth in paragraph (e)(2)(iv) of this section, the recipient may, at its discretion,
abate all interior and exterior chewable surfaces in accordance with the methods set out in 35.24(b)(4) of
this title. 



* * * * * 



PART 291_DISPOSITION OF HUD-ACQUIRED SINGLE FAMILY PROPERTY 



18. The authority citation for part 291 would be revised to read as follows:

 




Authority: 

12 U.S.C. 1709 and 1715b; 42 U.S.C. 1441, 1551a, and 3535(d).




19. Section 291.430 would be amended by revising the second and third sentences in paragraph (a); by removing the definitions
of ``Applicable surfaces'' and ``Defective paint surfaces'' in paragraph (b); by adding the definition of ``Defective
paint surface'' in alphabetical order in paragraph (b); by revising the second sentence in paragraph (c); and by revising
paragraph (d), to read as follows: 



291.430 



Elimination of lead-based paint hazards. 



(a) *** This section established procedures to eliminate, as far as practicable, the hazards of lead-based
paint poisoning with respect to properties that may be occupied by children less than six years of age. This section
is promulgated under 35.24(b)(6) of this title and supersedes, with respect to this program, the requirements
prescribed in subpart C of part 35 of this title. 

(b) *** 



Defective paint surface 

means a surface on which the paint is nonintact, i.e., the paint is cracking, scaling, chipping, peeling, or loose.




* * * * * 



(c) *** If defective paint surfaces are found, treatment as required by 35.24(b)(4) of this
title shall be completed by HUD before the sale or lease of the property. 

(d) 

Testing and treatment of painted surfaces. 

(1) If the lessee or purchaser knows or has reason to expect that the property will be occupied by homeless families
with children less than six years of age, the lessee or purchaser must cause the unit to be tested for lead-based paint
on all painted surfaces before initial occupancy. Testing must be conducted by a State or local health or housing agency,
by an inspector certified or regulated by a State or local health or housing agency, or by an organization recognized
by HUD. Lead content must be tested by using an X-ray fluorescence analyzer (XRF) or by laboratory analysis of paint
samples. Test readings of 1 mg/cm2 or higher using an XRF shall be considered positive for the presence of lead-based
paint. If the laboratory reports the test results in percent by weight, 0.5 percent or 5000 parts per million (ppm)
shall be considered positive. Where lead-based paint is identified, the lessee or purchaser must cause all painted
surfaces to be treated. Treatment must consist of covering or removal of the paint surface in accordance with 35.24(b)(4)
of this title. If the lessee or purchaser certifies to HUD that the property will not be occupied by children less than
six years of age, testing or treatment will not be required. 

(2) If a lessee or purchaser has reason to believe that a property contains lead-based paint on painted surfaces, the
lessee or purchaser may, at its option, dispense with the testing procedure and proceed directly to treatment. 

(3) The lessee or purchaser may not allow the property to be occupied by children less than six years of age until proof
of testing and, if necessary, treatment has been submitted to and reviewed by HUD. 



* * * * * 



PART 510_SECTION 312 REHABILITATION LOAN PROGRAM 



20. The authority citation for part 510 would be revised to read as follows:

 




Authority: 

42 U.S.C. 1452b and 3535(d). Sec. 510.106 is also issued under 42 U.S.C. 3543.

 


Section 510.410 would be amended by: 

a. Revising paragraph (b)(2)(v); 

b. Revising the first and third sentences of the introductory text in paragraph (c); 

c. Removing the definition of ``applicable surface'' and revising the definitions of ``chewable surface'', ``defective
paint surface'', and ``elevated blood lead level or EBL'' in paragraph (c)(1); 

d. Revising the first sentence in paragraph (c)(2)(i); and 



