 



Duplication 

means the process making a copy of a record and sending it to the requester, to the extent necessary to respond to the
request. Such copies include paper copy, microform, audiovisual materials, and magnetic tapes, cards and discs.



Educational institution 

means a preschool, elementary or secondary school, institution of undergraduate or graduate higher education,
or institution of professional or vocational education.



FOIA

 means section 552 of title 5, United States Code, as amended. 



Freedom of Information Officer 

means the USIA official who has been delegated the authority to release or withhold records and assess, waive, or reduce
fees in response to FOIA requests.



Non-commercial scientific institution 

means an institution that is not operated substantially for purposes of furthering its own or someone else's business,
trade, or profit interests, and that is operated for purposes of conducting scientific research whose results are
not intended to promote any particular product or industry.



Post 

or 

USIS 

means all overseas offices of the USIA.



Records 

means any handwritten, typed or printed documents (such as memoranda, books, brochures, studies, writings, drafts,
letters, transcripts, and minutes) and documentary material in other forms (such as punchcards; magnetic tapes,
cards, or discs; paper tapes; audio or video recordings; maps; photographs; slides, microfilm; and motion pictures).
It does not include objects or articles such as exhibits, models, equipment, and duplication machines or audiovisual
processing materials. Nor does it include books, magazines, pamphlets, or other reference material in formally
organized and officially designated USIA libraries, where such materials are available under the rules of the particular
library.



Representative of the news media 

means a person actively gathering news for an entity organized and operated to publish or broadcast news to the public.``News''
means information that is about current events or that would be of current interest to the public. News media entities
include television and radio broadcasters, publishers of periodicals (to the extent they publish ``news'') who
make their products available for purchase or subscription by the general public, and entities that may disseminate
news through other media (e.g., electronic dissemination of text). Freelance journalists shall be considered representatives
of a news media entity if they can show a solid basis for expecting publication through such an entity. A publication
contract or a requester's past publication record may show such a basis.



Request 

means asking in writing for records whether or not the request refers specifically to the Freedom of Information Act.



Review 

means examining the records to determine which portions, if any, may be released, and any other processing that is
necessary to prepare the records for release. It includes only the first examination and processing of the requested
documents for purposes of determining whether a specific exemption applies to a particular record or portion of a
record.



Search 

means looking for records or portions of records responsive to a request. It includes reading and interpreting a request,
and also page-by-page and line-by-line examination to identify responsive portions of a document. However, it does
not include line-by-line examination where merely duplicating the entire page would be a less expensive and a quicker
way to comply with the request.



503.2



Making a request.



(a) 

How to request records. 

All requests for documents shall be made in writing. Requests should be addressed to the United States Information
Agency, Freedom of Information Officer, GC/FOI, room M301 4th Street SW., Washington, DC 20547. Write the
words ``Freedom of Information Act Request'' on the envelope and letter.



