 

Also, there is no reason to conclude that the exercise of Federal oversight, pursuant to the provisions of the proposed
regulation, will lead to disruption in the permit application process. Paragraph (b)(1) of proposed 773.26
and the provisions of the final regulation discussed below are designed to avoid such disruption by allocating responsibilities
among the various regulatory authorities who each have a legitimate interest in the outcome of an ownership or control
issue. The oversight provisions of paragraph (b)(3) of proposed 773.26 are designed to support such allocation
of responsibilities in a way that is consistent with SMCRA and OSM's implementing regulations.

OSM further believes that the commenter's proposal that a final rule should make explicit that the initial decision
of a State regulatory authority with respect to an ownership or control issue will be considered presumptively correct
is adequately addressed. In substance, the provisions of paragraph (b)(3) of final 773.25 discussed below
already provide that State regulatory authorities who are issuing violations, considering permit applications,
and issuing permits with the first opportunity to decide the owners or controllers of, respectively, violations,
applications, and permits. While the first opportunity to make a particular decision is not equivalent to a legal
presumption in favor of the decision, such an opportunity does give a State regulatory authority the chance to define
the status quo which would be subject to oversight review. OSM declines, however, to convert such initial decisionmaking
opportunity into a presumption. The need for consistency with respect to ownership or control decisions and with
respect to AVS require that OSM conduct oversight reviews of such State decisions as are necessary without the application
of a presumption favoring the affirmance of such decisions.

OSM also declines to incorporate a standard such as ``gross inadequacy'' or some other criterion as the basis for Federal
oversight of State ownership or control decisions under paragraph (b)(3) of proposed 773.26. The application
of such a standard would limit OSM's ability to review State decisions for purposes of protecting the consistency
and accuracy of information in the AVS. As will be discussed with respect to the final rule 773.25 below, OSM
has made modifications to proposed 773.26 to reflect OSM's responsibility for the ownership or control information
shown on AVS and to enable OSM to act to maintain the integrity of the AVS database. With respect to oversight incident
to particular applications, permits, and violations, paragraph (b)(3) of proposed 773.26 already contains
references to 30 CFR parts 733, 842, and 843. Final rule 773.25 contains identical references. Each of these
parts of Title 30 of the Code of Federal Regulations contains provisions which have explicit criteria and triggering
standards for OSM's review and action with respect to State decisions. Such criteria and standards are incorporated
by reference in paragraph (b)(3) of proposed 773.26 and would be applied, as appropriate, by OSM. Accordingly,
there is no need for additional review criteria in OSM's oversight under the proposed regulation. As discussed below,
final rule 773.25 adopts the same approach.

A commenter representing environmental advocacy groups questioned whether the provisions of paragraph (b) of proposed
773.26 sufficiently explained the allocation of responsibilities between OSM and State regulatory authorities.
The commenter questioned the provision of the proposal contained at paragraph (b)(3) which provided that State regulatory
authorities' authority to make ownership or control decisions would be subject to OSM's review as an element of State
program oversight. The commenter asserted that this provision required further clarification as to the respective
roles of OSM and the State regulatory authorities in the making of ownership or control decisions.

OSM agrees with the commenter's observation that further clarification is in order with respect to the allocation
of responsibilities and authority contained in paragraph (b)(3) of proposed 773.26. Accordingly, OSM has
made a change to the final rule to clarify that, with respect to information shown on AVS, State responsibilities to
make decisions with respect to ownership or control are subject to OSM's plenary authority.

Thus, under the final rule, once ownership or control information is entered into AVS, OSM will assume control of such
data. If OSM reviews such information and concludes that it is incorrect, OSM will act to correct such ownership or
control information and will incorporate such corrected information into AVS. The rationale for OSM's plenary authority
is that AVS is used across State lines by all of the State regulatory authorities and the Federal government must act
to protect the accuracy and integrity of AVS. With respect to the State regulatory authority's decision underlying
such ownership or control information, OSM will further act pursuant to the provisions of final 843.24, which
is described in detail below.

