 

II. Background 


A. The Fair Packaging and Labeling Act 


The Fair Packaging and Labeling Act is designed to prevent the use of unfair or deceptive methods of packaging and labeling
of consumer commodities. The FPLA states that it shall be unlawful for persons to sell or distribute commodities whose
labels do not conform ``to the provisions of this Act and of regulations promulgated under the authority of this Act.''
(15 U.S.C. 1452.) The main requirements of the FPLA are that the label on a package disclose the identity of the commodity;
the name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor of the commodity; and the net quantity of
contents in terms of weight, measure, or numerical count. (15 U.S.C. 1453.) 


1. Shared Enforcement and Implementation Authority 


In the FPLA, Congress has established a system of divided authority for implementation and enforcement. The authority
to promulgate and enforce regulations with regard to foods, drugs, devices, or cosmetics is vested in the United States
Food and Drug Administration. (15 U.S.C. 1453(a), 15 U.S.C. 1456(a).) With respect to any other consumer commodity,
authority is vested in the FTC (15 U.S.C. 1454(a), 15 U.S.C. 1456(b)). With regard to imports of consumer commodities
into the United States, the Secretary of the Treasury enforces FPLA. (15 U.S.C. 1456(c).) Additionally, several
other agencies have adopted parallel disclosure schemes on their own initiative.

2

 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
In developing the proposed amendments that were published in the NPR, the Commission's staff consulted with the staffs
of other relevant agencies to harmonize requirements. The amendments the Commission adopts today are consistent
with the proposed metric amendments to food labeling rules contained in a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking issued by
the FDA on May 21, 1993 (58 FR 29719). As of the date of this FTC Statement of Basis and Purpose, the FDA has issued no final
rules for any of the products it regulates under the FPLA. 

</FOOTNOTE>


2. Consumer Commodities 


The FPLA defines consumer commodities as being any food, drug, device, or cosmetic and any other article, product
or commodity of any kind or class which is customarily produced or distributed for sale through retail sales agencies
or instrumentalities for consumption by individuals, or use by individuals for purposes of personal care or in the
performance of services ordinarily rendered within the household, and which usually is consumed or expended in the
course of such consumption or use.

3

 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


3

</FOOTNAME>
15 U.S.C. 1459(a). 

</FOOTNOTE>


The FPLA grants the FTC authority to exempt commodities it regulates under the Act.

4

 Acting under this authority, the FTC has exempted the following products from certain FPLA requirements_camera
film; Christmas tree ornaments; replacement bags for vacuum cleaners; chamois; paper table covers; certain cellulose
sponges; candles; and solder. (16 CFR part 501.) 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
15 U.S.C. 1454(c). 

</FOOTNOTE>


In a similar vein, the FTC has interpreted the meaning of ``consumer commodity'' as used in FPLA as not including 52
commodities or classes of commodities. These include such items as antifreeze and automotive accessories, garden
tools and hardware, toys, typewriter ribbons, and woodenware. (16 CFR part 503.) 


3. Procedures for Promulgating Regulations Under FPLA 


The FPLA sets out the procedures to be followed by the FTC in promulgating regulations. The FPLA states that regulations
promulgated by the Commission under section 4 or section 5 shall be promulgated, and shall be subject to judicial review,
by proceedings taken in conformity with the provisions of subsections (e), (f), and (g) of section 701 of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 371 (e), (f), and (g)) (``FDC Act'').

5

 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
15 U.S.C. 1455(b). 

</FOOTNOTE>


The FTC has implemented this statutory requirement to use the rulemaking procedures of section 371 of the FDC Act by
adopting 16 CFR part 1 subpart C, which sets forth the procedures for the promulgation of rules under authority other
than section 18(a)(1)(B) of the FTC Act. 
Subpart C provides that the effective date of any regulations issued under the FPLA shall not be prior to 30 days after
publication in the 

Federal Register

. 


B. Original FTC Regulations Issued Under the FPLA 


In 1968, the FTC issued the original regulations implementing the FPLA. (33 FR 4718, March 19, 1968.) There are twenty-seven
regulations, of which twenty-two relate to the net quantity of contents declaration. Several of the regulations
relate to the measurement system to be used in the net quantity declaration. For example, 500.8 prescribes
the units of weight and measures to be used; 500.9 through 500.14 set out how weight, fluid measure, length,
width, area, and cubic measure should be expressed; and 500.16 states how fractions should be treated. 
Each of the original regulations mandating measurement disclosure requires the use of customary inch/pound units.
This is because Section 4 of the original FPLA (15 U.S.C. 1453) states that required net quantity disclosure be in pounds,
inches, feet, yards, pints, quarts, gallons, etc. 



