 

In understanding the language of the HTSUS, Customs consults the ENs. The ENs, although not dispositive, provide
a commentary on the scope of each heading of the Harmonized System and are thus useful in ascertaining the classification
of merchandise. Customs believes that they should be consulted for guidance in determining the proper interpretation
of the HTSUS. See T.D. 8980, 54 FR 35127, 35128 (August 23, 1989). EN 70.10, pg. 933934, states, in pertinent
part, that: 
This heading covers all glass containers of the kinds commonly used commercially for the conveyance or packing of
liquids or of solid products (powders, granules, etc.). They include:

 

(A) Carboys, demijohns, bottles (including syphon vases), phials and similar containers, of all shapes and sizes,
used as containers for chemical products (acids, etc.) beverages, oils, meat extracts, perfumery preparations,
pharmaceutical products, inks, glues, etc. 
These articles, formerly produced by blowing, are now almost invariably manufactured by machines which automatically
feed molten glass into moulds where the finished articles are formed by the action of compressed air. They are usually
made of ordinary glass (colourless or coloured) although some bottles (e.g., for perfumes) may be made of lead crystal,
and certain large carboys are made of fused quartz or other fused silica ***
These containers remain in this heading even if they are ground, cut, sand-blasted, etched or engraved, or decorated
(this applies, in particular, to certain perfume or liqueur bottles), banded, wickered or otherwise trimmed with
various materials (wicker, straw, raffia, metal, etc.); they may also have tumbler-caps fitted to the neck. They
may be fitted with drop measuring devices or may be graduated, provided that they are not of a kind used as laboratory
glassware. 
(B) Jars, pots and similar containers for the conveyance or packing of certain foodstuffs ***, pharmaceutical
products, *** polishes, cleaning preparations, etc. 
These articles are usually made of ordinary glass (colourless or tinted) by pressure in a mould usually followed by
blowing with compressed air. They generally have a large opening, a short neck (if any) and as a rule, a lip or flange
to hold the lid or cap. Some of these containers, however may be closed by corks or screwstoppers.

 

In HRL 087359, dated August 8, 1990, Customs explained the phrase ``commercially used to convey'', as used in the ENs,
when referring to the class of glass containers commercially used to convey solid or liquid products. The ruling stated,
in pertinent part, that:

 

The key phrase in this instance is ``commonly used commercially for the conveyance'' of liquids. The root word of ``commercially''
is commerce which is described as the exchange or buying and selling of commodities. 

Webster's Third New International Dictionary,

 (1986) and 

The Random House Dictionary of the English Language,

 (1983). The root word of ``conveyance'' is convey which is described as to carry, bring or take from one place to another;
transport; bear. 

The Random House Dictionary of the English Language,

 (1983) and 

Webster's Third New International Dictionary,

 (1986).

 

Based on this ruling, Customs current position is that the principal use for the class ``containers used for the conveyance
or packing of goods'' is that glass articles of this class be part of the exchange or buying and selling of commodities,
and be used to convey or pack a product to a consumer who then uses the product and discards the container. 


After reviewing the Kraft case, the ENs and the relevant HRLs, Customs believes that together, they provide specific
identifiable characteristics which are indicative, but not conclusive of whether a particular glass article qualifies
as part of the class ``containers of glass of a kind used for the conveyance or packing of goods''. These characteristics
would include, containers, of all shapes and sizes:

 

1. generally having a large opening, a short neck (if any) and as a rule, a lip or flange to hold the lid or cap, made of ordinary
glass (colourless or coloured) and manufactured by machines which automatically feed molten glass into moulds where
the finished articles are formed by the action of compressed air; 
2. in which the ultimate purchaser's primary expectation is to discard the container after the conveyed or packed
goods are used; 
3. sold from the importer to a wholesaler/distributor who then packs them with goods; 
4. sold in an environment of sale that features the goods packed in the jar and not the jar itself; 
5. used to commercially convey foodstuffs, beverages, oils, meat extracts, etc.;
6. capable of being used in the hot packing process; and 
7. recognized in the trade as used primarily to pack and convey goods to a consumer who then discards the container after
this initial use.

 

Customs current position is that the physical characteristics of a particular glass article are the primary indicator
of whether it belongs to the class ``containers of a kind used for the packing or conveyance of goods''. 


