 

b. An example of an extraordinary mitigating circumstance would be destruction of records by accidental fire or act
of God. 
2. Unauthorized entry in secured area, failure to openly display or possess identification card, strip or seal or
failure to surrender identification upon demand by an authorized Customs officer, cancel the claim upon payment
of an amount between $250 and $500. 
3. Failure to return, failure to report loss or theft of identification card, strip or seal or failure to notify district
director that employee no longer requires access to a secured area: 
a. First violation_cancel upon payment of $500. 
b. Second or subsequent violation_grant no relief. 
4. Presentation of an identification card, strip or seal by a person other than to whom it was issued: 
a. For a first violation, cancel without payment if the bond principal can show that it was unaware that its employee,
agent or contractor used the card, strip or seal in an improper manner and it had given warnings about such conduct to
all its employees, agents or contractors. 
b. For a subsequent violation against a bond principal who has received full cancellation of a claim as described in
(B)(4)(a) above, cancel the claim upon payment of $200. 
c. For any violation where the bond principal was aware that its employees, agents or contractors were acting in this
improper manner, no relief shall be granted. 
5. Refusal of an employee, agent or contractor to obey any proper order of a Customs officer or any Customs order, rule
or regulation. 
a. For a first violation, cancel without payment if the bond principal can show that it was unaware that its employee,
agent or contractor had acted contrary to proper order, rule or regulation and it had given warnings about such conduct
to all its employees, agents and contractors. 
b. For a subsequent violation against a bond principal who has received full cancellation of a claim as described in
subparagraph (B)(5)(a) above, cancel upon payment of between $200 and $500. 
c. For any violation where the bond principal was aware that its employees, agents or contractors were acting in this
improper manner, no relief shall be granted. 


IX. Guidelines for Cancellation of Claims Arising From Violation of Foreign Trade Zone Regulations (19 CFR Part 146,
19 CFR 113.73) 


A. Defaults Involving Merchandise. Defaults involving merchandise include those violations relating to merchandise
which: 
1. Cannot be located or accounted for in the activated area of a foreign trade zone; 
2. Has been removed from the activated area of the zone without a proper Customs permit; or


