 

Gas Research Institute Study



Energen urged DOE to evaluate thoroughly a study commissioned by the gas 
industry on cost/efficiency of water heater designs. (Energen, No. 12 at 9.)

The Department did review and use information from this Gas Research Institute study,
<FOOTCITE>27</FOOTCITE>
 particularly cost data for installation and reventing. The study was also useful in categorizing standby losses.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
27

</FOOTNAME>


Ibid.



</FOOTNOTE>


3. Direct Heating Equipment





Classes.

 Among the comments on product classes, Southern Gas Association, Energen Corp. and Atlanta Gas Light Company proposed
that direct heating product classes be expanded to separate each present class into two classes, one with and one without
an electric cord. The division of product classes by capacity is not mentioned. Their arguments deal generally with
economic and utility issues, i.e., the ability of products without an electric cord to provide heat if a power outage
occurs, and the affordability of these products to lower-income people. (Southern Gas Association, No. 4 at 6; Energen,
No. 12 at 1213; and AGLC, No. 29 at 3). The California Energy Commission stated that there are too many product
classes for this product and proposed three classes which are wall (fan and gravity), floor (fan and gravity), and
room (fan and gravity). (California Energy Commission, No. 24 at 4).

As stated above, the Department does not believe that the ability of gas equipment to operate during electricity outages
is a utility that requires separating the existing gravity product classes into those with and without a power cord.
Instead, designs that use electricity are evaluated on their economic advantages and disadvantages. The Department
has kept the four product class categories as designated by the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act. The categories
are: fan-wall, gravity-wall, room, and floor. With respect to division by capacity, the Department kept the National
Appliance Energy Conservation Act divisions during the engineering analyses. The current class divisions by capacity
are necessary because of the manner in which direct heating equipment is evaluated by the DOE test procedure. The energy
descriptor for this equipment, the annual fuel utilization efficiency, is a function of, among other things, the
pilot fraction. The pilot fraction is defined as the energy input rate to the pilot light (Q

p

) divided by the steady-state heat input rate to the heater (Q

in

). As the pilot fraction decreases, the annual fuel utilization efficiency will increase. For each of the four categories
of direct heating equipment (fan-wall, gravity-wall, room, floor), the pilot light input rate is constant. Thus,
for heaters of two different capacities within the same category and with the same steady-state efficiency, the annual
fuel utilization efficiency will always be higher for the larger capacity equipment. The division of classes by capacity
is required to account for this relationship between the annual fuel utilization efficiency and the pilot fraction.



Design options.

 The Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association stated that gravity-type direct heating units provide a unique utility
in that they operate during an electrical power outage. In addition, gravity-type equipment can be used where an external
electrical source is not available. Because of these reasons, the Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association argued
that design options requiring electricity should not be required for floor heaters, room heaters, or gravity wall
furnaces. (Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association No. 40 at 6).

As stated above, the Department does not believe that the ability of gas equipment to operate during electric outages
is a utility that forecloses consideration of electricity-using design options for those appliances. Therefore,
the Department considered, for economic justification, design options that would require electricity for gravity
wall, floor, and room direct heating equipment.

With regard to electronic ignition systems, both Southern Gas Association and North Carolina Public Service Co.
stated that adding an automatic ignition system and electronic controls would add significantly to the price of direct
heating equipment. The Southern Gas Association said it would add $190 while North Carolina Public Service Co. stated
it would add $150 to $200. (Southern Gas Association, No. 4 at 7; North Carolina Public Service Co., No. 74 at 5). The
American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy said that intermittent ignition device and vent dampers should
be considered separately. (American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy, No. 6 at 3).

The Department took into account all sources of available data when determining the cost of an electronic ignition
system for direct heating equipment. Sources of data included manufacturers, suppliers, utilities, and published
papers and reports. The electronic ignition design option was evaluated not only separately from any other design
option, but also with other design options, including vent dampers.

The Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association commented that increased insulation does not improve the energy efficiency
of room heaters since this equipment is located within the heated space. (Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association,
No. 40 at 6).

The Department agrees with the Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association's comment and is not considering the increased
insulation design option for room heaters or wall furnaces. Insulation is only applicable to floor furnaces as this
equipment's intended installation is in an unconditioned crawl space.






