 

(iii) A net that is on a reel and is covered and secured, provided: 

(A) The entire surface of the net is covered with canvas or other similar material that is securely bound; 

(B) The towing wires, including the leg wires, are detached from the net; and 

(C) The codend is removed from the net and stored below deck; or 

(iv) Nets that are secured in a manner authorized in writing by the Regional Director. 

(8) 

Addition or deletion of exemptions. 

The Regional Director may add exemptions if he/she makes a determination that the exempted fishery, gear, and/or
area has a catch of less than 5 percent by weight of regulated species. The Regional Director may delete an existing
exemption if he/she makes a determination that the catch of regulated species is greater than or equal to 5 percent
by weight. Notification of additions or deletions will be made through publication of a rule in the 

Federal Register

. 

(d) *** 

(4) 

Mesh-size restrictions. 

Except as provided in paragraphs (d)(5), (e), and (f) of this section, the minimum mesh size for any trawl net, sink
gillnet, Scottish seine, purse seine, or midwater trawl in use, or available for use as described under paragraph
(c)(7) of this section, by a vessel fishing in the Mid-Atlantic regulated mesh area shall be that specified in the summer
flounder regulations at 625.24(a) of this chapter. This restriction does not apply to vessels that have not
been issued a multispecies finfish permit under 651.4 and are fishing exclusively in state waters. 

(5) 

Exemptions.

 (i) 

Fisheries. 

The butterfish, dogfish, herring, mackerel, ocean pout, scup, shrimp, squid, summer flounder, whiting, weakfish,
and scallop fisheries in the Mid-Atlantic regulated mesh area have been found to meet the exemption qualification
requirements specified in paragraph (d)(6) of this section. Therefore, vessels subject to the mesh restrictions
specified in paragraph (d)(4) of this section may fish for, harvest, possess or land any of the above mentioned species
with nets of mesh smaller than the minimum size specified in paragraph (d)(4) of this section in the Mid-Atlantic regulated
mesh area, provided such vessels comply with the requirements specified in paragraph (d)(5)(ii) of this section.


(ii) 

Possession and net stowage requirements. 

Vessels may possess regulated species while in possession of nets with mesh less than the minimum size specified in
paragraph (d)(4) of this section, provided that the nets are stowed and are not available for immediate use in accordance
with paragraph (c)(7) of this section, and provided that regulated species were not harvested by nets of mesh size
smaller than the minimum mesh size specified in paragraph (d)(4) of this section. Vessels may only possess butterfish,
dogfish, herring, mackerel, ocean pout, scup, shrimp, 

Loligo

 squid, 

Illex

 squid, summer flounder, whiting and/or weakfish fisheries while fishing with nets of mesh smaller than the minimum
size specified in paragraph (d)(4) of this section. Vessels fishing for these species may also possess and retain
the following species as incidental take to these exempted fisheries: conger eels, searobins, and black sea bass.


(6) 

Addition or deletion of exemptions. 

The Regional Director may add exemptions if he/she makes a determination that the exempted fishery, gear, and/or
area has a catch of less than 5 percent by weight of regulated species. The Regional Director may delete an existing
exemption if he/she makes a determination that the catch of regulated species is greater than or equal to 5 percent
by weight. Notification of additions or deletions will be made through publication of a rule in the 

Federal Register

. 

(e) *** 

(1) *** 

(v) The vessel does not fish for, possess or land multispecies finfish. 


(vi) The vessel only fishes for, possesses or lands Atlantic herring, blueback herring, mackerel, or squid in areas
south of 42
&cir;20
&rsquo; N. latitude, and Atlantic herring, blueback herring or 
mackerel in areas north of 42
&cir;20
&rsquo; N. latitude. 



* * * * * 



(3) For the GOM/GB and JL/SB regulated mesh areas north of 42
&cir;20
&rsquo; N. lat., fishing for Atlantic herring or blueback herring and for mackerel may take place throughout the fishing
year with midwater trawl gear of mesh size less than the regulated size, provided that the requirement of paragraphs
(e)(1)(i) through (v) of this section are met. 



