 

In accordance with sections 353.22(a) and 355.22(a) of the Commerce regulations, an interested party may request
in writing that the Secretary conduct an administrative review. For antidumping reviews, the interested party must
specify for which individual producers or resellers covered by an antidumping finding or order it is requesting a
review, and the requesting party must state why the person desires the Secretary to review those particular producers
or resellers. If the interested party intends for the Secretary to review sales of merchandise by a reseller (or a producer
if that producer also resells merchandise from other suppliers) which was produced in more than one country of origin,
and each country of origin is subject to a separate order, then the interested party must state specifically which
reseller(s) and which countries of origin for each reseller the request is intended to cover.

Seven copies of the request should be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for Import Administration, International
Trade Administration, Room B099, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C. 20230. The Department also
asks parties to serve a copy of their requests to the Office of Antidumping Compliance, Attention: John Kugelman,
in room 3065 of the main Commerce Building. Further, in accordance with section 353.31(g) or 355.31(g) of the Commerce
Regulations, a copy of each request must be served on every party on the Department's service list.

The Department will publish in the 

Federal Register

 a notice of ``Initiation of Antidumping (Countervailing) Duty Administrative Review'', for requests received
by August 31, 1994. If the Department does not receive, by August 31, 1994, a request for review of entries covered by
an order or finding listed in this notice and for the period identified above, the Department will instruct the Customs
Service to assess antidumping or countervailing duties on those entries at a rate equal to the cash deposit of (or bond
for) estimated antidumping or countervailing duties required on those entries at the time of entry, or withdrawal
from warehouse, for consumption and to continue to collect the cash deposit previously ordered.

This notice is not required by statute, but is published as a service to the international trading community.




Dated: July 28, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Roland L. MacDonald,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Compliance.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9419072 Filed 8294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3510DSM
</BILLING>

