 

The immediate result of Glass Melter treatment would be the conversion of waste that is primarily liquid and combustible
to a stable, inorganic form that would present very little environmental concern in storage. Most of the waste would
eventually require transport to a radioactive mixed waste land disposal facility. (Any waste that is not mixed waste
would be disposed of with other, similar Mound wastes, e.g., hazardous waste is shipped offsite for disposal.) 


Environmental Impacts:

 In a series of test burns conducted in January 1985, the Glass Melter demonstrated the capability to thermally treat
hazardous wastes in compliance with regulatory requirements. In June 1987, the Glass Melter was further tested and
demonstrated effective treatment of low-level radioactive waste while meeting applicable regulatory requirements.
Proposed future treatment of wastes using the Glass Melter would also meet all applicable environmental requirements.
The Glass Melter is considered a ``thermal treatment unit,'' not an ``incinerator'' under the Environmental Protection
Agency regulations (40 CFR 260.10). Under the regulations for miscellaneous treatment, storage, and disposal units
(40 CFR Part 264, Subpart X), any permit for the glass melter may include appropriate conditions from the incinerator
regulations (Subpart O). Thermal treatment is one of the limited options DOE currently has to meet the requirement
for site treatment plans under the Federal Facility Compliance Act. 
The Environmental Protection Agency issued a Draft Strategy for Combustion of Hazardous Waste in Incinerators and
Boilers on May 18, 1993, initiating a reexamination of its existing regulations and policies on waste combustion.
In the draft strategy the Environmental Protection Agency indicates that, ``if conducted in compliance with regulatory
standards and guidance, combustion can be a safe and effective means of disposing [of] hazardous wastes.'' To the
extent that the Glass Melter would destroy hazardous wastes it would effectively ``dispose'' of that portion of the
mixed waste backlog. Nevertheless, the thermal treatment of mixed wastes would 
necessitate the disposal of treatment residues as a mixed waste, which would be stored pending final disposal in an
approved location. 
Emissions of nonradiological pollutants to the air during routine operations of the Glass Melter would include arsenic,
cadmium, chromium, lead, carbon monoxide, hydrogen chloride, nitrogen oxides, and particulates. Predicted concentrations
of nonradiological pollutants would meet applicable National Ambient Air Quality Standards and the maximum acceptable
ground-level concentrations established by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. During routine operations
of the Glass Melter the effective dose equivalent of radiation to the maximally exposed individual at the Mound Plant
boundary [approximately 470 meters (510 yd) north-northeast from the Glass Melter stack] would be 0.07 mrem/year
(tritium, plutonium-238, and 
thorium-230) from inhalation and ingestion pathways. These emissions would not cause the Mound Plant to exceed the
individual effective dose equivalent limit of 10 mrem/year in the Environmental Protection Agency's National Emission
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants. Based on the 1990 population distribution surrounding the Mound Plant,
the collective effective dose equivalent to the total population residing within 80 km (50 mi) of the facility would
be 2.6 person-rem/year. The environmental assessment shows that the health risk from such exposures would be very
small. 





