 



EPA requests comment on the feasibility of meeting an NO

X

 standard of 1.5 g/bhp-hr for all engine applications, as well as on the need for the surcharge-based 2.5 g/bhp-hr standard.
EPA also requests comment on the possibility of adopting an NO

X

 standard of 2.5 g/bhp-hr for all California on-highway heavy-duty engines without a new vehicle emissions surcharge.


The Agency also notes that in the longer term, significant potential exists for low NO

X

 emissions from different engine designs. Other possibilities include such engines as turbines and stirling engines,
or fuel cell based designs. While such approaches may eventually offer attractive means of lowering NO

X

 emissions, EPA requests comment on the possibility of commercialization of any of these designs by 1999. 



b. Hydrocarbon standard. 

 Heavy-duty vehicles contribute hydrocarbon emissions from both exhaust and evaporative sources. To deal with exhaust
emissions, EPA is proposing an exhaust HC standard of between 0.2 and 0.6 g/bhp-hr NMHC. The 0.6 g/bhp-hr level represents
what is currently being achieved by most diesel engines. Most 1993 model year diesel-fueled engines are certified
at levels less than 0.6 


g/bhp-hr total HC without aftertreatment. Also, two of the three natural gas engines certified by CARB emit no more
than 0.6 g/bhp-hr NMHC. The 0.2 g/bhp-hr NMHC standard represents the current performance of methanol-fueled engines
and diesel-fueled engines equipped with catalysts; for the 1994 model year, such engines have been certified at levels
less than 0.2 g/bhp-hr total HC. On the other hand, most heavy-duty gasoline engines are certified in the 1 g/bhp-hr
range. However, with the application of optimized three-way feedback controlled catalyst systems these engines
should be able to reach levels in the proposed range. EPA requests comments on the appropriate level for this standard.




With regard to evaporative emissions, EPA is planning to extend the concept of inherently low-emitting vehicles
(ILEVs) to the FIP enhanced heavy-duty vehicle control program. EPA's rulemaking for Clean Fuel Fleets established
the ILEV concept of a vehicle that maintains low evaporative emissions without an active control system (58 FR 11888,
March 1, 1993). EPA proposes to adopt an ``evaporative-free'' requirement for all heavy-duty vehicles over 14,000
pounds GVWR to avoid a trade-off of increased evaporative emissions for reduced NO

X

 emissions as would likely occur with the use of gasoline fueled engines in this vehicle class. Engines in vehicles
under 14,000 lbs GVWR certified to the optional engine-based standards also would need to demonstrate evaporative-free
performance. This assurance is needed because vehicles equipped with these engines would not be subject to any in-use
I/M testing of the evaporative control systems. The in-use effectiveness of evaporative control systems consequently
could not be assured as it would be for vehicles subject to enhanced I/M and associated standards. 

Qualifying as an evaporative-free vehicle would require a demonstration that the vehicle does not have the potential
for significant evaporative emissions when operating in high temperature conditions. The demonstration would
have to show a maximum emission level of 5 grams for combined diurnal (adjusted to a nominal 20 gallon fuel tank volume),
hot soak, running loss, and resting loss emissions, without an active evaporative control system. Diurnal emissions
would be based on the engine and fuel system being exposed to ambient heating from 72
&cir; to 96 
&cir;F using 9 psi RVP fuel (or the parallel California requirements of 65
&cir; to 105 
&cir;F using 7 psi RVP fuel). Also, the evaporative-free requirement only supplements existing evaporative emissions
testing procedures; vehicles currently subject to evaporative emission testing would still have to comply with
all applicable requirements. 

For heavy-duty vehicles over 26,000 pounds GVWR, which already operate almost exclusively on diesel fuel, an evaporative-free
requirement would prevent a potential market shift to fuels (such as gasoline) that may be able to meet the proposed
NO

X

 standards but have the potential of high evaporative emission levels. Further, the requirement would decrease the
HC contribution from this class of engines as a whole by eliminating any current evaporative emissions. The heavy-duty
vehicles between 14,000 and 26,000 pounds GVWR, while relatively small in number, do consist of about two-thirds
gasoline vehicles. EPA recognizes that the evaporative-free requirement may discourage the sale of these engines,
however bladders and low volatility fuels could be explored as means of demonstrating evaporative-free performance.
EPA requests comments on other options that could provide assurances that market shifts could not occur and that in-use
evaporative systems for the gasoline vehicles in this class maintain their performance in use. 

EPA specifically requests comment on an option that would establish a chassis-based certification option similar
to that for heavy-duty vehicles less than 14,000 lbs. GVWR. Under this option, vehicles would be subject to enhanced
I/M and other aspects of the enhanced light-duty vehicle program, including the fleets hydrocarbon standard (see
the discussion of the fleet program under the enhanced light-duty vehicle portions of this appendix). Commenters
supporting this alternative should comment on the appropriate numerical standards for certification, recall,
and inspection-and-maintenance testing. 



c. Test requirements.

 Under the proposed enhanced heavy-duty vehicle program, certification and enforcement testing of on-highway heavy-duty
engines and vehicles subject to the new NO

X

 and hydrocarbon standards, including those medium-duty vehicles certified to engine-based standards, would be
subject to EPA requirements. Exhaust emission testing would be conducted following standard Federal test procedures,
with two exceptions. First, test fuels would be based on California specifications. Second, exhaust hydrocarbon
measurements would be quantified as nonmethane hydrocarbons, or other fuel-specific equivalent. Assembly-line
testing would be performed under EPA's Selective Enforcement Audit testing program as described in 40 CFR part 86
subpart K. 

