 

This proposed rule is in accordance with Department of Commerce regulations relating to the disclosure of commercial
or financial information (15 CFR 4.7(h)). Under these regulations, NMFS may disclose commercial or financial information
if (1) a notice of intent to disclose such information is adopted by NMFS pursuant to notice and public comment, (2)
NMFS specifies narrow classes of records submitted to it that are to be released under the FOIA, and (3) NMFS provides
in exceptional circumstances for notice when the submitter provides written justification, at the time the information
is submitted, that disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to cause substantial competitive
harm. 

Consistent with 15 CFR 4.7(h), in exceptional circumstances, vessel owners and operators may provide to the Regional
Director written justification at the time the observer data are submitted, or within a reasonable time thereafter
(such as 24 hours), that disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to cause substantial competitive
harm. The Regional Director would consider objections and specific grounds for nondisclosure prior to determining
whether to release the observer data. An example of an exceptional circumstance that would warrant Regional Director
consideration of observer data would be when fewer than three vessels participate in a particular trawl fishery during
a weekly reporting period and release of location or depth data for individual hauls observed onboard those vessels
would result in substantial competitive harm. Exceptional circumstances that would result in the nondisclosure
of observer data on vessel name and weekly bycatch amounts or rates of prohibited species have not been identified
by NMFS. Public comment is specifically encouraged on additional exceptional circumstances that may justify nondisclosure.




Classification 



The Assistant Administrator for Fisheries, NOAA (AA), has initially determined that this proposed rule is necessary
for the conservation and management of the groundfish fishery off Alaska and that, pending Secretarial approval
of Amendment 25, it would be consistent with the Magnuson Act and other applicable laws. 

The RIR prepared for the proposed action concludes that this proposed rule, if adopted, would not have significant
impacts on a substantial number of small entities. A copy of this analysis is available from the Council (see 

ADDRESSES

). Every vessel operator participating in the Alaska groundfish fisheries and every processor receiving BSAI groundfish
would be affected by the proposed action. Most operators of catcher vessels harvesting groundfish off Alaska meet
the definition of a small entity under the Regulatory Flexibility Act. In 1992, 180 catcher vessels landed groundfish
from the BSAI. All these vessel operators would be affected by the preferred alternatives, particularly those that
participate in the pollock fishery (about 123 vessels). The economic impact on small entities under the proposed
action would not result in a reduction in annual gross revenues by more than 5 percent, annual compliance costs that
increase total costs of production by more than 5 percent, or compliance costs for small entities that are at least
10 percent higher than compliance costs as a percent of sales for large entities. 



List of Subjects in 50 CFR Parts 672 and 675 



Fisheries, Reporting and recordkeeping. 




Dated: January 12, 1994.




<SIGNER>
Nancy Foster,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Assistant Administrator for Fisheries, National Marine Fisheries Service. 


 


For the reasons set out in the preamble, 50 CFR parts 672 and 675 are proposed to be amended as follows: 



PART 672_GROUNDFISH OF THE GULF OF ALASKA 



1. The authority citation for 50 CFR part 672 continues to read as follows: 


 




Authority:

 16 U.S.C. 1801, 

et seq

. 




</SIGNJOB>
