 

In contrast, the mechanism of traditional mechanical deboning machines from which MS(S) results, involves mechanically
separating and removing most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle of livestock through the application of high
pressure to crush, grind, and pulverize bones from which most of the meat has already been removed, and then using high
pressure to force the resulting paste through a sieve to separate bone particles and fragments that result from crushing
and pulverizing bones during processing. Due to the mechanism of the machinery used to manufacture MS(S), bone and
bone particles, including bone marrow, are incorporated into the finished product.

The regulation on MS(S) in 9 CFR 319.5 does not specify the type of equipment used to separate and remove bone because
it is intended to cover the product manufactured by any such machinery that operates on the differing resistance of
hard bone and soft tissue to passage through small openings, whether it employs sieves, screens, or other devices
and whether or not bones are pre-broken before being fed into such equipment. However, the regulation on MS(S) is not
intended to apply to whole pieces of muscle tissue which have been removed from livestock bones by mechanical or other
means (47 FR 28223). FSIS has determined that the consistency of MS(S) and its content of bone, including bone marrow,
and certain minerals, as well as muscle tissue, are materially different from those of ``meat,'' and that these differences
have potential consequences for finished product quality and for health and safety which are addressed by the regulations
for MS(S) (9 CFR 318.18, 319.5, and 319.6) and supported by the Agency's 1979 report on the health and safety aspects
of mechanically deboned meat.
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
A copy of the report entitled, ``Health and Safety Aspects of the Use of Mechanically Deboned Meat, Final Report and
Recommendations Select Panel'' and ``Health and Safety Aspects of the Use of Mechanically Deboned Meat, Volume II.
Background Materials and Details of Data'' is available for public inspection in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.

</FOOTNOTE>


Starting Materials



The starting materials from which the meat from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and meat recovery systems
results are intact livestock bones with adhering skeletal muscle and other soft tissue. While it has been reported
that it is possible to use whole carcasses, the raw materials for this type of processing generally are parts of carcasses
with skeletal muscle attached. Adhering skeletal muscle tissue usually varies in amount, depending on the anatomical
origin and size of the bones. Typically, the livestock bones with adhering skeletal tissue applicable to the advances
in meat recovery are those where the adhering tissue cannot be efficiently or effectively removed by traditional
hand-deboning techniques, and the bones are of sufficient hardness and of appropriate size compatible with the operation
of the advanced meat/bone separator/meat recovery system. It is FSIS's understanding that the advanced machinery
is capable of handling medium to smaller size bones, e.g., rib bones, button bones, loin bones, and feather bones.
The fact that no bone crushing, grinding, or pulverizing occurs limits the types of bones that are used. The bones must
be hard enough to emerge from the process essentially intact and in natural physical conformation.

In the traditional mechanical deboning process, described in the 1982 final regulations on MS(S) (47 FR 28214), it
is possible to use whole carcasses; however, generally, the raw materials for the conventional process are parts
of carcasses from which most of the skeletal muscle already has been removed by traditional hand-deboning methods.
With the mechanical deboning technology described in the regulations on MS(S), these bones are broken up and pushed
under high pressure through equipment with apertures that allow a small amount of powdered bone to pass through with
the soft tissue.



Characteristics and Composition of Meat



FSIS believes that the resulting product derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and meat recovery
systems is comparable to meat derived by hand-deboning techniques, including the use of mechanical knives and that,
as such it warrants classification as ``meat.'' FSIS believes that current relevant Federal meat inspection regulations
on labeling meat should apply, and, as such, the ``meat'' derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and
recovery systems may be described by any term that accurately reflects it as meat. Advanced meat/bone separation
machinery and meat recovery systems apply a process mechanism that shaves, presses or scrapes adhering tissue from
the surface of livestock bones. The machines do not grind, crush, or pulverize bones to separate muscle tissue, and
the bones and the interconnecting soft tissues that link bones emerge from the process in a manner consistent with
hand-deboning operations that use knives.


