 

(2) 

Effective date

_(i) 

In general.

 This section is 
effective for taxable years beginning after August 24, 1994.

(ii) 

DASTM prior-year election.

 A taxpayer may elect to apply this section to any open taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986 (whether or not
DASTM has been previously elected for some or all of those years). In order to make this election, the taxpayer must
apply 1.9853 to that year and all subsequent years. In addition, each person that is related (within
the meaning of 1.9853(e)(2)(vi)) to the taxpayer on the last day of any taxable year for which the election
is effective and that would have been eligible to elect DASTM must also apply these rules to that year and all subsequent
years. A taxpayer that has not previously elected to apply DASTM to its prior taxable years may make the DASTM election
for the pertinent years by filing amended returns and complying with the applicable election procedures of 1.9852.
Form 8819 shall be attached to the return for the first year for which the election is to be effective. A taxpayer that
has elected DASTM for prior taxable years and applied the rules under 1.9853 (as contained in the 
April 1, 1994 edition of 26 CFR part 1 (1.908 to 1.1000)) may amend its returns to apply the rules of this 1.9853.
In either case, the DASTM election for prior taxable years shall be deemed to be made with the consent of the Commissioner.


(b) 

Statement of method.

 Under DASTM, income or loss or earnings and profits (or a deficit in earnings and profits) of a QBU for its taxable year
shall be determined in dollars by_

(1) Preparing an income or loss statement from the QBU's books and records (within the meaning of 1.989(a)1(d))
as recorded in the QBU's hyperinflationary currency (as defined in 1.9851(b)(2)(ii)(D)); 

(2) Making the adjustments necessary to conform such 
statement to United States generally accepted accounting 
principles and tax accounting principles (including reversing 
monetary correction adjustments required by local accounting 
principles); 

(3) Translating the amounts of hyperinflationary currency as shown on such adjusted statement into dollars in accordance
with paragraph (c) of this section; and 

(4) Adjusting the resulting dollar income or loss or earnings and profits (or deficit in earnings and profits) and,
where necessary, particular items of gross income, deductible expense or other amounts, in accordance with paragraph
(e) of this section to reflect the amount of DASTM gain or loss as 
determined under paragraph (d) of this section. 

(c) 

Translation into United States dollars

_(1) 

In general.

 
Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (c), the amounts shown on the income or loss statement, as adjusted
under paragraph (b)(2) of this section, shall be translated into dollars at the exchange rate (as defined in paragraph
(c)(6) of this section) for the translation period (as defined in paragraph 
(c)(7) of this section) to which they relate. However, if the QBU previously changed its functional currency to the
dollar, and the rules of 1.9855 (or, if applicable, 1.9855T, as contained in the April
1, 1993 edition of 26 CFR part 1 (1.908 to 1.1000)) applied in translating its balance sheet amounts into dollars, then
the spot exchange rate applied under those rules shall be 
used to translate any amount that would otherwise be translated at a rate determined by reference to a translation
period prior to the change in functional currency. For example, depreciation with respect to an asset acquired while
the QBU had a nondollar functional currency shall be translated into dollars at the spot rate on the last day of the taxable
year before the year of change to a dollar functional currency, rather than at the rate for the period in which the asset
was acquired. 

(2) 

Cost of goods sold.

 The dollar value of cost of goods sold shall equal the sum of the dollar values of beginning inventory and purchases
less the dollar value of closing inventory as these amounts are determined under paragraph (c)(3) of this section.


(3) 

Beginning inventory, purchases, and closing inventory

_(i) 

Beginning inventory.

 Amounts representing beginning inventory shall be translated so as to obtain the same amount of dollars which represented
such items in the closing inventory balance for the preceding taxable year. 

(ii) 

Purchases.

 Amounts representing items purchased or otherwise first included in inventory during the taxable year shall be translated
at the exchange rate for the translation period in which the cost of such items was incurred. 


