 

H. Advance notice of proposed rulemaking


On March 3, 1993, RSPA issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPRM) and announced a public meeting under
Docket HM181G (58 FR 12207) concerning the issues raised by petitioners and commenters and the need for additional
regulatory changes pertaining to infectious substances. In order to provide time to evaluate the comments received
in response to the ANPRM, RSPA also extended the compliance date (58 FR 12182) for provisions applicable to infectious
substances from April 1, 1993, to January 1, 1994. The ANPRM addressed a number of complex issues pertaining to scope
of regulation, consistency with regulations of other agencies, the need for revised standards for non-bulk and bulk
packagings, and defining criteria for infectious substances and RMW. Following issuance of the ANPRM, RSPA continued
its efforts to gain information on other Federal agencies' regulatory requirements, and hosted and participated
in a number of interagency meetings on these issues. On December 20, 1993 (58 FR 66302), RSPA again extended the compliance
date for provisions applicable to infectious substances from January 1, 1994, to October 1, 1994 to provide additional
time for resolving the issues of concern. 


II. Final Rule Extending Compliance Dates 


In a final rule published on September 22, 1994 (59 FR 48762), RSPA revised 49 CFR 171.14(b) to once again delay compliance
dates. For regulatory requirements for RMW and for materials infectious only to animals, the compliance date was
extended from October 1, 1994, to October 1, 1995. This time period should be adequate for RSPA to evaluate comments
received in response to this Notice, and make any necessary changes to the HMR based on the merits of those comments.

For other infectious substances, e.g., for cultures and stocks of substances infectious to humans, the compliance
date was extended from October 1, 1994, to January 1, 1995. The provisions for these materials generally were not at
issue in comments or petitions to the December 1991 final rule. The principal effects of the January 1, 1995 compliance
date will be a nomenclature change from the old ``etiologic agent'' hazard class to the new Division 6.2 (infectious
substances) classification, broadening the definition of infectious substances to cover substances, such as the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and Lyme disease, which are not listed in the CDC regulations (42 CFR 72.3). The
removal of the 50 ml exception and expansion of the definition of infectious substances originally were to have occurred
on February 19, 1991 (Docket HM142A; January 3, 1991; 56 FR 197). RSPA believes it is necessary to implement
these requirements as quickly as possible to ensure public safety and end confusion as to the status of materials that
were not regulated prior to 1990. The interested reader is directed to the final rule for further information concerning
the extension of compliance dates. 


III. Response to Petitions for Reconsideration 


With respect to the issue of providing notice and comment, the December 20, 1991 final rule was issued to correct obvious
errors and respond to over 250 petitions for reconsideration of the final rule published on December 21, 1990. The
rulemaking proceeding under HM181 spanned over 10 years, provided numerous opportunities for public comment
(with over 2,500 comments received), and complied fully with the requirements of the APA. Similarly, the final rule
issued under HM142A was preceded by an NPRM and opportunity to comment. 
The specific criteria and provisions for medical waste were contained in the December 20, 1991 final rule to provide
relief from the more burdensome infectious substances packaging requirements adopted in the December 21, 1990 final
rule. Relief was provided in response to petitions for reconsideration stating that packaging prescribed in 173.196
would be both cost-prohibitive and impractical for medical waste and that, rather than being treated on-site, significant
quantities of medical waste containing infectious substances were routinely transported off-site for treatment
or disposal. The relief granted for medical waste was well within the scope of the NPRM and the final rule. 
Infectious substances, including medical waste containing infectious substances, are regulated under the HMR
and have been since 1973. For various reasons, many generators and transporters of medical waste may not have been
fully aware of these requirements. The change in the definition of an etiologic agent/infectious substance under
Dockets HM142A and HM181, coupled with the elimination of the 50 ml exception, increased both the awareness
of this issue and the likelihood that more medical waste would be subject to the HMR. Moreover, the petitions appeared
to be based on a misconception that RSPA intended to regulate all medical waste, rather than only that medical waste
containing an infectious substance. To the extent that there existed any confusion regarding the scope of RSPA's
regulation of medical waste, the notice published today sets forth a proposed definition of RMW that clearly limits
RMW to a waste containing an infectious substance. Accordingly, in this notice, RSPA is giving those persons who may
have been unaware of, or confused by, the previous requirements an opportunity to comment on the proposals. 

With regard to analysis of risk and economic impact, in the regulatory evaluation for HM181, RSPA performed
a macroscopic analysis of costs and benefits generically addressing all hazardous materials, their packagings,
and impacts of changes to classification and hazard communication. The HMR address tens of thousands of hazardous
materials and over 100 different types of packagings. Under HM181, it was not feasible or necessary to specifically
analyze each hazardous material or category of materials or each type of packaging and determine that the benefits
of change to classification, hazard communication or packaging for each would outweigh associated costs. The benefits
of the system put in place under HM181, involving the assessment of levels of hazard for materials and assignment
of packagings based on levels of hazard, were demonstrated to greatly exceed the costs of the system. RSPA did not receive
any comments in response to the notices in Dockets HM181 or HM142A on any economic impacts the rule would
have on the medical waste industry. Therefore, RSPA disagrees with the petitioners who claimed that RSPA did not adequately
assess costs and benefits attributable to changes to regulatory requirements, particularly with regard to medical
waste. For this notice, RSPA has prepared a regulatory evaluation and is providing an opportunity to comment on the
proposals. 



