 

D. Placement Procedures and Least Restrictive Environment



1. The placement of a preschool child or child in any special education program by the Section 6 School Arrangement
shall be made only under an IEP and after a determination has been made that such student has a disability and needs special
education and/or related services.

2. The Section 6 School Arrangement CSC shall identify the special education and related services to be provided under
the IEP.

3. A placement decision may not be implemented without the consent of a parent of the preschool child or child, except
as otherwise provided in accordance with this part.

4. The placement decision must be designed to educate a preschool child or child with a disability in the least restrictive
environment so that such student is educated to the maximum extent appropriate with students who do not have disabilities.
Special classes, separate schooling, or other removal of preschool children or children with disabilities from
the regular educational environment shall occur only when the nature or severity of the disability is such that the
preschool child or child with disabilities cannot be educated satisfactorily in the regular classes with the use
of supplementary aids and services, including related services.

5. Each educational placement for a preschool child or child with a disability shall be:

a. Determined at least annually by the appropriate CSC.

b. Based on the preschool child or child's IEP.

c. Located as close as possible to the residence of the parent who is sponsoring the preschool child or child for attendance
in a Section 6 School Arrangement.

d. Designed to assign the preschool child or child to the school such student would attend if he or she were not a student
with a disability, unless the IEP requires some other arrangement.

e. Predicated on the consideration of all factors affecting the preschool child's or child's well-being, including
the effects of separation from parent(s).

f. To the maximum extent appropriate, designed so that the preschool child or child participates in school activities,
including meals and recess periods, with students who do not have a disability.



E. Children With Disabilities Placed in Non-Section 6 School Arrangements



1. Before a Section 6 School Arrangement CSC, with the concurrence of the Section 6 School Arrangement Superintendent
concerned, places a preschool child or child with a disability in a non-Section 6 School or facility, the Section 6
School CSC shall conduct a meeting in accordance with this part to initiate the development of an IEP for such student.

2. Preschool children and children with disabilities eligible to receive instruction in Section 6 School Arrangements
who are referred to another school or facility by the Section 6 School CSC have all the rights of students with disabilities
who are attending the Section 6 School Arrangement.

a. If a Section 6 School Arrangement CSC places a preschool child or child with a disability in a non-Section 6 School
Arrangement or facility as a means of providing special education and related services, the program of that facility,
including nonmedical care, room, and board, as set forth in the student's IEP, must be at no cost to the student or the
student's parents.


