 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Federal Aviation Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 39</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93NM46AD]</RINDOCK>


Airworthiness Directives; de Havilland Model DHC8 Series Airplanes


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Federal Aviation Administration, DOT.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking; reopening of comment period.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This document revises an earlier proposed airworthiness directive (AD), applicable to certain de Havilland Model
DHC8 series airplanes, that would have required repetitive inspections of the passenger service unit (PSU)
printed circuit boards and power supply connectors to detect corrosion and evidence of overheating; and repair or
replacement of the circuit boards or replacement of connectors, if necessary. That proposal was prompted by reports
that certain PSU printed circuit boards and power supply connectors have overheated in service. This action revises
the proposed rule by adding a required terminating action for the repetitive inspections. The actions specified
by this proposed AD are intended to prevent overheating of the PSU printed circuit board and power supply connectors,
which could lead to a fire in the PSU.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Comments must be received by May 31, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit comments in triplicate to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Transport Airplane Directorate, ANM103,
Attention: Rules Docket No. 93NM46AD, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056.
Comments may be inspected at this location between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m., Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays.


The service information referenced in the proposed rule may be obtained from de Havilland, Inc., Garratt Boulevard,
Downsview, Ontario M3K 1Y5, Canada. This information may be examined at the FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate,
1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington; or at the FAA, Engine and Propeller Directorate, New York Aircraft Certification
Office, 181 South Franklin Avenue, room 202, Valley Stream, New York.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Michele Maurer, Aerospace Engineer, Systems and Equipment Branch, ANE173, FAA, Engine and Propeller Directorate,
New York Aircraft Certification Office, 181 South Franklin Avenue, room 202, Valley Stream, New York 11581; telephone
(516) 7916428; fax (516) 7919024.

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Comments Invited


Interested persons are invited to participate in the making of the proposed rule by submitting such written data,
views, or arguments as they may desire. Communications shall identify the Rules Docket number and be submitted in
triplicate to the address specified above. All communications received on or before the closing date for comments,
specified above, will be considered before taking action on the proposed rule. The proposals contained in this notice
may be changed in light of the comments received.
Comments are specifically invited on the overall regulatory, economic, environmental, and energy aspects of the
proposed rule. All comments submitted will be available, both before and after the closing date for comments, in the
Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report summarizing each FAA-public contact concerned with
the substance of this proposal will be filed in the Rules Docket.
Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments submitted in response to this notice must submit
a self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: ``Comments to Docket Number 93NM46AD.''
The postcard will be date stamped and returned to the commenter.


Availability of NPRMs


Any person may obtain a copy of this NPRM by submitting a request to the FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate, ANM103,
Attention: Rules Docket No. 93NM46AD, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056.


Discussion


A proposal to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) to add an airworthiness directive (AD),
applicable to de Havilland Model DHC8 series airplanes, was published as a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM)
in the 

Federal Register 

on May 25, 1993 (58 FR 30001). That NPRM would have required repetitive visual inspections of the PSU printed circuit
boards and power supply connectors to detect corrosion and evidence of overheating. If any corrosion or evidence
of overheating of the circuit board is detected, the proposed AD would have required the repair or replacement of the
circuit board. If any corrosion or evidence of overheating of the connectors is detected, the proposed AD would have
required replacement of the affected connector. The proposed AD would also have required that all findings of corrosion
or overheating be reported to the manufacturer. That NPRM was prompted by reports that certain PSU printed circuit
boards and power supply connectors have overheated in service. That condition, if not corrected, could result in
overheating of the PSU printed circuit board and power supply connectors, which could lead to a fire in the PSU.
Since the issuance of that NPRM, the manufacturer has developed a design modification that, if installed, would eliminate
the need for the proposed repetitive inspections. De Havilland has issued Service Bulletin 83334,
dated August 10, 1993, that describes installation of Modification 8/1950. Among other things, this modification
entails reworking the PSU to include a new circuit board cover, a modified circuit board mounting, and new wire harnesses.
Transport Canada Aviation, which is the airworthiness authority for Canada, has approved the technical content
of this service bulletin and has issued revised Canadian AD No. CF9301R1, dated December 3, 1993, to
include the modification described in the service bulletin as terminating action for that AD.
This airplane model is manufactured in Canada and is type certificated for operation in the United States under the
provisions of 21.29 of the Federal Aviation Regulations and the applicable bilateral airworthiness agreement.
Pursuant to this bilateral airworthiness agreement, Transport Canada Aviation has kept the FAA informed of the situation
described above. The FAA has examined the findings of Transport Canada Aviation, reviewed all available information,
and determined that AD action is necessary for products of this type design that are certificated for operation in
the United States.
Since an unsafe condition has been identified that is likely to exist or develop on other airplanes of the same type
design registered in the United States, the FAA has determined that the previously proposed AD must be revised to require
the installation of Modification 8/1950 as terminating action for the proposed repetitive inspections of the PSU.
This determination to mandate installation of the modification is based on the FAA's finding that long term continued
operational safety will be better assured by design changes to remove the source of the problem, rather than by repetitive
inspections. Long term inspections may not be providing the degree of safety assurance necessary for the transport
airplane fleet. This, coupled with a better understanding of the human factors associated with numerous continual
inspections, has led the FAA to consider placing less emphasis on inspections and more emphasis on design improvements.
The proposed modification requirement is in consonance with these considerations.
Since this change expands the scope of the originally proposed rule, the FAA has determined that it is necessary to
reopen the comment period to provide additional opportunity for public comment.

</SUPPLEM>
