 

Possession Limits 


A current criterion for the possession aboard a charter 
vessel or headboat of multi-day bag limits is that the vessel 
have two licensed operators aboard. Amendment 7 would delete 
this criterion. The Council believes the two-licensed operators 
aboard criterion has no reasonable biological or management 
correlation with multi-day bag limits. NMFS believes that this 
action should have little impact on the fishery, notwithstanding 
the Council's indication in Amendment 7 that this measure 
possibly may decrease income to operators/owners of charter 
vessels and headboats. 


Gear Limitations 


Under Amendment 7, the only gear authorized in a directed 
fishery for snapper-grouper species would be vertical hook-and-line gear, including hand-held rods and rods attached
to a vessel 
(bandit gear), in either case, with manual, electric, or 
hydraulic reels; spearfishing gear; bottom longlines; and sea 
bass pots. All other gear would be prohibited. Limits would be 
imposed on the possession and transfer of snapper-grouper species 
by vessels with unauthorized gear aboard. An exception to the 
possession limits would apply in the case of a permitted vessel 
that fishes in the EEZ off North Carolina with a sink net aboard. 
In addition, the use of bottom longlines to fish for 
snapper-grouper species in the EEZ south of St. Lucie Inlet, FL, 
would be prohibited; the use of powerheads to harvest snapper- 
grouper species in the EEZ off South Carolina would be 
prohibited; and the use of rebreathers to harvest snapper-grouper 
species with spearfishing gear in the EEZ off the southern 
Atlantic states would be prohibited. 
The concept of allowable gear allows managers to regulate 
the fishery more efficiently by enabling managers to test gear 
before it becomes widespread. This concept would enhance law 
enforcement by establishing standard gear. Environmental damage 
to the habitat would be minimized because gear would have to be 
evaluated before it could be used. Testing of experimental gear 
would minimize the possibility that very efficient gear could 
cause recruitment failure of the snapper grouper resource if it 
were allowed to be used throughout the fishery. 
The exception applicable to the use of sink nets off North 
Carolina would allow fishermen in that area to operate with 
multiple gears on a trip, that is, it would allow retention of 
snapper-grouper harvested with sea bass pots and/or vertical 
hook-and-line gear and fish harvested with a sink net. A sink 
net has virtually no bycatch of snapper-grouper species and is 
continuously tended, which minimizes the possibility of lost gear 
and ghost fishing. Therefore, the Council believes that sink 
nets, as used off North Carolina, do not pose the problems to the 
snapper-grouper fishery normally associated with entanglement 
nets. This exception would improve the economic efficiency of 
fishermen in North Carolina who are accustomed to using sink nets 
and authorized gear on a trip. 
The Council is proposing to ban the use of bottom longlines 
to fish for snapper-grouper species south of St. Lucie, FL, to 
increase the standing stock of tilefish in that area. The 
Council believes that the prohibition of bottom longlines will 
decrease fishing mortality on tilefish; hence, it should aid in 
the prevention of growth and recruitment overfishing. Also, the 
Council believes that banning bottom longline gear will reduce 
competition among traditional bandit gear commercial fishermen, 
recreational anglers, and longline fishermen and will result in 
reduced habitat damage. The Council noted that the continental 
shelf edge is quite narrow south of St. Lucie Inlet, and does not 
want a bottom longline fishery to develop that would lead to 
conflict among the competing user groups in that area. 
South Carolina prohibits the use of powerheads in its 
waters, and powerheads cannot be used in the special management 
zones in the EEZ off South Carolina. The Council's proposed ban 
on the use of powerheads in the entire EEZ off South Carolina is 
intended to enhance enforceability of the prohibition of 
powerheads in State waters. This measure would result in 
consistent State and Federal regulations off South Carolina. The 
Council also believes that the ban on use of powerheads in the 
EEZ would reduce conflict between recreational and commercial 
divers that appears to be a particular problem in the EEZ off 
South Carolina. 
The Council believes that the use of rebreathers 
significantly increases the efficiency of divers using 
spearfishing gear. The use of rebreathers eliminates bubbles, 
thus allowing divers to stalk fish more easily. The Council is 
concerned about the status of gag, which are particularly 
vulnerable to divers when they aggregate to spawn. The 
prohibition of rebreathers would lessen fishing mortality on the 
spawning aggregations, which will assist in prevention of 
recruitment overfishing. Amberjack are also targeted by divers 
during spawning periods, and this measure would also reduce 
fishing mortality on that species and lessen the chance of 
recruitment overfishing. 


Experimental Fishing 


Under Amendment 7, the Director, Southeast Region, NMFS, 
(Regional Director) would be authorized to issue permits for 
experimental fishing, provided that, as a condition of such 
permits, data on the gear used and fish caught in such 
experimental fishing must be maintained and provided to the 
Science and Research Director. Experimental fishing would 
provide an opportunity to test new gear for possible 
authorization for use in the snapper-grouper fishery. 


Management Unit for Scup 


Amendment 7 proposes to modify the management unit for scup, 


Stenotomus chrysops,

 so that management under the FMP would apply 
only south of Cape Hatteras. Scup are found from the North/South 
Carolina border to the U.S.-Canada border with a division of 
stocks at Cape Hatteras. The northern stock of scup is 
overfished and the Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council is 
considering measures to rebuild that stock. The proposed 
modification of the management unit would allow the Mid-Atlantic 
Council to manage the northern stock of scup throughout its 
range. This is a conservation measure that would result in more 
efficient management of this resource. 


Comments Requested 


While NMFS is inviting comments on all of the measures in 
Amendment 7, comments are specifically invited on the following 
concerns about provisions of the allowable gear measure. (1) 
What are the effects of prohibiting the use of bottom longlines 
south of St. Lucie Inlet, FL ? (2) What are the effects of 
prohibiting the use of powerheads in the EEZ off South Carolina? 


Additional Measures in Amendment 7 



