 

At SESAC's meeting of April 2526, 1990, the Committee recommended that the scope of the proposed shipyard standard
on vessels and vessel sections be expanded to include all confined and enclosed space operations within the shipyard
(Tr. 102, 4/25/90). The committee also recommended that the title of the subpart, originally called ``Explosive
and Dangerous Atmospheres in Vessels and Vessel Sections,'' be changed to clarify that this standard addresses all
confined and enclosed spaces and dangerous atmospheres encountered in shipyard employment. Additionally, SESAC
recommended that several provisions similar to those proposed for general industry be added to subpart B to make it
a comprehensive standard for shipyard employment. The provisions they recommended included a paragraph covering
training requirements and duties of confined space entrants; a new paragraph on self-rescue and rescue teams; and
a new paragraph addressing the duties of employers with respect to on-site contractors. As recommended by SESAC,
the additional provisions would make subpart B a comprehensive set of requirements applicable to the hazards posed
by confined and enclosed spaces and dangerous atmospheres encountered throughout shipyard employment. 
In response to issues raised in various comments submitted to the docket concerning the general industry permit-required
confined spaces proposal and to enable OSHA to place the SESAC recommendations into the subpart B rulemaking record,
the Agency reopened the subpart B record for additional comment (57 FR 28152). In the notice reopening the record,
which was published on June 24, 1992, OSHA invited public comment on seven issues. These issues were: 
(1) Whether or not land-side confined and enclosed spaces and other dangerous atmospheres should be treated separately
from spaces in vessels and vessel sections. 
(2) What kind of training should shipyard confined space workers receive. 
(3) Whether or not subpart B should require attendants for shipyard confined spaces. 
(4) What should be a shipyard employer's duty with respect to rescue services. 
(5) What should be a shipyard employer's duty with respect to contractors and other employers. 
(6) Whether or not hot work permits should be required. 
(7) What are the costs associated with applying requirements from the generic confined spaces standard to shipyards.

Interested persons were given until September 22, 1992, to submit comments. OSHA received 53 comments in response
to the notice reopening the record on the revision of subpart B. 
The final rule on general industry permit-required confined spaces was published in the 

Federal Register

 on January 14, 1993 (58 FR 4462). Shipyards were omitted from the scope of the final general industry standard because
the Agency felt that it would be more appropriate to address them in the revision of subpart B of part 1915. The relationship
between subpart B and 1910.146 and OSHA's reasons for adopting a separate rule in subpart B are presented in
the summary and explanation discussion of the scope and application section for subpart B (1915.11). 
The information OSHA relied upon to prepare the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), comments received in response
to the (NPRM), to the notice of the reopening of the record, and the exhibits (including the written transcripts of
relevant SESAC meetings) submitted during the period allowed for such submissions, constitute the rulemaking record
for this proceeding. The entire record was carefully considered in the preparation of this final rule. 


B. Significant Risk 


The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has determined that there is a significant risk to the health
and safety of workers who enter confined spaces in shipyards. According to the most recent data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS), SIC 3731 (Ship building and Repairing) has the highest lost workday case incidence rate for injuries
of any industry (``Occupational Injuries and Illnesses in the United States by Industry, 1991,'' Bureau of Labor
Statistics, May, 1993). 
The industry as a whole therefore poses the highest risk of injury from all hazards for its employees in the U.S. Within
shipyards, confined space operations are one of the riskiest activities, which is why the industry developed its
own effective confined space procedures that were adopted by OSHA as subpart B in 29 CFR part 1915 in the early 1970s.

At the present time, work in confined spaces on vessels is covered by the current shipyard confined space regulations
in subpart B of part 1915, but work in ``land-side'' confined spaces is not. This work on land-side operations is therefore
not currently addressed by a specific OSHA regulation. These operations were originally included in the scope of
the proposed general industry confined space rule (1910.146) but were omitted in the final rule. In the preamble
to that final rule, the Agency noted its intention to cover confined spaces, both on vessels and on land, in its revision
of subpart B of part 1915. (58 FR 4471) 





