 

(b) For all other stations in the Public Mobile Services, station identification must be transmitted at the end of
each transmission or series of transmissions. During prolonged or continuous series of transmissions, station
identification must be transmitted at periodic intervals not to exceed thirty minutes; however, transmission of
such periodic station identification may be temporarily delayed to avoid interrupting the continuity of any public
communication in progress, provided that station identification is transmitted at the conclusion of that public
communication.

(c) Station identification must be transmitted by telephone using the English language or by telegraphy using the
international Morse code, and in a form that can be received using equipment appropriate for the modulation type employed,
and understood without the use of unscrambling devices. Station identification comprises transmission of the call
sign assigned by the FCC to the station, however, the following may be used in lieu of the call sign:

(1) For transmissions from subscriber operated transmitters, the telephone number or other designation assigned
by the carrier, provided that a written record of such designations is maintained by the carrier;

(2) For general aviation airborne mobile stations in the Air-ground Radiotelephone Service, the official FAA registration
number of the aircraft;

(3) For stations in the Paging and Radiotelephone Service, a call sign assigned to another station within the same
system.



22.315



Duty to respond to official communications.



Licensees in the Public Mobile services must respond to official communications from the FCC with reasonable dispatch
and according to the tenor of the communication. Failure to do so may be considered by the FCC to reflect adversely on
a carrier's qualifications to hold FCC authorizations, and may also create liabilities for other sanctions.

(a) Any person receiving official notice of an apparent or actual violation of a federal statute, international agreement,
Executive Order, or regulation pertaining to communications shall respond in writing within 10 days to the office
of the FCC originating the notice. If a response can not be sent within 10 days, an acknowledgement shall be sent, followed
by a response as soon as possible explaining the reason for the delay.

(b) Responses to official communications must be complete and self-contained without reference to other communications
unless copies of such other communications are attached to the response.



22.317



Discontinuance of station operation.



If the operation of a Public Mobile Services station is permanently discontinued, the licensee shall send the authorization
for cancellation to: Mobile Services Division, Common Carrier Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, Washington
DC 20554. For purposes of this section, any station that has not provided service to subscribers for 90 continuous
days is considered to have been permanently discontinued, unless the applicant notified the FCC otherwise prior
to the end of the 90 day period and provided a date on which operation will resume, which date must not be in excess of 30
additional days.



22.321



Equal employment opportunities.



Public Mobile Services licensees shall afford equal opportunity in employment to all qualified persons, and personnel
must not be discriminated against in employment because of sex, race, color, religion, or national origin.
(a) 

Equal employment opportunity program.

 Each licensee shall establish, maintain, and carry out a positive continuing program of specific practices designed
to assure equal opportunity in every aspect of employment policy and practice.

(1) Under the terms of its program, each licensee shall:

(i) Define the responsibility of each level of management to insure a positive application and vigorous enforcement
of the policy of equal opportunity, and establish a procedure to review and control managerial and supervisory performance.

(ii) Inform its employees and recognized employee organizations of the positive equal employment opportunity policy
and program and enlist their cooperation.



