 



The certifier would perform all actions necessary to bring 
the engine to the certified configuration before issuing a useful 
life renewal certificate. Necessary actions may range from 
replacement of selected emission control and other hardware to 
major engine overhaul. Anyone able to meet the requirements of 
the program may certify an engine configuration and issue useful 
life renewal certificates. EPA would anticipate that candidates 
for certifiers would most likely be the original engine 
manufacturers, parts suppliers, and engine rebuilders. Once a 
useful life renewal certificate is issued to the vehicle owner, 
the certifier assumes all of the manufacturer's liability for the 
emissions performance of the engine as described in the proposal 
for new engines. 
The marketplace, rather than EPA, should develop the most 
cost effective methods of ensuring effective emissions control 
for each engine. Engine rebuilding may not be necessary in all 
cases. Some engine manufacturers may elect to provide a longer 
original useful life. By extending the useful life, the 
manufacturer would allow owners to use their vehicles for a 
longer period of time without incurring the additional cost of an 
engine rebuild. The Agency believes that there will be 
significant market demand for longer useful life periods, that 
more closely match actual in-use engine rebuild practices. 
The original engine manufacturer or another party may be 
able to provide a useful life renewal certificate upon the 
performance of some specified maintenance on the vehicle. Such 
maintenance would include anything that was needed to bring the 
engine to a certified configuration and ensure emissions control 
for the specified useful life renewal period, possibly including 
the replacement of emissions control devices. There are likely 
to be other possible options for the vehicle owner that EPA has 
not considered. 
As previously mentioned, the vehicle owner must be in 
compliance with these requirements at all times. Enhanced 
engines without valid useful life certificates may not be 
registered in California. At time of registration, the owner 
would be required to show either that the engine was still within 
its original useful life or a useful life renewal period. The 
certifier would be required to provide a certificate to the 
vehicle owner (as described above) and label the engine, allowing 
such a demonstration to be made easily. The label must include 
information identifying the certificate, and the effective and 
expiration dates (mileages and/or hours as applicable) of the 
useful life renewal certificate as applied to the labeled engine. 
Furthermore, if the vehicle owner is found to be out of 
compliance through a roadside check or other means, EPA would 
consider the owner to be in violation of federal tampering 
provisions (see section 203(a) of the Clean Air Act) and the 
owner would be fined for every engine out of compliance. EPA 
requests comments on other ways to enhance its ability to enforce 
these owner requirements. 
EPA recognizes that lighter HDEs are not usually rebuilt 
because their operating life is comparable to that of the 
chassis. Also, their lifetime mileage is generally lower than 
that of larger vehicles. For these reasons, there may not be as 
much incentive for the marketplace to offer as many options for 
lighter heavy-duty vehicles. If an engine reaches the end of its 
statutory useful life and there is no way to renew its useful 
life, the owner would no longer be able to register the vehicle 
with that engine in California. Operators of heavy-duty engines 
would be expected to purchase vehicles equipped with engines with 
a useful life comparable to their needs or purchase vehicles with 
engines that are designed to be rebuilt. It should be noted that 
these requirements only apply to vehicles certified on an engine 
test; many smaller trucks would be certified on a chassis test. 


c. Certification requirements and liability.

 
To help ensure continuous emissions control effectiveness, 
EPA proposes that anyone offering a useful life renewal 
certificate must certify the engine configuration that will 
result from the actions they will perform on the in-use engines. 
EPA also proposes to require that emissions durability be 
demonstrated for the useful life renewal period being provided by 
the certifier. 
The resultant engine configuration must be certified in the 
same manner that a new engine is certified. A full emissions 
test would be required showing that in-use HDEs, after being 
restored to the engine configuration being certified, will meet 
all applicable HDE in-use recall emissions standards to which the 
engine was originally certified. EPA proposes that the test 
engine be representative of actual in-use engines and therefore, 
be an engine at or beyond its statutory useful life. EPA 
recognizes that this may be burdensome for the certifier in the 
early years of the program because available engines will 
generally be at low mileages. However, EPA believes that it is 
necessary to know how high mileage engines will perform after 
being brought to the configuration being certified. EPA requests 
comments on these and any other aspect of the certification 
testing requirements. EPA is especially interested in comments 
on effective but less burdensome test engine requirements. 



