 





(4) 

Soaps; detergents; cleaning, polishing, and sanitizing preparations; surface active agents, finishing agents,
sulfonated oils, and assistants; and perfumes and cosmetics. 



(5) 

Food additives and sweeteners. 



(6) 

Paints, varnishes, lacquers, enamels, inks, primers, paint removers, thinners, stains, shellacs, cleaners, putty,
coatings, adhesives, fillers, sealants, explosives, and carbon black. 



(7) 

Fabricated rubber and miscellaneous plastics products including, but not limited to, tires and inner tubes; rubber
and plastics footware, hose, belting, gasket, packing, and sealing devices; and molded, extruded, and lathe-cut
mechanical rubber goods. 



Manufacture 

means to produce or combine any ingredients contained in any product. 



Manufacturing process 

means a process or a series of processes used to convert raw materials, feed stocks, subassemblies, or other components
into a product which will be sold, offered for sale, supplied, or distributed or will be used as a component in a subsequent
manufacturing process. This definition includes the storage and handling of organic compounds or gases which are
used in a manufacturing process and the handling of organic compounds or gases used to clean-up a manufacturing process.


(ii) 

Applicability

.

(A) The requirements of paragraphs (b)(2) (iii)(A), (iii)(B), (iv)(A), (v)(A), and (vi)(A) of this section shall
apply to any owner or operator of a facility which manufactures products containing VOCs located in the control area
as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this section at which total VOC emissions are greater than or equal to 4.5 kg (10 lbs)
during any one day. 

(B) The requirements of paragraphs (b)(2) (iv)(B), (v)(B), and (vi)(B) of this section shall apply to any owner or
operator of a facility which manufactures products containing VOCs located in the applicable area specified in paragraph
(b)(2)(ii)(A) of this section at which total VOC emissions from all emissions sources are always less than 4.5 kg (10
lbs) during any one day. If uncontrolled VOC emissions from a facility which is exempt from the limitations of paragraphs
(b)(2)(iii)(B) 

(1)

 through 

(5)

 of this section ever exceed 4.5 kg (10 lbs) during any one day on or after January 1, 2000, the facility will lose its exempt
status, and the owner or operator shall comply with the requirements of paragraphs (b)(2) (iii)(B), (iv)(A), (v)(A),
and (vi)(A) of this section beginning January 1 of the calendar year following the date of the exceedance. 

(iii) 

Specific Provisions

. 

(A) Each owner or operator of a source subject to the FIP VOC emissions cap program as defined in paragraph (b)(1)(ii)
of this section shall submit a VOC emissions reduction compliance plan to the Administrator by January 1, 1999. The
plan shall be prepared for the years 2001 through 2005 and shall include all of the information specified in paragraphs
(b)(1)(iii)(A) 

(1)

 through 

(5)

 of this section. Each owner or operator shall submit a revised plan to the Administrator within 30 calendar days of
receipt of comments from the Administrator. Each owner or operator shall comply at all times with the provisions of
the most recent plan approved by the Administrator. 



(1) 

The name, title, address, and telephone number of the owner or operator of the facility, and of each person responsible
for preparing the information required under paragraph (b)(1)(iii)(A)

(2)

 of this section. 



(2) 

Baseline VOC emissions shall be calculated for each facility. Baseline emissions for each facility shall equal the
sum of VOC emissions from all emissions sources at the facility including emissions associated with the use of architectural
coatings and clean-up solvents. Baseline emissions shall be calculated as specified in paragraph (a)(4)(xii) and
(a)(4)(xiii) of this section. 



(3) 

Methods to be employed by the owner or operator to limit VOC emissions from emissions sources to within the emissions
level required in paragraphs (b)(2)(iii)(B) 

(1)

 through 

(5)

 of this section. Methods may include but are not limited to: 



(i) 

Installation of capture systems and control devices; 



(ii) 

Modifications to increase the efficiency of existing capture systems and/or control devices; 



(iii) 

Process modifications and/or substitutions; and 



