 




<USBUREAU>Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>RIN 0905ZA33 </RINDOCK>


Cooperative Agreement for a Training and Technical Assistance Center To Support the Comprehensive Community Mental
Health Services Grant Program for Children and Adolescents with Serious Emotional Disturbances 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Center for Mental Health Service, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), HHS.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of availability of funds and request for applications.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Center for Mental Health Services (CMHS) intends to support one cooperative agreement for a Technical Assistance
Center (hereafter referred to as the TA Center) to provide training and technical assistance in support of the Comprehensive
Community Mental Health Services for Children and Adolescents with Serious Emotional Disturbances Program (Request
for Applications No. SM 9302 and 9401) which is part of the CMHS Child, Adolescent, and Family Mental
Health Services Program. The TA Center will provide expert assistance to the eleven current grantees of that initiative,
to the seven to ten new grantees projected for fiscal year (FY) 1994, and to new grantees in future years, as applicable.
Assistance will be provided to grantees in planning, developing, and operating systems of care. This assistance
must be delivered through at least three regional entities that will be organized by the TA Center, and will use the
expertise available among existing Child, Adolescent, and Family Mental Health Services Program grantees to the
maximum extent possible to provide on-site, telephonic, and written consultation. A cooperative agreement is being
used to permit maximum utilization of the knowledge and skills of CMHS staff in the conduct of this project, and to assure
that the activities of the TA Center are appropriately coordinated with related CMHS training, technical assistance,
and evaluation activities as well as with related technical assistance activities of the Annie E. Casey and the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundations' Mental Health Services Initiative for Youth, among others. 



This notice consists of three parts: 



Part I 

covers information on the legislative authority and the applicable regulations and policies related to this CMHS
cooperative agreement program. 



Part II 

describes the programmatic goals, target population, project requirements and discusses eligibility, availability
of funds, period of support and the receipt date for applications. 



Part III 

describes special requirements of the program, the application process, the review and award criteria and lists
contacts for additional information. 



Part I_Legislative Authority and Other Applicable Regulations and Policies 



Statutory Authority: Cooperative Agreements awarded under this RFA are authorized under Section 565(b) of the Public
Health Service Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 290ff4(b)). 

Applicable Federal Regulations: Federal regulations at title 45 CFR parts 74 and 92, generic requirements concerning
the administration of grants, are applicable to these awards. 

PHS Grants Policy Statement: Grants must be administered in accordance with the PHS Grants Policy Statement (Rev.
April 1, 1994). 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number: The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) number for this
program is 93.104. 

Reporting Requirements: Interim and final progress reports and financial status reports will be required and specified
to awardees in accord with PHS Grants Policy requirements. 

Healthy People 2000: The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention
objectives of Healthy People 2000. This Request for Applications (RFA) is related to priority area 6, 

Mental Health Disorders.

 Specific subsections include: 6.3, ``Reduce to less than 10 percent the prevalence of mental disorders among children
and adolescents,'' and 6.14, ``Increase to at least 75 percent the proportion of providers of primary care for children
who include assessment of cognitive, emotional, and parent-child functioning, with appropriate counseling, referral,
and follow-up, in the clinical practices.''

1

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
Potential Applicants may obtain a copy of Healthy People 2000 (Full Report; Stock Number 017001004740)
or Healthy People 2000 (Summary Report; Stock Number 017001004731) through the Superintendent
of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 204029325 (Telephone 2027833238).






</FOOTNOTE>
</SUMMARY>
