 

As demands on adults' time continue to escalate_with more people working longer hours, commuting greater distances,
and coping with day care and elder care issues_the traditional, tutorial/classroom-based approach to adult education
may not be the best mechanism, in many cases, for attracting and retaining adult education students. Incorporating
new technologies into adult literacy programs may be one way to address the time constraints of the adult education
student. The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) found in a 1993 study that technology could help transform the
field of adult literacy by, for example, allowing students to proceed at their own pace, customize their studies,
and establish a schedule that is compatible with their daily lives. However, OTA also suggested that technology does
not play a central role in most adult literacy programs. 
Should the Federal Government encourage the use of more technology in adult literacy programs? If so, how can technology
of proven effectiveness in enhancing learning be incorporated in cost-effective ways that learners will find beneficial?

&bull;Linking Adult Education to Other Domestic Initiatives. 
In recent years, policymakers have begun to turn to adult education services as a means of addressing other societal
problems, for example, requiring participation in literacy programs for prison parole, continuation of welfare
benefits, or, through Even Start, making adult literacy instruction a component of elementary and secondary education
improvement. Should the Adult Education Act continue to address very general purposes, or should it be tied explicitly
to national efforts to redevelop poor neighborhoods, end welfare dependency, fight crime, or ensure a smooth integration
of new immigrants into American society? If the Adult Education Act is linked to other domestic initiatives, should
the Act be revised to reflect the impact that mandatory participation requirements of certain programs, such as JOBS,
have on adult education programs? 


2. State Literacy Resource Centers


The National Literacy Act created the State Literacy Resource Centers program to stimulate the coordination of literacy
services, enhance the capacity of State and local organizations to provide literacy services, and serve as a link
between the National Institute for Literacy and service providers to share information and expertise. 
Are State Literacy Resource Centers effective at meeting the goals of the Act? What steps, if any, should be taken at
the Federal level to improve the effectiveness of the Centers? Should the funds allotted under this program continue
to be channeled through State Governors? 


3. Discretionary Programs


Current law authorizes several discretionary grant programs. Most of these programs are small and fund a limited
number of recipients. Although the purpose of the programs is generally the demonstration of effective strategies
for addressing particular issues or problems, funds often support local projects that, while beneficial to the recipients,
are not designed in a way to yield lessons for broader use. 
What role should Adult Education discretionary programs play in helping the Nation achieve its education goals?
Would these resources be more effectively utilized under broader authorities, such as the Adult Education State
formula grant program? Do the current programs encourage a piecemeal, rather than comprehensive, approach to adult
education reform (with service providers devoting too much attention to applying for and administering separate
competitive grants), or do they focus attention where it is needed? If there is a need for Federal demonstration programs,
what changes are needed to ensure that they are designed as true demonstrations and serve their purposes effectively?
What types of evaluation and reporting ought to be required? 


4. Workplace Literacy Partnerships


At current funding levels, the National Workplace Literacy program makes discretionary grants for demonstrations
that provide literacy training to meet workplace needs. Since its inception in 1988, this demonstration program
has generated important information about effective workplace literacy practices. The program has produced curricula
transferable for use by specific types of industries, and a national evaluation, currently underway, will generate
additional information about program effectiveness. However, after eight years and 261 grants the continuation
of the National Workplace Literacy program, in its current form, may not appreciably add to our base of knowledge in
this area. 



