 

The commenter thought the age of the home should be included in home sales analyses. He recommended comparing prices
of homes of a similar age, size, and room count. Numerous factors influence home sale prices, but data on many of these
factors are not readily available. Runzheimer uses home size and room count as the major criteria in housing comparisons
because data on these factors are usually available in all areas and because these factors typically have a significant
influence on home prices. Age is not used because data on it frequently are not available and because OPM's initial
research indicates that its use may be problematic. Moreover, as noted in the report, the number of home sales observations
is limited in many areas. Stratifying these small quantities into age groups for purposes of comparison would complicate
the model_something the commenter wished to avoid. It would also probably introduce unwarranted fluctuations in
the housing index from one year to the next_something OPM wants to avoid. 
The commenter said the survey failed to take into consideration the use of solar water heaters in Hawaii and Guam. The
commenter believed the model did not account for the capital cost of such heaters or the possible reduction in overall
utility consumption. 
As OPM stated in its response to comments received on an earlier proposed rule (at 59 FR 13847), significant home features
and improvements generally are reflected in the selling price of the home. Therefore, living-cost surveys reflect
the cost of solar water heaters to the extent that such items influence home market values and are commonly found in
homes in any area, including Hawaii and Guam. If solar water heaters are so common that their use generally reduces
the consumption of utilities, the survey results will reflect lower utility costs. This is as it should be. The COLA
model compares overall living costs in the allowance area with overall living costs in the DC area. If housing is more
expensive and utility costs are lower because solar heaters are common, the final comparison of overall housing costs
will be equitable. No special consideration of capital improvement costs or reduced utility consumption is appropriate.

The commenter said employees in the allowance areas face extreme weather disturbances, particularly typhoons or
hurricanes. He believed these weather disturbances and other climatic conditions result in higher costs, particularly
home insurance and maintenance costs. 
The cost of homeowner's insurance is part of the COLA model. The policies priced include coverage of damage caused
by high winds (e.g., hurricane winds). As shown in Appendix 7 of the report, these policies are relatively expensive
in areas where severe weather is a problem. Other costs, such as the cost of repairing storm damage, are more difficult
to address in the surveys. Although it may be possible to price the cost of repairing or replacing an item such as a window
or a roof, it is difficult to know how often this must be done in each allowance area compared with the Washington, DC,
area. The same is true with other types of maintenance, such as painting. It is difficult to know what tasks, if any,
must be performed more often in the allowance areas than in the Washington, DC, area. OPM is researching these issues
and plans to discuss them in its report to Congress. 
The commenter objected to the selection of Los Angeles as the common destination point for comparing airfares. He
said the Los Angeles routes were highly competitive and resulted in lower fares compared with other destinations.
The commenter suggested pricing round-trip tickets from each area to Kansas City. As stated in the report, Los Angeles
was selected because it is a common point within the continental United States that is roughly equidistant from each
of the allowance areas and the Washington, DC, area. The route may be highly competitive, but that does not invalidate
cost comparisons. OPM is measuring the 

relative

 cost of air travel. If competition reduces fares, the reductions will be reflected in the Washington, DC, to Los Angeles
fares as well as in the allowance area to Los Angeles fares. Therefore, OPM believes the comparisons are appropriate.

The commenter also felt that the COLA model did not measure true air transportation costs. He said inter-island travel
and travel to the contiguous 48 States required more frequent use of air transportation. The COLA model does not account
for regional differences in the frequency of transportation. It assumes the typical Federal employee uses air travel
occasionally but mainly travels by private automobile, putting 15,000 miles per year on a car. The model may underestimate
the cost of air travel for some allowance area residents, but it probably overestimates private transportation costs
for others because it is unlikely that most island residents would put 15,000 miles per year on their cars. Needless
to say, OPM would prefer to employ better usage estimates for both private and air transportation. To this end, OPM
is researching transportation issues and plans to include the results of this research in its report to Congress.

The commenter believed the medical expense portion of the Miscellaneous Component failed to reflect the higher out-of-pocket
expenses that some Federal employees in the allowance areas incur. The commenter cited as examples the higher price
of medical service, the absence of Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO's), and the need to travel outside the area
to obtain some medical services. The COLA model takes into consideration relative differences in medical costs.
For example, the report indicated that medical costs in Honolulu are roughly 10 percent above those in the Washington,
DC, area. OPM notes that HMO's are very popular in Hawaii and Puerto Rico and that all of the allowance areas have medical
facilities that provide commonly required medical services. Nevertheless, OPM is researching issues relating
to medical expenses. The results of that research will be incorporated in our report to Congress. 
The commenter criticized the methodology used for catalog pricing. He assumed DC employees do not purchase by catalog
but that allowance areas employees do because certain items were not locally available. Consequently, he recommended
comparing allowance area catalog prices with over-the-counter prices in the Washington, DC, area. 
As stated in the report, catalogs are a popular form of retailing in both the allowance areas and in the Washington,
DC, area. The COLA model includes catalog sales to reflect this common type of shopping and to allow the comparison
of the prices of certain items for which the same brands, models, and sizes are difficult to find in the allowance areas
and in the Washington, DC, area. OPM does not agree with the commenter's assumption that people only purchase from
catalogs when the item is not available locally. People make catalog purchases for a variety of reasons, including
price, convenience, and availability. Numerous catalog merchandisers compete in the allowance areas and in the
Washington, DC, area. It would be inappropriate, therefore, to compare allowance area catalog prices with over-the-counter
prices in the DC area. In the employee survey, OPM asked employees about their purchasing patterns, including whether
they typically purchase various types of items by catalog. OPM plans to include the results of this survey in its report
to Congress. 



