 

44. Sections 34.65_34.91 are added to subpart E to read as follows: 


34.65 

Records of radiation survey instruments. 


Each licensee shall maintain records of the calibrations of its radiation survey instruments and retain each record
for 3 years after it is made. 


34.67 

Records of leak testing of sealed sources. 


Each licensee shall maintain records of leak test results in units of becquerels (curies) and retain each record for
3 years after it is made. 


34.69 

Records of quarterly inventory. 


(a) Each licensee shall maintain records of the quarterly inventory and retain each record for 3 years after it is made.

(b) The record must include the quantities and kinds of byproduct material (including the model number, the serial
number and manufacturer), location of sealed sources, the name of the individual conducting the inventory, and the
date of the inventory. 


34.71 

Utilization logs. 


(a) Each licensee shall maintain current utilization logs at the address specified in the license, showing for each
sealed source the following information: 
(1) A description, including the make, model number, and serial number of the radiographic exposure device or storage
container in which the sealed source is located; 
(2) The identity and signature of the radiographer to whom assigned; and (3) The plant or site where used and dates of
use, including the dates removed and returned to storage. 
(b) The licensee shall retain the logs required by paragraph (a) of this section for 3 years after the log is made. 


34.73 

Records of inspection and maintenance of radiographic exposure devices, storage containers, associated equipment,
and source changers. 


(a) Each licensee shall maintain records of defects found in daily checks and quarterly inspections and maintenance
of radiographic exposure devices, storage containers, associated equipment, and source changers, and retain each
record for 3 years after it is made. 
(b) The record must include the date of check, name of inspector, equipment involved, any defects found, and repairs
made. 


34.75 

Records of alarm system and entrance control checks at permanent radiographic installations. 


Each licensee shall maintain records of alarm system and entrance control device tests and retain each record for
3 years after it is made. 


34.79 

Records of training and certification. 


Each licensee shall maintain the following records (of training and certification) for 3 years after the record is
made: 
(a) Records of training of each radiographer and each radiographer's assistant. The record must include radiographer
certification documents, certification status verification, copies of written tests, dates of field examinations,
and names of individuals conducting the field examinations, and (b) Records of annual safety reviews and annual inspections
for each radiographer and each radiographer's assistant. The records must list the topics discussed during the annual
safety review, the dates the annual safety review was conducted, and names of the instructors and attendees. For annual
inspections, the records must also include a list showing the items checked and any regulatory non-compliances observed
by the RSO. 


34.81 

Copies of operating and emergency procedures. 


Each licensee shall maintain a copy of current operating and emergency procedures until the Commission terminates
the license. Superseded material must be retained for 3 years after the change is made. 


34.83 

Records of personnel monitoring. 


Each licensee shall maintain the following exposure records: 
(a) Daily pocket dosimeter readings and yearly operability checks for 3 years after the record is made. 
(b) Records of alarm ratemeter calibrations for 3 years after the record is made. 
(c) Reports received from the film badge or TLD processor until the Commission terminates the license. 
(d) Records of estimates of exposures as a result of off-scale pocket dosimeters or lost or damaged film badges or TLDs
until the Commission terminates the license. 




