 



Discussion: 

The Secretary understands that a guaranty agency is not a member of the Program Integrity Triad authorized under Part
H of the HEA and that the Triad has imposed a new management structure on the oversight of schools participating in the
Title IV student assistance programs. However, the Secretary believes that the statute continues to provide a guaranty
agency with oversight authority for schools applying to or continuing to participate in its guaranteed loan program
and disagrees that the regulations provide an improper delegation beyond the scope of statutory authority. Section
428(b)(1)(V) provides authority for the guaranty agency to require a participation agreement between the agency
and the school as a condition for the agency guaranteeing loans for students attending the school. As part of that process,
the Secretary believes that a guaranty agency must be permitted to establish standards that are consistent with the
standards of administrative capability and financial responsibility contained in 34 CFR 668 for a school's participation
in its guaranteed loan program. The Secretary believes that a guaranty agency should be allowed to protect itself
from schools that abuse the FFEL program. Generally, a guaranty agency must assume that a school that the Secretary
has found to be eligible is eligible. However, because the agency's examination of a school for participation in its
program may take place a significant period of time after the Secretary's examination of the school for certification,
the Secretary understands that the agency may uncover information relevant to the school's administrative capability
and financial responsibility that it wishes the Secretary to consider before signing a participation agreement
with the school. Subject to the Secretary's agreement that such information indicates the school's failure to meet
the standards of administrative capability and financial responsibility contained in 34 CFR 668, the agency may
decline to establish a participation agreement with the school. The Secretary believes this authority provided
to a guaranty agency does not intrude upon the statutory responsibilities of other members of the Triad. The Secretary
also notes that the guaranty agencies have long had responsibility for reviewing schools and have specific statutory
authority in section 428(b)(1)(T)(ii)(I) for limiting, suspending, or terminating a school from the FFEL program.
The Secretary believes that these regulations are consistent with the agency's statutory authority and longstanding
Department policy and regulation. Additionally, the Secretary does not believe that this regulatory authority
would provide an agency with the opportunity to retaliate against a school as a result of a school's appeal of its cohort
default rate. Such an appeal presumes that a school already participates in the agency's program. The statute authorizes
an agency to initiate an emergency action, limitation, suspension or termination (LST) of an eligible institution,
but provides that the action must be undertaken pursuant to criteria, rules, or regulations issued under the student
loan insurance program which are substantially the same as regulations issued by the Secretary. Further, an emergency
action or LST is subject to review by the Secretary. Therefore, the Secretary does not believe that the guaranty agency
can use its authority to retaliate against a school as the commenter suggests. 



Changes: 

The Secretary has revised 682.401(b)(6)(i)(F) of the regulations to clarify that a guaranty agency's determination
that a school does not satisfy the standards of administrative capability and financial responsibility defined
in 34 CFR 668 is subject to the agreement of the Secretary. 



Section 682.401(b)(6)(ii) 





Comments: 

A number of commenters objected to the provision that gives a guaranty agency the authority to limit the total number
of loans or the volume of loans made to students attending a particular school, or to otherwise establish appropriate
limitations on the school's participation in the agency's program where the agency has determined that a school does
not satisfy the financial responsibility and administrative capability standards. The commenters suggested that
this inappropriately places responsibility for evaluating a school's administrative and financial responsibility
in the hands of the guaranty agency. Some commenters objected to applying this provision to schools that are renewing
an application to continue to participate. Some commenters suggested that allowing guaranty agencies to limit the
participation of schools that seek to renew participation gives guaranty agencies an easy way to retaliate against
institutions that appeal their cohort default rates or take other actions that challenge the guaranty agency. 



Discussion: 

Section 428(b)(1)(T) of the HEA authorizes a guaranty agency to limit the total number of loans or the volume of loans
to students attending a particular eligible institution during any academic year. The Secretary notes that there
must be a legitimate basis for the agency to impose such a limitation. The Secretary expects a guaranty agency to maintain
evidence of the school's questionable administrative capability. 




Changes: 

None. 



Section 682.401(b)(6)(iii) 





Comments: 

The commenters suggested that if a guaranty agency limits, suspends, or terminates (LST) the participation of a school
that the Secretary should not extend the LST to all locations of the school until the Department determines that the
guaranty agency in fact followed proper procedures, correctly interpreted the law and regulations, and gave all
due process rights to the institution. 



Discussion: 

Section 428(b)(1)(T)(ii)(I) provides authority to a guaranty agency to limit, suspend, terminate (or take emergency
action against) a school based on the Secretary's regulations or regulations of the guaranty agency that are substantially
the same as regulations issued by the Secretary. The statute further directs the Secretary to apply the limitation,
suspension, or termination proceeding to all locations of those schools unless the Secretary finds, within 30 days
of the guaranty agency's notification to the Secretary of the action, that the action did not comply with the statute
and regulations. To make this finding, the Secretary reviews the guaranty agency's actions under section 428(b)(1)(T)(ii)
of the HEA before extending the LST to all locations. 



Changes: 

None. 





