 



Some Revision to Second Definition. 

The second definition in the proposed rule, which is also derived from the statute, provided that a section 3 business
concern also includes a business concern that employs a substantial number of section 3 residents for the type of activity
in which the business concern is engaged. Commenters stated that this definition was more realistic than the first
definition, but requested that the rule provide more guidance about the meaning of ``substantial.'' Several commenters
suggested that this term be quantified, and submitted suggestions ranging from 20 percent to 75 percent of the employees
of the business. 
In response to public comment, the second definition has been revised in the interim rule to mean a ``business concern
whose permanent, full-time employees consist of persons, at least 30 percent of whom are section 3 residents'' (or
who were section 3 residents at the time of their initial employment.) The Department believes that the 30 percent
figure represents a reasonable interpretation of ``substantial'' in this context. A figure of 30 percent is not so
high as to significantly limit the number of business concerns that could meet this standard, nor so low as to make the
preference for a business concern that employs a substantial number of low- or very low-income persons to be irrelevant.

In response to several commenters who stated that employers should receive credit for hiring persons who were formerly
low-income or very low-income persons, this second definition of ``section 3 business concern'' provides for this
credit. This second definition of section 3 business concern provides that in determining which business concerns
meet this second definition, consideration is give to business concerns that employ a substantial number (30 percent)
of low or very low-income persons who were low- or very low-income persons at the time the persons were employed by the
business, but whose incomes now exceed the income level of a low- or very low-income person, and the date of first employment
by the business concern has not exceeded a period of three years. The Department wants to give preference to business
concerns who employed low- and very low-income persons, and provided for their advancement from that income level.



New Third Definition. 

In the proposed rule, the third definition for ``section 3 business concern'' referred to a business concern that
is substantially owned, but less than 51 percent owned, by low-income persons or very low-income persons and employs
these persons in key management positions. This definition was soundly criticized by a number of commenters as being
unrealistic, and promoting fraud and abuse by allowing less than 51 percent ownership by low- and very low-income
persons. 
In response to public comment, this definition has been removed in the interim rule and replaced with the following:
``a business concern that provides evidence of a commitment to subcontract, in excess of 25 percent of the dollar amount
of all subcontracts to be awarded, to business concerns that meet either the first or second definition of section
3 business concern.'' Through this definition, a preference in contracting will be provided to business concerns
that are neither owned by low- or very low-income persons, nor employ (as their own employees) a substantial number
(30 percent) of low- or very low-income persons, but that actively seek and award subcontracts to businesses owned
by low- or very low-income persons, or businesses that substantially employ low- and very low-income persons. The
purpose of this definition is to provide a preference to primary contractors that have a successful record of subcontracting
with section 3 business concerns. 


Proof of Status as Section 3 Business Concern Is the Responsibility of the Business Concern. 

A few commenters raised questions about verifying the status of a section 3 business concern. Again, verification
or certification is not mandated by this interim rule. If requested, it is the responsibility of the business concern
that wants to take advantage of the preference provided by section 3 to produce acceptable support or documentation
that it qualifies as a section 3 business concern. 


