 

These factors and their application to 

Clermontia lindseyana

 Rock ('oha wai), 

Clermontia peleana

 Rock ('oha wai), 

Clermontia pyrularia

 Hillebr. ('oha wai), 

Colubrina oppositifolia

 Brongn. ex H. Mann (kauila), 

Cyanea copelandii

 Rock ssp. 

copelandii

 (haha), 

Cyanea hamatiflora

 ssp. 

carlsonii

 (Rock) Lammers (haha), 

Cyanea shipmanii

 Rock (haha), 

Cyanea stictophylla

 Rock (haha), 

Cyrtandra giffardii

 Rock (ha'iwale), 

Cyrtandra tintinnabula

 Rock (ha'iwale), 

Ischaemum byrone

 (Trin.) Hitch. (Hilo ischaemum), 

Isodendrion pyrifolium

 A. Gray (wahine noho kula), 

Mariscus fauriei

 (Kukenth.) T. Koyama (NCN), 

Nothocestrum breviflorum

 A. Gray ('aiea), 

Ochrosia kilaueaensis

 St. John (holei), 

Plantago hawaiensis

 (A. Gray) Pilg. (laukahi kuahiwi), 

Portulaca sclerocarpa

 A. Gray (po'e), 

Pritchardia 
affinis

 Becc. (loulu), 

Silene hawaiiensis

 Sherff (NCN), 

Tetramolopium arenarium

 (A. Gray) Hillebr. (NCN), and 

Zanthoxylum hawaiiense

 Hillebr. (a'e) are as follows: 


A. The Present or Threatened Destruction, Modification, or 
Curtailment of Its Habitat or Range


The habitat of the plants included in this rule has undergone extreme alteration because of past and present land management
practices, including deliberate alien animal and plant introductions; agricultural, commercial, and urban development;
and military and recreational use. Natural disturbances such as flooding, landslides, and volcanic activity also
destroy habitat and can have a significant effect on small populations of plants. Competition with alien plants as
well as destruction of plants and modification of habitat by 
introduced animals are the primary threats facing 18 of the 21 taxa included in this rule (See Table 1). 
Beginning with Captain James Cook in 1792, early European explorers introduced livestock, which became feral, increased
in number and 
range, and caused significant changes to the natural environment of Hawaii. 
The 1848 provision for land sales to individuals allowed large-scale 
agricultural and ranching ventures to begin. So much land was cleared for 
these enterprises that climatic conditions began to change, and the amount 
and distribution of rainfall were altered (Wenkam 1969). Plantation owners 
supported reforestation programs which resulted in many alien trees being 
introduced in the hope that the watershed could be conserved. 
Past and present activities of introduced alien mammals are the 
primary factor in altering and degrading vegetation and habitats on the 
island of Hawaii as well as on Kauai, Oahu, Molokai, and Maui, where some 
populations of these species occur. Feral ungulates trample and eat native 
vegetation and disturb and open areas. This causes erosion and allows the 
entry of alien plant species (Cuddihy and Stone 1990, Wagner 

et al. 

1990). 
Fourteen taxa in this rule are directly threatened by habitat degradation 
resulting from introduced ungulates: 4 taxa are threatened by cattle, 1 
taxon by deer, 7 taxa by goats, 8 by pigs, and 4 by sheep. 




