 

(C) Shall provide advice and leadership to the committee and prepare a report on its activities; 
(iv) The ability to respond flexibly to the needs of affected workers by devising and implementing a strategy for assessing
the employment and training needs of each dislocated worker and for obtaining the services and assistance necessary
to meet those needs; 
(v) A formal agreement, terminable at will by the workers or the company management, and terminable for cause by the
Governor; and 
(vi) Local job identification activities by the chairperson and members of the committee on behalf of the affected
workers. 
(2) Because they include employee representatives, labor-management committees typically provide a channel whereby
the needs of eligible dislocated workers can be assessed, and programs of assistance developed and implemented,
in an atmosphere supportive to each affected worker. As such, committees must be perceived to be representative and
fair in order to be most effective. 


631.31 

Monitoring and oversight. 


The Governor is responsible for monitoring and oversight of all State and substate grantee activities under this
part. In such monitoring and oversight of substate grantees, the Governor shall ensure that expenditures and activities
are in accordance with the substate plan or modification thereof, and with the cost limitations described in 631.14
of this part. 


631.32 

Allocation of funds by the Governor. 


Of the funds allotted to the Governor by the Secretary under 631.11 and 631.12 of this part: 
(a) The Governor shall issue allocations to substate grantees, the sum of which shall be no less than 50 percent of the
State's allotment (section 302(d)). 
(b)(1) The Governor shall prescribe the formula to be used in issuing substate allocations required under paragraph
(a) of this section to substate grantees. 
(2) The formula prescribed pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall utilize the most appropriate information
available to the Governor. In prescribing the formula, the Governor shall include (but need not be limited to) the
following information: 
(i) Insured unemployment data; 
(ii) Unemployment concentrations; 
(iii) Plant closing and mass layoff data; 
(iv) Declining industries data; 
(v) Farmer-rancher economic hardship data; and 
(vi) Long-term unemployment data. 
(3) The Governor may allow for an appropriate weight for each of the formula factors set forth in paragraph (b)(2) of
this section. A weight of zero for any of the factors required in section 302(d) of the Act and identified in paragraph
(b)(2) of this section shall only be made when a review of available data indicates that the factor is not relevant to
determining the incidence of need for worker dislocation assistance within the State. The formula may be amended
no more frequently than once each program year (section 302(d)). 
(c) The Governor may reserve an amount equal to not more than 40 percent of the funds allotted to the State under 631.11
and 631.12 of this part for State activities and for discretionary allocations to substate grantees (section
302(c)(1)). 
(d) The Governor may reserve an additional amount equal to not more than 10 percent of the funds allotted to the State
under 631.11 of this part. The Governor shall allocate such funds, subject to the SJTCC or HRIC review and comment,
during the first three quarters of the program year among substate grantees on the basis of need. Such funds shall be
allocated to substate grantees and shall not be used for statewide activities. Such funds shall be included in each
substate grantee's allocation for purposes of cost limitations, as described in 631.14 of this part (sections
302(c)(2) and 317(1)(B)). 


631.33 

State procedures for identifying funds subject to mandatory Federal reallotment. 


The Governor shall establish procedures to assure the equitable identification of funds required to be reallotted
pursuant to section 303(b) of the Act. Funds so identified may be funds reserved by the State pursuant to section 302(c)(1)(A)
through (D) of the Act and/or allocated to substate grantees pursuant to section 302(c)(1)(E), (c)(2) and/or (d)
of the Act (section 303(d)). Such procedures may not exempt either State or substate funds from reallotment. 




631.34 

Designation of substate areas. 


(a) The Governor, after receiving recommendations from the SJTCC or HRIC, shall designate substate areas for the
State (section 312(a)). 
(b) In designating substate areas, the Governor shall: 
(1) Ensure that each service delivery area within the State is included within a substate area and that no SDA is divided
among two or more substate areas; and 
(2) Consider the availability of services throughout the State, the capability to coordinate the delivery of services
with other human services and economic development programs, and the geographic boundaries of labor market areas
within the State. 
(c) Subject to paragraph (b) of this section, the Governor shall designate as a substate area: 





