 

The technological feasibility of reducing emissions from area sources depends on the ability to alter the characteristics
that affect emissions from the sources. Those characteristics have to do with the size or extent of the sources, their
physical characteristics and the operating procedures. Reducing emissions of fugitive dust from construction
activities, for example, could require the most effective combination of reducing the size of the sources (i.e.,
acres cleared at one time or vehicle miles traveled on unpaved surfaces), changing the physical characteristics
(i.e., silt loading on travel surfaces or moisture content of materials handled), and/or changing the operating
practices (i.e., lower vehicle speeds, less surface area exposed to the wind, treating or paving travel surfaces).


The technological feasibility of applying an emission reduction method to a particular point source should consider
the source's process and operating procedures, raw materials, physical plant layout, energy requirements, and
any collateral environmental impacts (e.g., water pollution and waste disposal). The process, operating procedures,
and raw materials used by a source can affect the feasibility of implementing process changes that reduce emissions
and the selection of add-on emission control equipment. The operation and longevity of control equipment can be significantly
influenced by the raw materials used and the process to which it is applied. The feasibility of modifying processes
or applying control equipment is also influenced by the physical layout of the particular plant. The space available
in which to implement such changes may limit the choices and will also affect the costs of control. 



4. Evaluate Costs of Control 



Economic feasibility considers the cost of reducing emissions from a particular source category and costs incurred
by similar sources that have implemented emission reductions. As with RACT determinations and BACT/LAER analyses
in other statutory contexts, EPA believes that for PM10 BACM purposes, it is reasonable for similar sources
to bear similar costs of emission reduction. As such, when identifying BACM, consideration of economic feasibility
should not rely on claims regarding the ability of a particular source to ``afford'' to reduce emissions to the level
of similar sources. Otherwise, less efficient sources might be rewarded for their inefficiency by being allowed
to bear lower emission reduction costs. Instead, economic feasibility for PM10 BACM purposes should focus
upon evidence that the control technology in question has previously been implemented at other sources in a similar
source category without unreasonable economic impacts. 

Where the economic feasibility of a measure (e.g., road paving) depends on public funding, EPA will consider past
funding of similar activities as well as availability of funding sources to determine whether a good faith effort
is being made to expeditiously implement the available control measures. In other words, if 20 miles of unpaved roads
are typically paved each year, then the BACM fugitive dust program should include paving more than 20 miles per year
of existing roads and should offer evidence of ambitious efforts to increase funding and increase the priority for
use of existing funds. 

The capital costs, annualized costs, and cost effectiveness of an emission reduction technology should be considered
in determining its economic feasibility. The ``OAQPS Control Cost Manual, Fourth Edition,'' EPA450/390006,
January 1990, describes procedures for determining these costs. The above costs should be determined for all technologically-feasible
emission reduction options. 



E. Selection of BACM for Area Sources 



Once the significant PM10 area source categories have been identified, the State should select area source
control measures from the candidate BACM listed in the technical information documents for fugitive dust, residential
wood combustion (RWC), prescribed burning, or any other technical information documents issued by EPA (see footnote
38). This guidance is based on EPA's analysis of available control alternatives for the identified source categories.
While the guidance is intended to be comprehensive, it is by no means exhaustive. Consequently, the State is encouraged
to consider other sources of information and is not precluded from selecting other measures and demonstrating to
the public and EPA that they constitute BACM. Further, any control measure that a commenter indicates during the public
comment period is available for a given area should be reviewed by the planning agency. The agency should determine
whether the affected categories of sources are significant and, if so, whether the available measure is achievable
in the area considering energy, environmental, and economic impacts and other costs. 

As stated earlier, EPA considers measures that prevent PM10 emissions over the long term to be preferable to
short-term curtailment measures. Therefore, when selecting BACM for area sources, a State should first consider
pollution preventive measures and measures that provide for long-term sustained progress toward attainment in
preference to quick, temporary control. For example, a State should consider requiring the replacement, over time,
of old wood stoves with cleaner-burning wood stoves or alternative fuels. Such programs would complement and reduce
dependance on wood-burning curtailment programs adopted as RACM for the moderate area SIP. However, EPA recognizes
that such long-term measures may entail significant lead time and that temporary measures like wood-burning curtailments
may need to be continued in serious areas, at a minimum, to provide interim health protection. 






