 

c. 

Principle of Minimum Cash on Hand.

 Recipient organizations should request funds based upon immediate disbursement requirements. Grantees should
time their requests to ensure that cash on hand is the minimum needed for disbursements to be made immediately or within
a few days. Idle funds in the hands of subgrantees will impair the goals of good cash management. 



2. Financial Reporting 



In order to obtain financial information concerning the use of funds, the Institute requires that grantees/subgrantees
of these funds submit timely reports for review. 

Two copies of the Financial Status Report are required from all grantees, other than recipients of scholarships under
section II.B.2.b.v., for each active quarter on a calendar-quarter basis. This report is due within 30 days after
the close of the calendar quarter. It is designed to provide financial informa-tion relating to Institute funds,
State and local matching shares, and any other fund sources included in the approved project budget. The report contains
information on obligations as well as outlays. A copy of the Financial Status Report, along with instructions for
its preparation, will be included in the official Institute Award package. In circumstances where an organization
requests substantial payments for a project prior to the completion of a given quarter, the Institute may request
a brief summary of the amount requested, by object class, in support of the Request for Advance or Reimbursement. 

Grantees receiving a continuation or on-going support grant should provide financial information and number their
quarterly Financial Status Reports on a project rather than a grant basis. 

Grantees receiving a package grant must submit a quarterly financial report summarizing the financial activity
for the entire package and separate reports for each project within the package. On the separate reports for the component
projects, the alphabetic project identifier (A, B, C, etc.) must be appended to the grant number in Block 5 of the Financial
Status Report. 



3. Consequences of Non-Compliance With Submission Requirements 



Failure of the grantee organization to submit required financial and program reports may result in a suspension of
grant payments or revocation of the grant award. 



H. Allowability of Costs 



1. General 



Except as may be otherwise provided in the conditions of a particular grant, cost allowability shall be determined
in accordance with the principles set forth in 

OMB Circulars A87,

 Cost Principles for State and Local Governments; 

A21

, Cost Principles Applicable to Grants and Contracts with Educational Institutions; and 

A122

, Cost Principles for Non-Profit Organizations. No costs may be recovered to liquidate obligations which are incurred
after the approved grant period. 



2. Costs Requiring Prior Approval 



a. 

Preagreement Costs.

 The written prior approval of the Institute is required for costs which are considered necessary to the project but
occur prior to the award date of the grant. 

b. 

Equipment.

 Grant funds may be used to purchase or lease only that equipment which is essential to accom-plishing the goals and
objectives of the project. The written prior approval of the Institute is required when the amount of automated data
processing (ADP) equipment to be purchased or leased exceeds $10,000 or the software to be purchased exceeds $3,000.


c. 

Consultants.

 The written prior approval of the Institute is required when the rate of compensation to be paid a consultant exceeds
$300 a day. 



3. Travel Costs 



Transportation and per diem rates must comply with the policies of the applicant organization. If the applicant does
not have an established written travel policy, then travel rates shall be consistent with those established by the
Institute or the Federal Government. Institute funds shall not be used to cover the transportation or per diem costs
of a member of a national organization to attend an annual or other regular meeting of that organization. 




