 

51. One comment suggested that ANDA applicants amend their patent certifications to a paragraph I certification
if FDA or the NDA holder ``delists'' a patent. 
As stated in the preamble to the proposed rule, the agency believes that a certification under 314.94(a)(12)(ii),
stating that no relevant patents claim the listed drug, would be more appropriate if a patent is ``delisted'' (see
54 FR 28872 at 28886). 
52. One comment asked FDA to clarify proposed 314.94(a)(12)(viii)(A) so that an amended patent certification
would be required if a patent were held valid and infringed but not required if a patent were held infringed, but not
valid. 
If a claim is found to be invalid or unenforceable, the patent will ordinarily be removed from the list, and applicants
with pending applications containing certifications with respect to that patent must amend their certifications
accordingly to certify that no relevant patents claim the drug or, if another relevant patent claims the drug, to make
an appropriate certification regarding that patent. In the amendment, the applicant must state the reason for the
change in certification (that the patent has been removed from the list). A patent that is the subject of a lawsuit under
314.107(c) will not be removed from the list until FDA determines either that no delay in effective dates of
approval is required as a result of the lawsuit or that any such period of delay in effective dates of approval is ended.
The agency has amended 314.94(a)(12)(viii)(B) to clarify its position regarding certifications and patents
removed from the list. 
The agency also advises applicants to submit any patent certification changes by letter if the applicant has not received
a ``not approvable'' letter from the agency. If the applicant has received a ``not approvable'' letter, it may include
the amended certification along with the complete response to the deficiencies in the ``not approvable'' letter.
This will enable FDA to process amendments more efficiently. 
53. Six comments addressed amended certifications under proposed 314.94(a)(12)(viii)(C)(

2

) which would not require applicants to amend their patent certifications when patent information is submitted after
the abbreviated application's approval ``whether or not the approval of the abbreviated application is effective.''
One comment would require amended patent certifications only if a new patent issued after the ANDA had been submitted
and make supplements optional after ANDA approval. Five comments would require ANDA applicants to amend patent certifications
until the effective date of their ANDA approvals because the existence of a patent would affect the ANDA's effective
date of approval. 
In the 

Federal Register

 of April 28, 1992 (57 FR 17950 at 17953), FDA stated that it had clarified its policies with respect to drug products
with delayed effective dates of approval. The agency stated that an approval with a delayed effective date is tentative
and does not become final until the effective date. Therefore, FDA has amended 314.94(a)(12)(viii)(C)(

2

) by deleting the phrase ``whether or not the approval of the abbreviated application is effective,'' and, consistent
with this change, and in response to the comments, by requiring an ANDA applicant to amend its patent certifications
until the effective date of ANDA approval. 


G. Section 314.95_Notice of Certification of Invalidity or Noninfringement of a Patent 


Proposed 314.95 described an ANDA applicant's obligations with respect to a notice of certification of invalidity
or noninfringement of a patent. Proposed 314.95(a), for example, would require an ANDA applicant to provide
notice to the patent owner and the NDA holder. Proposed 314.95(b) would require an ANDA applicant to send the
notice when it receives an acknowledgment letter from FDA stating that the ANDA is sufficiently complete for review
to begin. Proposed 314.95(c) prescribed the contents of a notice of certification of invalidity or noninfringement
of a patent, including ``a detailed statement of the factual and legal basis of the applicant's opinion that the patent
is not valid or will not be infringed.'' 
54. One comment recommended that FDA revise the regulation by adding a mechanism whereby FDA or the United States Patent
and Trademark Office would review notices of certification of invalidity or noninfringement. The comment would
have FDA suspend the 45-day period provided by section 505(j)(4)(B)(iii) of the act until FDA or the United States
Patent and Trademark Office determined that the notice was sufficient. 
FDA declines to adopt the comment. As stated elsewhere in this preamble, FDA lacks expertise in patent law. Moreover,
neither FDA nor the United States Patent and Trademark Office currently has access to the additional resources that
would be necessary to review these notices, and a patent certification review system would subject the agency's decisions
to questioning that would require further resource expenditures and create delays in the statutory patent certification
and challenge process. 


