 

The full provisions of section 7 apply to nonessential experimental populations in a national park or national wildlife
refuge. Consequently, the Service, National Park Service, Forest Service, or any other Federal agency is prohibited
from authorizing, funding, or carrying out an action within a national park or national wildlife refuge that is likely
to jeopardize the continued existence of the gray wolf. Pursuant to 50 CFR 17.83(b), section 7 determinations must
consider all experimental and nonexperimental wolves as a listed species for analysis purposes in national parks.
The Service has reviewed all ongoing and proposed uses of the parks and refuges and determined that none are likely
to jeopardize the continued existence of the gray wolf, nor will they adversely affect the success of the reintroduction
program.

Most of the reintroduction area is remote and sparsely inhabited wild lands. However, there are some risks to wolf
recovery associated with take of wolves in regard to other land uses and various recreational activities. Potential
threats are hunting, trapping, animal damage control activities, and high speed vehicular traffic. Hunting, trapping,
and USDA Animal Damage Control programs are prohibited or strictly regulated in national parks, as well as closely
regulated by State and Federal law and policy. There are very few paved or unpaved roads in the proposed reintroduction
area or immediately outside of it. The unpaved roads typically have low vehicle traffic, are constructed for low speeds
and used only seasonally. Thus, wolves should encounter vehicles infrequently. In accordance with existing labeling,
the use of toxicants lethal to wolves in areas occupied by wolves is prohibited. Overall, the possible risks and threats
that could impact the success of the reintroduction effort are thought to be minimal.



Location of Experimental Population



The release site for reintroducing wolves will be in Yellowstone National Park. The designated experimental population
area will include the State of Wyoming; that portion of Idaho east of Interstate Highway 15; and the State of Montana
east of Interstate Highway 15 and south of the Missouri River east of Great Falls, Montana, to the Montana/North Dakota
border.



Management



To date, the experimental population area does not currently support any reproducing pairs of wolves. It is also unlikely
that wolves from the natural southern expansion from northwestern Montana have arrived in the Park. Except for the
gray wolves in northwestern Montana, only an occasional, isolated wolf has been reported, killed, or otherwise documented
in Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, or other Western States. Single packs have been reported throughout the northern Rocky
Mountains. However, these reported wolves or groups of wolves, if factual, apparently disappeared for unknown reasons
and did not establish recoverable ``populations'' as defined by wolf experts. A wolf population is defined as at least
two breeding pairs of gray wolves that each successfully raise at least two young to December 31 of their birth year
for 2 consecutive years (Service 1994). Thus, the Service has determined that there is no population of wolves in the
Park and therefore, the Park reintroduction is consistent with provisions of section 10(j) of the Act; specifically,
that experimental wolves need to be geographically separate from other nonexperimental populations. It is possible
that prior to 2002, other wolves may appear in the wild and be attracted to the experimental area occupied by the reintroduced
wolves. Any ``new'' arrivals would be classified as part of the experimental population. These wolves could assist
in the recovery and expansion of the experimental population to where wolves could be dispersing into central Idaho
and Montana.

Wolves dispersing into areas in Idaho and Montana, outside of the experimental area, would continue to receive endangered
species protection under the Act, as did the wolves that recolonized an area near Glacier National Park in 1982. It
is also possible, but not probable, that during the next 3 years wolves could move between recovery areas and enhance
the genetic diversity between natural recovery areas and reintroduction sites. It is not anticipated that such exchange
will significantly alter the recovery rate in the Park's experimental population area.

Although the Service determined that there is no existing wolf population in the recovery area that would preclude
reintroduction and establishment of an experimental population in the Park, the Service will continue to determine
the presence of any wild wolves. Prior to any reintroduction, the Service would evaluate the status of any wolves found
in the experimental population area. If a wolf population is discovered in the proposed experimental area, no reintroduction
of wolves would occur. Instead, the success of the naturally occurring wolf population would be monitored to determine
if recovery was continuing. If a natural wolf population is located in the experimental area prior to the effective
date of the final rule, then the final rule would not be implemented and there would be no reintroduction program. Wolves
naturally occurring would be endangered and managed as such, with full protection under the Act. If the natural wolf
population failed to maintain positive growth for two consecutive years, then the reintroduction effort could proceed
or other recovery measures taken. After reintroduction is completed, according to the Reintroduction Protocol
(section 5 above), management of the experimental population will begin.

Once this rule is effective and wolves have been released into the recovery area, the rule would remain in effect until
wolf recovery occurs or a scientific review indicates that modifications in the experimental rule are necessary
to achieve wolf recovery.



