 

A. Gasoline 



For the gasoline base fuel, EPA is requiring the use of the reformulated gasoline summer baseline fuel as specified
in CAA Section 211(k)(10)(B)(i). This unleaded gasoline fuel, which is free of oxygenates, was determined from fuel
survey data and will be used to represent all grades of conventional gasoline. This base fuel has the same specifications
as the industry average gasoline used in many recent fuel emission studies, including the Auto/Oil Program
<FOOTCITE>20</FOOTCITE>
 and EPA's reformulated gasoline testing program. Selecting this formulation as the base gasoline fuel allows the
comparison of emission characterization results from the F/FA testing program with a larger body of current emission
data. The blending tolerances for the gasoline base fuel are consistent with certain blending tolerances specified
in the RFG rule (59 FR 7716). 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
20

</FOOTNAME>
Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program, Technical Bulletin 

#

1, December 1990; available in Docket A9007, Item No. IVA08.

</FOOTNOTE>


The gasoline base fuel must contain the following additives: deposit control, corrosion inhibitor, demulsifier,
anti-oxidant, and metal deactivator. In addition to the above required additives, the final rule allows manufacturers
to use anti-static additives in the gasoline base fuel, if needed. Anti-static additives are not required in gasoline
base fuel because this type of additives is not considered essential for the fuel's production, distribution, or
the vehicle operation. Thus, anti-static additives should be used only as a safety measure on a case-by-case basis,
as needed (e.g., when static problems present a risk of explosion). The required and permissible gasoline base fuel
additives may contain no elements in addition to carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and/or sulfur. 

In the Reopening Notice, EPA proposed to preclude the use of sulfur-containing additives in the gasoline base fuel.
However, in response to a number of comments from the regulated industry, this final rule permits up to 15 ppm sulfur
to be included in the additives. The total sulfur content in the base fuel, including any sulfur contributed by the
additive components, must equal 339 ppm (within a tolerance of 

# 

25 ppm). A summary of the gasoline base fuel specifications and its additive components is provided in the accompanying
regulations [see Table F941 in 79.55(b)].



B. Diesel 



Reflecting its predominant usage, 

#

2 diesel is selected in this final rule as the base fuel for diesel. The specifications for the diesel base fuel were
determined by calculating an industry average diesel fuel from 1990 industry and government diesel fuel survey data.
The sources of data and methods of 
calculations are contained in the docket for this rulemaking.
<FOOTCITE>21</FOOTCITE>
 The blending tolerances for the diesel base fuel have been set to be comparable to those used in the gasoline base fuel.
An exception to this general methodology is the base fuel specification for sulfur level. The required sulfur level
(0.05 weight percent) reflects current on-road diesel fuel sulfur limits (55 FR 34120). 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
21

</FOOTNAME>
See memorandum from James Greaves to Docket A9007 (Item No. IVB01) regarding ``Revised
Base Diesel Fuel Determination Procedures for the Fuels and Fuel Additives Rulemaking.''

</FOOTNOTE>


The additives required as diesel base fuel components are: corrosion inhibitor, demulsifier, anti-oxidant, and
metal deactivator. In addition to the above required additives, the final rule allows the use of anti-static and flow
improver additives in the diesel base fuel, as needed. As with gasoline, anti-static additives are not required because
they should only be used in the case of static accumulation problems. Similarly, flow improvers may be used on a need
basis to improve cold weather handling.

As in the gasoline base fuel, the diesel base fuel additives may contain sulfur, as well as carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
and nitrogen. The total sulfur content in the diesel base fuel formulation, including any sulfur contributed by the
additives, may not exceed 0.05 percent by weight. A summary of the diesel base fuel specifications and allowed additive
components is provided in the regulatory text [see Table F942 in 79.55(c)]. 



C. Alternative Fuels


