 

92. Copies of the final regulatory flexibility analysis are available for inspection and copying, Monday through
Friday, 9 a.m.4:30 p.m., in the FCC Dockets Reference Room (Room 239), 1919 M Street NW., Washington, DC 20554.
The added final regulatory flexibility analysis may also be purchased, as part of the 

Memorandum Opinion and Order on Reconsideration

, from the Commission's copy contractor, ITS, Inc., room 246, 1919 M St. NW., Washington, DC 20037. See 5 U.S.C. 604(b).



Ordering Clauses



93. 

It is ordered

 that, pursuant to sections 1, 4, 201205, 214, and 220 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and Section
613 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 151, 154, 201205, 214, 220, 533, the 

Memorandum Opinion and Order on Reconsideration

, affirming in part, and modifying in part, the 

Second Report and Order

 is adopted.

94. 

It is further ordered

 that, the Petition for Rulemaking filed by CFA and NCTA is 

denied in part

 and 

granted in part

 to the extent indicated in the 

Memorandum Opinion and Order on Reconsideration.



List of Subjects in 47 CFR Part 63



Cable television, Communications common carriers, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Telephone, Video
Dialtone.



Final Rule Changes



Part 63 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:



PART 63_[AMENDED]



1. The authority citation for Part 63 is revised to read as follows:






Authority: 

Sections 1, 4(i), 4(j), 201205, 218, and 403 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and Section 613 of
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. secs. 151, 154(i), 15(j), 201205, 218, 403, and 533 unless
otherwise noted.




2. Section 63.54 is amended by revising paragraph (d), and adding paragraphs (e)(5), (e)(6), (f), and (g), to read
as follows:



63.54



Facilities for provision of video programming by a telephone common carrier in its telephone service area.



* * * * *



(d)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (d)(5) of this section, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the provision of video dialtone services.

(2) Nothing in this section prohibits a telephone company from exceeding the carrier-user relationship with a video
programmer or video programmers by providing services, and engaging in activities, not related to the provision
of video programming directly to subscribers in its local exchange area.

(3) A telephone company may exceed the carrier-user relationship in its local exchange area with a video programmer
by providing enhanced or other nonregulated services related to the provision of video programming to such video
programmer, provided that a basic video platform is available to 70% of the households for which the video programmer
seeks such enhanced or nonregulated services and provided that the telephone company does not:

(i) Determine how video programming is presented for sale to subscribers in its local exchange service area, including
making decisions concerning the bundling or ``tiering,'' or the price, terms, or conditions on which video programming
is offered to subscribers in that area; or

(ii) Have a cognizable financial interest in, or exercise direct or indirect control over, any entity that performs
any of the activities listed in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section within the telephone company's local exchange
service area.

(4) A telephone company may exceed the carrier-user relationship with a video programmer or video programmers by
providing services, and engaging in activities, related to the provision of video programming (other than enhanced
or other nonregulated services), provided that the telephone company does not:

(i) Determine how video programming is presented for sale to subscribers in its local exchange service area, including
making decisions concerning the bundling or ``tiering,'' or the price, terms, or conditions on which video programming
is offered to subscribers in that area;

(ii) Have a cognizable financial interest in, or exercise direct or indirect control over, any entity that performs
any of the activities listed in paragraph (d)(4)(i) of this section within the telephone company's local exchange
service area;

(iii) Permit any video programmer to participate in the operation or management of basic video dialtone service,
except as may be authorized by the Commission; or

(iv) Exceed the carrier-user relationship with any franchised cable operator in the telephone company's local exchange
service area, or affiliate of such cable operator, except to: lease cable drop wires, in accordance with paragraph
(d)(5) of this section, or to provide enhanced or other nonregulated services, in accordance with paragraph (d)(3)
of this section.

(5) A telephone company may not acquire cable facilities in its local exchange service area for use in providing video
dialtone service, or services related to the provision of video programming directly to subscribers. Notwithstanding
the above, a telephone company may acquire cable facilities in its local exchange service area for use in providing
common carrier channel service, subject to Section 214 certification and compliance with the Commission's rules.
A telephone company may also lease drop wires from a franchised cable operator in its local exchange service area,
provided that:

(i) Such lease is for a nonrenewable term of three years or less; and

(ii) The telephone company does not obtain exclusive rights to use such drop wires, or otherwise unreasonably restrict
the access of any video programmer to any of the cable operator's drop wires.

(e) ***



