 

An additional notification extending the comment period to December 2, 1985, was published on October 3, 1985 (50
FR 40424). These two additional notifications were also published in the aforementioned nine newspapers in July
and October, respectively. On May 2, 1986, the least Bell's vireo was listed as endangered, and the public comment
period on proposed critical habitat was reopened for an additional 90 days (51 FR 16483). A further extension of the
comment period to January 1, 1987, was published on July 31, 1986 (51 FR 27429). Approximately 120 interested parties
were notified regarding this extension of the comment period. 

The public comment period was again reopened for 90 days subsequent to the publication of the revised proposed rule
on August 7, 1992 (57 FR 34298). Two additional public hearings were also scheduled by the Service. A legal notice announcing
the hearings and inviting general public comment on the revised proposal was published in the San Diego Union-Tribune
on August 17, 1992. About 200 potentially affected or interested parties were notified regarding this revised proposed
action. Public hearings were held in Garden Grove, California, on October 20, 1992, and in San Diego on October 22,
1992. A total of about 30 individuals attended these hearings. 

Multiple comments whether written or oral from the same interested party are regarded as one comment. Written comments
and oral statements questioning or opposing critical habitat designation as originally proposed were grouped into
24 issues and discussed in the revised proposed rule (57 FR 34892). 

Of the 87 comments received on the revised proposal to designate critical habitat, 24 (28 percent) supported the designation,
3 (3 percent) opposed the designation, 51 (59 percent) recommended that the Service change the boundaries or delay
the designation, and 9 (10 percent) were non-committal. 

The Service has identified 25 issues associated with these 87 comments that reflect a questioning of, or opposition
to, critical habitat designation and are discussed below. 



Issue 1: 

Certain areas should be excluded from critical habitat because the habitat is already degraded, or proposed plans
will indirectly degrade the habitat. Along the Santa Clara River, for example, cowbirds are numerous within the habitat
and make it less suitable for vireos. Also, reclaimed sewage water flows through the Santa Clara River, and treatment
chemicals may affect the vireo. At expected build-out conditions, the noise generated by traffic along such areas
as Jamul Creek and the San Luis Rey River may render the habitat unsuitable for vireos. 



Service Response:

 As long as the constituent elements of critical habitat are present, the factors leading to the degradation of such
habitat are not considered in the designation process. Noise, cowbird parasitism, pollution, and other factors
contribute incremental impacts upon the vireo, but management of critical habitat areas may reduce or eliminate
these impacts. Extensive unmitigated habitat loss may preclude the ability of a listed species to recover. Critical
habitat designation should reduce the chances of this occurring with respect to the least Bell's vireo. 

The Act also specifies that certain management considerations may be necessary in critical habitat areas. Cowbirds
are common in riparian habitat throughout the range of the least Bell's vireo. The judicious trapping of cowbirds
and monitoring of vireo nests has significantly reduced the detrimental effects of cowbird parasitism on the vireo
at several localities. 



Issue 2:

 Critical habitat should be modified to more accurately reflect the location of nesting and foraging habitat. Urban
developments, agricultural lands, industrial operations, recreational facilities, highways, railroads, etc.,
are included within the boundaries of critical habitat designation. 

The Service has exceeded its authority under the Act by including in the critical habitat area, land which it knows
does not meet the Act's definition of critical habitat. The regulations state that ``critical habitat will be defined
by specific limits using reference points and lines as found on standard topographic maps of the area'' [50 CFR 424.12(c)].
The Service should choose reference points that are more precise than section lines, and less ephemeral than trees
and sandbars. 



Service Response:

 The suggestion to designate more precise boundaries may be possible in some cases. No specifics on suggested boundaries
were provided. Attempting to redefine the critical habitat by another means would unduly delay a final decision on
this matter. 






