 

&bull;Tested and the results were negative; or 
&bull;Tested, results were positive, but an adequate in-place management plan has been developed; or 
&bull;The subject of a risk assessment previously. 
(2) Actual implementation of recommendations that result from the risk assessment conducted is not eligible for
funding under this NOFA. The implementation of resulting recommendations (

e.g.,

 comprehensive or random testing, abatement of lead, in-place management measures, and work order modifications)
may be funded from other HA sources (i.e., CIAP, CGP, operating subsidy, or operating reserves). HAs are expected
to implement these recommendations, especially those related to in-place management measures when abatement of
lead hazards will not take place within a reasonable time (one year). 

In no instance shall the implementation of in-place management measures satisfy the HA's obligation under the Lead-Based
Paint Poisoning Prevention Act to test and/or abate lead-based paint hazards. 
(3) Funds under this NOFA may not

 be used to purchase insurance including existing-conditions LBP liability insurance. While funds may be used to
conduct risk assessments required to be in place prior to the issuance of an insurance policy, under no circumstance
may these funds be used to pay for the premiums associated with this insurance. 


D. Selection of Applications 


(1) Applications will be selected for funding only after they have been deemed eligible in accordance with the threshold
requirements set forth in Section II.B. of this NOFA. 
(2) 

Field Offices will ensure that all applications (including copies) are date- and time-stamped immediately upon
receipt.

 Decisions for funding are to be made known to Headquarters by the date specified in the Processing Schedule in Section
III.B of this NOFA. The Field Office will be responsible for identifying, notifying applicants of, and receiving
corrections of any technical deficiencies in the application, as discussed in Section IV of this NOFA. 
(3) The Field Office Public Housing Division Director shall make final funding decisions on the amounts assigned
to each Field Office. As many applications as possible will be funded within the Field allocation or any redistribution
of funds. Each Field Office will advise Headquarters, by the date specified in the Processing Schedule in Section
III.B of this NOFA, on whether there are sufficient eligible applications within its jurisdiction to require all
of the funds assigned. In cases where all assigned funds cannot be used within a Field Office's jurisdiction, Headquarters
will reassign the funds to other Field Offices that have identified a need for additional funds, as described in Section
I.A(4) of this NOFA. 


E. Notification of Awards 


The Field Office will notify the HA of the funding decision after HUD has completed the required congressional notification.
Reservation and congressional notification documents will be prepared by the Field Office. 


II. Application Process 


A. General Requirements 


Applications are available from HUD Field Offices listed in the Appendix of this NOFA. To be considered for funding,
an original and 2 copies of the application must be submitted to the HUD Field Office that has jurisdiction over the
applicant HA. An application may be submitted immediately upon publication of this NOFA, and must be submitted before
3:00 p.m., local time, on August 4, 1994, to the HUD Field Office that has jurisdiction over the applicant HA. The contents
of the application are listed below, in Section III.A of this NOFA. 
The above-stated deadline is firm as to date and hour. In the interest of fairness to all applicants, the Department
will treat as ineligible for consideration any application that is received after the deadline. Applicants should
take this practice into account and make early submission of their materials to avoid any risk of loss of eligibility
brought about by unanticipated delays or other delivery-related problems. 


B. Threshold Requirements 


To be considered eligible for funding, an HA must propose to conduct risk assessments for pre-1980 family developments
that: 
&bull;Have not previously been the subject of a risk assessment; OR 
&bull;Have not been tested and abated; OR 
&bull;Have been tested, results were positive but have not been abated or an adequate in-place management plan has
not been developed. 


III. Checklist of Application Submission Requirements 


A. Application Content


The following documents comprise the application: 
(1) OMB Standard Form 424, Application for Federal Assistance (HAs shall complete 

ONLY

 items 2, 5, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17 and 18) and SF424(B); 
(2) Form HUD52825, Comprehensive Assessment/Program Budget, Part I - Summary. The total amount requested
for funding will be identified on this form under either account 1410.1, Administration (where HA staff will be used
and the HA certifies that it has the capability of, and will be conducting the professional risk assessment; NOTE:
a portion, not to exceed ten percent [10%] of the funding requested, may be used for administrative expenses incurred
by the HA, including the use of a consultant to prepare background materials in support of the risk assessment), or
account 1430.2, Consultant Fees (where the HA will be contracting for the professional risk assessment). 
(3) Form HUD52825, Comprehensive Assessment/Program Budget, Part II - Supporting Pages. Developments proposed
to be the subject of a risk assessment are to be identified on this form. The applicant must provide the name; address;
project number; total number of units; number of units to be sampled, in accordance with the requirements set forth
in Section I.A(3) of this NOFA and in the risk assessment protocol; and amount requested for each development, with
supporting justification, as appropriate. 
(4) Certification signed by the HA Executive Director that, at a minimum, the risk assessment protocol to be used will
be equivalent to the Department's protocol. 
(5) Certification signed by the HA Executive Director that the proposed risk assessment will be completed within
eighteen (18) months of the date that funds are awarded and that the HA agrees to participate, if requested by HUD, in
a subsequent evaluation of the risk assessment protocol, to assess its validity for the identification of lead-based
paint hazards and effectiveness in addressing those hazards. 
(6) Certification signed by the HA Executive Director that a copy of the completed risk assessment will be provided
to the appropriate HUD Field Office upon completion of the assessment. 
(7) Certification that HA staff are qualified to conduct LBP risk assessments, if applicable. 
(8) Certification that the HA will comply with the requirements of section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act
of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135. 
(9) Form HUD50070, Certification for Drug-Free Workplace. 



