 

^ In the lower extremities, i.e., the iliac, femoral, and popliteal arteries, or in the upper extremities, i.e., the
innominate, subclavian, axillary, and brachial arteries. The upper extremities do not include head or neck vessels.
 
^ Of a single coronary artery for patients for whom the likely alternative treatment is coronary bypass surgery and
who exhibit the following characteristics:  


#

 Angina refractory to optimal medical management;  




#

 Objective evidence of myocardial ischemia; and  




#

 Lesions amenable to angioplasty;  


^ Of the renal arteries for patients in whom there is an inadequate response to a thorough medical management of symptoms
and for whom surgery is the likely alternative. PTA for this group of patients is an alternative to surgery, not simply
an addition to medical management.  
&bull;Obstructive lesions of arteriovenous dialysis fistulas and grafts when performed through either a venous
or arterial approach.  
PTA is not covered to treat obstructive lesions of the carotid, vertebral and cerebral arteries. 

The safety and efficacy of these procedures have not been established.  
 
Transmittal No. 69. Section 5013. Changed Implementing Instructions_Effective Date: Services performed
on or after 03/22/94.  
 
Section 5013, Magnetic Resonance Imaging, provides for coverage of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to diagnose
disc disease without regard to whether radiologic imaging has been tried first to diagnose the problem.  


5013Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Effective for services performed on or after 112285.)
 


Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), formerly called nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), is covered under Medicare
when furnished as described below for the types of covered conditions described in this instruction.  
A. General  
1. Method of Operation._Magnetic resonance imaging is a noninvasive method of graphically representing the distribution
of water and other hydrogen-rich molecules in the human body. In contrast to conventional radiographs or CT scans,
in which the image is produced by X-ray beam attenuation by an object, MRI is capable of producing images by several
techniques. In fact, various combinations of MR image production methods may be employed to emphasize particular
characteristics of the tissue or body part being examined. The basic elements by which MRI produces an image are the
density of hydrogen nuclei in the object examined, their motion, and the relaxation times, the period of time required
for the nuclei to return to their original states in the main, static magnetic field after being subjected to a brief
additional magnetic field. These relaxation times reflect the physical-chemical properties of tissue and the molecular
environment of its hydrogen nuclei. Only hydrogren atoms are present in human tissues in sufficient concentration
for current use in clinical MRI.  
2. General Clinical Utility._Overall, MRI is a useful diagnostic imaging modality that is capable of demonstrating
a wide variety of soft-tissue lesions with contrast resolution equal or superior to CT scanning in various parts of
the body.  
Among the advantages of MRI are the absence of ionizing radiation and the ability to achieve high levels of tissue contrast
resolution without injected iodinated radiological contrast agents. Recent advances in technology have resulted
in development and FDA approval of new paramagnetic contrast agents for MRI which allow even better visualization
in some instances. Multislice imaging and the ability to image in multiple planes, especially sagittal and coronal,
have provided a flexibility not easily available with other modalities. Because cortical (outer layer) bone and
metallic prostheses do not cause distortion of MR images, it has been possible to visualize certain lesions and body
regions with greater certainty than has been possible with CT. The use of MRI on certain soft tissue structures for
the purpose of detecting disruptive, neoplastic, degenerative, or inflammatory lesions has now become established
in medical practice.  
B. Covered Clinical Applications._Although several uses of MRI are still considered investigational and some uses
are clearly contraindicated (see subsection D), MRI is considered medically efficacious for a number of uses. Use
the following descriptions as general guidelines or examples of what may be considered covered rather than as a restrictive
list of specific coverages. Coverage is limited to MRI units which have received FDA premarket approval, and such
units must be operated within the parameters specified by the approval. As with all items and services, the services
must be reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of the specific patient involved.  
MRI is useful in examining the head, central nervous system, and spine. Multiple sclerosis can be diagnosed with MRI
and the contents of the posterior fossa are visible. The inherent tissue contrast resolution of MRI makes it an appropriate
standard diagnostic modality for general neuroradiology.  
 
 
 


