 




<DOCTITLE> Issuance of Decisions and Orders the Week of July 25 through July 29, 1994</DOCTITLE>




<USBUREAU>Office of Hearings and Appeals</USBUREAU>


During the week of July 25 through July 29, 1994, the decisions and orders summarized below were issued with respect
to appeals and applications for other relief filed with the Office of Hearings and Appeals of the Department of Energy.
The following summary also contains a list of submissions that were dismissed by the Office of Hearings and Appeals.





Appeals


Betty M. Daley, 7/28/94, LFA0396 








Mrs. Betty M. Daley filed an Appeal of the adequacy of a search for the medical records of her husband (a deceased former
Oak Ridge employee) under a Request for Information which she had submitted under the Freedom of Information Act.
The late Mr. Daley had been employed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory from March 1944 until his retirement in September
1985. In considering the Appeal, the DOE found that the Oak Ridge Field Office had performed a search reasonably calculated
to recover responsive materials because records were found from the period June 1947 through September 1985, even
though no responsive materials were found from his initial employment in March 1944 through May 1947.

 


Beulah B. Carney, 7/29/94, LFA0401 








Mrs. Beulah B. Carney appealed the adequacy of the search conducted by the DOE Oak Ridge Facility for her late husband's
personnel records. The Authorizing Official subsequently discovered documents proving that these personnel records
were destroyed as part of routine document destruction. The OHA ordered that the documents pertaining to the destruction
of the records be released to the requester and in all other respects denied the request.

 


Government Accountability Project, 
7/29/94, LFA0398 








The Government Accountability Project (GAP) filed an Appeal from a partial denial by the Oak Ridge Operations Office
(Oak Ridge) of a Request for Information which it had submitted under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). GAP had
requested billing statements submitted by outside counsel to DOE contractors. In considering the Appeal, the DOE
found that while some of the information that had initially been withheld under FOIA Exemption 4 should have been released
to the public, some of the information requested by the Appellant was properly withheld under Exemption 4 since it
was both privileged and confidential. Accordingly, the Appeal was remanded to Oak Ridge for further processing.

 


Marilyn Cribb Stanley, 7/28/94, LFA0399 








Marilyn Cribb Stanley filed an Appeal from a determination issued to her on June 20, 1994, by the Oak Ridge Operations
Office (Oak Ridge) which denied a request for information which she had submitted under the Freedom of Information
Act. The request sought records relating to the late Mary Avery Cribb, wife of a contractor employee at Oak Ridge Laboratory
during the 1940s. Oak Ridge stated that it did not possess any responsive documents, and the Appeal challenged the
adequacy of the search. In considering the Appeal, the DOE found that Oak Ridge followed procedures which were reasonably
calculated to uncover the material sought. Accordingly, the Appeal was denied.

 


Robert Heitmann, 7/29/94, LFA0397 








Robert Heitmann filed an Appeal from a determination issued to him on June 14, 1994, by the Albuquerque Operations
Office (AL) which denied a request for information which he had submitted under the Freedom of Information Act. The
request sought records relating to an alleged incident at the Travis School involving an airplane crash and atomic
weaponry. AL stated that it did not possess any responsive documents, and the Appeal challenged the adequacy of the
search. In considering the Appeal, the DOE found that AL followed procedures which were reasonably calculated to
uncover the material sought. Accordingly, the Appeal was denied.

 


Texas Instruments, Inc., , 7/28/94, LFA0395 








Texas Instruments, Inc. (TI) filed an Appeal from a determination issued by the Oak Ridge Operations Office (Oak Ridge)
in response to TI's request under the Freedom of Information Act. In the Appeal, TI claimed that the search by Oak Ridge
was inadequate. TI cited in support of its argument an incident in which a TI employee allegedly saw a stack of responsive
documents that were not released. 



In denying the Appeal, the DOE found that the incident did not provide a basis for believing that responsive documents
had been withheld. The DOE also found that Oak Ridge had adequately searched for documents. 



Whistle Blower Proceeding


Francis M. O'Laughlin, 7/29/94, LWA0005 








Francis M. O'Laughlin (O'Laughlin) filed a complaint under the DOE's Contractor Employee Protection Program, 10
C.F.R. Part 708, contending that reprisals were taken against him after he raised concerns relating to health and
safety with Boeing Petroleum Services, Inc. (BPS), a DOE contractor. The alleged reprisals included wrongfully
denying O'Laughlin a management position to which he ostensibly was entitled, and later taking adverse personnel
action against O'Laughlin which included a demotion and corresponding salary reduction. Pursuant to O'Laughlin's
request under 10 CFR 708.9(a), a hearing in this matter was conducted by an Office of Hearings and Appeals Hearing Officer
on May 18 and 19, 1994, in New Orleans, Louisiana. In considering the transcript of testimony taken at the hearing and
the pleadings filed on behalf of O'Laughlin and BPS, the Hearing Officer determined that O'Laughlin had failed to
establish that he actually disclosed information to BPS which evidenced his good faith belief that there was a substantial
and specific danger to health or safety. 10 CFR 708.5(a)(1). Accordingly, in the DOE's Initial Agency Decision, O'Laughlin's
request for relief under Part 708 was denied. 



Request for Exception


RR Oil, Inc., 7/27/94, LEE0079 








RR Oil, Inc. filed an Application for Exception from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) requirement
that it file Form EIA782B, the ``Resellers'/Retailers' Monthly Petroleum Product Sales Report.'' In considering
this request, the DOE found that the firm was not suffering gross inequity or serious hardship. Accordingly, exception
relief was denied. 



Implementation of Special Refund Procedures


Telum, Inc., 7/25/94, LEF0114 








The DOE issued a Decision and Order setting forth refund procedures to distribute $56,149.35 plus interest, received
as a result of a Consent Order between Telum, Inc. and the DOE. The Decision sets forth refund application procedures
for the customer who purchased middle distillates from Telum, Inc. during the period from December 1, 1973 through
April 30, 1974. Specific information regarding the data to be included in the refund application is discussed in the
Decision. 



Refund applications


Barrick Enterprises, Inc., 7/28/94, RF27292432 








The DOE issued a Decision and Order concerning the Application for Refund of a claimant in the Subpart V crude oil overcharge
refund proceeding. The DOE determined that the applicant resold the refined petroleum products that formed the basis
of its application and thus passed on the costs of any crude oil overcharges to its customers. Therefore, the DOE concluded
that the claimant was not injured by any of the overcharges associated with the gallons that it purchased. Accordingly,
the Application for Refund was denied. 



