 

3. The proposed regulations added two new steps to the process by which accrediting agencies are recognized by the
Secretary. First, the Secretary proposed to give an agency seeking recognition the opportunity to respond in writing
to the designated Department official's analysis of its application for recognition before the application was
reviewed by the National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and Integrity. Second, after the Advisory
Committee's review of the agency's application and recommendation to the Secretary, the Secretary proposed to give
both the agency and the designated Department official an opportunity to contest the Advisory Committee's recommendation.

4. In accordance with section 496(n) of the HEA, the proposed regulations permitted the Department, at the Secretary's
discretion, to conduct unannounced site visits to an accrediting agency or its member institutions or programs as
part of the Department's analysis of the agency's application for recognition or its compliance with the requirements
for recognition. 
5. In accordance with section 496(l) of the HEA, the proposed regulations allowed the Secretary to limit, suspend,
or terminate an agency's recognition if the Secretary determined that the agency failed to meet the requirements
for recognition. 
6. The proposed regulations eliminated the provision contained in previous regulations that, in order to demonstrate

experience in accreditation, an agency had to demonstrate that its policies, evaluation methods, and decisions
were accepted throughout the United States by recognized accrediting agencies. 
7. As required by section 496(c)(1) of the HEA, the proposed regulations required an accrediting agency whose accreditation
enables the institutions it accredits to participate in programs authorized under the HEA to conduct, in addition
to its regular announced on-site review of an institution, at least one unannounced on-site review of each institution
that provides prebaccalaureate vocational education or training. 
8. The proposed regulations required accrediting agencies to assess any new or substantively changed program before
including it in the agency's previous grant of accreditation. 
9. As required by section 496(a)(5) of the HEA, the proposed regulations required accrediting agencies to have standards
that assess curricula; faculty; facilities, equipment and supplies; fiscal and administrative capacity as appropriate
to the specified scale of operation; student support services; recruiting and admissions practices, academic calendars,
catalogs, publications, grading and advertising; program length and tuition and fees in relation to the subject
matters taught and the objectives of the degrees or credentials offered; measures of program length in clock hours
or credit hours; success with respect to student achievement in relation to the institution's mission; default rates
in student loan programs 
under Title IV of the HEA; record of student complaints received by, or available to, the accrediting agency; and the
institution's compliance with its program responsibilities under Title IV of the HEA. 
10. As required by section 484B of the HEA, the proposed regulations required accrediting agencies to have a standard
that assesses an institution's practice of making refunds to students. 
11. The proposed regulations required an accrediting agency to take adverse action against an institution or program
that failed to bring itself into compliance with agency standards within a time frame established by the agency. The
proposed regulations permitted this time frame to exceed 18 months only for cause. 
12. As required by section 496(c) of the HEA, the proposed regulations required accrediting agencies whose accreditation
enables institutions to participate in Title IV, HEA programs to take special action whenever institutions establish
new branch campuses. Specifically, agencies must approve a business plan for the branch before its opening and conduct
an on-site review within six months. 
13. As required by section 496(c) of the HEA, the proposed regulations required accrediting agencies to conduct an
on-site review within six months at any institution that undergoes a change in ownership that results in a change in
control. 
14. As required by section 496(c) of the HEA, the proposed regulations required that any institution that enters into
a 
teach-out agreement with another institution must agree to submit to its accrediting agency for approval a teach-out
agreement that is consistent with applicable standards and regulations. 


Changes Resulting From Public Comment 


As a result of the comments received concerning the NPRM, and as discussed in detail in the appendix, the Secretary
has made the following significant changes in the final regulations. 
1. The term ``prebaccalaureate vocational education'' has been deleted from these final regulations. The term ``vocational
education'' has been redefined to be ``an instructional program, below the bachelor's level, designed to prepare
individuals with the skills and training required for employment in a specific trade, occupation, or profession
related to the instructional program.'' This definition is consistent with that used for the term ``vocational program''
in the final regulations governing the State Postsecondary Review Program. This definition was chosen because it
is basically the same as the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) glossary definition of an ``occupationally
specific program,'' and institutions already use this term in reporting enrollment data for various types of vocational
education. The advantage in using this definition is that the IPEDS inventory of occupationally specific programs
provides a list of instructional programs which, if offered by an institution, subject the institution to an unannounced
inspection by its accrediting agency. 



