 

Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements



As required by the Federal Employees Family Friendly Leave Act, OPM must submit a report to Congress by June 22, 1997,
to evaluate the use of sick leave under the Federal Employees Family Friendly Leave Act and make a recommendation as
to whether or not the entitlements under the Act should continue beyond December 22, 1997. To enable OPM to have access
to sufficient information to make such an evaluation, a new section has been added at 5 CFR 630.408 to require agencies
to maintain and report to OPM information on each employee's use of sick leave to care for a family member or for bereavement
purposes as provided under the final regulations. Beginning with leave year 1995, the regulations require agencies
to maintain records on (1) the grade or pay level and gender of each employee; (2) the total number of hours of sick leave
used by each employee for family care or bereavement purposes and for all other purposes; and (3) any additional information
OPM may require.



Suggestions for Leave Reform



Three agencies observed that opening up sick leave usage to situations other than the employee's own medical needs
blurs the distinction between sick leave and annual leave. One agency suggested that this should be considered in
future discussions on how the Federal leave program can be reformed to help Federal employees cope with their work
and family responsibilities.



Miscellaneous Comments



A labor organization requested that OPM clarify that the 5-day limitation on the use of sick leave to make arrangements
necessitated by the death of a family member or attend the funeral of a family member does not apply to an employee's
incapacitation due to sickness, including severe depression or emotional distress, resulting from the death of
a family member. OPM concurs with this comment. Employees who are incapacitated as a result of severe emotional distress
due to the death of a family member are entitled to use sick leave for their own sickness or illness. This is consistent
with an opinion of the Comptroller General (B207444, October 20, 1982). In response to this comment, 630.401(a)(2)
has been clarified to state that an employee may use sick leave because of incapacitation for the performance of duties
by physical or mental illness.

A professional organization suggested that OPM consider permitting Federal employees to transfer their available
annual leave to family members who are also employed by the Federal Government. This suggestion would require legislation.
Under current law, sections 6332 and 6362 of title 5, United States Code, specifically provide for the transfer of
annual leave only for 

medical emergencies.

Several agencies requested guidance as to whether the 5 days of sick leave to care for a family member or for bereavement
purposes could be advanced and whether an employee may substitute the 5 days of sick leave for unpaid leave under the
FMLA, when appropriate. The sick leave available to covered employees for these purposes under the final regulations
may be advanced, and such employees may substitute sick leave for unpaid leave under the FMLA. In addition, an agency
questioned whether the 5 days of sick leave may accumulate over the years without limit, like sick leave generally,
even though only 5 days of sick leave may be used each leave year. If an employee does not use any or all of the amount of
sick leave provided under 630.401 for family care or bereavement purposes in a leave year, it cannot be accumulated
in succeeding years to be used to care for a family member or for bereavement purposes.

Some agencies requested that OPM clearly define the situations in which an employee may use sick leave to care for a
family member_e.g., for medical and dental appointments or for a common cold, fever, or vomiting, since a child care
facility typically will not permit the attendance of a child with these symptoms. An agency questioned how the sick
leave program will be used in conjunction with other leave programs_e.g., the leave sharing program, the FMLA, and
advanced leave. Agencies have discretionary authority to administer the Federal leave program, consistent with
current law and regulations. OPM encourages agencies to assist employees in balancing their work and family responsibilities.
Agencies must apply the same criteria they would apply if an employee were suffering from a similar symptoms or receiving
medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment.



