 

1.65 and 8.11

[Amended]



9. In subtitle A of 49 CFR, the words ``Assistant Secretary for Policy and International Affairs;'' are revised to
read ``Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy; Assistant Secretary for Aviation and International Affairs;''
wherever they appear in the following places:

a. Section 1.65(c)(1),

b. Section 8.11(b)(1).



7.11, 7.53 and 7.97

[Amended]



10. In subtitle A of 49 CFR, the words ``Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs'' are revised to read ``Assistant General
Counsel for Environmental, Civil Rights, and General Law'' wherever they appear in the following places:

a. Section 7.11,

b. Section 7.53(c),

c. Section 7.97(e).

11. 49 CFR Subtitle A is amended as follows:

a. Section 1.22 is revised to read as follows:



1.22 

Structure.



(a) 

Secretary and Deputy Secretary. 

The Secretary and Deputy Secretary are assisted by the following, all of which report directly to the Secretary: The
Associate Deputy Secretary and Director, Office of Intermodalism; the Executive Secretariat; the Board of Contract
Appeals; the Departmental Office of Civil Rights; the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization; the
Office of Commercial Space Transportation; the Office of Intelligence and Security; and the Office of Public Affairs.
The Assistant Secretaries, the General Counsel, and the Inspector General also report directly to the Secretary.

(b) 

Office of the Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy. 

This Office is composed of the Offices of Environment, Energy and Safety; and Economics.

(c) 

Office of the Assistant Secretary for Aviation and International Affairs. 

This Office is composed of the Offices of International Transportation and Trade; International Aviation; and Aviation
Analysis.

(d) 

Office of the General Counsel. 

This Office is composed of the Offices of Environmental, Civil Rights, and General Law; International Law; Litigation;
Legislation; Regulation and Enforcement; the Board for Correction of Military Records; and Aviation Enforcement
and Proceedings.

(e) 

Office of the Assistant Secretary for Budget and Programs. 

This Office is composed of the Offices of Programs and Evaluation; and Budget.

(f) 

Office of the Assistant Secretary for Governmental Affairs. 

This Office is composed of the Offices of Congressional Affairs; and Intergovernmental and Consumer Affairs.

(g) 

Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration. 

This Office is composed of the Offices of Personnel; Management Planning; Information Resource Management; Administrative
Services and Property Management; Hearings; Acquisition and Grant Management; Security; Financial Management;
and Administrative Systems Development.

(h) 

Office of the Inspector General. 

The duties and responsibilities of the Office of Inspector General are carried out by the Assistant Inspector General
for Auditing; the Assistant Inspector General for Investigations; the Assistant Inspector General for Policy,
Planning, and Resources; and the Assistant Inspector General for Inspections and Evaluations.

b. Section 1.23 is revised to read as follows:



1.23 

Spheres of primary responsibility.



(a) 

Secretary and Deputy Secretary. 

Overall planning, direction, and control of departmental affairs including civil rights, contract appeals, small
and disadvantaged business participation in departmental programs, transportation research and technology,
commercial space transportation, intelligence and security, and public affairs.

(b) 

Associate Deputy Secretary and Director, Office of Intermodalism. 

Assists the Secretary and Deputy Secretary in carrying out a variety of executive and managerial policies, programs
and initiatives. Focal point within the Federal Government for coordination of intermodal transportation policy
which brings together departmental intermodal perspectives, advocates intermodal interests, and provides secretarial
leadership and visibility on issues that involve or affect more than one operating administration.

(c) 

General Counsel. 

Legal services as the chief legal officer of the Department, legal advisor to the Secretary and the Office of the Secretary;
final authority within the Department on questions of law; professional supervision, including coordination and
review, over the legal work of the legal offices of the Department; drafting of legislation and review of legal aspects
of legislative matters; point of coordination for the Office of the Secretary and Department Regulations Council;
advice on questions of international law; exercise of functions, powers, and duties as Judge Advocate General under
the Uniform Code of Military Justice (Chapter 47 of Title 10, U.S.C.) with respect to the United States Coast Guard;
advice and assistance with respect to uniform time matters; ensures uniform departmental implementation of the
Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552); responds to requests for records of the Office of the Secretary including
the Office of the Inspector General, under that statute; review and final action on applications for reconsideration
of initial decisions not to disclose unclassified records of the Office of the Secretary requested under 5 U.S.C.
552(a)(3); promotion and coordination of efficient use of Departmental legal resources; recommendation, in conjunction
with the Assistant Secretary for Administration, of legal career development programs within the Department; review
and final action on application for correction of military records of the United States Coast Guard.




