 

III. Revisions to the Process in Light of Statutory Requirements



No statute compels the use of a formal ``TAS'' or other prequalification process separate from approval of the underlying
request for a grant or program approval. The only requirements imposed by statute are that, to be eligible for financial
assistance and/or program authorization, a tribe must be federally recognized, have a governing body carrying out
substantial duties and powers, and have adequate jurisdiction and capability to carry out the proposed activities.
Thus, EPA may authorize a tribal program or grant without formally designating the tribe as ``eligible for TAS,''
so long as the Agency establishes that the tribe meets applicable statutory requirements. In other words, the Agency
can ensure compliance with statutory mandates without requiring tribes to undergo a discrete, formal process of
seeking ``TAS'' approval.

Accordingly, EPA is amending its regulations to eliminate ``TAS'' review as a separate step in the processing of a
tribal application for a grant. Under the new, simplified process, the Agency will ensure compliance with statutory
requirements as an integral part of the process of reviewing grant applications. To the extent that this rule or preamble
conflicts with the language of previous rules and preambles, the language herein shall be controlling. EPA will also,
as far as possible, discontinue use of the term ``treatment as a state;'' however, since this phrase is included in
several statutes, its continued use may sometimes be necessary.



A. Simplified Determination as to Recognition and Government



As a general rule, the recognition and governmental requirements are essentially the same under the Clean Water and
Safe Drinking Water Acts. The new process will reflect this by establishing identical requirements for making this
showing under each statute. Moreover, the fact that a tribe has met the recognition or governmental functions requirement
under either of the Water Acts will establish that it meets those requirements under both statutes. To facilitate
review of tribal applications, EPA therefore requests that tribal applications inform EPA whether a tribe has been
approved for ``TAS'' (under the old process) or deemed eligible to receive funding or authorization (under the revised
process) for any other program.

A tribe that has not done so may establish that it has been federally recognized by simply stating in its grant or program
authorization application that it appears on the list of federally recognized tribes that the Secretary of the Interior
publishes periodically in the 

Federal Register

. If the tribe notifies EPA that it has been recognized but does not appear on this list because the list has not been updated,
EPA will seek to verify the fact of recognition with the Department of the Interior.

A tribe that has not yet made its initial governmental showing can do so by certifying that it has a government carrying
out substantial governmental functions. A tribe will be able to make the required certification if it is currently
performing governmental functions to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of its population. Examples
of such functions include, but are not limited to, levying taxes, acquiring land by exercise of the power of eminent
domain, and exercising police power. Such examples should be included in a narrative statement supporting the certification,
(1) Describing the form of tribal government and the types of essential governmental functions currently performed,
and (2) identifying the legal authorities for performing those functions (e.g., tribal constitutions or codes).
It should be relatively easy for tribes to meet this requirement without submitting copies of specific documents
unless requested to do so by the Agency.



B. Case by Case Review of Jurisdiction and Capability



A tribe may have jurisdiction over, and capability to carry out, certain activities (e.g., protection of the quality
of a particular lake for the Clean Lakes program under the Clean Water Act), but not others (e.g., waste management
on a portion of the reservation far removed from any lakes). For this reason, EPA believes that the Agency must make
a specific determination that a tribe has adequate jurisdictional authority and administrative and programmatic
capability before it approves each tribal program. This will ensure that tribes meet the statutory requirements
Congress has established as prerequisites to tribal eligibility for each particular program.






