 

NTIA requires that all applicants whose proposed projects need authorization from the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) must tender an application to the FCC for such authority on or before March 17, 1994. (An application is tendered
to the FCC when it has been received by the Secretary of the FCC.) However, applicants are urged to submit it with as much
lead time before the PTFP closing date as possible. The greater the lead time, the better the chance the FCC application
will be processed to coincide with NTIA's grant cycle. NTIA may return the application of any applicant which fails
to tender an application to the FCC for any necessary authority on or before March 17, 1994.

Effective October 1, 1988, OMB Circular A102, as it applies to grant recipients, has been superseded by Department
of Commerce regulations, Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative Agreements with State
and Local Governments (53 FR 8034, codified at 15 CFR 24 (1988)). Applicants should note that PTFP grant recipients,
depending on their type of organization, are subject to the provisions of diverse Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) Circulars; i.e., A87 ``Cost Principles for State and Local Governments,'' A21 ``Cost Principles
for Educational Institutions,'' A110, A122, A128, as implemented by 15 CFR part 29a, and A133,
as implemented by 15 CFR part 29b.
Indirect costs for construction applications are not supported by this program. The total dollar amount of the indirect
costs proposed in a planning application under this program must not exceed the indirect cost rate negotiated and
approved by a cognizant Federal agency prior to the proposed effective date of the award or 100 percent of the total
proposed direct costs dollar amount in the application, whichever is less.

All non-profit applicants are subject to a name check review process. Name checks are intended to reveal if any key
individuals associated with the applicant have been convicted of or are presently facing criminal charges such as
fraud, theft, perjury, or other matters which significantly reflect on the applicant's management honesty or financial
integrity. Potential grant recipient organizations may also be subject to reviews of Dun and Bradstreet data or other
similar credit checks.
All primary applicants must submit a completed Form CD511, ``Certifications Regarding Debarment, Suspension,
and Other Responsibility Matters; Drug-Free Workplace Requirements and Lobbying.'' Applicants are further advised
that:


(1) Nonprocurement Debarment and Suspension 



Prospective participants (as defined at 15 CFR part 26, section 105) are subject to 15 CFR part 26, ``Nonprocurement
Debarment and Suspension'' and the related section of the certification form;


(2) Drug-Free Workplace


Grantees (as defined at 15 CFR part 26, section 605) are subject to 15 CFR part 26, subpart F, ``Governmentwide Requirements
for Drug-Free Workplace (Grants)'' and the related section of the certification form;


(3) Anti-Lobbying


Persons (as defined at 15 CFR part 28, section 105) are subject to the lobbying provisions of 31 U.S.C. 1352, ``Limitation
on use of appropriated funds to influence certain Federal contracting and financial transactions,'' and the lobbying
section of the certification form prescribed above applies to applications/bids for grants, cooperative agreements,
and contracts for more than $100,000, and loans and loan guarantees for more than $150,000, or the single family maximum
mortgage limit for affected programs, whichever is greater; and 


(4) Anti-Lobbying Disclosures


Any applicant that has paid or will pay for lobbying using any funds must submit an SFLLL, ``Disclosure of Lobbying
Activities,'' as required under 15 CFR part 28, Appendix B.

For awards granted by NTIA, the recipient shall require applicants/bidders for subgrants, contracts, subcontracts,
or other lower tier covered transactions at any tier under the grant award to submit, if applicable, a completed Form
CD512, ``Certifications Regarding Debarment, Suspension, Ineligibility and Voluntary Exclusion_Lower
Tier Covered Transactions and Lobbying'' and disclosure form, SFLLL, ``Disclosure of Lobbying Activities.''
Form CD512 is intended for the use of recipients and should not be transmitted to the Department. SFLLL
completed by any tier recipient or subrecipient should be submitted to the Department in accordance with the instructions
contained in the award document.
If an application is selected for funding, the Department of Commerce has no obligation to provide any additional
future funding in connection with that award. Renewal or amendment of an award to increase funding or to extend the
period of performance is at the total discretion of the Department.
Recipients and subrecipients are subject to all Federal laws and Federal and DOC policies, regulations, and procedures
applicable to Federal financial assistance awards. In addition, unsatisfactory performance by the applicant under
prior Federal awards may result in the application not being considered for funding.


Applicants are reminded that a false statement on the application is grounds for denial or termination of funds and
grounds for possible punishment by a fine or imprisonment as provided in 18 U.S.C. 1001.
If applicants incure any costs prior to an award being made, they do so solely at their own risk of not being reimbursed
by the Government. Notwithstanding any verbal or written assurance that may have been received, there is no obligation
on the part of DOC to cover preaward costs.


IV. Funding Criteria




All PTFP funding criteria are equal in weight. 

In determining whether to approve or defer a construction grant application, in whole or in part, and the amount of
such grant, the Agency will evaluate all the information in the application file and consider, in no order of priority,
the following factors:
(a) The extent to which the project meets the program purposes set forth in the Final Rules, 15 CFR 2301.2, as well as
the specific program priorities set forth in the Appendix of those Rules;
(b) The adequacy and continuity of financial resources for long-term operational support;


