 

A. ``HOP'' means the reading program known as ``Hooked on Phonics/SRA Reading Power'' marketed by Gateway Educational
Products, Ltd. 

B. ``Educational program or product'' means any program of product that provides instruction in any field of study,
including but not limited to any aspect of reading. 

C. ``Competent and reliable scientific evidence'' means tests, analyses, research, studies, or other evidence
based on the expertise of professionals in the relevant area, has been conducted and evaluated in an objective manner
by persons qualified to do so, using procedures generally accepted in the profession to yield accurate and reliable
results.



I. 



It is ordered that respondents Gateway Educational Products, Ltd., a corporation, its successors and assigns, and
its officers, and John Shanahan and John Herlihy, individually and as officers of said corporation, and respondents'
agents, representatives, and employees, directly or through any corporation, subsidiary, division or other device,
in connection with the manufacturing, labelling, advertising, promotion, offering for sale, sale, or distribution
of HOP or any other educational program or product in or affecting commerce, as ``commerce'' is defined in the Federal
Trade Commission Act, do forthwith cease and desist from representing, in any manner, directly or by implication,
that such program or product: 

A. Can or will quickly and easily teach persons with reading problems or disabilities to read, regardless of the nature
of the problem or disability; 

B. Is effective for teaching persons with learning disabilities, including dyslexia and attention deficit disorders,
to read; 

C. Can or will cause users with reading problems or disabilities to achieve significant improvement in reading levels
or classroom grades; 

D. Is effective for teaching persons in a home setting to read, without the need for additional assistance such as a
teacher or tutor; 

E. Is effective for teaching reading comprehension skills; 

F. Has helped nearly one million or any other number of students to learn to read; or 


