 







<USDEPT>NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION</USDEPT>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 50346]</RINDOCK>



Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company, Et Al. (Davis-Besse Nuclear Power Plant, Unit No. 1); Environmental Assessment
and Finding of No Significant Impact



The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is considering issuance of a partial exemption from the
requirements of 10 CFR part 50, appendix J, for Facility Operating License No. NPF3 issued to the Toledo Edison
Company, Centerior Service Company, and the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company (the licensees), for operation
of the Davis-Besse Nuclear Power Station, Unit No. 1, located in Ottawa County, Ohio. 



Environmental Assessment



Identification of Proposed Action



The proposed exemption would relieve the licensee from the requirement of conducting a full pressure airlock leakage
test, pursuant to section III.D.2(b)(ii) of appendix J to 10 CFR part 50, whenever airlocks are opened during periods
when containment integrity is not required and no maintenance has been performed on the airlock that affects its sealing
capabilities. The licensee would rely instead, on the seal leakage test described in section III.D.2(b)(iii), when
the reactor is in cold shutdown (MODE 5) or refueling (MODE 6) and when no maintenance has been performed on the airlock.

The licensee's request for exemption and the bases therefor are contained in a letter dated October 21, 1994.



The Need for the Proposed Action



The proposed exemption is from performance of the leakage rate test required by paragraph III.D.2(b)(ii) of 10 CFR
part 50, appendix J, which requires at least 12 hours per airlock to perform. Exemption from full pressure leakage
tests on airlocks opened during a period when containment integrity is not required would provide the licensee with
greater plant availability over the lifetime of the plant.



Environmental Impact of Proposed Action



The proposed exemption would permit the substitution of an airlock seal leakage test (section III.D.2(b)(iii) of
appendix J of 10 CFR part 50) for the full pressure airlock test, otherwise required by section III.D.2(b)(ii) when
the airlock is opened, while the reactor is in cold shutdown or refueling mode. If the tests required by section III.D.2(b)
(i) and (iii) are current, and no maintenance performed on the airlock, then there will be adequate assurance of continued
leak tight integrity of the airlock, and this exemption will not affect containment integrity, and does not affect
the risk of facility accidents. Thus, post-accident radiological releases will not be greater than previously determined,
nor does the proposed exemption otherwise affect radiological plant effluents, nor result in any significant occupational
exposure. Likewise, the exemption does not affect non-radiological plant effluents and has no other environmental
impact. Therefore, the Commission concludes that there are no significant radiological or non-radiological environmental
impacts associated with the proposed exemption.



Alternative to the Proposed Action



Because it has been concluded that there is no significant impact associated with the proposed exemption, any alternative
to the exemption will have either no environmental impact or greater environmental impact.

The principal alternative would be to deny the requested exemption. Such action would not reduce environmental impacts
of Davis-Besse, Unit No. 1 operations and would result in reduced operational flexibility or unwarranted delays
in power ascension.



Alternative Use of Resources



This action does not involve the use of resources not previously considered in connection with the ``Final Environmental
Statement Related to Operation of Davis-Besse, Unit No. 1,'' dated October 1975.



Agencies and Persons Consulted



The NRC staff consulted with the Ohio State official regarding the environmental impact of the proposed action. The
state official had no comments.



Finding of No Significant Impact



Based upon the foregoing environmental assessment, the Commission concludes that the proposed action will not have
a significant effect on the quality of the human environment. Accordingly, the Commission has determined not to prepare
an environmental impact statement for the proposed exemption.

For further details with respect to the proposed action, see the licensee's request for exemption dated October 21,
1994, which is available for public inspection at the Commission's Public Document Room, 1717 H Street NW., Washington,
DC, and the University of Toledo Library, Documents Department, 2801 Bancroft Avenue, Toledo, Ohio 03606.






Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 21st day of October 1994.






For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.




<SIGNER>
Linda L. Gundrum,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Project Manager, Project Directorate III3, Division of Reactor Projects_III/IV, Office of Nuclear Reactor
Regulation.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9426649 Filed 102794; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M 
</BILLING>



