 

b. 

Concept Papers Requesting a Package Grant Covering More Than One Project


A separate preliminary budget for each component project of the package, as well as a combined budget that reflects
the costs of the entire package, must be attached to the narrative. Each project budget must be identified by the title
that corresponds to the narrative description of the project in the program narrative and a letter of the alphabet
(i.e. A, B, C). Each of these budgets must include the estimates and information specified on Form E included in Appendix
IV of this Guideline. 


c. Concept Papers Requesting Accelerated Award of a Grant of Less than $40,000


Applicants requesting a waiver of the application requirement and approval of a grant based on a concept paper under
section VI.C., must attach to Form E (see Appendix IV) a budget narrative explaining the basis for each of the items
listed, and whether the costs would be paid from grant funds or through a matching contribution or other sources. The
budget narrative is not counted against the eight-page limit for the program narrative. 

4. The Institute encourages concept paper applicants to attach letters of cooperation and support from the courts
and related agencies that will be involved in or directly affected by the proposed project. Letters of support also
may be sent under separate cover. How-ever, in order to ensure that there is sufficient time to bring them to the Board's
attention, support letters sent under separate cover must be received no later than January 13, 1995. 

5. The Institute will not accept concept papers with program narratives exceeding the limits set in sections VI.A.2.a.
and b. The page limit does not include the cover page, budget form, the budget narrative if required under section VI.A.3.c.,
and any letters of cooperation or endorsements. Additional material should not be attached unless it is essential
to impart a clear understanding of the project. 

6. Applicants submitting more than one concept paper may include material that would be identical in each concept
paper in a cover letter, and incorporate that material by reference in each paper. The incorporated material will
be counted against the eight-page limit for each paper. A copy of the cover letter should be attached to each copy of
each concept paper. 

7. Sample concept papers from previous funding cycles are available from the Institute upon request. 


B. Selection Criteria.








1. All concept papers will be evaluated by the staff on the basis of the following criteria: 
a. The demonstration of need for the project; 
b. The soundness and innovativeness of the approach described; 
c. The benefits to be derived from the project; 
d. The reasonableness of the proposed budget; 
e. The proposed project's relationship to one of the ``Special Interest'' categories set forth in section II.B; and


f. The degree to which the findings, procedures, 
training, technology, or other results of the project can be transferred to other jurisdictions. 
2. ``Single jurisdiction'' concept papers submitted pursuant to section II.C. will be rated on the proposed project's
relation to one of the ``Special Interest'' categories set forth in section II.B., and on the special requirements
listed in section II.C.1. 
3. In determining which concept papers will be selected for development into full applications, the Institute will
also consider the availability of financial assistance from other sources for the project; the amount and nature
(cash or in-kind) of the applicant's anticipated match; whether the applicant is a State court, a national court support
or education organi-zation, a non-court unit of government, or another type of entity eligible to receive grants
under the Institute's enabling legislation (see 42 U.S.C. 10705(b) (as amended) and section IV above); the extent
to which the proposed project would also benefit the Federal courts or help the State courts enforce Federal constitutional
and legislative requirements, and the level of appropriations available to the Institute in the current year and
the amount expected to be available in succeeding fiscal years. 


C. Review Process 


Concept papers will be reviewed competitively by the Board of Directors. Institute staff will prepare a narrative
summary and a rating sheet assigning points for each relevant selection criterion for those concept papers which
fall within the scope of the Institute's funding program and merit serious consideration by the Board. Staff will
also prepare a list of those papers that, in the judgment of the Executive Director, propose projects that lie outside
the scope of the Institute's funding program or are not likely to merit serious consideration by the Board. The narrative
summaries, rating sheets, and list of non-reviewed papers will be presented to the Board for their review. Committees
of the Board will review concept paper summaries within assigned program areas and prepare recommendations for the
full Board. The full Board of Directors will then decide which concept paper applicants should be invited to submit
formal applications for funding. 
The decision to invite an application is solely that of the Board of Directors. With regard to concept papers requesting
a package grant, the Board retains discretion to invite an application including all, none, or selected portions
of the package for possible funding. 

The Board may waive the application requirement and approve a grant based on a concept paper for a project requiring
less than $40,000, when the need for and benefits of the project are clear, and the methodology and budget require little
additional explanation. 





