 

III. Director's Findings


Set forth below, pursuant to SMCRA and the Federal regulations at 40 CFR 732.17, are the Director's findings concerning
the proposed amendment. Any revisions not specifically addressed below are found to be no less stringent than SMCRA
and no less effective than the Federal rules.



1. Section 86.142Definitions


a. Adverse opinion. Pennsylvania proposes to add this definition to mean a statement by an independent certified
public accountant (CPA) that the financial statements of the applicant do not present fairly the financial condition
of the applicant in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. Although there is no counterpart
Federal definition, the Federal regulations at 30 CFR 800.23(b)(4)(i) require that the applicant submit a financial
statement for the latest complete fiscal year accompanied by a report by an independent certified public accountant
and containing the accountant's audit opinion or review opinion. If either opinion contains an adverse opinion,
the self-bond application must be denied. The independent CPA's audit or review opinion is required on the accuracy
of the information in the financial statement. An Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) proposed rule (52 FR 12786,
April 17, 1987) in discussing a firm's financial tests states that an ``adverse opinion, indicates that, in the opinion
of the auditor, a firm's financial statement does not present the firm's financial position, results of operations,
or changes in financial position in a manner that conforms to generally accepted accounting principles. ...''
Although the EPA discussion is not controlling on OSM, it is being used for guidance. While there is no Federal definition,
the Director finds the proposed definition to be not inconsistent with the requirements of SMCRA and the Federal regulations
because the application of the definition will aid Pennsylvania in applying a uniform standard in determining whether
or not a self-bond application should be rejected.

b. Applicant. Pennsylvania proposes to add a definition for ``applicant'' to mean a permittee or an applicant for
a permit who is applying to self-bond under this subchapter. There is no corresponding Federal definition for ``applicant''
under the self-bonding rules. However, at 30 CFR 701.5 the Federal definition of ``applicant'' means any person seeking
a permit, permit revision, renewal, and transfer, assignment, or sale of permit rights from a regulatory authority
to conduct surface coal mining and reclamation operations or, where required, seeking approval for coal exploration.
Under section 86.1, the State's general definition of applicant means any person who seeks to obtain a permit from
the Department to conduct coal mining activities under this chapter. Pennsylvania is proposing an additional definition
of ``applicant'' at section 86.142 to include an existing permittee or applicant for a permit who is applying to utilize
a self-bond. At first blush it appears that the two definitions conflict with each other. Upon further examination,
the definition of ``applicant'' found at section 86.142 will not supersede the general definition of applicant found
at section 86.1 because the entity defined under section 86.142 already has to be a permittee or in the process of becoming
one. By its own terms, the section 86.142 definition only concerns the self-bonding regulations. Therefore, the
definition of ``applicant'' as it is applied in the self-bonding regulations is consistent with the self-bonding
regulations at 30 CFR 800.23.

c. Continuous business operations. Pennsylvania proposes to add this definition to mean operations in which the
applicant has been in business and operating for at least 10 years prior to the filing of its self-bonding application
unless the applicant's existence results from a reorganization, consolidation or merger involving a company with
this longevity. If the applicant is a majority-owned subsidiary of a corporation, it may rely upon its parent corporation's
business history, which has a 10-year business history.

