 







<USDEPT>FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>Grupo Financiero Banamex Accival, S.A., de C.V.; Formation of, Acquisition by, or Merger of Bank Holding Companies;
and Acquisition of Nonbanking Company</DOCTITLE>

The company listed in this notice has applied under  225.14 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.14) for the Board's
approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1842) to become a bank holding company or to acquire
voting securities of a bank or bank holding company. The listed company has also applied under  225.23(a)(2) of Regulation
Y (12 CFR 225.23(a)(2)) for the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8))
and  225.21(a) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.21(a)) to acquire or control voting securities or assets of a company engaged
in a nonbanking activity that is listed in  225.25 of Regulation Y as closely related to banking and permissible for
bank holding companies, or to engage in such an activity. Unless otherwise noted, these activities will be conducted
throughout the United States.
The application is available for immediate inspection at the Federal Reserve Bank indicated. Once the application
has been accepted for processing, it will also be available for inspection at the offices of the Board of Governors.
Interested persons may express their views in writing on the question whether consummation of the proposal can ``reasonably
be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency,
that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition,
conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices.'' Any request for a hearing on this question must be accompanied
by a statement of the reasons a written presentation would not suffice in lieu of a hearing, identifying specifically
any questions of fact that are in dispute, summarizing the evidence that would be presented at a hearing, and indicating
how the party commenting would be aggrieved by approval of the proposal.
Comments regarding the application must be received at the Reserve Bank indicated or the offices of the Board of Governors
not later than January 31, 1994.


A. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

 (Kenneth R. Binning, Director, Bank Holding Company) 101 Market Street, San Francisco, California 94105:


1. Grupo Financiero Banamex Accival, S.A. de C.V.

, Mexico, D.F., Mexico; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of Banco Nacional
de Mexico, S.A., Mexico, D.F., Mexico, and thereby indirectly acquire Banamex USA Bancorp, Los Angeles, California,
and California Commerce Bank, Los Angeles, California.
In connection with this application, Applicant also proposes to acquire ACCI Securities, Inc., New York, New York,
and thereby engage in full service brokerage pursuant to  225.25(b)(4) and (b)(15) of the Board's Regulation Y; and
private placement services (soliciting purchasers in the private placement of all types of securities) pursuant
to the criteria set forth in 

NCNB Corporation

, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 864 (1990).



Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 3, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Jennifer J. Johnson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Secretary of the Board.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94-467 Filed 1-7-94; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 6210-01-F
</BILLING>



