 

II. Health Effects 


 

Indoor air quality problems can occur in all types and ages of buildings; in newly constructed buildings, in renovated
or remodeled buildings, and in old buildings. Problems in new, clean buildings are rarely, if ever, related to microbial
growth, since the physical structures are new [Ex. 361]. Older buildings that have not been adequately maintained
and operated may have problems with bioaerosols if parts of the building have been allowed to become reservoirs for
microbial growth. Also, if inadequate outside air is provided, regardless of the age of the building, chemical and
biological contaminants will build up to levels that can cause health effects in some workers. In addition, other
physical factors such as lack of windows, noise, and inadequate lighting, and ergonomic factors involving uncomfortable
furniture and intensive use of video display units, etc., will cause discomfort in occupants that may be inaccurately
attributed to air quality. 


 Some information contained in the docket indicates that these chronic health complaints are psychological, however,
OSHA believes that chronic health complaints related to poor indoor air quality are unlikely to be due to mass psychogenic
illness, even though a psychological overlay is common. It is true that poor management, boring work, poor lighting
conditions, temperature variations, poor ergonomic design, and noise may all lower the threshold for complaint.
Nevertheless, air quality complaints usually have some basis, although they are often difficult to assess with specificity
[Exs. 361C, 4144]. 


 Indoor air quality problems are generally classified as Sick Building Syndrome (SBS) or Building-related Illness
(BRI). However, a very important constituent of poor indoor air quality is ETS because of the serious health effects
that result from exposure. The following discussion will first identify the health effects associated with SBS and
BRI. A discussion of the health effects associated with exposure to ETS will follow. 


 It is important to note that OSHA considers these health effects to be material impairments of health when the worker
is clinically diagnosed with a condition that is either caused or aggravated by poor indoor air quality in the workplace.
For example, in the formaldehyde standard (29 CFR 1910.1048) [Ex. 4107] OSHA determined that a physician's
diagnosis of irritation met the requirement of material impairment of health. In addition, OSHA considers all the
other health effects discussed, which are more clinically severe than irritation, to be material impairments of
health as well. 


 

A. Sick Building Syndrome 


 

Typically, health effects caused by poor indoor air quality have been categorized as SBS or BRI. In 1983, the World
Health Organization published a list of eight non-inclusive symptoms that characterize Sick Building Syndrome
[Ex. 4325]. These include irritation of the eyes, nose and throat; dry mucous membranes and skin; erythema;
mental fatigue and headache; respiratory infections and cough; hoarseness of voice and wheezing; hypersensitivity
reactions; and nausea and dizziness. Generally, these conditions are not easily traced to a specific substance,
but are perceived as resulting from some unidentified contaminant or combination of contaminants. Symptoms are
relieved when the employee leaves the building and may be reduced or eliminated by modifying the ventilation system.
Comments to the docket indicate that such symptoms have been observed in and reported by workers [Exs. 3446,
487]. 


 In some instances, outbreaks of SBS are identified with specific pollutant exposures, but in general only general
etiologic factors related to building design, operation and maintenance can be identified [Ex. 4274]. In
1987, Woods et al. [Ex. 3745] conducted a stratified random telephone survey of 600 U.S. office workers across
the national. Twenty four percent reported that they were dissatisfied with the air quality at the office; while 20%
perceived their performance to be hampered by poor indoor air quality. Women were nearly twice as likely to report
a productivity effect of poor indoor air quality than men (28% versus 15%). Based on this, Woods et al. [Ex. 3745]
hypothesized that 20% of U.S. office workers are exposed to indoor conditions which manifest as SBS. In fact, complaints
about SBS have become so numerous that 37 out of 53 states and territories have designated a building complaints investigation
contact person [Ex. 4310]. 




