 

4. The Air Quality Improvement Must Be Permanent and Enforceable 


Several control measures have come into place since the Memphis and Shelby County area violated the O

3

 NAAQS. The State of Tennessee believes that the predominance of the emission reductions that have occurred, as demonstrated
by a comparison of previous emission inventories versus the 1990 base year emission inventory that was presented
in their supplemental submittal of March 31, 1994 (as attachment E), that air quality has been improved in the Memphis
and Shelby County area as a result of permanent and enforceable emission reductions through local, state and federal
programs. Of significance are emission reductions of point source VOC's from 49,000 tons per year (tpy) in 1979, to
27,633 tpy in 1983, to 14,986 tpy in 1990. The VOC reductions that have occurred are the result of several factors. These
include federal emission limitations and fleet turnover, the Memphis vehicle inspection and maintenance (IM)
program to enforce the federal limitations and the implementation and enforcement of Shelby County regulations
concerning the construction and operation of VOC emitting sources. These sources are regulated as they relate to
new source requirements for best available control technology (BACT), lowest achievable emission rate (LAER) technology
and offsets, and to existing source requirements calling for the installation of reasonably available control technology
(RACT). The IM program has been in operation since the mid-1980's and has been improved in its operation from
a quality standpoint since that time. The Savings Clause For Vehicle Inspection and Maintenance [CAA section 187(a)(4)]
insures, at a minimum, the continuation of IM in the current configuration. Air pollution regulations have
been in existence, in large part, since the 1970's and early 1980's with continued amendments and improvements since
that time. Projections indicate that VOC emissions will not exceed the 1990 baseline inventory before the year 2005.

These reductions have occurred while Memphis has continued to pursue, expand and enhance accountability of sources
both in quality and quantity. Also of significance are reductions in mobile source emissions which may not be readily
apparent from comparisons of the different inventories. Road projects that make up the Transportation Improvement
Plan (TIP) must have a positive impact on air quality. These projects, including some outlying area signal improvements,
a Suburban Transit Center program for the Memphis Area Transit Authority (MATA) and a Land Use/Transportation Systems
Integration Study, should provide some measure for reduction to the mobile source emission inventory. Finally,
road construction or improvement projects, in order to meet conformity requirements, must provide a positive effect
on air quality. The contribution of these projects to air quality is evaluated by computer modelling using MOBILE5A.
This will be quantified annually in the conformity process for TIP approval. However, allowing for the increased
vehicle population and increased vehicle miles travelled, strides have been made in reducing vehicular emissions.

In association with its emission inventory discussed below, the State of Tennessee has demonstrated that actual
enforceable emission reductions are responsible for the recent air quality improvement and that the VOC emissions
in the base year are not artificially low due to local economic downturn. 


5. The Area Must Have a Fully Approved Maintenance Plan Pursuant to Section 175A of the Act 


Section 175A of the CAA sets forth the elements of a maintenance plan for areas seeking redesignation from nonattainment
to attainment. The plan must demonstrate continued attainment of the applicable NAAQS for at least ten years after
the Administrator approves a redesignation to attainment. Eight years after the redesignation, the State must submit
a revised maintenance plan which demonstrates attainment for the ten years following the initial ten-year period.
To provide for the possibility of future NAAQS violations, the maintenance plan must contain contingency measures,
with a schedule for implementation, adequate to assure prompt correction of any air quality problems. 




