 

(c) 

Arrangement of lights

. Lights shall be arranged so that they do not shine into the eyes of winch-drivers, crane operators or hatchtenders.
On Ro-Ro ships, stationary lights shall not shine directly into the eyes of drivers. 
(d) 

Portable lights

. Portable lights shall meet the following requirements: 
(1) Portable lights shall be equipped with substantial reflectors and guards to prevent materials from coming into
contact with the bulb. 
(2) Flexible electric cords used with temporary lights shall be designed by the manufacturer for hard or extra-hard
usage. Temporary and portable lights shall not be suspended by their electric cords unless the cords and lights are
designed for this means of suspension. Connections and insulation shall be maintained in safe condition. 
(3) Electric conductors and fixtures for portable lights shall be so arranged as to be free from contact with drafts,
running gear, and other moving equipment. 
(4) Portable cargo lights furnished by the employer for use aboard vessels shall be listed as approved for marine use
by the U.S. Coast Guard or by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. 
(e) 

Entry into darkened areas

. Employees shall not be permitted to enter dark holds, compartments, decks or other spaces without a flashlight or
other portable light. The use of matches or open flame lights is prohibited. 


1918.93 

Hazardous atmospheres and substances. 


(See 1918.2(j).) 
(a) 

Purpose and scope

. This section covers areas in which the employer is aware that a hazardous atmosphere or substance may exist, except
where one or more of the following sections or sub sections apply: Section 1918.89, Hazardous cargo; 1918.94(a),
Carbon monoxide; 1918.94(b), Fumigated grains; 1918.94(c), Fumigated tobacco; 1918.94(d),
Other fumigated cargoes; 1918.94(e), Catch of Menhaden and similar species of fish. 
(b) 

Determination of hazard

. (1) When the employer is aware that a space on a vessel contains or has contained a hazardous atmosphere, a designated
and appropriately equipped persons shall test the atmosphere before employee entry to determine whether a hazardous
atmosphere exists. 
(2) Records of results of any tests required by this section shall be maintained for at least 30 days. 
(c) 

Testing during ventilation.

 When mechanical ventilation is used to maintain a safe atmosphere, tests shall be made by a designated person to ensure
that the atmosphere is not hazardous. 
(d) 

Entry into hazardous atmospheres

. Only designated person shall enter hazardous atmospheres, in which case the following provisions shall apply:

(1) Persons entering a space containing a hazardous atmosphere shall be protected by respiratory and emergency protective
equipment meeting the requirement of subpart J of this part; 





