 

In contrast to the individual focus in clinical evaluation, neurobehavioral tests primarily have been used to evaluate
differences between groups, comparing unexposed groups with persons environmentally or occupationally exposed
to a suspected neurotoxic agent. An ideal evaluation of groups for quantitative evidence of chemically induced neurobehavioral
impairment would involve the assessment of a wide variety of functions, but testing all possible neurobehavioral
functions that might be affected in a group of exposed workers, for example, would be impossible. Therefore, a testing
strategy has been to use limited number tests that sample representative neurobehavioral functional domains such
as 
dexterity, visual memory, and reaction time. 



3.3.1.1. Test batteries. 



Many field and laboratory studies have selected neurobehavioral methods according to available information about
the spectrum of effects of the suspected neurotoxic agent(s). This focused strategy is useful for answering specific
questions about known neurotoxins. To identify unspecified neurotoxic effects in groups of workers or to characterize
the effects of less well-studied chemicals or mixtures of chemicals, several tests that sample a representative
range of functional domains have been grouped into test batteries. The advantage of a standardized battery is that
data from different study populations and chemical classes can be compared, and similarities in effects observed
(Johnson, 1987). Standardized batteries can be categorized into investigator-administered and computer-administered
types. 



3.3.1.2. Investigator-administered test batteries. 



The WHO-recommended Neurobehavioral Core Test Battery (NCTB) (Johnson, 1987), the Finnish Institute of Occupational
Health (FIOH) (Hanninen, 1990), and the Pittsburgh Occupational Exposures Test Battery (POET) (Ryan et al., 1987)
are three commonly used batteries. The NCTB is frequently used in field 
studies worldwide and can be fit inside a medium-sized suitcase for transport. The NCTB consists of the following
tests: simple reaction time task, digit-symbol coding task, timed motor coordination test (Santa Ana pegboard),
digit span memory test, Benton Visual Retention test, pursuit aiming test, and the Profile of Mood States (POMS).
Based on factor-analytic studies (Hooisma et al., 1990), these tests are believed to measure the functional domains
of immediate memory, attention, dexterity/hand-eye coordination, reaction time, and mood. Long-term memory,
verbal and language functions, auditory sensation, judgment, and so forth are not assessed. 



3.3.1.3. Computerized test batteries. 



Computerized tests and batteries have been developed for field and laboratory use. The Neurobehavioral Evaluation
System (NES) (Baker et al., 1985), MicroTox (Eckerman et al., 1985), the SPES (Iregren et al., 1985), and the NCTR Operant
Battery (Paule et al., 1990) are computerized systems developed for neurotoxicity assessment. Current versions
of the NES, for example, consist of about 15 different neurobehavioral tests, and the battery has been used in epidemiologic
studies of groups exposed to solvent, pesticide, and mercury, and in laboratory studies of NO

2

, ethanol, and toluene (Letz, 1990). 





