 

c. 

Health professionals and communities. 

(1) Develop and distribute environmental health information resource guides, for health professionals and communities,
that include relevant and up-to-date information concerning Superfund sites and chemicals, including environmental
health references and local, State, and Federal resources and contacts.
(2) Assess program effectiveness by implementing an evaluation plan that includes process and impact/outcome measures
for educational activities and materials.


2. 

General Environmental Health Education


Up to 20% of health education efforts can be devoted to developing for health professionals general educational materials
and programs that may not be directly related to a site, but expand the base of knowledge in the area of environmental
health. Types of activities could include grand rounds, short courses, workshops, or curriculum development. Topics,
for example, could include materials or programs on: improving the knowledge and skills of health care providers
in determining potential hazardous substance exposure as an integral part of their patient workup (i.e., taking
exposure histories); environmental toxicology; environmental epidemiology; and health risk communication.
General environmental education activities must also be evaluated.


B. ATSDR Activities


1. Site-Specific Preventive Health Education


a. Health professionals. 

(1) Collaborate with the recipient to develop effective methods to enhance skill and knowledge required for appropriate
medical surveillance, screening, treatment, and prevention of injury or disease related to exposure to hazardous
substances at Superfund sites.
(2) Collaborate with the recipient in developing and reviewing all materials and ensuring scientific consistency.
When appropriate, provide the recipient with existing education materials to be used in their programs.
b. 

Communities. 

Assist in developing appropriate, targeted education activities and materials that address the needs and concerns
of communities.
c. 

Health professionals and communities. 

(1) Collaborate with the recipient in developing an environmental health information resource guide.


