 

(i) Verified statement by State ginseng official that the ginseng was obtained in that State in accordance with the
State law of that harvest year; 
(j) Name and title of State certifying official; 
(k) Date of certification; 
(l) Signatures of both the dealer and the State official making certification.

 

This certificate should be issued in triplicate, with the original designated for the dealer's use in commerce, first
copy for dealer records, and second copy retained by the State for reference. 
7. State regulations that (a) prohibit export from the State of its ginseng without certification by the State of origin,
and (b) require uncertified ginseng supplied to State-registered dealers to be returned to the State of origin within
30 calendar days for certification. Failure to have such ginseng certified will render those roots illegal for commerce
under State law. 
Each State from which ginseng export is approved shall, without further notice, make program information on each
year's harvest available to the Service's Office of Management Authority no later than May 31 of the subsequent year
(

e.g.,

 the State's 1994 ginseng data should be received by May 31, 1995). These data should be sufficient to satisfy the Scientific
Authority criteria indicated above. The following information is needed to satisfy the Management Authority criteria:



1. Reaffirm the State ginseng program and indicate modifications, if any, concerning:

 

(a) State ginseng laws and regulations; 
(b) Season of ginseng harvest and commerce; 
(c) State dealer, digger, and/or grower license or registration rules; 
(d) Sample of required ginseng-related licenses, including dates of authorized use; 
(e) Fees for any ginseng-related license or registration; 
(f) Dealer, digger, or grower record maintenance and reporting requirements; 
(g) Sample of current-year dealer certificates and reporting forms; 
(h) Description of State certification system for wild and cultivated ginseng legally harvested within the State,
including controls to deter uncertified ginseng from moving out of or into the State; 
(i) Name, address, telephone number, and fax number of State official to contact concerning such information.

 

2. The State data should also include information on the following:

 

(a) Pounds (dry weight) of wild and of cultivated ginseng roots and weight or number of live plants (i) harvested and
(ii) certified by the State, and (iii) the pounds of each bought and sold from in-State and from out-of-State sources;





