 

Reducing the need for transfusions also increases kidney transplant success in chronic renal failure patients by
reducing sensitization. According to the above cited article, some individuals receiving frequent transfusions
may develop cytotoxic antibodies. Excessive cytotoxity levels may result in increased waiting time for suitable
organs. Also, when high cytotoxity levels are present, graft survival rates are reduced. When EPO is used, thus reducing
or eliminating the need for transfusions, patients are more likely to retain transplanted organs successfully.

There are other potential benefits associated with the use of EPO. Since EPO stimulates the production of red blood
cells thereby reducing or eliminating anemia, the need for hospitalization due to anemia or anemia-related illnesses
could be expected to decline.

Another very important though not quantifiable benefit of receiving EPO is improved quality of life. An article appearing
in The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) (The Quality of Life of Hemodialysis Recipients Treated
with Recombinant Human Erythropoietin, Vol. 263, No. 6, February 9, 1990) reported on the results of a study of over
300 hemodialysis patients in nine dialysis centers. The study showed that hemodialysis patients receiving EPO are
happier_their energy levels are higher, physical functioning is improved, physical activity levels are increased,
etc. Similar results were also reported in the American Journal of Kidney Diseases article mentioned earlier in this
impact statement. Although these studies did not specifically study home dialysis patients, we believe that results
would be equally true for this group.

In reviewing the literature on EPO, we also found that most EPO recipients require additional medications or therapies
to counteract possible adverse effects. Some of the possible side effects of EPO therapy are iron depletion, hypertension,
and arteriovenous graft clotting.

Iron Depletion_EPO recipients may not get the full benefit of increased hematocrits from EPO if they lack sufficient
iron reserves. EPO increases the body's production of red blood cells. This requires sufficient iron reserves. Consequently,
patients on EPO may become iron deficient. Their iron reserves must be monitored and iron supplements administered
to ensure that the patient's iron reserves are not depleted.

Hypertension_Use of EPO may elevate a patient's blood pressure, a reaction that may be related to the rate of increase
in hematocrit. Therefore, an EPO patient's blood pressure must be carefully monitored. Thirty percent of all EPO
patients receive hypertension therapy.

Arteriovenous (AV) Graft Clotting_Fourteen percent of all EPO patients experience clotting of AV graft as compared
to 6 percent of chronic renal patients not receiving EPO. The cause of the AV clotting is believed due to increased hematocrit.

The foregoing benefits and adverse effects of using EPO are the same for patients who receive the drug in a physician's
office or ESRD facility as for patients who self-administer the drug. Those beneficiaries who received EPO in a physician's
office or ESRD facility and, as a result of this regulation, shift to self-administration will realize further benefits,
such as savings of time and in transportation costs. In order to receive the full benefit of EPO therapy, most patients
receive it at least three times a week. Therefore, we estimate that the savings in transportation costs will average
approximately $300 per beneficiary for calendar year 1992. Of course, this estimate is only an average; the actual
saving will vary depending on distance traveled to and from the ESRD facility or physician's office by a particular
beneficiary.

Since EPO is a relatively new drug, definitive information on its large scale effectiveness, direct costs, savings,
etc., is not available. Literature supports the view that ESRD beneficiaries receiving EPO experience an improved
quality of life, resulting in higher energy levels and improved physical functioning. For those beneficiaries who
did receive EPO in a physician's office or ESRD facility and meet the criteria for self-administration, the change
to self-administration will save time and eliminate travel expenses associated with office and facility visits.
We expect that over time more home dialysis beneficiaries who did not receive EPO or received a reduced dosage because
they were unable to travel to the physician's office or ESRD facility as often as needed will become candidates for
self-administration of EPO. We do not have data on which to base a prediction of the number who will choose this form
of administration. Obviously, each beneficiary's physician will need to consider potential adverse as well as beneficial
effects. 


B. Regulatory Flexibility Act



We generally prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis that is consistent with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)
(5 U.S.C. 602 through 612) unless the Secretary certifies that a final rule will not have a significant economic impact
on a substantial number of small entities. For purposes of the RFA, individuals are not considered to be small entities.

Also, section 1102(b) of the Act requires the Secretary to prepare a regulatory impact analysis if a final rule may
have a significant impact on the operations of a substantial number of small rural hospitals. This analysis must conform
to the provisions of section 604 of the RFA. For purposes of section 1102(b) of the Act, we define a small rural hospital
as a hospital that is located outside of a Metropolitan Statistical Area and has fewer than 50 beds.

We are not preparing analyses for either the RFA or section 1102(b) of the Act since we have determined, and the Secretary
certifies, that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities and
will not have a significant impact on the operations of a substantial number of small rural hospitals. 


Paperwork Reduction Act



Section 405.2137 of this rule contains information collection requirements that are subject to review by the Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980. When OMB approves these provisions, we will
publish a Federal Register

 notice to that effect. If you comment on the information collection requirements, please send a copy of those comments
directly to: Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, room 3002, New Executive
Office Building, Washington, DC 20503, Attention: Allison Herron Eydt, Desk Officer for HCFA.



