 

During the proposed extension, each market will transmit to the other static price/volume information compiled
at the end of each trading day on approximately 35 Nasdaq securities which are also traded on the SES. The NASD will transmit
for each Pilot Security the closing inside quotes, cumulative volume, last sale price and the closing quote of every
Nasdaq market maker in each of the Pilot Securities (collectively referred to as ``NASD information''). In recognition
of the SES's use of the order-driven CLOB system, the SES will transmit the following data elements for each Pilot security:
closing price (

i.e.,

 the price of the final transaction in the CLOB on that business day), the highest and lowest prices at which transactions
were effected, and the aggregate volume (collectively referred to as ``SES information'').
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>
 Because all trading of Pilot Securities on the SES occurs in the CLOB, the price information sent to the NASD will reflect
the prices of actual trades consummated by the automated matching of buy and sell orders resident in the CLOB system.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>
If no trades are effected in a Pilot security on a given day, the SES will transmit no data on that issue even if bids or
offers had been entered into the CLOB for possible execution.
</FOOTNOTE>


The CLOB is a fully automated trading system that was instituted by the SES in 1989. Prior to that time, the SES employed
a quote-driven, market maker system similar to the Nasdaq Stock Market. Orders to buy and sell securities are entered
into the CLOB through some 1,800 trading terminals on the premises of approximately 26 SES member firms. The CLOB provides
an electronic limit order file with open orders ranked by price and time in each security. When the terms of two orders
match, the CLOB generates an automated execution accompanied by confirmations back to the originating brokers.
As noted in File No. SRNASD9328, the SES intends to incorporate the Pilot Securities into ``CLOB
International.'' The latter is a separate section of the SES market system for the trading of foreign issues that are
not listed on the SES. These securities trade through the CLOB in the same manner as SES-listed securities. CLOB International
currently includes the stocks of Malaysian, Hong Kong, and Philippine issuers. The SES regards inclusion of the Pilot
Securities in CLOB International as a logical step in the progression of the Pilot Program. Further, the SES believes
that this step could stimulate greater trading interest in Nasdaq securities among Singapore investors. Accordingly,
both the NASD and the SES desire to continue the Pilot Program.
The incorporation of Pilot Securities into CLOB International will not alter the basic operation of the Pilot Program,
namely, the interchange of static, end-of-day information on the Pilot Securities. SES information will continue
to be offered only to subscribers of Nasdaq Level 2/3 services.
<FOOTCITE>6</FOOTCITE>
 Similarly, NASD information transmitted to Singapore will be available only on the terminals used by SES members
to access the CLOB. The original linkage agreement between the NASD and the SES will remain in effect for the term of
the extended Pilot Program. That agreement, which provides for the sharing of regulatory information as needed,
is believed adequate given the limited nature and limited scope of the Pilot Program.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
6

</FOOTNAME>
To retrieve this information, a Nasdaq subscriber must enter a discrete query through a Nasdaq Workstation device.
</FOOTNOTE>


Finally, the NASD acknowledges that any further enhancement to the Pilot Program, including the introduction of
automated order routing and execution facilities, would require concurrent authorizations from the Commission
and the Monetary Authority of Singapore. No such enhancement is planned for implementation during the requested
extension.
The NASD believes that Sections 11A(a)(1) (B) and (C), 15A(b)(6), and 17A(a)(1) of the Act provide the statutory basis
for this proposed rule change. Subsections (B) and (C) of Section 11A(a)(1) set forth the Congressional goals of achieving
more efficient and effective market operations, the availability of information with respect to quotations for
securities and the execution of investor orders in the best market through the application of new data processing
and communications techniques. Section 15A(b)(6) requires, among other things, that the rules of the NASD be designed
to foster cooperation and coordination with persons engaged in regulating, clearing, settling, processing information
with respect to, and facilitating transactions in securities, and to remove impediments to and perfect the mechanism
of a free and open market. Finally, Section 17A(a)(1) reflects the Congressional goals of linking all clearance and
settlement facilities and reducing costs involved in the clearance and settlement process through new data processing
and communications techniques. The NASD submits that extension of the Pilot Program will further these ends by providing
the cooperative regulatory environment and operating experience needed for advancement of these goals in the context
of internationalization of securities markets.


B. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Burden on Competition


The extended Pilot Program will permit the continued exchange of static market data on a limited group of Nasdaq securities
between the NASD and the SES on a non-exclusive basis. The costs of supporting the Pilot Program are nominal, and the
sponsoring markets absorb their respective costs. The market information being exchanged by the NASD and SES under
the Pilot Program is deemed to constitute an exchange of equivalent value. Hence, no additional fee is paid by NASD
and SES member firms for receipt of the static data being provided on Pilot Securities.
The NASD submits that neither the structure no operation of the present Pilot Program poses any burden on competition.


C. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Comment on the Proposed Rule Change Received From Members, Participants,
or Others


The NASD did not solicit or receive written comments on this rule proposal.


III. Date of Effectiveness of the Proposed Rule Change and Timing for Commission Action


The NASD requests that the Commission find, pursuant to Section 19(b)(2) of the Act, good cause for approving the proposed
rule change prior to the 30th day after the date of publishing notice of the filing and, in any event, by May 12, 1994.
The NASD believes that accelerated approval is appropriate for the following reasons: (1) The experimental character
of the Pilot Program and the need to maintain continuity in its operation; (2) the commitment not to make any significant
operational changes during the requested extension absent Commission approval; (3) the limited nature of the Pilot
Program, both in terms of the number of Pilot securities and the amount of market information being exchanged; and
(4) the limited utility of end-of-day, static information to the NASD and SES member firms capable of accessing, respectively,
SES and NASD information. Moreover, during the period of the proposed extension, the sponsoring markets remain committed
to exchange regulatory information whenever the need arises. Finally, if accelerated approval is not granted, the
sponsors will be obliged to terminate this experimental program before its potential benefits can be realized in
relation to the globalization of securities markets.

The Commission finds that the proposed rule change is consistent with the requirements of the Act and the rules and
regulations thereunder applicable to the NASD and, in particular, the requirements of Sections 11A(a)(1) (B) and
(C), 15A(b)(6), 17A(a)(1) and the rules and regulations thereunder.

The Commission finds good cause for approving the proposed rule change prior to the 30th day after the date of publishing
of notice of filing thereof. The Commission believes that accelerated approval is appropriate to maintain continuity
in the Pilot Program and to allow the sponsors to continue to assess the impact of the trading of these securities in
the international section of the SES's order-driven market system. Further, the Pilot Program is of a limited nature
and no substantive changes will be implemented during the proposed extension. Accordingly, the Commission believes
that the Pilot Program should not be terminated under these circumstances.



IV. Solicitation of Comments




Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and arguments concerning the foregoing. Persons making
written submissions should file six copies thereof with the secretary, Securities and Exchange Commission, 450
Fifth Street NW., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of the submission, all subsequent amendments,all written statements
with respect to the proposed rule change that are filed with the Commission, and all written communications relating
to the proposed rule change between the Commission and any person, other than those that may be withheld from the public
in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552, will be available for inspection and copying in the Commission's
Public Reference Room. Copies of such filing will also be available for inspection and copying at the principal office
of the NASD.

All submissions should refer to File Number SRNASD9425 and should be submitted by June 3, 1994.



It is therefore ordered, 

pursuant to section 19(b)(2) of the Act, that the proposed rule change be, and hereby is, approved for a period of six
months, through November 12, 1994.






For the Commission, by the Division of Market Regulation, pursuant to delegated authority, 17 CFR 200.303(a)(12).



<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9411700 Filed 51294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>


