 

(4) No liability will be incurred by or attributed to the U.S. Government in connection with any possible infringement
of privately owned patent or proprietary rights, either domestic or foreign, by reason of the U.S. Government's approval
of this arrangement.

(5) No export, sale, transfer, or other disposition of the U.S. Munitions List articles covered by this arrangement
is authorized to any country outside the distribution territory without the prior written approval of the Office
of Defense Trade Controls of the U.S. Department of State.

(6) The applicant agrees that a semi-annual report of sales or other transfers pursuant to this arrangement of the
licensed articles, by quantity, type, U.S. dollar value, and purchaser or recipient shall be provided by (applicant)
to the Department of State. Such reports may cover calendar or fiscal years. Reporting shall continue until such time
as all articles authorized under the arrangement or a permanent unclassified license (DSP5) authorized in
support of the arrangement have been reported. Reports shall be deemed proprietary information by the Department
of State and will not be disclosed to unauthorized persons. (See 126.10(b) of this subchapter.)

(7) The applicant agrees to notify (identify foreign end-user) of any end use or retransfer restrictions and (identify
foreign end user) agrees to incorporate the following statement as an integral provision of a contract, invoice or
other appropriate document when the articles covered by this arrangement are sold or otherwise transferred:

``These commodities are authorized for export by the U.S. Government only to (identify country of ultimate destination).
They may not be resold, diverted, transferred, transshipped, or otherwise be disposed of in any other country, either
in their original form or after being incorporated through an intermediate process into other end-items, without
the prior written approval of the U.S. Department of State.''

(8) All provisions in this arrangement which refer to the United States Government and the Department of State will
remain binding on the applicant after the termination of the arrangement.

(d) The license will be valid for four years and quantities and values should reflect those for this time period. No
application will be accepted for any export for which Congressional notification is required.

The application shall be filled out in accordance with the instructions; however, in this instance, foreign end-user,
foreign consignee, and foreign intermediate consignees need not be identified. In each block state: ``The foreign
person in this block will be reported in accordance with 124.15 of the ITAR.'' The provisions of 126.13(b)
with regards to foreign consignee and foreign intermediate consignee need not be complied with at the time the application
is transmitted but will be reported semi-annually.

(e) Transmittal letter. Requests for approval of the arrangement must be made by letter. The original letter and seven
copies of the proposed arrangement shall be submitted to the Office of Defense Trade Controls. The letter shall contain
the following:

(1) A statement giving the applicant's Defense Trade Controls registration number.

(2) A statement identifying the country or countries to comprise the distribution territory.

(3) A statement identifying the defense articles to be distributed under the arrangement.

(4) A statement identifying any U.S. Government contract under which the equipment may have been generated, improved,
developed or supplied to the U.S. Government, and whether the equipment was derived from any bid or other proposal
to the U.S. Government.

(5) A statement that no classified defense articles or classified technical data are involved.

(6) A statement identifying any patent application which discloses any of the subject matter of the equipment or related
technical data covered by an invention secrecy order issued by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

(7) A statement that the applicant will not permit any exports to take place until the arrangement and the export license
have been approved by the Department of State.




Dated: August 1, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Lynn E. Davis,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Under Secretary for Arms Control and International Security Affairs, Department of State.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9421419 Filed 9194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 471025M
</BILLING>



