 

(4) The plan for locating the project within the applicant's organizational structure, and the plan to inform the
applicant community of the goals and objectives of the project; 
(5) The various services and activities to be provided to project participants and their parents; 
(6) The extent to which the timelines presented are appropriate for accomplishing critical elements of the project;

(7) The extent to which proposed services and activities relate logically to the needs in the target area; 
(8) The plan to ensure effective and efficient administration of the project, including, but not limited to matters
such as financial management, quality control, student records management, personnel management, and the plan
for coordinating the Upward Bound project with other programs for disadvantaged students; 
(9) The quality of the applicants plan to use its resources and personnel to achieve project objectives; and 
(10) The plan to work cooperatively with key administrative, teaching and counseling personnel at the target schools
to achieve project objectives. 
(d) 

Applicant and community support

 (16 points). The Secretary evaluates the applicant and community support for the proposed project on the basis of
the extent to which the applicant demonstrates that_ 
(1) The applicant is committed to supplementing the project with resources such as space, furniture and equipment,
supplies, and personnel that enhance the project; 
(2) The applicant has secured written commitments of support from schools, community organizations, and businesses,
including the commitment of resources that will enhance the project as described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section.

(e) 

Quality of personnel

 (8 points). To determine the quality of personnel the applicant plans to use, the Secretary looks for information
that shows_ 
(1) The qualifications required of the project director, including formal educational training in fields related
to the objectives of the project and experience in designing, managing, or implementing similar projects; 
(2) The qualifications required of each of the other personnel to be used in the project, including formal educational
training and work experience in fields related to the objectives of the project; and 
(3) The quality of the applicant's plan for employing personnel who have succeeded in overcoming barriers similar
to those confronting the project's target population. 
(f) 

Budget and cost effectiveness

 (5 points). The Secretary reviews each application to determine the extent to which_
(1) The budget for the project is adequate to support planned project services and activities; and 
(2) Costs are reasonable in relation to the objectives and scope of the project. 
(g) 

Evaluation plan

 (8 points). The Secretary evaluates the quality of the evaluation plan for the project on the basis of the extent to
which the applicant's methods of evaluation_ 
(1) Are appropriate to the project and include both quantitative and qualitative evaluation measures; and 
(2) Examine in specific and measurable ways, the success of the project in_ 
(i) Making progress toward achieving its process objectives; and 
(ii) Achieving its outcomes objectives.



(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1070a16) 



645.32

 How does the Secretary evaluate prior experience? 



(a) In the case of an application described in 645.30(a)(2), the Secretary reviews information relating to
an applicant's performance under its expiring Upward Bound grant. This information includes information derived
from annual performance reports, audit reports, site visit reports, project evaluation reports, and any other verifiable
information submitted by the applicant. 

(b) The Secretary evaluates the applicant's prior experience in delivering services on the basis of the following
criteria: 

(1) (3 points) Whether the applicant consistently provided services to the number of participants required to be
served under the approved application; 


