 

C. Enact legislation and implement community prevention programs (including educational, promotional, legislative
and maintenance strategies) to encourage the use of smoke detectors. 
D. Determine the effectiveness of strategies for increasing smoke detector installation and use. 


Motor Vehicle Injuries 


Awards for prevention of motor vehicle injuries are designed to develop, implement, and evaluate the effectiveness
of occupant protection programs in increasing occupant protection and reducing morbidity, mortality, severity,
disability, and costs associated with motor vehicle injuries. This program will facilitate the development, expansion,
and improvement of programs to increase the use of occupant protection within State public health agencies. Programs
within State public health agencies are expected to define and monitor the motor vehicle injury problem, develop
intervention strategies, including programs in highway safety, and evaluate the program's effectiveness in terms
of increased usage patterns and reduced morbidity, mortality, severity, disability, and cost associated with motor
vehicle injuries. 
Specifically, occupant protection usage programs are intended to: 
A. Develop or improve injury surveillance activities to identify motor vehicle-related injuries, including linkage
with other data systems to describe the magnitude and cost of the problem, who is affected, and use of occupant protection
(seat belts, child safety seats, air bags, or some combination of these). These data should be collected in a manner
that allows for the evaluation of progress toward the Year 2000 Objectives for the nation; 
B. Implement and evaluate multi-faceted prevention activities to address and define the motor vehicle injury problem
using evaluation guidelines for State injury control programs developed by CDC/NCIPC; 
C. Enact and strengthen legislation to cover all ages and seating positions and implement community-based interventions
(including education, behavioral change, and policy development) to encourage the use of occupant protection;

D. Determine the effectiveness of specific interventions in increasing occupant protection. 



Firearm-Related Injury Surveillance 


Awards for development of firearm-related injury surveillance systems are designed to develop, implement, and
evaluate such surveillance systems. This program will enable State public health agencies to define and monitor
the firearm-related injury problem in their jurisdictions, and to evaluate the program's effectiveness in terms
of surveillance sensitivity, timeliness, representation, predictive value positive, and ability to measure the
impact 
of specific interventions on morbidity, mortality, severity, disability, and cost of firearm-related injury.

Specifically, firearm-related injury surveillance programs are intended to: 
A. Develop or improve injury surveillance activities to identify firearm-related injuries, including data describing
the magnitude of the problem, who is affected, areas and persons at greatest risk, and the type and source of the firearm
and ammunition used; 
B. Link data from various sources to form a more complete picture of firearm-related injuries (e.g., linkage of emergency
department or hospital discharge data with police data). 
C. Measure the effectiveness of specific interventions in reducing firearm-related injuries. 


Violence Against Women 


Awards for identification and prevention of violence against women are designed to develop, implement, and evaluate
a surveillance system for injuries due to violence against women, define the role of the State public health agency
in preventing violence against women, and develop, implement and evaluate the effectiveness of strategies to prevent
violence against women. Programs will define and monitor this injury problem and evaluate the surveillance system's
effectiveness in terms of sensitivity, timeliness, representativeness, and predictive value positive. Programs
will evaluate the effectiveness of the interventions in reducing morbidity, mortality, severity, disability,
and cost of injury. 
Specifically, programs to prevent violence against women are intended to: 
A. Identify data sources and develop or improve existing surveillance systems for violence against women. Field
test violence against women surveillance guidelines developed by a drafting group convened by CDC/NCIPC. 




