 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93N0317] </RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Albuquerque Substance Abuse Clinic; Denial of Hearing and Revocation of Approval of a Narcotic Addiction Treatment
Program; Final Order </DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.

 
</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice. 


 

</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is revoking approval of an ``Application for Approval of Use of Methadone in
a Treatment Program'' (Form FDA2632) held by Albuquerque Substance Abuse Clinic, Inc. (ASAC). The sponsor
has failed to demonstrate the ability to correct and prevent violations of FDA's methadone regulation. Also, FDA
is denying ASAC~'s request for hearing because they failed to submit information showing that there is a genuine issue
of fact to justify a hearing. 

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 February 4, 1994.

 
</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Gerald R. Hajarian, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (HFD342), Food and Drug Administration, 7500
Standish Pl., Rockville, MD 20855, 
3015941029. 

 
</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 In the 

Federal Register

 of September 23, 1993 (58 FR 49519), FDA published a notice of opportunity for a hearing (NOOH) proposing to revoke
approval of ASAC's Form FDA2632 because of recurring, egregious violations of FDA's methadone regulation
in 291.505 (21 CFR 291.505). The September 23, 1993, NOOH: (1) Set forth in detail the specific violations found
in three FDA inspections conducted between April 2, 1991, and September 11, 1992; (2) described FDA's two unsuccessful
efforts to arrange an informal conference to allow ASAC the opportunity to explain why the program's approval should
not be revoked; and (3) offered ASAC the opportunity for a hearing on the proposal to revoke approval. 


By letter dated October 19, 1993, ASAC submitted a written notice of appearance and request for a hearing, but they
failed to submit the information and analyses to demonstrate that there is a genuine issue of fact to justify a hearing.

FDA's Associate Commissioner for Regulatory Affairs has reviewed ASAC's notice of appearance and request for a hearing,
as well as the data on file with the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857, submitted by the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research in support of the
NOOH, and concludes that ASAC has failed to raise a genuine and substantial issue of fact requiring a hearing under
314.200 (21 CFR 314.200), and that summary judgment should be entered against ASAC. The reasons for this decision
are set forth in section II of this document. 


I. Legislative and Regulatory Background 


Under the Controlled Substances Act (Pub. L. 91513) (21 U.S.C. 801 

et seq

.), methadone is classified as a schedule II controlled substance (21 U.S.C. 812(c)). A schedule II classification
means that methadone is regarded to have a currently accepted medical use, but it has a high potential for abuse that
may lead to severe psychological or physical dependence (21 U.S.C. 812(b)). 
Methadone is a synthetic narcotic analgesic and has been approved by FDA for: (1) Relief of severe pain, (2) detoxification
treatment of narcotic addiction, and (3) temporary maintenance treatment of narcotic addiction. As discussed in
this section, the use of methadone for maintenance treatment of narcotic addiction is permitted to be used only by
approved methadone programs, i.e., programs found to be in accord with the conditions for distribution and use of
methadone set forth in 291.505. The reason for this restriction is methadone's potential for abuse and diversion
from legitimate commerce into the illegal marketplace. 
The current action revoking approval of a methadone program's Form FDA2632 is the first such action FDA has
taken in more than 20 years of regulating methadone programs. The following discussion is intended to provide the
legislative and regulatory history underlying this action, so that the serious nature of ASAC's violations, and
FDA's response to them, are clearly understood. 
The current system by which FDA regulates and monitors the use of methadone in the treatment of addiction began in 1970
with passage of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (the CDAPCA) (Pub. L. 91513)
(21 U.S.C. 801 

et seq.

). Prior to the CDAPCA, FDA's control over methadone was based exclusively on FDA's regulation of new drugs, including
the investigational use of new drugs, under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C.
355). 
The CDAPCA directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to determine the appropriate methods of professional
practice in the medical treatment of the narcotic addiction of various classes of narcotic addicts (42 U.S.C. 257a).
The Secretary's authority to determine the safety and effectiveness of drugs or to approve new drugs to be used in the
treatment of narcotic addicts is delegated to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs (5.10(a)(8) (21 CFR 5.10(a)(8))).
Practitioners who wish to prescribe or dispense controlled drugs, including methadone, are required under the CDAPCA
to register annually with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). 
In the 

Federal Register

 of April 2, 1971 (36 FR 6075), FDA published guidelines for investigating the use of methadone in maintenance treatment.
The purpose of these guidelines was to assure the availability of valid data on the use of methadone in maintenance
treatment and to protect the community from the hazards of diversion and abuse of methadone. 
It was FDA's position that restricting the use of methadone in maintenance treatment only under investigational
new drug application (IND) protocols was not warranted and that methadone should be available to all addicts who consent
to use it in approved treatment programs. On the other hand, FDA was aware that, despite the distribution restriction
of the IND protocols then in effect, the use of methadone outside IND protocols was substantial. FDA was concerned
that the usual form of new drug application (NDA) approval would lead to even greater diversion or misuse of the drug,
because it would permit relatively unrestricted distribution and allow all physicians wide discretion in prescribing
the drug. Therefore, FDA exercised its authority under both the IND and NDA control mechanisms, as well as the authority
granted under the CDAPCA, to ensure that the required information for assessing the safety and efficacy of methadone
would be obtained, and close control would be maintained over the distribution, administration, and dispensing
of the drug. 
In 1972, FDA issued its methadone regulations under the new drug provisions of section 505 of the act and the CDAPCA.
These regulations set forth medical standards in the treatment of narcotic addiction in accord with the CDAPCA and
provided for a closed system of methadone distribution. 
In the early 1970's, diversion of methadone from legitimate commerce into the illegal marketplace became a serious
problem. The authority of DEA to impose and enforce standards relating to the security and diversion of narcotic drugs
used in the treatment of narcotic addiction was strengthened in 1974 when Congress enacted the Narcotic Addict Treatment
Act of 1974 (the NATA) (Pub. L. 93281) (21 U.S.C. note). The NATA ensured that only bona fide narcotic addicts
were admitted to maintenance or detoxification treatment, that they received quality care, and that illicit diversion
was limited. 
Under the NATA, those practitioners who dispense narcotic drugs in the treatment of narcotic-dependent persons
must obtain an annual registration with DEA. This registration is distinct from the general registration requirement,
previously mentioned, under the CDAPCA to prescribe or dispense controlled drugs. To be registered, these practitioners
must comply with the requirements established by DEA for secure drug storage, recordkeeping, and unsupervised use;
and these practitioners must be found qualified under the treatment standards established by FDA's methadone regulation
to engage in such treatment (21 U.S.C. 823(g)). 
In the 

Federal Register

 of September 19, 1980 (45 FR 62694), FDA and the National Institute of Drug Abuse jointly issued a final rule amending
FDA's methadone regulation to make it consistent with the requirements of the NATA and the implementing regulations
issued by DEA. Changes included requirements for physiologic dependence of patients, physician staffing, and urine
testing in methadone maintenance programs, more flexibility in clinical standards, clarification of patient care
responsibilities by indicating the minimum standards for the appropriate methods of professional practice in the
medical treatment of narcotic addicts, and recommendations regarding sound medical practice in the safe and effective
treatment of narcotic addicts with methadone. 


II. ASAC's Hearing Request and FDA's Finding 


ASAC, 117 Quincy St. NE., Albuquerque, NM 87124, is a substance abuse treatment clinic; one of its primary functions
is the dispensing of methadone hydrochloride in the treatment of narcotic addiction (heroin or other morphine-like
drugs). 
The NOOH proposing to revoke approval of ASAC's Form FDA2632 set forth in detail a long list of serious violations
of FDA's methadone regulation. These violations have continued to recur over an extended period of time. ASAC has
shown an inability to function in accord with the methadone regulation. 
The fact that ASAC was unable to bring itself in compliance with the methadone regulation after multiple inspections
is clear evidence that the management of ASAC is not suited to run a narcotic treatment center using methadone. Moreover,
since publication of the NOOH, FDA has become aware that ASAC no longer has a medical director. A narcotic treatment
center using methadone treatment cannot legally function without a medical director. (See, inter alia, 291.505(c)
and (d)(4)(ii).) 
ASAC's entire hearing request consists of the following statement, dated October 19, 1993: 


 This letter is being sent to request a hearing for [ASAC] that we may show why our approval for a narcotic treatment program
should not be revoked. 
 We are gathering together all information and data showing just cause for us to remain open. We are in hopes this data
will demonstrate our ability to correct and prevent violations. 
The information will follow within the next thirty days. 
We are sincerely hoping you will accept and allow our request for the hearing. 


ASAC did not submit any additional information, and the request itself is nothing more than a notice of appearance.
As stated in the NOOH, a hearing request must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue of fact that
requires a hearing. ASAC has failed even to attempt to submit such information. 
Therefore, for the reasons stated in the September 23, 1993, NOOH, and the reasons discussed in this final order, the
Associate Commissioner for Regulatory Affairs hereby enters summary judgment against ASAC and revokes approval
of ASAC's ``Application for Approval of Use of Methadone in a Treatment Program'' (Form FDA2632), effective
February 4, 1994. DEA and the New Mexico State authority are notified, concurrently with the issuance of this notice,
that the Associate Commissioner has determined that ASAC is not qualified to engage in the treatment with respect
to which registration under section 303 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 823) was previously granted.
This notice is issued under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs (5.10 (a)(9)) and redelegated
to the Associate Commissioner for Regulatory Affairs (21 CFR 5.20). 


 

Dated: January 24, 1994. 

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Ronald G. Chesemore, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Commissioner for Regulatory Affairs. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 942470 Filed 2394; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

