 

In addition, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service funded a visit in the Spring of 1994 to Moscow and Kalmykia by Dr. James
Teer, Welder Wildlife Foundation, Sinton, Texas, and Dr. Fred Lindzey, Wyoming Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research
Unit, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, to report on the status of the saiga. Teer and Lindzey opined that the
Kalmykian saiga population can no longer sustain itself when harvests for horns, meat, and hides are permitted for
export, but that it can sustain a small offtake from hunting. Even so, they were concerned about poaching and the ease
of movement of saiga parts across borders. They also felt that the Kalmykian population might rebound due to the great
fecundity of saiga, along with a reduction in livestock, habitat improvement, and the control of poaching, all factors
the Kalmykian authorities claim they are implementing. While realizing that an Appendix II listing would not prohibit
exports, Teer and Lindzey suggested that the United States might delay proposing a CITES listing to allow time for
current management measures and the population status in Kalmykia to be evaluated, and to give Kazakhstan time to
become a Party to CITES. 
 As a result of comments and information received concerning the amount of poaching of saiga antelope and the illegal
trade in saiga horns, the use of saiga horns in combination with or as a substitute for rhinoceros horns in traditional
medicines in conjunction with intensified pressures to stop the trade in rhinoceros horn, and the evidence of considerable
declines in populations of 

S. t. tatarica 

over the last two decades for various reasons, the Service has proposed that populations of 

S. t. tatarica

 be included in Appendix II of CITES. The numbers of 

S. t. mongolica

 are so low in the wild that the full protective potential of CITES seems warranted, therefore the Service has proposed
that the Mongolian population be included in Appendix I of CITES. 
2. Urial (

Ovis vignei

). The Service requested information and comments to help clarify which populations of the urial should be included
in Appendix I as a result of the 1973 listing of 

Ovis vignei 

by India. Confusion regarding the intended inclusiveness of the original listing of 1973 arose as a result of (1) actions
considered at COP2 in 1979; (2) range information presented in the CITES-adopted check list for mammals, Mammal Species
of the World, 1982, edited by Honacki, Kinman, and Koeppl; and, (3) distribution and synonymy given in Mammal Species
of the World, 2nd Edition, 1993, edited by Wilson and Reeder. The issue was whether the original listing implies a conservative
application of the name, thereby restricting the listing to only populations in the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir,
or there was a broader intent, as presented in Honacki, Kinman, and Koeppl, 1982? 


Five comments were received within the comment period on this problem. TRAFFIC USA passed on information from TRAFFIC
India attesting to the endangered status of the urial sheep in India, and from TRAFFIC France indicating that urial
hunting trips in central Asia are being organized by French companies. Dr. Steve Edwards, IUCN, supported the submission
of a proposal to clarify which populations of 

O. vignei 

are to be included in Appendix I. 


The three remaining comments were from Safari Club International, Dr. Richard Mitchell, and Mr. Ron Young of Expeditions
by Ron. The first two commenters argued that the intent of the original listing was to include only the population in
the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir, while the latter noted that, according to his observation, the Transcaspian
urial, the Afghan urial, the Blandford urial, and the Punjab urial are all abundant in the wild. 
The Government of Pakistan indicated that the shapu (

O. orientalis vignei

 (

= O. v. vignei

)), the gad (

O. o. blanfordi

 (

= O. v. blanfordi

)), and the Punjab urial (

O. o. punjabiensis

 (

= O. v. punjabiensis

)) are in fair numbers in Pakistan and that there is no need to list them under CITES. 

Also, Mr. Earl Baysinger, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, who attended the Convention's Plenipotentiary Meeting
and COP2, provided a detailed account of the discussions that took place at that meeting of the Parties concerning
the proposal and ultimate listing of the urial, and claimed that the Parties intended to include only 

O. vignei vignei

 in Appendix I. 


The Service is, therefore, proposing that only 

O. vignei vignei

 of the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir be retained in Appendix I, and that all other populations of 

O. vignei

 be included in Appendix II for biological and similarity of appearance purposes. 


3. Box turtles (

Terrapene 

spp.). Prior to COP8, the New York Zoological Society recommended listing box turtles in Appendix II. However, the
Service did not have sufficient information on trade in these species, and did not submit a proposal for consideration
at COP8. Since then the Service has accumulated data in its Law Enforcement Management Information System (LEMIS)
on exports and imports of box turtles in an effort to obtain appropriate trade information. 
The genus 

Terrapene

 includes the four species (

T. carolina, T. coahuila, T. nelsoni, 

and 

T. ornata

), with 11 subspecies recognized among them. 

Terrapene coahuila 

is currently listed in Appendix I of CITES. 

Terrapene nelsoni

 occurs in a small fragmented range on the west coast of Mexico, while 

T. ornata

 is found over a large area of the midwestern United States. 

Terrapene carolina 

has the largest range, occurring from Canada to Mexico as far as Yucatan, and from the Atlantic coast west into approximately
the eastern edge of the prairie in the Midwest. 


