 

8. Information repository


B. Requirements Regarding the Trial Burn


1. Notices of Trial Burns


C. Cost Estimates


V. State Authority


A. Applicability of Rules in Authorized States
B. Effect on State Authorizations


1. Pre-HSWA Provisions
a. Part 270_Hazardous Waste Permitting
b. Part 124_Public Participation Requirements
2. Procedures Applicable to pre-HSWA Provisions


VI. Regulatory Impact Analysis Pursuant to Executive Order 12866


A. Cost Analysis


1. Expanded Public Involvement Opportunities
2. Modification of the Permitting Process
a. Direct Costs
b. Other Effects


B. Summary of Benefits


1. Expanded Public Involvement Opptortunities
2. Modification of the Permitting Process


C. Regulatory Flexibility Act


1. Small Entity Impacts of Expanded Public 
Participation Requirements
2. Small Entity Impacts of Revised Requirements for ``Data in Lieu of'' a Trial Burn
3. Small Entity Impacts of Requirements Following a Trial Burn Failure


D. Enhancing the Intergovernmental Partnership
E. Paperwork Reduction Act


I. Authority


These regulations are proposed under the authority of sections 2002, 3004, 3005 and 7004(b) of the Solid Waste Disposal
Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended by the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments
of 1984.


II. Background


Section 3004 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), requires owners and operators of treatment, storage,
and disposal facilities to comply with standards ``necessary to protect human health and the environment.'' These
standards are implemented generally through interim status standards applicable to facilities that achieve interim
status under RCRA section 3005(c), and through permits that are issued by EPA or under authorized State programs.
EPA continuously strives to improve the hazardous waste management standards in order to ensure protection of human
health and the environment.
The role that combustion plays in hazardous waste management has changed dramatically over the last decade and a half.
With the recognition that land disposal of hazardous waste could present long term pollution problems, larger use
of combustion ensued. However, waste treatment alone will not totally solve the problems associated with hazardous
waste disposal. Therefore, EPA decided to take a fresh look at how to achieve a fully integrated waste management program
that gives source reduction its proper emphasis.

1




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
 While the Agency is committed to source reduction as its primary approach to waste management, it believes that there
will continue to be a role for waste combustion, provided it is done safely and in compliance with federal regulations.
Combustion is a proven waste treatment technique to address many types of wastes.
</FOOTNOTE>


To this end, on May 18, 1993, the Agency announced its Draft Strategy on Waste Minimization and Hazardous Waste Combustion.
EPA issued the strategy in draft form as the starting point for the debate on what source reduction/recycling actions
and regulatory changes the Agency should pursue. The Agency has been aggressive in involving all the stakeholders
as part of the national dialogue on these national policy questions. In addition, since EPA and the States are partners
and co-regulators in hazardous waste management, any evaluation of the role of waste minimization and hazardous
waste combustion in the hazardous waste management system must be a joint federal and state effort. Thus, EPA and the
States have used, and will continue to use, a joint EPA/State committee to further develop the national strategy.
In the context of a national dialogue on waste minimization and hazardous waste combustion, the Agency has identified
a number of specific actions it would pursue to ensure that existing combustion facilities operate safely and without
unacceptable risks to human health and the environment. These actions include:



&bull;Aggressive use of waste minimization measures in permitting and enforcement efforts that involve generators
of combustible waste, as well as incinerators and boilers and industrial furnaces (BIFs);
&bull;Ensuring that a comprehensive risk assessment, including indirect risk, is conducted at each facility site;
&bull;Use of omnibus permitting authority to include dioxin/furan emission limits and more stringent particulate
matter standards in new permits, where necessary to protect human health and the environment; and
&bull;Giving low management priority to permitting any new incinerator and BIF capacity, unless the new facilities
would replace and be a significant improvement over existing capacity; in other words, the draft strategy makes interim
status combustion facilities the highest permitting priority, in terms of processing permits, in order to bring
these facilities under more comprehensive environmental controls.



In addition, the draft strategy calls for development of mechanisms to facilitate increased public participation
in the permitting process. By developing such mechanisms, EPA hopes to allow the public early access to information
about the facility and an opportunity to participate in permitting decisions regarding hazardous waste storage,
treatment, or disposal facilities (TSDFs) that may affect their communities.
By providing citizens an enhanced opportunity to participate in facility permitting, the Agency is striving to give
citizens more input into decisions about facilities that may impact their communities. This may be particularly
so in low income or minority communities where the lack of this opportunity has been felt strongly. Consistent with
the Agency's efforts to ensure environmental justice, EPA intends that this rulemaking will give people in such communities
increased opportunity to affect RCRA permitting decisions.


