 

(3) Simultaneous multiple round auctions



(b) The Commission may use combinatorial bidding, which would allow bidders to submit all or nothing bids on combinations
of licenses, in addition to bids on individual licenses. The Commission may require that to be declared the high bid,
a combinatorial bid must exceed the sum of the individual bids by a specified amount. Combinatorial bidding may be
used with any type of auction.
(c) The Commission may use single combined auctions, which combine bidding for two or more substitutable licenses
and award licenses to the highest bidders until the available licenses are exhausted. This technique may be used in
conjunction with any type of auction.


Section 1.2104 Competitive Bidding Mechanisms


(a) 

Sequencing. 

The Commission will establish the sequence in which multiple licenses will be auctioned.
(b) 

Grouping. 

In the event the Commission uses either a simultaneous multiple round competitive bidding design or combinatorial
bidding, the Commission will determine which licenses will be auctioned simultaneously or in combination.
(c) 

Reservation Price. 

The Commission may establish a reservation price, either disclosed or undisclosed, below which a license subject
to auction will not be awarded.
(d) 

Minimum Bid Increments. 

The Commission may, by announcement before or during an auction, require minimum bid increments in dollar or percentage
terms. The Commission may also establish suggested minimum opening bids on a service-specific basis.
(e) 

Stopping Rules. 

The Commission may establish stopping rules before or during multiple round auctions in order to terminate the auctions
within a reasonable time.
(f) 

Activity Rules. 

The Commission may establish activity rules which require a minimum amount of bidding activity.
(g) 

Withdrawal, Default and Disqualification Penalties. 

As specified below, when the Commission conducts a simultaneous multiple round auction pursuant to 1.2103,
the Commission will impose penalties on bidders who withdraw high bids during the course of an auction, or who default
on payments due after an auction closes or who are disqualified.
(1) Bid withdrawal prior to close of auction. A bidder who withdraws a high bid during the course of an auction will be
subject to a penalty equal to the difference between the amount bid and the amount of the winning bid the next time the
license is offered by the Commission. No withdrawal penalty would be assessed if the subsequent winning bid exceeds
the withdrawn bid. This penalty amount will be deducted from any upfront payments or down payments that the withdrawing
bidder has deposited with the Commission.
(2) Default or disqualification after close of auction. If a high bidder defaults or is disqualified after the close
of such an auction, the defaulting bidder will be subject to the penalty in subsection (1) plus an additional penalty
equal to 3 percent of the subsequent winning bid. If the subsequent winning bid exceeds the defaulting bidder's bid
amount, the 3 percent penalty will be calculated based on the defaulting bidder's bid amount. These amounts will be
deducted from any upfront payments or down payments that the defaulting or disqualified bidder has deposited with
the Commission.
When the Commission conducts single round sealed bid auctions or sequential oral auctions, the Commission may modify
the penalties to be paid in the event of bid withdrawal, default or disqualification; provided, however, that such
penalties shall not exceed the penalties specified above.
(h) The Commission will generally release information concerning the identities of bidders before each auction
but may choose, on an auction-by-auction basis, to withhold the identity of the bidders associated with bidder identification
numbers.
(i) The Commission may delay, suspend, or cancel an auction in the event of a natural disaster, technical obstacle,
evidence of security breach, unlawful bidding activity, administrative necessity, or for any other reason that
affects the fair and efficient conduct of the competitive bidding. The Commission also has the authority, at its sole
discretion, to resume the competitive bidding starting from the beginning of the current or some previous round or
cancel the competitive bidding in its entirety.


Section 1.2105 Bidding Application and Certification Procedures; Prohibition of Collusion


(a) 

Submission of Short Form Application (FCC Form 175). 

In order to be eligible to bid, an applicant must timely submit a short-form application (FCC Form 175), together with
any appropriate filing fee set forth by Public Notice. Unless otherwise provided by Public Notice, the Form 175 need
not be accompanied by an upfront payment (

see 

Section 1.2106 of this part).
(1) All Form 175s will be due:
(i) On the date(s) specified by Public Notice; or
(ii) In the case of application filing dates which occur automatically by operation of law (

see, e.g., 

47 CFR Section 22.902), on a date specified by Public Notice after the Commission has reviewed the applications that
have been filed on those dates and determined that mutual exclusivity exists.


