 

Section 266.310Insurance of advances or insurance upon completion; applicability of requirements. 





Comment. 

Commenter 12 asked that ``completion of construction'' in paragraph (c) be defined so as not to preclude closing subject
to escrows acceptable to the HFA, in order to assure completion of non-critical items that remain to be done. 



HUD Response. 

The regulation does not define ``completion of construction'' since the exact definition will likely vary among
the procedures of the 33 approved program participants. Because the Department wishes to allow HFAs to use their own
procedures to the maximum extent possible, we do not think that a specific definition is necessary or desirable. This
issue will be addressed further in the administrative instructions. 



Section 266.405Title. 





Comment. 

Commenter 12 recommended deleting the requirement that marketable title to the mortgaged property be vested in the
mortgagor on the date the mortgage is filed for record, stating that adequate protection is provided in 266.405(b)
and 266.410(c). 



HUD Response. 

The meaning of this comment is obscure. Paragraph (a) states that marketable title is required and when. Paragraph
(b) describes what evidence of title consists of. Section 266.410(c) discusses that the mortgage must be a first lien.




Section 266.410Mortgage provisions. 





Comments. 

Commenter 3 objected to the requirement that the mortgage provide for full amortization of the loan over the term of
the mortgage. The commenter stated that an HFA should be allowed to set the amortization period and term of the mortgage
in order to have full access to capital resources. Commenter 12 suggested that use restrictions (paragraph (f)) should
also be included in the regulatory agreement. The same commenter stated that the provision in paragraph (h) regarding
modification of terms of the mortgage must result in a reduction of Section 8 rents should be deleted. The commenter
stated that the Section 8 statute, regulations, and contract rights should determine HUD's rights to adjust rents,
and that this provision could prove harmful where a project is in trouble financially and refinancing at a lower rate
could provide the means to address the problem without causing a claim on the insurance fund. 



HUD Response. 

Fully amortizing loan. While the Department wishes to permit HFAs participating in the program to use their own standards
and requirements as much as possible, we nevertheless are obliged to develop a fiscally prudent program. Mortgages
that are not fully amortizing have an inherent risk that the Department does not wish to incur, particularly in a pilot
program that will test so many aspects of this new partnership. 

Use restriction. The commenter suggests that the use restriction in the insured mortgage prohibiting the use of the
property for any purpose other than that intended on the day the mortgage is executed also be included in the regulatory
agreement between the HFA and the mortgagor. Section 266.505(b)(4) on the requirements of the regulatory agreement
already contains this provision. 

Section 8 projects. Section 8 projects are subject to the Section 8 statute, regulations and contract rights, as well
as other HUD guidelines that may arise from time to time in response to Congressional or other requirements. This provision
in the Risk-Sharing rule merely notifies participants of current requirements relative to reduction of Section
8 rents in certain circumstances. 



Section 266.415Mortgage lien and other obligations. 





Comment. 

Commenter 12 suggested adding language to the end of paragraph (b) (contractual obligations) to allow a final closing
to occur where there may be outstanding lien claims not yet determined by a court in situations where a mortgage lien
is protected through title insurance. 





