 

To Request Copies of This Final Rule Contact: 
Delores Frank, 
U.S. EPA (RDSD12), 
Regulation Development and Support Division, 
2565 Plymouth Road, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48105, 
Telephone: (313) 6684295. 
Copies of the preamble, the Final Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA), the Responses to Comments on Enforcement Provisions
(RCEP), the complex model, the simple model and the regulations for the reformulated gasoline rulemaking are available
on the OAQPS Technology Transfer Network Bulletin Board System (TTNBBS). The TTNBBS can be accessed with a dial-in
phone line and a high-speed modem (PH# 9195415742). The parity of your modem should be set to none, the
data bits to 8, and the stop bits to 1. Either a 1200, 2400, or 9600 baud modem should be used. When first signing on, the
user will be required to answer some basic informational questions for registration purposes. After completing
the registration process, proceed through the following series of menus: 
(M) OMS 
(K) Rulemaking and Reporting 
(3) Fuels 
(9) Reformulated gasoline 
A list of ZIP files will be shown, all of which are related to the reformulated gasoline rulemaking process. The six
documents mentioned above will be in the form of a ZIP file and can be identified by the following titles: ``PREAMBLE.ZIP''
(preamble); ``RIAFINAL.ZIP'' (RIA); ``ENFORCE.ZIP'' (RCEP); ``EPAFINAL.ZIP'' (complex model); ``MODFINAL.ZIP''
(simple model); ``REGFINAL.ZIP'' (regulations). To download these files, type the instructions below and transfer
according to the appropriate software on your computer:




&lt;D>ownload, &lt;P>rotocol, &lt;E>xamine, &lt;N>ew, &lt;L>ist, or &lt;Help 
Selection or &lt;CR> to exit: D 

filename.zip 






You will be given a list of transfer protocols from which you must choose one that matches with the terminal software
on your own computer. Then go into your own software and tell it to receive the file using the same protocol. Programs
and instructions for de-archiving compressed files can be found via &lt;S>ystems Utilities from the top menu, under
&lt;A>rchivers/de-archivers. 


I. Background 


The purpose of the reformulated gasoline regulations is to improve air quality by requiring that gasoline be reformulated
to reduce motor vehicle emissions of toxic and tropospheric ozone-forming compounds, as prescribed by section 211(k)(1)
of the Clean Air Act (CAA or the Act), as amended. This section of the Act mandates that reformulated gasoline be sold
in the nine largest metropolitan areas with the most severe summertime ozone levels and other ozone nonattainment
areas that opt into the program. It also prohibits conventional gasoline sold in the rest of the country from becoming
any more polluting than it was in 1990. This requirement ensures that refiners do not ``dump'' fuel components that
are restricted in reformulated gasoline and that cause environmentally harmful emissions into conventional gasoline.

Section 211(k)(l) directs EPA to issue regulations that, beginning in 1995, ``require the greatest reduction in
emissions of ozone-forming and toxic air pollutants (``toxics'') achievable through the reformulation of conventional
gasoline, taking into consideration the cost of achieving such emission reductions, any non air-quality and other
air-quality related health and environmental impacts and energy requirements.'' The Act mandates certain requirements
for the reformulated gasoline program. Section 211(k)(3) specifies that the minimum requirement for reductions
of volatile organic compounds (VOC) and toxics for 1995 through 1999, or Phase I of the reformulated gasoline program,
must require the more stringent of either a formula fuel or an emission reductions performance standard, measured
on a mass basis, equal to 15 percent of baseline emissions. Baseline emissions are the emissions of 1990 model year
vehicles operated on a specified baseline gasoline. CAA compositional specifications for reformulated gasoline
include a 2.0 weight percent oxygen minimum and a 1.0 volume percent benzene maximum. 
For the year 2000 and beyond, the Act specifies that the VOC and toxics performance standards must be no less than that
of the formula fuel or a 25 percent reduction from baseline emissions, whichever is more stringent. EPA can adjust
this standard upward or downward taking into account such factors as feasibility and cost, but in no case can it be less
than 20 percent. These are known as the Phase II reformulated gasoline performance standards. Taken together, sections
211(k)(1) and 211(k)(3) call for the Agency to set standards that achieve the most stringent level of control, taking
into account the specified factors, but no less stringent than those described by section 211(k)(3). 
The reader may refer to the April 16, 1992 SNPRM (57 FR 13416) and the February 26, 1993 NPRM (58 FR 11722) described in
more detail below), the February 1993 Draft Regulatory Impact Analysis (DRIA), the Final Regulatory Impact Analysis
(RIA), and Public Dockets A9102 and A9212 for a thorough description of the goals and regulatory
development of the reformulated and anti-dumping programs and discussions of a number of associated technical issues.







