 

(2) 

Substance 

means a specific food or component of a food. 

(3) 

Nutritive value 

means a value in sustaining human existence by such processes as promoting growth, replacing loss of essential nutrients,
or providing energy. 

(4) 

Disqualifying nutrient levels 

mean the levels of total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, or sodium in a meat or meat food product above which the product
will be disqualified from making a health claim. These levels are 13 grams (g) of fat, 4 g of saturated fat, 60 milligrams
(mg) of cholesterol, or 480 mg of sodium per reference amount customarily consumed, per labeled serving size, and,
only for foods with reference amounts customarily consumed of 30 g or less or 2 tablespoons or less, per 50 g. For dehydrated
products that must be reconstituted before typical consumption with water or a diluent containing an insignificant
amount, as defined in 317.309(g)(1), of all nutrients, the per 50-g criterion refers to the prepared form.
Any one of the levels, on a per reference amount customarily consumed, a per labeled serving size or, when applicable,
a per 50-g basis, will disqualify a meat or meat food product from making a health claim unless an exception is provided
for in 317.371, except that: 

(i) The levels for a meal product, as defined in 
317.313(l), that weighs at least 6 ounces (oz) but less than 10 oz per serving (container), are 20 g of fat, 6 g
of saturated fat, 95 mg of cholesterol, or 720 mg of sodium per labeled serving size. 

(ii) The levels for a meal product, as defined in 
317.313(l), that weighs 10 oz or more per serving (container), are 26 g of fat, 8 g of saturated fat, 120 mg of cholesterol,
or 960 mg of sodium per labeled serving size. 

(5) 

Disease or health-related condition 

means damage to an organ, part, structure, or system of the body such that it does not function properly (e.g., cardiovascular
disease), or a state of health leading to such dysfunctioning (e.g., hypertension); except that diseases resulting
from essential nutrient deficiencies (e.g., scurvy, pellagra) are not included in this definition and, thereby,
claims pertaining to such diseases are not subject to 317.314 or 317.370. 

(b) 

Eligibility. 

For a substance to be eligible for a health claim: 

(1) The substance must be associated with a disease or health-related condition for which the general U.S. population,
or an identified U.S. population subgroup (e.g., the elderly) is at risk, or, alternatively, the labeling application
submitted by the proponent of the claim otherwise explains the prevalence of the disease or health-related condition
in the U.S. population and the relevance of the claim in context of the total daily diet and satisfies the other requirements
of this section. 

(2) If the substance is to be consumed as a component of a meat or meat food product at decreased dietary levels, the substance
must be a nutrient that is required to be included in the label or labeling as set forth in 317.309(b); or 

(3) If the substance is to be consumed at other than decreased dietary levels: 

(i) The substance must contribute taste, aroma, or nutritive value, or any technical effect listed in 21 CFR 170.3(o),
to the food and must retain that attribute when consumed at levels that are necessary to justify a claim; and 

(ii) The substance must be a food or a food ingredient or a component of a food ingredient whose use at the levels necessary
to justify a claim has been demonstrated by the proponent of the claim to be safe and lawful under the applicable food
safety provisions of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the Federal Meat Inspection Act. 

(c) 

Validity requirement. 

The Administrator will approve the use of a health claim only when he or she determines that the claim is not false or
misleading, because it is supported by: 

(1) The totality of publicly available scientific evidence (including evidence from well-designed studies conducted
in a manner which is consistent with generally recognized scientific procedures and principles); and 

(2) Significant scientific agreement among experts qualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate
such claims. 






