 



(12) 

Permittees shall allow observers from the Point Reyes Bird Observatory or other appropriate independent observers
as specified in permits to be present on disposal vessels on all trips to the SFDODS for the purpose of conducting
shipboard surveys of seabirds and marine mammals. In addition, permittees shall ensure that independent observers
are present on a sufficient number of vessel trips to characterize fully the potential impact of disposal site use
on seabirds and marine mammals, taking into account, to the extent feasible, seasonal variations in such potential
impacts. At a minimum, permittees shall ensure that independent observers are present on at least one disposal trip
in any calendar month in which a disposal trip to the SFDODS is made. 



(13) 

At the completion of short-term dredging projects or annually for on-going projects, permittees shall prepare and
submit to the District Engineer and the Regional Administrator complete pre-dredging and post-dredging bathymetric
surveys showing the depth of all areas dredged, including side slope areas, before and after dredging. Permittees
shall include a report indicating whether any dredged material was dredged outside of areas authorized for dredging
or was dredged within project boundaries at depths deeper than authorized for dredging by their permits. 

(B) 

Project-specific conditions. 

Permits or federal project authorizations authorizing use of the SFDODS may include the following conditions,
if EPA determines these conditions are necessary to facilitate safe use of the SFDODS, the prevention of potential
harm to the environment or accurate monitoring of site use: 


(1) 

Permittees may be required to limit the speed of disposal vessels in transit to the SFDODS to a rate that is safe
under the circumstances and will prevent the spillage of dredged materials. 



(2) 

Permittees may be required to use automated data logging systems for recording navigation and disposal coordinates
and/or load levels throughout disposal trips when such systems are feasible and represent an improvement over manual
recording methodologies. 



(3)

 Any other conditions that EPA or the Corps of Engineers determine to be necessary or appropriate to facilitate compliance
with the requirements of the MPRSA and this Rule may be included in site use permits. 
(C) 

Alternative permit/project conditions.

 Alternatives to the permit conditions specified in paragraph (b)(70)(ii) of this section in a permit or federal project
authorization may be authorized if the permittee demonstrates to the District Engineer and the Regional Administrator
that the alternative conditions are sufficient to accomplish the specific intended purpose of the permit condition
in issue and further demonstrates that the waiver will not increase the risk of harm to the environment, the health
or safety of persons, nor will impede monitoring of compliance with the MPRSA, regulations promulgated under the
MPRSA, or any permit issued under the MPRSA. 

(iii) 

Site monitoring. 

Data shall be collected in accordance with a three-tiered site monitoring program which consists of three interdependent
types of monitoring for each tier: physical, chemical and biological. In addition, periodic confirmatory monitoring
concerning potential site contamination shall be performed. 

Specific guidance for site monitoring tasks required by this paragraph shall be described in a Site Management and
Monitoring Implementation Manual (SMMP Implementation Manual) developed by EPA. The SMMP Implementation Manual
shall be reviewed periodically and any necessary revisions to the Manual will be issued for public review under an
EPA Public Notice. 

(A) 

Tier 1 monitoring activities. 

Tier 1 monitoring activities shall consist of the following: 



(1) Physical monitoring. 

Tier 1 Physical Monitoring shall consist of a physical survey to map the area on the seafloor within and in the vicinity
of the disposal site where dredged material has been deposited (the footprint). Such a survey shall use appropriate
technology (for example, sediment profile photography) to determine the areal extent and thickness of the disposed
dredged material, and to determine if any dredged material has deposited outside of the disposal site boundary. 



(2) Chemical monitoring. 

Tier 1 Chemical Monitoring shall consist of collecting, processing, and preserving boxscore samples of sediments
so that such sediments could be subjected to sediment chemistry analysis in the appropriate tier. Samples shall be
collected within the dredged material footprint, outside of the dredged material footprint, and outside of the disposal
site boundaries. Samples within the footprint shall be subjected to chemical analysis in annual Tier 1 activity.
Samples from outside of the footprint and outside of the disposal site boundaries shall be archived and analyzed only
when the criteria requiring Tier 2 as specified in paragraph (b)(70)(iv) are met. A sufficient number of samples shall
be collected so that the potential for adverse impacts due to elevated chemistry can be assessed with an appropriate
time-series or ordinal technique. 


(3) Biological monitoring. 

Tier 1 Biological Monitoring shall have two components: monitoring of pelagic communities and monitoring of benthic
communities. 



(i) Pelagic communities. 

Tier 1 Biological Monitoring shall include regional surveys of seabirds, marine mammals and mid water column fish
populations appropriate for evaluating how these populations might be affected by disposal site use. A combination
of annual regional and periodic (random) shipboard surveys of seabirds and marine mammals will be used. The regional
survey designs for each category of biota shall be similar to that used for the regional characterization studies
referenced in the Final Environmental Impact Statement for Designation of a Deep Water Ocean Dredged Material Disposal
Site off San Francisco, California (August 1993) with appropriate realignments to accommodate transects within
and in the vicinity of the SFDODS. The periodic shipboard surveys shall be performed from vessels involved
in dredged material disposal operations at the SFDODS as specified in permit conditions imposed pursuant
to paragraph (b)(70)(ii)(A)(

12

). The minimum number of surveys must be sufficient to characterize the disposal operations for each project, and,
as practicable, provide seasonal data for an assessment of the potential for adverse impacts for the one-year period.
An appropriate time-series (ordinal) and community analysis shall be performed using data collected during the
current year and previous years. 



(ii) Benthic communities. 

Tier 1 Biological Monitoring shall include collection and preservation of boxscore samples of benthic communities
so that such samples could be analyzed as a Tier 2 activity. 



(4) Annual reporting. 

The results of the annual Tier 1 studies shall be compiled in an annual report which will be available for public review.

(B) 

Tier 2 monitoring activities. 

Tier 2 monitoring activities shall consist of the following: 


(1) Physical monitoring. 

Tier 2 Physical Monitoring shall consist of oceanographic studies conducted to validate and/or improve the models
used to predict the dispersion in the water column and deposition of dredged material on the seafloor at the SFDODS.
The appropriate physical oceanographic studies may include: the collection of additional current meter data, deployment
of sediment traps, and deployment of surface and subsurface drifters. 


(2) Chemical monitoring. 

Tier 2 Chemical Monitoring shall consist of performing sediment chemistry analysis on samples collected and preserved
in Tier 1 from outside of the footprint and outside of the disposal site boundaries. 



(3) Biological monitoring. 

Tier 2 Biological Monitoring shall involve monitoring of pelagic communities and monitoring of benthic communities.


