 

Availability of NPRMs 


Any person may obtain a copy of this NPRM by submitting a request to the FAA, 
Transport Airplane Directorate, ANM103, Attention: Rules Docket No. 
93NM229AD, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056. 



Discussion 


In April 1988, a transport category airplane managed to land after tiny cracks in 
rivet holes in the upper fuselage linked together, causing structural failure and explosive 
decompression. An 18-foot section ripped from the fuselage. This accident focused 
greater attention on the problem of aging aircraft. 

In June 1988, the FAA sponsored a conference on aging airplane issues, which was 
attended by representatives of the aviation industry from around the world. It became 
obvious that, because of the tremendous increase in air travel, the relatively slow pace of 
new airplane production, and the apparent economic feasibility of operating older 
technology airplanes rather than retiring them, increased attention needed to be focused on 
this aging fleet and maintaining its continued operational safety. 

The FAA, in concert with the Regional Airline Association (RAA); the General 
Aviation Manufacturers Association (GAMA); several U.S. and non-U.S. operators of the 
affected airplanes; the Rijksluchtvaartdienst (RLD), which is the airworthiness authority 
for the Netherlands; and Fokker; has agreed to undertake the task of identifying and 
implementing procedures to ensure continuing structural airworthiness of aging 
commuter-class airplanes. This group reviewed selected service bulletins, applicable to 
Fokker Model F27 series airplanes, to be recommended for mandatory rulemaking action 
to ensure the continued operational safety of these airplanes. 

This group's proposal is contained in Fokker Report Number SE278, ``F27 Aging 
Aircraft Project-Final Document,'' Issue 3, dated February 1, 1993. This Report 
references modifications from eight service bulletins and recommends that they be 
incorporated in the applicable Fokker Model F27 series airplanes. The modifications 
consist of three modifications to the fuselage, two modifications to the wing, and three 
modifications to the empennage of the airplane. They include structural reinforcement of 
frames, ribs, and stringers; replacement of formers and ribs; and installation of inspection 
doors and covers, access holes, and drain holes. 

The procedures described in these service bulletins are intended to positively 
address conditions identified in Model F27 series airplanes that, if not corrected, could 
result in structural failure. 

The RLD classified this Report as mandatory and issued Netherlands 
Airworthiness Directive (BLA) 91058/5 (A), dated July 16, 1993, in order to assure the 
continued airworthiness of these airplanes in the Netherlands. 

This airplane model is manufactured in the Netherlands and is type certificated for 
operation in the United States under the provisions of 21.29 of the Federal 
Aviation Regulations and the applicable bilateral airworthiness agreement. Pursuant to 
this bilateral airworthiness agreement, the RLD has kept the FAA informed of the 
situation described above. The FAA has examined the findings of the RLD, reviewed all 
available information, and determined that AD action is necessary for products of this type 
design that are certificated for operation in the United States. 

Since fatigue cracking and corrosion are likely to exist or develop on other 
airplanes of the same type design registered in the United States, the proposed AD would 
require modification of Fokker Model F27 series airplanes prior to their economic design 
goal in accordance with the Fokker Report described previously. 

The economic design goal of an airplane is typically considered to be the period of 
service after which a substantial increase in the maintenance costs is expected to take place 
in order to assure continued operational safety. The economic design goal for Fokker 
Model F27 series airplanes is 90,000 landings for structural problems associated with 
fatigue damage. 

The proposed compliance time for implementation of the mandatory structural 
modification program is prior to reaching the applicable economic design goal. This time 
interval was determined based upon the ability of the manufacturer to provide the parts 
necessary for the modification, and the time necessary to incorporate the modifications. 

In the interim, safety will be provided by various means currently in place that are 
considered satisfactory to detect damage prior to the occurrence of an unsafe condition. 
These include operators' on-going basic maintenance programs; continuing inspections 
required by numerous previously issued AD's; the Structural Integrity Program (SIP) 
program, previously mandated by AD 921907, Amendment 398365 (57 FR 42693, 
September 16, 1992); the FAA's increased emphasis on surveillance of operators' 
maintenance programs and procedures; and the FAA's participation in programs to 
physically inspect high-time airplanes during scheduled heavy maintenance. 

The FAA estimates that 58 Fokker Model F27 series airplanes (excluding Mark 050 series airplanes) of U.S. registry
would be affected by this proposed AD within the initial threshold. Since not all affected airplanes would be required
to accomplish every modification referenced in each of the service bulletins, the cost impact of the proposed modifications
is estimated in the following table. This cost includes the price of modification kits, and the estimated labor rate
is $55 per work hour. It does not include the cost of downtime, planning, set up, familiarization, or tool acquisition.





