 

Friday, January 7, 1994





8:30 a.m.8:35 a.m.: Opening Remarks by the ACRS Chairman

 (Open)_The ACRS Chairman will make opening remarks regarding conduct of the meeting.



8:35 a.m.10:15 a.m.: Preparation of ACRS Reports

 (Open)_The Committee will discuss proposed ACRS reports regarding items considered during this meeting.



10:30 a.m.11:30 a.m.: Meeting with the Deputy Executive Director

 (Open)_The Committee will meet with Mr. Sniezek, Deputy Executive Director for Nuclear Reactor Regulation, Regional
Operations and Research, and Mr. Milhoan who will succeed Mr. Sniezek in early February 1994 and discuss items of mutual
interest.



12:30 p.m.1:15 p.m.: Future Activities

 (Open)_The Committee will discuss topics proposed for consideration during future ACRS meetings.



1:15 p.m.2 p.m.: Report of the Planning and Procedures Subcommittee

 (Open/Closed)_The Committee will hear a report of the Planning and Procedures Subcommittee on matters related to
the conduct of ACRS business and internal organizational and personnel matters relating to the ACRS staff members.
It may also discuss qualifications of candidates nominated for appointment to the ACRS.

A portion of this session may be closed to public attendance to discuss matters that relate solely to internal personnel
rules and practices of this advisory committee and to discuss matters the release of which would represent a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.



2 p.m.2:15 p.m.: Reconciliation of ACRS Comments and Recommendations

 (Open)_The Committee will discuss responses from the NRC Executive Director for Operations to recent ACRS comments
and recommendations.



2:15 p.m.6:30 p.m.: Preparation of ACRS Reports

 (Open)_The Committee will discuss proposed ACRS reports regarding items considered during this meeting.



Saturday, January 8, 1994





8:30 a.m.10:30 a.m.: Preparation of ACRS Reports

 (Open)_The Committee will discuss proposed ACRS reports regarding items considered during this meeting.



10:30 a.m.11 a.m.: Miscellaneous

 (Open)_The Committee will discuss miscellaneous matters related to the conduct of Committee activities and complete
discussion of topics that were not completed during previous meetings as time and availability of information permit.



11 a.m.12 noon: ACRS Subcommittee Activities

 (Open)_The Committee will hear reports and hold discussions regarding the status of ACRS subcommittee activities.

Procedures for the conduct of and participation in ACRS meetings were published in the 

Federal Register

 on September 30, 1993 (58 FR 51118). In accordance with these procedures, oral or written statements may be presented
by members of the public, electronic recordings will be permitted only during the open portions of the meeting, and
questions may be asked only by members of the Committee, its consultants, and staff. Persons desiring to make oral
statements should notify the ACRS Executive Director, Dr. John T. Larkins, as far in advance as practicable so that
appropriate arrangements can be made to allow the necessary time during the meeting for such statements. Use of still,
motion picture, and television cameras during this meeting may be limited to selected portions of the meeting as determined
by the Chairman. Information regarding the time to be set aside for this purpose may be obtained by contacting the ACRS
Executive Director prior to the meeting. In view of the possibility that the schedule for ACRS meetings may be adjusted
by the Chairman as necessary to facilitate the conduct of the meeting, persons planning to attend should check with
the ACRS Executive Director if such rescheduling would result in major inconvenience.

I have determined in accordance with subsection 10(d) Public Law 92463 that it is necessary to close portions
of this meeting noted above to discuss information that involves the internal personnel rules and practices of this
advisory Committee per 5 U.S.C. 552b(c)(2) and to discuss information the release of which would represent a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy per 5 U.S.C. 552b(c)(6).

Further information regarding topics to be discussed, whether the meeting has been cancelled or rescheduled, the
Chairman's ruling on requests for the opportunity to present oral statements and the time allotted therefor can be
obtained by contacting the ACRS Executive Director, Dr. John T. Larkins (telephone 3014924516), between
7:30 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. EST.





Dated: December 23, 1993.



<SIGNER>
John C. Hoyle,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Advisory Committee Management Officer.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94124 Filed 1494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M
</BILLING>

