 




<DOCTITLE>Videoconferencing Facility; Availability </DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing the availability of a videoconferencing facility. The videoconferencing
facility was established to improve communications between the agency and interested parties. The facility will
be used for a variety of purposes, including meetings, with the public and regulated industries, internal FDA meetings,
and training. The facility will be used to supplement face-to-face meetings and allow broader participation in discussions
with FDA.


</SUMMARY>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Angela M. Youngblood, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (HFD50), Food and Drug Administration, 5600
Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, 3014430724. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 FDA has established a videoconferencing facility for general use by FDA. The facility, which became operational
on June 1, 1993, is located in rm. 13B37 in the Parklawn Bldg., 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857. The facility
has a capacity for 25 to 30 people and can be used to conduct videoconferences with FDA. The establishment of the facility
culminates a 3-year project by FDA and the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association to improve communications
between the agency and interested parties.


The agency does not intend to restrict the use of the videoconferencing facility to any specific purpose. The facility
can be used to expedite meetings with the public and regulated industries, or to facilitate training and internal
FDA meetings. In addition to improving communications, FDA believes that the facility may even shorten FDA review
times for applications because the facility can be used to facilitate prompt resolution of specific issues. Videoconferencing
will also facilitate broader participation by industry staff in FDA meetings and make meetings more productive.



Policies and Procedures for Use


FDA has established videoconferencing as an optional means of communicating with FDA. The decision on whether to
conduct a face-to-face meeting or videoconference, or a combination of meetings and videoconferences, must be agreed
to by both the agency and the interested party. Use of the videoconferencing facility is not intended to limit, in any
way, either face-to-face, telephone, written, or any other type of interaction involving FDA personnel. In fact,
videoconferences can be used to supplement face-to-face meetings and enable more persons outside the Rockville,
MD area to participate in discussions with FDA.
All existing confidentiality rules that apply to face-to-face meetings also apply to videoconferences. The transmission
signal between the videoconferencing sites is conducted through cables and is scrambled to provide security. Ordinarily,
there will be no videotaping of videoconferences, but videotaping may be permitted if all parties agree to videotaping
before the videoconference is held. FDA will not permit videoconferences to be broadcasted, however, because some
information presented at such meetings may be confidential or otherwise protected from disclosure.
All current FDA procedures for conducting meetings will apply to videoconferences. Because some participants may
not always be in view of the camera, FDA recommends that each videoconference begin by introducing or identifying
all participants.
FDA will schedule videoconferences in response to a specific request. The request should be made to the contact person
listed above. FDA recommends that parties request a videoconference at least several weeks in advance, and there
is no time limit on how far in advance a videoconference may be scheduled.
Scheduling will be done on a first-come, first-served basis. FDA will consider the geographical location of the parties
when scheduling a videoconference; thus, for example, FDA will schedule morning meetings with parties in the Eastern
United States, and schedule afternoon meetings with parties in the Western United States. The agency does not intend
to establish prereserved blocks of time for parties in the Western United States.
Once a videoconference has been scheduled, the agency will not reschedule the videoconference except in emergencies.
This policy is in consideration of the substantial amount of scheduling and preparation involved in setting up a videoconference.
Additionally, videoconferencing should be reserved for meetings that are likely to run at least 30 minutes. If a videoconference
extends beyond its scheduled time, the videoconference may be extended, provided the facility is still available.
The agenda and all materials planned to be presented during a videoconference should be sent to the Project Management
Officer, Consumer Safety Officer, or appropriate official (in nonindustry-related meetings) at least 14 days before
the scheduled videoconference. The materials will be used as reference or backup material and will help assure high
quality communication.
During the videoconferencing facility's first year of operation, FDA will maintain a log on the use of the facility
to determine the demand and variety of uses for the facility and to determine how much use is for internal FDA purposes
or for FDA and nongovernmental entities. In addition, FDA will provide a questionnaire to participants to obtain
their opinions on the value of the videoconferencing facility.
Persons interested in obtaining information concerning the policies and procedures, which are continuing to evolve
at this time, for using FDA's videoconferencing facility, as well as a listing of public videoconferencing rooms,
should notify the contact person listed above. 





Dated: February 17, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 944412 Filed 22594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

