 



FRA Conclusions. 

Contrary to several commenters' views, FRA feels that many of the requirements contained in Appendix B for power brake
systems are still necessary. FRA does recognize that some of the requirements are outdated and should be eliminated.
Consequently, FRA proposes to eliminate Appendix B and incorporate those requirements that it feels are still relevant
to today's equipment directly into various sections of the revised regulation. Furthermore, in order to address
the concerns of several parties that the requirements contained in Appendix B are too restrictive to allow the development
of new technology, FRA proposes to permit parties to petition the FRA to convert some of the train brake system specification
and design requirements into performance-based safety requirements. 



F. The 1,000-Mile Inspection



FRA's current regulations require intermediate brake inspections at points not more than 1,000 miles apart. These
inspections are far more limited than the currently required initial terminal inspections in that the railroad is
required only to determine that brake pipe leakage is not excessive, the brakes apply on each car, and the brake rigging
is secure and does not bind or foul. 49 CFR 232.12(b). In the 1982 revisions to the power brake rules, FRA extended the
distance between such inspections from 500 miles to 1,000 miles. The industry now suggests that modern freight trains
can operate at least 5,000 miles without a brake test. Consequently, in order to determine whether a change in the current
1,000-mile inspection requirement should be adopted, FRA requested comments from interested parties regarding
evidence to support any increase in the current requirement, the costs and delays involved with performing these
inspections, and any safety concerns inherent in increasing the distance beyond what is currently permitted. See
57 FR 62556. Several railroads, together with the AAR, commented that the current 1,000-mile inspection interval
should be increased to as much as 5,000 miles. (See 232.12(b).) These parties relied on several factors in recommending
such an increase, which include the new technology and improved equipment since 1982, the 1985 study conducted by
the AAR, which they contended establishes that trains receiving proper initial terminal tests could be operated
within regulation limits for over 5,000 miles, and the fact that since 1982 the number of brake-related accidents
and derailments and the failure rates of brake equipment have declined dramatically. The majority of these commenters
also stated that the key to increasing the limit is quality initial terminal inspections. One railroad commented
that in Canada en route inspections are required at 1,500-mile intervals and felt that these en route inspections
do not enhance safety. This railroad also stated, based on a small sampling, that only one-half of a percent of its cars
receiving intermediate inspections are found with defective brakes. The AAR also commented that the statistics
presented by labor organizations, regarding the number of defects they are finding at various locations, are meaningless
unless presented in terms of their effect on safety. 

The AAR and several railroads also provided information regarding the costs of performing these inspections. These
parties estimated that the current 1,000-mile inspection requires the industry to perform these inspections on
15 percent of the total number of road trains, which amounts to about 240,000 intermediate inspections annually.
They estimated the total cost of performing these inspections at approximately $90-$130 million. One railroad estimated
the cost at $550 per inspection. Another railroad estimated that if the distance required for these inspections were
increased to 2,000 miles the industry would save $47 million. Several railroads also commented that if FRA reinstated
a 500-mile inspection their costs and the industry's cost of performing intermediate inspections would at least
double. 

Labor organizations and individual members opposed any increase in the 1,000-mile intermediate inspection interval
and argued that FRA should reinstate the 500-mile requirement. The RLEA stated that labor's agreement to extend the
intermediate test to 1,000 miles in 1982 was based upon a promise by the railroads that complete and perfect initial
terminal tests would be performed. The RLEA contends that the performance of initial terminal inspections has been
terrible and that they are being performed by unqualified operating crews. The BRC, the UTU, the BLE, and several individual
carmen reiterated RLEA's contention that proper initial terminal inspections are not being performed. These parties
also stated that the inspections being performed at 1,000 miles are also inadequate. They stated that many of these
inspections are being performed by train crews that are not qualified to conduct these inspections properly. The
BRC and several of its individual members contended that numerous defects are being found at the 1,000-mile inspections
and that the main reason for this is that quality initial terminal inspections are not being performed. These commenters
also provided statistics as to the number of defects being found at various 1,000-mile inspection points. They claim
that their members have found approximately 50,000 defects per year at these locations and that the statistics used
by the carriers to support an increase to 5,000 miles are faulty. These parties feel that independent data needs to
be developed before any increase in the distance is considered. 



FRA Conclusions. 

In 1982, when FRA extended the 500-mile inspection interval to 1,000 miles, FRA intended that quality initial terminal
brake inspections would be performed by the railroads. FRA feels that railroads have not conducted the excellent
initial terminal inspections that were contemplated in 1982. Furthermore, contrary to the railroads' contention,
FRA feels that many initial terminal brake inspections are being performed by individuals who are not sufficiently
qualified or trained. FRA recognizes that since 1982 new technology and improved equipment have been developed that
allow trains to operate for longer distances with fewer defects. However, the key to achieving this improved capability
is to ensure the proper operation and condition of the equipment at initial terminals. The best way of ensuring the
proper operation and condition of equipment is to perform quality initial terminal brake inspections and to conduct
proper equipment maintenance. Consequently, in order to ensure that a train is in safe and proper condition to travel
a prescribed distance without further inspection, FRA believes that a sliding-scale approach should be adopted
that bases the allowable distance a train may travel on a variety of factors including the quality of the initial terminal
brake inspection, the maintenance practices of the railroad, and the type of equipment operated and installed on
the train. 


