 

The commenter also stated that ``Congress found highwalls to be one of the most destructive impacts of irresponsible
coal mining'' and that ``[t]hey cause serious erosion and land instability, threaten human and animal safety, and
degrade the beauty and usefulness of public and private lands (E.g., See U.S. Senate Report 95128, 1977, p.
51).'' The commenter has mischaracterized Congress' statements in the referenced report. The cited section of this
report does not specifically address highwalls. It states that




[i]f surface mining and reclamation are not done carefully, significant environmental damage can result. In addition,


unreclaimed or improperly reclaimed surface coal mines

 pose a continuing threat to the environment, and at times are a danger to public health and safety, public or private
property. Similar hazards also occur from the surface effects of underground coal mining, including the dumping
of coal waste piles, subsidence and mine fires.




(U.S. Senate Report 95128, 1977, p. 50; emphasis added).




While OSM realizes that unreclaimed highwalls left by irresponsible operators could cause such adverse impacts
as identified by the commenter and Congress, OSM does not find that highwalls retained by responsible operators in
accordance with Colorado's proposed rules would cause such adverse impacts.

As discussed in finding Nos. III.3. and III.4. above, Colorado has proposed regulations at Rule 4.14.1(2)(f), regarding
incomplete elimination of highwalls for continuously mined areas that are not inconsistent with the Federal regulations
at 30 CFR 816.106 (a), (b), and (b)(1) and 817.106 (a), (b), and (b)(1) and Rule 4.14.1(2)(g), regarding incomplete
elimination of highwalls for remining operations in previously mined areas that are substantively identical to
the Federal regulations at 30 CFR 816.106(b) (1) through (4), 817.106(b) (1) through (4), 816.102(a)(3) and (f),
and 817.102(a)(3) and (f). 
Both Colorado's proposed regulations and the corresponding Federal regulations include provisions that protect
against erosion and land instability, as well as the threat to human and animal safety. Specifically, Rules 4.14.1(2)(f)
(ii) and (iii) and 4.14.1(2) (ii) and (iii) require that a retained highwall be backfilled and graded to meet a minimum
static safety factor of 1.3 and that a highwall remnant shall be sufficiently stable so as not to pose a hazard to the
public health and safety or to the environment. In addition, before any highwall remnant is retained, the operator
must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Division, that the highwall remnant is stable. The Director believes
that Colorado's proposed rules, which are no less effective than the corresponding Federal regulations, provide
sufficient safeguards to ensure that highwall stability is achieved and that threat to public health and safety or
to the environment are prevented.

The commenter stated that the Division makes the misleading claim that its proposed rules put underground mines on
equitable footing with remining operations. The commenter asserted that, in fact, Colorado's proposed amendment
will significantly reduce the environmental standards for mines that have operated continuously since 1977. The
commenter further stated that the Federal rules allow remining operations to meet lower environmental standards
and leave some highwalls because they are cleaning up abandoned mines that might otherwise not be reclaimed. The commenter
asserted that the Division proposes to treat all existing underground mines as remining sites and deny the public
the protections promised by law and to allow underground mines to escape their obligations.

The Director does not agree with the commenter's assertions and statements. Colorado's proposed Rule 4.14.1(2)(f)
requires face-up entry areas and highwalls to be eliminated to the maximum extent technically practical using all
reasonably available spoil and achieve a minimum static safety factor of 1.3. These backfilling and grading standards
apply to both continuously mined areas and remining operations.



