 

For the reasons set out in the preamble, 38 CFR part 3 is amended as set forth below:



PART 3_ADJUDICATION



Subpart A_Pension, Compensation, and Dependency and Indemnity Compensation



The authority citation for part 3, subpart A, continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 38 U.S.C. 501(a), unless otherwise noted.




2. In 3.307, the heading and paragraph (a)(6) are revised to read as follows:



3.307


Presumptive service connection for chronic, tropical or prisoner-of-war related disease, or disease associated
with exposure to certain herbicide agents; wartime and service on or after January 1, 1947.



(a)***

(6) 

Diseases associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents.

 (i) For the purposes of this section, the term ``herbicide agent'' means a chemical in an herbicide used in support
of the United States and allied military operations in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era, specifically:
2,4D; 2,4,5T and its contaminant TCDD; cacodylic acid; and picloram.

(ii) The diseases listed at 3.309(e) shall have become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more at any time after
service, except that chloracne or other acneform disease consistent with chloracne and porphyria cutanea tarda
shall have become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within a year after the last date on which the veteran was
exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service.

(iii) A veteran who, during active military, naval, or air service, served in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam
era and has a disease listed at 3.309(e) shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to an herbicide
agent, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the veteran was not exposed to any such agent during
that service. The last date on which such a veteran shall be presumed to have been exposed to an herbicide agent shall
be the last date on which he or she served in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era. ``Service in the Republic
of Vietnam'' includes service in the waters offshore and service in other locations if the conditions of service involved
duty or visitation in the Republic of Vietnam.



* * * * *



3.307


[Amended]



3. In 3.307(a), the first sentence of the introductory text, remove the words ``a disease associated with service
in the Republic of Vietnam'' and insert, in their place, the words ``a disease associated with exposure to certain
herbicide agents''.

4. In 3.309, paragraph (e) is revised to read as follows:



3.309


Disease subject to presumptive service connection.



* * * * *



(e) 

Disease associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents.

 If a veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service, the following diseases
shall be service-connected if the requirements of 3.307(a)(6) are met even though there is no record of such
disease during service, provided further that the rebuttable presumption provisions of 3.307(d) are also
satisfied.




Chloracne or other acneform disease consistent with chloracne
Hodgkin's disease
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Soft-tissue sarcoma (other than osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Kaposi's sarcoma, or mesothelioma)






Note: 

The term ``soft-tissue sarcoma'' includes the following:




Adult fibrosarcoma
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma
Liposarcoma
Leiomyosarcoma
Epithelioid leiomyosarcoma (malignant leiomyoblastoma)
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Ectomesenchymoma
Angiosarcoma (hemangiosarcoma and lymphangiosarcoma)
Proliferating (systemic) angioendotheliomatosis
Malignant glomus tumor
Malignant hemangiopericytoma
Synovial sarcoma (malignant synovioma)
Malignant giant cell tumor of tendon sheath
Malignant schwannoma, including malignant schwannoma with rhabdomyoblastic differentiation (malignant Triton
tumor), glandular and epithelioid malignant schwannomas
Malignant mesenchymoma
Malignant granular cell tumor
Alveolar soft part sarcoma
Epithelioid sarcoma
Clear cell sarcoma of tendons and aponeuroses
Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma
Congenital and infantile fibrosarcoma
Malignant ganglioneuroma



3.311a


[Removed]



3.311b


[Redesignated as 3.311]



5. Section 3.311a is removed and 3.311b is redesignated as 3.311.



<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 942403 Filed 2294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 832001P
</BILLING>



