 

882.720 

PHA unit selection policy. 



* * * * * 



(b) ***
 
(3) *** 

(v) A statement identifying: 

(A) The number of persons (families, individuals, businesses, and nonprofit organizations) occupying the property
on the date of the submission of the application; 

(B) The number of persons to be displaced, temporarily relocated, or moved permanently within the building or complex;


(C) The estimated cost of relocation payments and services, and the source of funding; and 

(D) The organization(s) that will carry out the relocation activities; 



* * * * * 



882.721 

[Amended]



22. In 882.721, paragraph (c) is amended by removing the phrase ``can be rehabilitated without causing displacement
of residential tenants from units to be assisted (see 882.712);''. 

23. In 882.803, paragraph (d), introductory text, is revised to read as follows: 



882.803 

Project eligibility and other requirements. 



* * * * * 



(d) 

Relocation.

 A project assisted under this subpart H is subject to the requirements of 882.810. 



* * * * * 



24. A new 882.810 is added to read as follows: 



882.810 

Displacement, relocation, and acquisition. 



(a) 

Minimizing displacement.

 (1) Consistent with the other goals and objectives of this part, Owners shall assure that they have taken all reasonable
steps to minimize the displacement of persons (households, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farms) as
a result of a project assisted under this part. 

(2) Whenever a building/complex is rehabilitated and some, but not all, of the rehabilitated units will be assisted
upon completion of the rehabilitation, the relocation requirements described in this section cover the occupants
of each rehabilitated unit, whether or not Section 8 assistance will be provided for the unit. 

(b) 

Temporary relocation.

 The following policies cover residential tenants who will not be required to move permanently but who must relocate
temporarily for the project. Such tenants must be provided: 

(1) Reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the temporary relocation,
including the cost of moving to and from the temporarily occupied housing, any increase in monthly rent/utility costs,
and incidental expenses. 

(2) Appropriate advisory services, including reasonable advance written notice of: 

(i) The date and approximate duration of the temporary relocation; 

(ii) The location of the suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling to be made available for the temporary period;


(iii) The terms and conditions under which the tenant may lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling
in the project upon completion of the rehabilitation, and 

(iv) The assistance required under paragraph (b)(1) of this section. 

(c) 

Relocation assistance for displaced persons.

 A ``displaced person'' (defined in paragraph (g) of this section) must be provided relocation assistance at the levels
described in, and in accordance with the requirements of, the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition
Policies Act of 1970, as amended (URA) (42 U.S.C. 46014655) and implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24.
A ``displaced person'' shall be advised of his or her rights under the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 360119) and,
if the comparable replacement dwelling used to establish the amount of the replacement housing payment to be provided
to a minority is located in an area of minority concentration, such person also shall be given, if possible, referrals
to comparable and suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary replacement dwellings not located in such areas. 

(d) 

Real property acquisition requirements.

 The acquisition of real property for a project is subject to the URA and the requirements described in 49 CFR part 24,
subpart B. 

(e) 

Appeals.

 A person who disagrees with the PHA's determination concerning whether the person qualifies as a ``displaced person,''
or the amount of relocation assistance for which the person is eligible, may file a written appeal of that determination
with the PHA. A person who is dissatisfied with the PHA's determination on his or her appeal may submit a written request
for review of that determination to the HUD Field Office. 

(f) 

Responsibility of PHA.

 (1) The PHA shall certify (i.e., provide assurance of compliance as required by 49 CFR part 24) that it will comply with
the URA, the regulations at 49 CFR part 24, and the requirements of this section and shall ensure such compliance notwithstanding
any third party's contractual obligation to the PHA to comply with these provisions. 

(2) The cost of required assistance is an eligible project cost in the same manner and to the same extent as other project
costs. Such costs also may be paid for with local public funds or funds available from other sources. The cost of PHA
advisory services for temporary relocation of tenants to be assisted under the program also may be paid from preliminary
administrative funds. 

(3) The PHA shall maintain records in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this section.
The PHA shall maintain data on the race, ethnic, gender, and disability status of displaced persons. 


