 




Thursday


April 7, 1994





Part VIII


Department of the Interior





Fish and Wildlife Service





50 CFR Part 20
Proposed 19941995 Migratory Game Bird Hunting Regulations (Preliminary) With Requests for Indian Tribal
Proposals; Proposed Rule












Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 67/Thursday, April 7, 1994/Proposed Rules





<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</USDEPT>





<USBUREAU>Fish and Wildlife Service</USBUREAU>

50 CFR Part 20




<RINDOCK>RIN 1018-AA24</RINDOCK>



Migratory Bird Hunting; Proposed 19941995 Migratory Game Bird Hunting Regulations (Preliminary) with Requests
for Indian Tribal Proposals



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Proposed rulemaking.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (hereinafter the Service) proposes to establish annual hunting regulations for
certain migratory game birds. The Service also requests proposals from Indian Tribes that wish to establish special
migratory bird hunting regulations. These regulations will permit the taking of the designated species during the
199495 season. The Service annually prescribes outside limits (frameworks) within which States may select
hunting seasons. The Service has also employed guidelines to establish special migratory bird hunting regulations
on Federal Indian reservations and ceded lands. These seasons provide hunting opportunities for recreation and
sustenance; aid Federal, State, and Tribal governments in the management of migratory game birds; and are designed
to permit harvests at levels compatible with migratory bird population and habitat conditions.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Tribal proposals and related comments should be submitted by June 3, 1994. The comment period for proposed early-season
frameworks will end on July 22, 1994; and for proposed late-season frameworks on September 2, 1994. The public hearing
for early-season frameworks will be held on June 23, 1994, at 9 a.m. The public hearing for late-season frameworks
will be held on August 4, 1994, at 9 a.m.





</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Both public hearings will be held in the Auditorium, Department of the Interior Building, 1849 C Street NW., Washington,
DC. Written comments on the proposals and notice of intention to testify at either hearing may be mailed to the Chief,
Office of Migratory Bird Management, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, ms 634_ARLSQ, 1849
C Street, NW, Washington, DC 20240. Comments received will be available for public inspection during normal business
hours in room 634, Arlington Square Building, 4401 N. Fairfax Drive, Arlington, Virginia.





</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

For further information on tribal proposals contact Keith A. Morehouse, for other issues regarding annual migratory
bird hunting regulations contact William O. Vogel. Both Dr. Morehouse and Mr. Vogel may be contacted at: Office of
Migratory Bird Management, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, ms 634_ARLSQ, 1849 C Street,
NW, Washington, DC 20240 (703) 3581714.





</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

For administrative purposes, this document consolidates the notice of intent and request for Tribal proposals with
the preliminary proposals for the annual regulations-development process. The remaining proposed and final rulemaking
documents will be published separately.



Notice of Intent to Establish Open Seasons



This notice announces the intention of the Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, to establish open hunting seasons
and daily bag and possession limits for certain designated groups or species of migratory game birds for 19941995
in the contiguous United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands, under 20.101
through 20.107, 20.109, and 20.110 of subpart K of 50 CFR part 20.

``Migratory game birds'' are those bird species so designated in conventions between the United States and several
foreign nations for the protection and management of these birds. For the 199495 hunting season, regulations
will be proposed for certain designated members of the avian families Anatidae (ducks, geese, and swans); Columbidae
(doves and pigeons); Gruidae (cranes); Rallidae (rails, coots, moorhens, and gallinules); and Scolopacidae (woodcock
and snipe). These proposals are described under Proposed 199495 Migratory Game Bird Hunting Regulations
(Preliminary) in this document. Definitions of waterfowl flyways and mourning dove management units, as well as
a description of the data used in and the factors affecting the regulatory process, were published in the March 14,
1990, 

Federal Register

 (55 FR 9618).



Regulatory Schedule for 19941995



This is the first in a series of proposed and final rulemaking documents for migratory game bird hunting regulations.
Proposals relating to the harvest of migratory game birds that may be initiated after publication of this proposed
rulemaking will be made available for public review in supplemental proposed rulemakings to be published in the 

Federal Register

. Also, additional supplemental proposals will be published for public comment in the 

Federal Register

 as population, habitat, harvest, and other information becomes available.

Because of the late dates when certain portions of these data become available, it is anticipated that comment periods
on some proposals will necessarily be abbreviated. Special circumstances that limit the amount of time which the
Service can allow for public comment are involved in the establishment of these regulations. Specifically, two considerations
compress the time in which the rulemaking process must operate: the need, on one hand, to establish final rules at a
time early enough in the summer to allow resource agencies to select and publish season dates and bag limits prior to
the hunting seasons and, on the other hand, the lack of current data on the status of most migratory game birds until
later in the summer.

Because the process is strongly influenced by the times when information is available for consideration, the overall
regulations process is divided into two segments. Early seasons are those seasons that generally open prior to October
1, and include seasons in Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. Late seasons are those seasons opening
in the remainder of the United States about October 1 and later, and include most of the waterfowl seasons.

Major steps in the 19941995 regulatory cycle relating to public hearings and 

Federal Register

 notifications are illustrated in the accompanying diagram. Dates shown relative to publication of 

Federal Register

 documents are target dates. 




Sections of this and subsequent documents which outline hunting frameworks and guidelines are organized under numbered
headings. These headings are:



1. Ducks
2. Sea Ducks
3. Mergansers
4. Canada Geese
5. White-fronted Geese
6. Brant
7. Snow and Ross's (Light) Geese
8. Tundra Swans
9. Sandhill Cranes
10. Coots
11. Moorhens and Gallinules
12. Rails
13. Snipe
14. Woodcock
15. Band-tailed Pigeons
16. Mourning Doves
17. White-winged and White-tipped Doves
18. Alaska
19. Hawaii
20. Puerto Rico 
21. Virgin Islands
22. Falconry
23. Other



Later sections of this and subsequent documents will refer only to numbered items requiring attention. Therefore,
items requiring no attention will be omitted and the remaining numbered items will be discontinuous and appear incomplete.




Hearings



Two public hearings pertaining to 19941995 migratory game bird hunting regulations are scheduled. Both hearings
will be conducted in accordance with 455 DM 1 of the Departmental Manual. On June 23, a public hearing will be held at
9 a.m. in the Auditorium of the Department of the Interior Building, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC. This hearing
is for the purpose of reviewing the status of migratory shore and upland game birds. Proposed hunting regulations
will be discussed for these species plus regulations for migratory game birds in Alaska, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin
Islands; special September waterfowl seasons in designated States; special sea duck seasons in the Atlantic Flyway,
and extended falconry seasons. On August 4, a public hearing will be held at 9 a.m. in the Auditorium of the Department
of the Interior Building, address above. This hearing is for the purpose of reviewing the status and proposed regulations
for waterfowl not previously discussed at the June 23 public hearing. The public is invited to participate in both
hearings. Persons wishing to make a statement at these hearings should write to the address indicated under the caption


ADDRESSES

. 




Requests for Tribal Proposals



Background



Beginning with the 1985-86 hunting season, the Service has employed guidelines described in the June 4, 1985 Federal
Register (50 FR 23467) to establish special migratory bird hunting regulations on Federal Indian reservations (including
off-reservation trust lands) and ceded lands. The guidelines were developed in response to tribal requests for Service
recognition of their reserved hunting rights, and for some tribes, recognition of their authority to regulate hunting
by both tribal and nontribal members throughout their reservations. The guidelines include possibilities for:
(1) on-reservation hunting by both tribal and nontribal members, with hunting by nontribal members on some reservations
to take place within Federal frameworks, but on dates different from those selected by the surrounding State(s);
(2) on-reservation hunting by tribal members only, outside of usual Federal frameworks for season dates and length,
and for daily bag and possession limits; and (3) off-reservation hunting by tribal members on ceded lands, outside
of usual framework dates and season length, with some added flexibility in daily bag and possession limits. In all
cases, the regulations established under the guidelines would have to be consistent with the annual March 10 to September
1 closed season mandated by the 1916 Convention Between the United States and Great Britain (for Canada) For the Protection
of Migratory Birds (Convention). The guidelines are capable of application to those tribes that have reserved hunting
rights on Federal Indian reservations (including off-reservation trust lands) and ceded lands. They also apply
to the establishment of migratory bird hunting regulations for nontribal members on all lands within the exterior
boundaries of reservations where tribes have full wildlife management authority over such hunting, or where the
tribes and affected States otherwise have reached agreement over hunting by nontribal members on non-Indian lands.

Tribes usually have the authority to regulate migratory bird hunting by nonmembers on Indian-owned reservation
lands, subject to Service approval. The question of jurisdiction is more complex on reservations that include lands
owned by non-Indians, especially when the surrounding States have established or intend to establish regulations
governing hunting by non-Indians on these lands. In such cases, the Service encourages the tribes and States to reach
agreement on regulations that would apply throughout the reservations. When appropriate, the Service will consult
with a tribe and State with the aim of facilitating an accord. The Service also will consult jointly with tribal and
State officials in the affected States where tribes may wish to establish special hunting regulations for tribal
members on ceded lands. As explained in previous rulemaking documents, it is incumbent upon the tribe and/or the State
to put forward a request for consultation as a result of the proposal being published in the 

Federal Register

. The Service will not presume to make a determination, without being advised by a tribe or a State, that any issue is/is
not worthy of formal consultation. 

One of the guidelines provides for the continuation of harvest of migratory game birds by tribal members on reservations
where it is a customary practice. The Service does not oppose this harvest, provided it does not take place during the
closed season required by the Convention, and it is not so large as to adversely affect the status of the migratory bird
resource. For several years, the Service has reached annual agreement with tribes (for example, in Minnesota, the
Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians) for hunting by tribal members on their lands or on lands where they have reserved
hunting rights. The Service will continue to consult with tribes that wish to reach a mutual agreement on hunting regulations
for on-reservation hunting by tribal members.

The guidelines should not be viewed as inflexible. Nevertheless, the Service believes that they provide appropriate
opportunity to accommodate the reserved hunting rights and management authority of Indian tribes while ensuring
that the migratory bird resource receives necessary protection. The conservation of this important international
resource is paramount. Use of the guidelines is not required if a tribe wishes to observe the hunting regulations established
by the State(s) in which the reservation is located. 



Details Needed in Tribal Proposals 



Tribes that wish to use the guidelines to establish special hunting regulations for the 1994-95 hunting season must
submit a proposal that includes: (1) The requested hunting season dates and other details regarding regulations
to be observed; (2) harvest anticipated under the requested regulations; (3) methods that will be employed to measure
or monitor harvest (mail-questionnaire survey, bag checks, etc.); (4) steps that will be taken to limit level of harvest,
where it could be shown that failure to limit such harvest would impact seriously on the migratory bird resource; and
(5) tribal capabilities to establish and enforce migratory bird hunting regulations. 

A tribe that desires the earliest possible opening of the waterfowl season should specify this in the proposal, rather
than request a date that might not be within the final Federal frameworks. Similarly, unless a tribe wishes to set more
restrictive regulations than Federal regulations will permit, the proposal should request the same daily bag and
possession limits and season length for ducks and geese that Federal regulations are likely to permit the States in
the Flyway in which the reservation is located. 



Proposal Procedures



Pertinent details in proposals received from tribes will be published for public review in later 

Federal Register

 documents. Because of the time required for Service and public review, Indian tribes that desire special migratory
bird hunting regulations for the 199495 hunting season should submit their proposals as soon as possible,
but no later than June 3, 1994. Tribal inquiries regarding the guidelines and proposals should be directed to the appropriate
Service Regional Office. Tribes that request special hunting regulations for tribal members on ceded lands should
send a courtesy copy of the proposal to officials in the affected State(s).



Public Comments Solicited



The policy of the Department of the Interior is, whenever practicable, to afford the public an opportunity to participate
in the rulemaking process. Accordingly, interested persons are invited to submit written comments, suggestions,
or recommendations regarding the proposed regulations. Promulgation of final migratory game bird hunting regulations
will take into consideration all comments received by the Service. Such comments, and any additional information
received, may lead to final regulations that differ from these proposals. Interested persons are invited to participate
in this rulemaking by submitting written comments to the address indicated under the caption 

ADDRESSES

. 

Comments received on the proposed annual regulations will be available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the Service's office in room 634, 4401 North Fairfax Drive, Arlington, Virginia. Specific comment periods
will be established for each series of proposed rulemakings. All relevant comments will be accepted through the closing
date of the comment period on the particular proposal under consideration. The Service will consider, but possibly
may not respond in detail to, each comment. As in the past, the Service will summarize all comments received during
the comment period and respond to them after the closing date. 



Flyway Council Meetings



Departmental representatives will be present at the following winter meetings of the various Flyway Councils:


Date:

 March 20, 1994



_Atlantic Flyway Council, 8:30 a.m.
_Mississippi Flyway Council, 8:30 a.m.
_Central Flyway Council, 8:00 a.m.
_Pacific Flyway Council, 9:30 a.m.
_National Waterfowl Council, 3:30 p.m.



The Council meetings will be held at the Egan Civic and Convention Center, Anchorage, Alaska.



NEPA Consideration 


NEPA considerations are covered by the programmatic document, ``Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement:
Issuance of Annual Regulations Permitting the Sport Hunting of Migratory Birds (FSES 88-14)'', filed with the Environmental
Protection Agency on June 9, 1988. Notice of Availability was published in the 

Federal Register

 on June 16, 1988 (53 FR 22582). The Service's Record of Decision was published on August 18, 1988 (53 FR 31341). In addition,
an August 1985 environmental assessment entitled ``Guidelines for Migratory Bird Hunting Regulations on Federal
Indian Reservations and Ceded Lands'' is available from the Service at the address indicated under the caption 

ADDRESSES

. 



Endangered Species Act Consideration



Prior to issuance of the 199495 migratory game bird hunting regulations, consideration will be given to provisions
of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, (16 U.S.C. 1531-1543; hereinafter the Act) to ensure that hunting
is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any species designated as endangered or threatened or modify
or destroy its critical habitat and is consistent with conservation programs for those species. Consultations under
section 7 of this Act may cause changes to be made to proposals in this and future supplemental proposed rulemaking
documents.



Regulatory Flexibility Act and the Paperwork Reduction Act



This document was reviewed under Executive Order 12866.

These regulations have a significant economic impact on substantial numbers of small entities under the Regulatory
Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

). Therefore, in accordance with Office of Management and Budget instructions, a Final Regulatory Impact Analysis
(FRIA) was prepared in 1981 and revised in 1990. Although a FRIA is no longer required, the economic analysis contained
in the FRIA has been reviewed and the Service has determined that it meets the requirements of Executive Order 12866.
This analysis was updated for 1994. The FRIA update included waterfowl hunter and harvest information from the 199293
season. The summary of the 1994 update follows:

``New information which can be compared to that appearing in the 1990 Final Regulatory Impact Analysis (FRIA) includes
estimates of the 1992 fall flight of ducks from surveyed areas, and hunter activity and harvest information from the
199293 hunting season. There was essentially no change in the total fall flight of ducks, regulatory frameworks,
hunter numbers, number of hunting days, or total duck harvest between the 199192 and the 199293 seasons.''


Copies of the updated analysis are available upon request from the Office of Migratory Bird Management. The address
is indicated under the caption 

ADDRESSES

. 

These regulations contain no information collections subject to Office of Management and Budget review under the
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

).



Authorship



The primary authors of this proposed rule are Keith A. Morehouse and William O. Vogel, Office of Migratory Bird Management,
(703) 3581714.



List of Subjects in 50 CFR part 20



Exports, Hunting, Imports, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Transportation, Wildlife.






The rules that eventually will be promulgated for the 1994-95 hunting season are authorized under the Migratory Bird
Treaty Act (July 3, 1918), as amended, (16 U.S.C. 703-711); the Fish and Wildlife Improvement Act of 1978 (November
8, 1978), as amended, (16 U.S.C. 712); and the Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956 (August 8, 1956), as amended, (16 U.S.C.
742 a-d and e-j).







Dated: March 10, 1994.


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
George T. Frampton,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks.






Proposed 19941995 Migratory Game Bird Hunting Regulations (Preliminary)






Pending current information on populations, harvest, and habitat conditions, and receipt of recommendations from
the four Flyway Councils; specific framework proposals (including opening and closing dates, seasons lengths,
and bag limits) may be deferred. Unless otherwise specified, no change from the final 199394 frameworks of
August 23 and September 24, 1993, (58 FR 44590 and 50188) is proposed. Specific preliminary proposals that vary from
the 199394 frameworks and issues requiring early discussion, action, or the attention of the States or Tribes
are contained below:



1. Ducks.



F. Zones and Splits.





Temporary Zone in the Southern San Joaquin Valley of California. 

In 1993, the Service allowed the State of California an additional year to modify its zoning proposal to conform more
closely with the Service's policy. The Service encourages a reopening of dialogue in order to resolve this problem
as soon as possible.

 


G. Special seasons/species management.



i. Canvasback Management. 



During 1983-92, annual sport-harvest regulations for this species were guided by provisions in the environmental
assessment ``Proposed Hunting Regulations on Canvasback Ducks, 1983''. That document acknowledged separate eastern
and western populations and set breeding-population threshold levels for each, below which all possible actions,
including season closure, in the respective regions, would be considered for canvasbacks. In 1993, after completing
a review of canvasback databases, the Service determined that currently there is not sufficient evidence to warrant
managing canvasbacks as separate eastern and western populations. However, the Service did not adopt a new harvest
strategy to regulate the overall harvest of canvasbacks and the allocation of that harvest. Rather, it continued
to follow guidelines set forth in the environmental assessment for a continental population. Because the most recent
3-year average (482,000 birds) was below the threshold identified in the assessment (500,000 birds), the Service
determined liberalizations were not warranted during 1993-94; no changes in regulations from those which occurred
during 1992-93 were enacted.

Although the Service delayed implementation of a revised harvest strategy, the Service is not satisfied with an indefinite
continuation of the 1983 guidelines. The Service desires to build consensus on an improved harvest-management strategy
which ensures the welfare of the canvasback population and preserves the historical emphasis on Flyway-based management.


The Service has circulated to the Flyway Councils and Technical Sections a draft harvest-management strategy to
be considered for the 199495 hunting season and continues to welcome suggestions for improving our capabilities
to manage the harvests of this important species. Copies of the draft harvest-management strategy are available
at the address indicated under the caption 

ADDRESSES

. 



ii. September Teal Seasons.



Evaluations of shooting hours for teal seasons were initiated in several Mississippi and Central Flyway States in
1993, and more than 1 year likely will be required to achieve needed sample sizes. Provided methods being employed
are acceptable and the amount of progress being made indicates a good-faith effort, we would recommend continuation
of presunrise shooting hours conditional upon satisfactory progress toward completion of evaluations.




iii. September Wood Duck/Teal Seasons.



Evaluations of shooting hours for wood duck/teal seasons forwarded to Service in 1993 were sufficient to allow continuation
of presunrise shooting hours in Florida, Kentucky, and Tennessee. 



4. Canada Geese. 



In 1993, the Service announced that the administrative process for setting hunting seasons does not permit the setting
of regular seasons that open prior to the Saturday nearest October 1 during the late-season regulations-development
cycle. Those portions of seasons that open earlier must be established during the early-season regulations-development
cycle in June. The Service is concerned about setting seasons in the absence of current status information. Because
of this, requests for regular Canada goose seasons that open earlier than the Saturday nearest October 1 must include
full justification of the need for the early opening, which will be weighed against the risk of establishing seasons
prior to the time status information is available. The Service proposed to implement these procedures beginning
with the 1994-95 hunting season in order to allow those States desiring early-season dates for regular Canada goose
seasons sufficient time to prepare their proposals and to provide an opportunity for flyway council review.



7. Snow and Ross's (Light) Geese.



In 1993, the Central Flyway Council recommended a review of framework closing dates for light geese. The Service indicated
it would work with the Flyway Councils during the coming year to review its policy of framework dates for light geese.
At this time, the Service requests that the States and Flyway Councils submit any pertinent information for joint
review and that the Service, States, Flyway Councils, and other interested parties accelerate discussions regarding
closing dates for light geese in migration-terminus and other areas.



9. Sandhill Cranes.



The Service has clearly indicated that it does not believe it is appropriate to increase harvest on the Mid-continent
Population at this time, and that there should be no increase or shift in harvest toward the Gulf Coast Subpopulation,
especially the greater-sandhill-crane component. In recent years, the Central Flyway Council has requested changes
in the frameworks which would increase harvest pressure on this population. The Service recognizes the desire of
the Central Flyway Council to liberalize regulations in certain areas, but concern for greater sandhill cranes would
preclude any increase under the current approach to establishing frameworks. 

Because there is an east-west gradient in the distribution of the 3 subspecies managed as the Mid-continent Population,
the Service would be willing to consider an approach that would, in the future, provide the ability to establish frameworks
by geographic areas within the Central Flyway. Such an approach of setting differential frameworks would provide
the ability to shift harvest toward the western portions of the flyway, while limiting harvest in eastern portions.
The Service requests comments regarding such an approach.



15. Band-tailed Pigeons.



Evidence from three separate surveys suggests that the long-term decline experienced by the Coastal Population
may have subsided; and, in fact, the overall and individual State population estimates appear to have stabilized
at low levels. Also, the status of the Interior Population is not well understood. Efforts are underway to gather more
information about both populations. In 1993, all States having band-tailed pigeon hunting seasons either participated
in the nationwide Migratory Bird harvest Information Program or required band-tailed pigeon hunters to obtain mandatory
State permits to provide sampling frames for obtaining more precise estimates of band-tailed pigeon harvest. Those
States issuing permits were required to conduct a harvest survey and provide the results to the Service by June 1 of
each year. In addition, all States with band-tailed pigeon hunting seasons are participating in a wing-collection
survey to provide information on annual recruitment. The Service will continue to closely monitor population and
harvest information from both populations and will evaluate this information in June prior to making any decisions
regarding the 1994-95 seasons. Indian Tribes also should consider this situation when proposing harvest regulations
for this species. 



</SIGNJOB>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055F
</BILLING>









<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSep07ap94.015




</IMPORT>





<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948318 Filed 4694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055C
</BILLING>

