 

a. The characteristics of the telecommunication transmission equipment or systems are limited to those that release
them from control or make them eligible under the relevant Advisory Notes that provide administrative exceptions
treatment, provided that the following limits are not exceeded: 

1. QAM techniques of level 16; 

2. A ``digital transfer rate'' of 140 Mbits/s and a ``total digital transfer rate'' of 168 Mbits/s;

 




N.B.:

 An additional 2 Mbit/s may be added to the ``total digital transfer rate'' of 168 Mbit/s for operation, maintenance
and service communications.

 


3. A ``laser'' transmission wavelength of 1,370 nm; 

b. Modification of the telecommunications transmission equipment or systems is not permitted if any aspect of the
design would result in exceeding the performance thresholds or features of the relevant Advisory Notes that provide
administrative exceptions treatment; 

c. Testing of large scale integrated (LSI) circuits or those with higher component densities is limited to go/no go
tests;

 




N.B.:

 Advisory Note 24.c does not preclude exports of equipment or technology that would be possible in accordance with
the provisions of other Categories in the Commerce Control List. 




d. The specially designed ``software'' is that necessary to use the transferred technology, instrumentation and
test equipment; 

e. All ``software'' must be supplied in machine executable form only except for the specific customer data and site
parameters; 

f. ``Development'' technology is not included; 

g. The contract includes explicit conditions to ensure that: 

1. The ``production'' technology or production equipment is not exported or reexported, either directly or indirectly,
to another proscribed destination; 

2. The supplier or licensor may appoint a representative who is entitled to verify that the ``production'' technology
and production equipment or systems serve their intended use; 

3. Any modification of the capabilities or functions of the equipment produced must be approved by the supplier or
licensor; 

4. The supplier's or licensor's personnel have right of access to all the facilities directly involved in the production
of the equipment or systems covered by this Advisory Note; 

5. The ``production'' technology, production equipment and equipment or systems produced do not exceed the characteristics
of the relevant Advisory Notes that provide administrative exceptions treatment and will be for civil end-use only;


h. System integration testing will be performed by the supplier or licensor if it requires test tools that provide
the licensee with the capability to recover ``source code'' or upgrade the system beyond the performance thresholds
or features of the relevant Advisory Notes that provide administrative exceptions treatment; 

i. The relevant Advisory Note that provides administrative exceptions treatment should be indicated on the license
application. 






N.B.:

 No export under the favorable consideration provisions of this Advisory Note shall establish a precedent for the
approval of exports under other Categories in the Commerce Control List. 





