 

In its orders approving the pilot procedures,
<FOOTCITE>10</FOOTCITE>
 the Commission asked the Amex to study the effects of stopping stock in a minimum fractional change market. Specifically,
the Commission requested information on: (1) The percentage of stopped orders executed at the stop price, versus
the percentage of such orders receiving a better price; (2) whether limit orders on the specialist's book were being
bypassed due to the execution of stopped orders at a better price (and, to this end, the Commission requested that the
Amex conduct a one-day review of all book orders in the ten stocks receiving the greatest number of stops); (3) market
depth, including a comparison of the size of stopped orders to the size of the opposite side of the quote and to any quote
size imbalance, and including an analysis of the ratio of the size of the bid to the size of the offer; and (4) specialist
compliance with the pilot program's procedures.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
10

</FOOTNAME>
See supra, note 3.

</FOOTNOTE>


On March 12, 1993, June 28 and July 1, 1993, and October 15, 1993 and January 5, 1994, the Exchange submitted to the Commission
monitoring reports regarding the amendments to Rule 109. The Commission believes that, although these monitoring
reports provide certain useful information concerning the operation of the pilot program, the Amex must provide
further data, particularly about Rule 109's impact on limit orders on the specialist's book, before the commission
can fairly and comprehensively evaluate the Amex's use of the pilot procedures. To allow such additional information
to be gathered and reviewed, without compromising the benefit that investors might receive under Rule 109, as amended,
the Commission believes that it is reasonable to extend the pilot program until March 21, 1995. During this extension,
the Commission expects the Amex to respond fully to the concerns set forth below.

First, the January monitoring report indicates that approximately three-quarters of orders stopped in minimum
fractional change markets received price improvement. The Commission, therefore, believes that the pilot procedures
provide a benefit to investors by offering the possibility of price improvement to customers whose orders are granted
stops in minimum fractional change markets. According to the latest Amex report, moreover, nearly all stopped orders
were for 2,000 shares or less. In this respect, the amendments to Rule 109 should mainly affect small public customer
orders, which the Commission envisioned could most benefit from professional handling by the specialist. During
the pilot extension, the commission requests that the Amex continue to monitor the percentage of stopped orders that
are for 2,000 shares or less.

Second, the Amex preliminarily believes that, with respect to a significant majority of stops granted under these
amendments to Rule 109, customer limit orders existing on the specialist's book were not disadvantaged.
<FOOTCITE>11</FOOTCITE>
 This conclusion is based on the Exchange's review of limit orders on the opposite side of the market at the time a stop
was granted pursuant to this pilot program. As part of its one-day review of the ten stocks receiving the greatest number
of stops, the Amex determined how often book orders which might have been entitled to an execution had the order not
been stopped, in fact, were executed at their limit price by the close of the day's trading.
<FOOTCITE>12</FOOTCITE>
 The Commission does not consider that data to be conclusive given the narrow scope of the Exchange's analysis of the
pilot program's impact.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
11

</FOOTNAME>
When stock is stopped, book orders on the opposite side of the market that are entitled to immediate execution lose
their priority. If the stopped order then receives an improved price, limit orders at the stop price are bypassed and,
if the market turns away from that limit, may never be executed.

As for book orders on the same side of the market as the stopped stock, the Commission believes that Rule 109's requirements
make it unlikely that these limit orders would not be executed. Under the Amex's pilot program, an order can be stopped
only if a substantial imbalance exists on the opposite side of the market. See infra, text accompanying notes 1925.
In those circumstances, the stock would probably trade away from the large imbalance, resulting in execution of orders
on the book.


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
12

</FOOTNAME>
Beyond the one-day review, the Amex could make this determination only for those stocks in which the electronic display
book had been implemented. For other stocks, the Amex determined how often an equivalent volume (i.e., the same number
of shares as the stopped order) was executed at the opposite side's limit price by the close of the day's trading.



</FOOTNOTE>

