 

Applications must contain the following information:

A. 

Applicant Identification.

 Name and address of the PHA and name and telephone number of contact person.

B. 

HOPE VI Certification.

 Certification that the applicant is a HOPE VI grantee and program participants will be eligible participants.

C. 

Program Description

. A comprehensive description of the proposed Youth Apprenticeship program.

D. 

Agreements

. A copy of the agreement(s) that has been executed between the PHA, a Youth Corps, a local labor organization, and a
multi-employer organization.

E. 

Resident Involvement

. A description of the resident involvement in the planning and implementation phases of this program.

F. 

Outreach Efforts

. A description of youth outreach, recruitment and selection efforts.

G. 

Mentoring Program

. A description of the mentoring program to be provided for program participants.

H. 

Letters of Commitment

. Letters of commitment identifying all commitments for resources to be made available to the program from the applicable
entity.

I. 

Budget and Implementation Schedule

. A project budget and implementation schedule.

J. 

Previous Experience

. A narrative on the housing authority's past experience in obtaining and providing similar opportunities for public
and assisted housing youths.

K. 

Occupations for Youths

. A narrative describing the occupations for which training and apprenticeships are being developed and the market
for future employment in these occupations.

L. 

Supportive Services

. A description of the need for supportive services and the supportive services to be provided for program participants.

M. 

Equal Opportunity Requirements

. The PHA must certify that it will carry out activities assisted under the program in compliance with:

(i) The requirements of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 36013619); and Executive Order 11063; and Title VI of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

(ii) The prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of age under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975; the prohibition
against discrimination against individuals with a disability under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
and the requirements of Executive Order 11246;

(iii) The requirements of section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968; and

(iv) The requirements of Executive Orders 11625, 12432, and 12138.

N. 

Form HUD2880

. Form HUD2880 (Applicant/Recipient Disclosure Update Report) must be completed in accordance with 24 CFR
part 12, Accountability in the Provision of HUD Assistance.

O. 

Certification concerning Funds for Eligible Costs

. A certification that funds used to pay for items listed in Section I.E.3 of this NOFA (Eligible Cost) are not duplicative
expenses from any other program.

P. 

Drug-Free Workplace Certification

. The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. 701) requires grantees of Federal agencies to certify that they will
provide drug-free workplaces.

Q. 

Certification regarding Lobbying

. Section 319 of the Department of the Interior Appropriations Act, Public Law 101121, approved October 23,
1989 (31 U.S.C. 1342) (the ``Byrd Amendment''). Any PHA submitting an application under this announcement for more
than $100,000 of budget authority must submit a certification and, if applicable, a Disclosure of Lobbying Activities
(SFLLL form).



Reports



Each PHA receiving a grant shall submit to HUD an annual progress report. As party of HUD's evaluation of the program,
grantees will be expected to maintain records on each of the participants in the program. Grantees will maintain these
records on forms to be developed and provided by HUD and will make these records available to HUD for use in an evaluation
of the Initiative.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9419512 Filed 8994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 421033M
</BILLING>



