 

Processing of reactor fuel and other waste management activities created a wide variety of radioactive wastes, including
high-level wastes that have been stored in underground tanks. The high-level wastes came from many different processes
and sources, and they have been processed and transferred among tanks so that chemical and physical characteristics
of the wastes vary greatly among tanks and even within individual tanks. Typically, the tank wastes are highly radioactive
and chemically hazardous. 

SSTs have one steel wall, surrounded by reinforced concrete; they were constructed between 1944 and 1964 and received
waste until 1980. The capacity of most SSTs is 0.5 million gallons (Mgal) to 1.0 Mgal. The tanks are situated below grade
and are covered with 6 to 10 feet of earth. 

Waste in SSTs consists of liquids, sludges, and saltcake, i.e., crusty solids made of crystallized salts. Some of
the liquids in the SSTs are contained in the pores of the sludges and saltcake, and some liquids are free standing in
the tanks. 

There are 149 SSTs storing about 36 Mgal of waste. This waste is comprised of approximately 0.6 Mgal of free-standing
liquid, 23.2 Mgal of saltcake, and 12.5 Mgal of sludge. About half of the SSTs have leaked or are assumed to have leaked.
Approximately 0.6 to 0.9 Mgal of waste has leaked or spilled into the nearby soil. Over the years, much of the liquid
stored in SSTs has evaporated or been pumped to DSTs. 

There are 28 one Mgal DSTs at Hanford. The DSTs were constructed between 1970 and 1986. Most of these tanks are designed
for up to 50 years of storage. DSTs have a second steel containment wall. The space between the two walls is monitored
for leaks. DOE has used the DSTs since 1970 and none has been known to leak. The DSTs are used to treat and store a variety
of liquid radioactive wastes from the SSTs and from various Hanford Site processes. The wastes are stored in tanks
based upon composition, level of radioactivity, or origin. The DSTs now contain about 25 Mgal of waste. 

In the 1960s and 1970s, radioactive strontium and cesium were extracted from wastes in some SSTs. The strontium and
cesium were converted to salt forms and placed in double-walled capsules. Most of the 610 strontium capsules and 1323
cesium capsules are stored at Hanford. Some capsules were shipped offsite for beneficial use as heat or radiation
sources. Because the capsules were only leased from DOE, it is anticipated that they will be returned to Hanford. 

In the April 1988 HDW EIS ROD, DOE decided to proceed with preparing the DST waste for final disposal because it was readily
retrievable. Wastes were to be processed in a pretreatment facility (planned to be the Hanford B-Plant and AR Vault)
to separate DST waste into two portions. The larger portion would be low activity waste, and a much smaller portion
would be highly radioactive. The low activity waste was to be mixed with a cement-like material to form grout. The grout
was to be poured into large, lined, concrete, near-surface, underground vaults where it would solidify. 

The high activity waste fraction was to be made into a borosilicate glass and poured into stainless-steel canisters
(approximately 0.6 m diameter by 3 m long) at the proposed Hanford Waste Vitrification Plant (HWVP). The canisters
were to be stored there until a geologic repository was ready to receive this waste. 

Existing and future DST wastes were to be characterized for hazardous chemical constituents as well as other constituents
that might affect glass or grout formulations before processing. This characterization would also help ensure that
proper treatment, in accordance with hazardous waste regulations, occurred before disposal of the waste. 

The HDW EIS ROD also called for storage of cesium and strontium capsules to continue until a geologic repository is
ready to receive this waste for disposal. Before shipment to the repository, the capsules would be packaged to meet
repository acceptance criteria. 

In the HDW EIS ROD, DOE decided to conduct additional development and evaluation before making decisions on final
disposal of SST wastes. This development and evaluation effort was to focus both on methods to retrieve and process
SST wastes for disposal and to stabilize and isolate the wastes near-surface. SST waste would continue to be stored
and monitored. Before a decision on the final disposal of the wastes could be made, the alternatives were to be analyzed
in a supplement to the HDW EIS. 

Several significant changes have occurred subsequent to the HDW EIS. These include the identification of significant
waste tank safety issues; the DOE, EPA and Ecology signing the TPA; the elimination of B-Plant from consideration
as a waste pretreatment facility; the delay of the HWVP; and the proposal to treat SST waste with DST waste. These changes
resulted in DOE's proposal to integrate all Hanford tank waste remediation efforts. As a result, resolving waste
tank safety issues, planning for SST waste retrieval, and developing pretreatment facilities have become major
elements of the proposed Hanford tank waste remediation program. 



Purpose and Need for Agency


<ACTION>
ACTION:

 




DOE needs to take action to treat, store, and dispose of Hanford's stored high-level tank waste and encapsulated strontium
and cesium and to reduce the overall potential risks posed by the tank wastes. This entails addressing four major programmatic
elements: Retrieval, pretreatment, immobilization, and storage/disposal. More specifically, these programmatic
elements include: 

&bull;Retrieval of SST and DST wastes.
&bull;Conditioning (e.g., evaporation/dilution) of wastes.
&bull;Waste pretreatment.
&bull;New infrastructure such as facilities, tanks, and transfer lines.
&bull;Production of a stabilized high-activity waste form.

</ACTION>
