 

The FHWA agrees with the commenters concerns about motorist ability to understand the warning devices. The FHWA believes
that the effectiveness of the three warning devices placed around the stopped vehicle would be diminished by allowing
a different type of device to be used at each location. Therefore, 392.22 is being amended to require that the
same type(s) of warning devices be used at each of the locations specified in 392.22. 



Minimum Number of Fusees and Flares Required 




The FHWA proposed that CMVs equipped with only fusees or liquid-burning flares have a minimum of six of these warning
devices at all times. The ATA believed the proposed minimum was unrealistic. The ATA believed that the one hour of protection
provided by six 30-minute fusees would not be sufficient based on what they considered the ``best available information''
on the duration of CMV breakdown time under ``optimum'' conditions. The ATA also pointed out that UL 912 specifies
that each liquid-burning flare be capable of burning for 12 hours and that three of these devices should be sufficient.



The FHWA believes that a requirement for six fusees is appropriate. As stated in the NHTSA Report: 


Roughly one-half of all emergency stops and disabled vehicle situations last for more than 30 minutes ***.
Moreover, since the distribution of emergency stop durations is highly positively skewed, the total disabled vehicle
exposure time for the time period of more than 30 minutes is considerably greater than for the time period of less than
30 minutes. No statistics are available to compare the ``total risk'' incurred after 30 minutes to that incurred before
30 minutes, but presumably the risk per minute is greatest soon after the emergency stop ***. However,
the total exposure time of disabled vehicles is greater after 30 minutes due to those vehicles left for several hours
or more. 


The FHWA recognizes that a number of factors affect the amount of time a vehicle remains disabled, including its location
(e.g., urban area versus a rural area) and the availability of maintenance personnel and equipment. The FHWA believes
that the performance-based requirement that warning devices be in place for the entire period the vehicle is stopped
adequately addresses this issue. Motor carriers are responsible for ensuring that a sufficient number of warning
devices are provided on their CMVs. 


With regard to the ATA's comments about liquid-burning flares, the FHWA agrees that the proposed requirement for
six liquid-burning flares was inconsistent with the UL 912 performance criteria which was proposed for incorporation
by reference. Because UL 912 requires that liquid-burning flares be capable of burning for 12 hours, requiring three
liquid-burning flares for vehicles which are not equipped with fusees or bidirectional reflective triangles is
sufficient. 




Incorporation by Reference of UL 912 




The NPRM included a proposal that fusees and liquid-burning flares meet UL 912. In the case of fusees, UL 912 would be
used to replace the 393.95(j) reference to the Association of American Railroads (AAR), ``Specifications
for Red Railway or Red Highway Fuses.'' The ATA and the PSMA were the only commenters that addressed this issue. The
ATA believed the FHWA should allow the use of fusees meeting either UL 912 or the AAR standards. The PSMA believed the
performance standards of UL 912 are appropriate. 


The FHWA has reviewed the UL and AAR standards. The two documents have comparable performance criteria for fusees.
However, the UL document provides performance criteria for both fusees and liquid-burning flares while the AAR document
only covers fusees. The FHWA has concluded the UL document is appropriate for incorporation by reference because
the ISTEA requires that both fusees and liquid-burning flares be allowed for use as emergency warning devices. 


In addition to the requirements contained in UL 912, the PSMA suggested that all fusees be of the ``lay-down type''
with a ``no-roll device.'' The PSMA did not provide any discussion of this suggestion. 


A requirement that all fusees be of the ``lay-down type'' is unnecessarily design restrictive in that it would prohibit,
without technical justification, the use of fusees that are provided with a means to remain in an upright position.



With regard to a ``no-roll device,'' motor carriers must ensure that warning devices are in place at the required locations.
If certain devices are necessary to keep fusees in place, the motor carrier is responsible for providing them. Furthermore,
a general requirement for a ``no-roll device'' would not provide objective criteria as to what constitutes an acceptable
device. The FHWA has not adopted the PSMA's suggestions. 



Economic Impact of the Rulemaking 




Both Sate-Lite and the TSEI submitted comments to the docket expressing concern over possible adverse effects of
the proposed regulation on small entities. These comments are discussed below under the heading ``Regulatory Flexibility
Act.'' 



Discussion of Final Rule 




The FHWA is amending 393.95 to allow CMVs to be equipped with fusees and liquid-burning flares in lieu of bidirectional
reflective triangles, except CMVs transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 hazardous materials (explosives), cargo
tank motor vehicles used for Class 3 (flammable and combustible liquid) or Division 2.1 (flammable gas) hazardous
materials (whether loaded or empty), or motor vehicles using compressed gas as a motor fuel. This prohibition is necessary
to minimize the risk of explosion or catastrophic fire involving cargoes and fuels of these types. The FHWA believes
the retention of this provision is consistent with congressional intent. 


The final rule amends 393.95(f)(2) to require that CMVs be equipped with either (1) three bidirectional reflective
triangles, (2) six fusees (each capable of burning for 30 minutes), or (3) three liquid-burning flares (filled with
a sufficient amount of fuel to burn continuously for at least one hour). Although the FHWA has specified a minimum number
of fusees and liquid burning flares, motor carriers relying solely upon these devices are responsible for ensuring
that fusees or liquid-burning flares are in use for the entire time the vehicle is stopped upon the traveled portion
of a highway or the shoulder of a highway. 


The FHWA is amending 392.22(b)(1) to require that the same type(s) of warning devices be used at each of the locations
where warning devices are placed around the CMV. Section 392.22(b)(2)(i) 

Fusees and liquid-burning flares

, is being amended to require that motor carriers relying solely upon fusees or liquid-burning flares ensure that
those devices are in use for the entire time the vehicle is stopped upon the traveled portion of a highway or the shoulder
of a highway. The driver of the vehicle is required to extinguish and remove each fusee or liquid-burning flare before
the stopped vehicle is moved. 


In addition, the FHWA is amending 392.22(b)(2)(ii) 

Daylight hours

, to allow motor carriers to use fusees or liquid-burning flares in lieu of bidirectional reflective triangles when
their CMVs are stopped during daylight hours in business or residential districts. Section 392.22(b)(2)(ii) requires
that if fusees or liquid-burning flares are used, there must be at least one lighted fusee or flare at each of the prescribed
locations as long as the vehicle is stopped. 


The FHWA is removing 392.22(b)(2)(vii) Exemption for lightweight vehicles, and certain United States Code
and CFR citations at the end of 392.22. Although the NPRM did not address these issues, the amendments are considered
administrative in nature. 


