 

(d) 

Benefit to service area(s)_

(1) 

Benefit inside service area(s). 

For purposes of assessing a wholesale or limited purpose bank's community 
development performance under this section, the OCC shall consider all 
qualified investments, community development loans outstanding, and 
community development services that benefit areas within the bank's service 
area(s). 
 
(2) 

Benefit outside service area(s). 

The OCC shall consider the qualified investments, community development loans outstanding, and community 
development services provided by a wholesale or limited purpose bank that 
benefit areas outside the bank's service area(s) only up to an amount equivalent to the amount of investments, loans,
and services considered under paragraph (d)(1) of this section. If a bank demonstrates a limited need or opportunity
for these investments, lending, and services, in its service area(s), the OCC may exempt the bank from all or part of
this limitation. 
 
(e) 

Community development performance rating. 

The OCC shall rate a 
bank's community development performance as provided in Appendix A of this 
part. 



25.26 

Small bank assessment standards. 



(a) 

Scope of assessment. 

The OCC shall assess the degree to which a 
small bank is helping to meet the credit needs of its service area(s) under the assessment standards described in this
section. 
 
(b) 

Assessment criteria. 

The OCC shall evaluate a small bank's CRA 
performance pursuant to the following criteria: 
 
(1) The bank's loan-to-deposit ratio, adjusted for seasonal variation and, as appropriate, other lending-related
activities, such as loan originations for sale to the secondary markets or community development lending or investment;


(2) The percentage of loans and, as appropriate, other lending-related 
activities located in the bank's service area(s); 
 
(3) The bank's record of lending to and, as appropriate, engaging in other 
lending-related activities for borrowers of different income levels and businesses and farms of different sizes;

 
(4) The geographic distribution of the bank's loans given its service area(s); and 
 
(5) The bank's record of taking action, if warranted, in response to written complaints about its performance in meeting
the credit needs of its service area(s). 
 
(c) 

Small bank performance rating. 

The OCC shall rate a small bank's 
performance as provided in Appendix A of this part. 



25.27 

Strategic plan assessment. 
 


(a) 

Alternative election. 

A bank may request to be rated under a strategic plan rather than under the lending, service, and investment tests (25.22
through 25.24 of this part), the community development test (25.25 of this part), or the small bank assessment
standards (25.26 of this part), by submitting to the OCC a strategic plan as provided for in this section. A 
bank's request to be rated under a strategic plan is not approved until the OCC approves the plan. The OCC's approval
of a strategic plan does not affect the bank's obligation, if any, to report data as required by 25.42 of this
part. 
 
(b) 

Strategic plans in general. 

(1) A plan may have a term of no more than five years, and any multi-year plan shall include annual interim measurable
goals according to which the OCC shall evaluate the bank's performance. 

(2) A bank with more than one service area may prepare a single plan for 
all of its service areas or a plan for one or more but not all of its service areas. 






