 

For these reasons, the first SSA reengineering project focused on the process of filing for benefits_beginning with
the initial claim and continuing through the payment of benefits or the final administrative appeal_under both the
Disability Insurance program and the disability portion of the SSI program.

The parameters set for this first project restricted the team from proposing any changes to the statutory definition
of disability or the amount of benefits for which individuals are eligible. The project also did not address vocational
rehabilitation, work incentives or continuing disability reviews as these issues are being addressed by SSA in other
ways.



How Was the Disability Process Reengineering Project Accomplished?



The Disability Process Reengineering Project began in October 1993 when a team of 18 Federal and State employees came
together for the purpose of reengineering the initial and administrative appeals system for determining an individual's
entitlement to Disability Insurance and SSI disability payments. After completing their initial tasks of analyzing
the current process, obtaining process improvement recommendations from over 3,600 individuals and groups internal
and external to the disability claim process, benchmarking with public and private sector organizations to identify
``best practices,'' and modeling theoretical processes via computer, the team presented an initial proposal on
March 31, 1994. (A copy of this proposal was published in the 

Federal Register

, Vol. 59, No. 73, on Friday, April 15, 1994.) The team distributed the proposal widely throughout SSA, the State DDSs,
and to interested public and private individuals and organizations and asked the audience for reactions to the proposal,
items of concern, and additional ideas for improvement.

During the comment period that began on April 1, 1994, and ended on June 14, 1994, the team received over 6,000 written
responses from SSA and DDS employees, employee unions, professional associations, members of the public, claimant
representatives, physicians, State governors, claimant advocacy groups, Federal entities, and other interested
parties. Members of the team read and analyzed every one of the comments so that no idea, reaction or nuance would be
overlooked. Group employee feedback discussions were held in over 80 sites across the country to facilitate dialogue
with almost 2,000 SSA and DDS employees. In addition, team members conducted briefings and spoke with more than 3,000
individuals about their reactions to the proposal during this period. A public forum was also held in Washington,
D.C. A summary of the comments received is provided in Appendix III of the attached plan.

After considering all comments, the team reviewed the breadth of the initial proposal to determine concepts that
needed to be revised, language that needed to be clarified, and details that needed to be added. On June 30, 1994, the
team submitted its revised proposal to the Commissioner of Social Security. Subsequently, after careful consideration,
on September 7, 1994, the Commissioner released SSA's Plan for a New Disability Claim Process. Accepting all of the
concepts contained in the team's June 30 revised proposal as SSA's plan, the Commissioner released the redesign plan
with the understanding that certain concepts (primarily aspects of the simplified disability methodology) would
require extensive research and testing before determining how quickly they could be implemented.



What Service Improvements Does the Plan for a New Disability Claim Process Offer?



The Commissioner established five primary objectives against which SSA will measure the success of a redesigned
disability claim process:



_ The process is user friendly for claimants and those who assist them;
_ The right decision is made the first time;
_ Decisions are made and effectuated quickly;
_ The process is efficient; and
_ Employees find the work satisfying.




By focusing on these objectives, the redesigned process replaces an existing process that is slow, labor-intensive,
and paper reliant with a seamless claim process that makes better use of technology, eliminates fragmentation and
duplication, promotes more flexible use of resources, and results in dramatic improvements in public service. With
the redesign plan, SSA has embarked on an era of change that will revitalize and streamline the way it delivers disability
claim service to the public to achieve greater quality, speed and efficiency.

Specific customer focused improvements that the plan will offer include a process that will:
&bull;Be a user-friendly, more accessible and customer focused process, that ensures benefits are paid to all eligible
individuals as quickly as possible. Case processing times will be cut in half once the new process is fully implemented;
&bull;Provide complete and accurate consumer-oriented information to applicants throughout the process and allow
individuals who are able to be full partners in the processing of their claim;
&bull;Utilize modern technology and highly skilled and trained employees to deliver high-quality service in an
accountable, cost-efficient manner;
&bull;Implement a comprehensive quality assurance program that continually strives to improve operational excellence
and the level of service that disability applicants receive; and
&bull;Use education and training opportunities to enrich employees
 jobs, increase their job satisfaction and quality of work life.
A detailed description of the redesigned disability claim process is included in the attached plan.


What Happens Next?


SSA will move quickly to begin implementing the redesigned disability claim process. Some new process features,
involving research and changes to regulations and computer systems, necessitate a phased-in approach. Other new
process features can be implemented in the near-term and, when combined with special short-term initiatives to address
case backlogs, will result in better service for individuals currently filing for disability benefits. The goal
is to make near-term, visible improvements while at the same time building for long-term results.

SSA will make an unprecedented effort to conduct a full and open dialogue with both SSA and non-SSA audiences as the
Agency moves through the implementation phase. The Agency will use all appropriate modes of communication to ensure
that necessary information about implementation activities is regularly and widely disseminated and will develop
appropriate feedback channels to permit the meaningful exchange of information.




Dated: September 7, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Rhoda M. G. Davis,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Process Reengineering Program.



</SIGNJOB>
