 

4. Federal Register Requirements 



As discussed below in Section VII.A.3.g., the Agency will publish quarterly notices in the 

Federal Register

 updating the list of acceptable and unacceptable alternatives. If the name of a specific substitute contained in
any studies supporting such notices must be maintained as confidential, the submitter and the Agency will together
develop a generic name that will protect the proprietary nature of the substitute, but will provide sufficient detail
for the public to evaluate the health and safety studies. If appropriate, the submitter may reference any generic
names identified for use in the PMN program. 



D. Display of OMB Control Numbers 



EPA is also amending the table of currently approved information collection request (ICR) control numbers issued
by OMB for various regulations. This amendment updates the table to accurately display those information requirements
contained in this final rule. This display of the OMB control number and its subsequent codification in the Code of
Federal Regulations satisfies the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

) and OMB's implementing regulations at 5 CFR part 1320. 
The ICR was subject to public notice and comment prior to OMB approval. As a result, EPA finds that there is ``good cause''
under section 553(b)(B) of the Administrative Procedures Act (5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B)) to amend this table without prior
notice and comment. Due to the technical nature of the table, further notice and comment would be unnecessary. For
the same reasons, EPA also finds that there is good cause under 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(3). 



VI. Effective Date of Coverage 



A. General Provisions 



This final rule includes a list of acceptable substitutes and a list of unacceptable substitutes. Unacceptable substitutes
cannot be used in manufacturing or in final applications as substitutes for ozone-depleting compounds. The list
of unacceptable substitutes and acceptable substitutes subject to use restrictions becomes binding 30 days after
March 18, 1994. In contrast, the list of fully acceptable substitutes is furnished for the purpose of assisting users
in understanding the full range of available, acceptable substitutes in each application. Many of the substitutes
listed as pending or proposed in the NPRM have since been added to the final acceptable or unacceptable lists. 

As noted above, the Agency does not believe that determinations on substitutes that are acceptable with no use restrictions
need be made through rulemaking. Consequently, EPA believes that it is within its discretion to supplement the list
of acceptable substitutes at any time upon making determinations consistent with the criteria established in this
rulemaking. Until the Agency reaches a final decision restricting the use of a substitute, vendors are not barred
from selling such substitutes once notification is given and the 90 day prior-to-sale notification period expires.




B. Grandfathering of Unacceptable Substitutes 



EPA is authorized to permit the continuation of activities otherwise restricted where the balance of equities supports
such grandfathering. Consequently, where appropriate, EPA may grandfather the production and use of particular
substitutes by setting the effective date of unacceptability listings in the future. 

The United States District Court for the District of Columbia Circuit has established a four-part test to judge the
appropriateness of Agency grandfathering (see 

Sierra Club 

v. 

EPA, 

719 F.2d 436 (DC Cir. 1983)). This test involves balancing the results of four analyses, including whether the new
rule represents an abrupt departure from previously established practice, the extent to which a party relied on the
previous rule, the degree of burden which application of the new rule would impose on the party, and the statutory interest
in applying the new rule immediately. In each rulemaking listing a substitute as unacceptable where grandfathering
seems appropriate, EPA will conduct these four analyses and weigh their results. Where the balance of equities favors
grandfathering, EPA will set a delayed effective date for such listings. 

Setting future effective dates to ban the sale and distribution of specific substitutes will allow the Agency to avoid
penalizing those who in specific applications may have already invested in good faith in alternatives the SNAP program
determines to be unacceptable. For example, the Agency in this final rule finds unacceptable the use of HCFC141b
in solvent applications. New information on stratospheric ozone depletion has increased concern over possible
adverse human health and environmental effects, and the Agency's unacceptable determination in the case of HCFC141b
reflects these concerns. 

However, the Agency recognizes that some solvent users may have switched to HCFC141b in good faith, expecting
that this substitute would sufficiently lower the risk of ozone depletion relative to earlier materials. To provide
for these users, the Agency has extended the effective date for certain end users of HCFC141b. See the listing
determination narrative discussion in section IX.F., as well as the listing tables in appendix B, for a full discussion
of HCFC141b and associated effective dates. Finally, to balance the desire not to penalize those who switched
early in good faith with the need to avoid creating an incentive for continued investment in alternatives the Agency
wishes to discourage, the longer-term effective dates discussed above will affect only existing uses. 


VII. Notice, Review, and Decision-making Procedures 



The purpose of this section is to summarize the procedures for submitting the required information to the Agency,
the steps EPA will take in reviewing SNAP submissions, and the process of making determinations based on these reviews.
This section focuses on three procedures, summarized in Exhibit 1, depending on the nature of the submission received
by the Agency. Some substitutes may already be approved or may not need approval under other environmental statutes,
especially TSCA and FIFRA. These substitutes, in consequence, would only require review under the SNAP program.
Section VII.A. discusses in greater detail the submission and review process for alternatives that fall into this
category. In other cases, a substitute will require review under section 612 as well as relevant provisions of TSCA
and FIFRA. With respect to any substitute that is a new chemical (i.e., not currently listed on the TSCA inventory),
information must be submitted to the Agency for review both under the SNAP program and the PMN program. Section VII.B.
describes steps for this review in more detail. For alternatives to class I and II chemicals that will be used in pesticide
products, the substitute manufacturer will need to file notification jointly with EPA's Office of Pesticide Programs
(OPP) and EPA's SNAP program. Section VII.C. discusses the latter procedure. The SNAP program has coordinated closely
with each of these regulatory programs to establish a joint review process that will ensure consistency in the final
decisions, while minimizing the time for review, the reporting burden, and the costs for both the submitter and the
Agency.



<BILLING>
Billing Code 656050P
</BILLING>







<IMPORT>



e:graphicser18mr94.000


</IMPORT>





<IMPORT>




e:graphicser18mr94.001 




</IMPORT>



<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050C 
</BILLING>


 
