 

The present statutory standard for BAT under 1412(b)(5) represents a 
change from the provision prior to 1986, which required EPA to judge 
feasibility on the basis of ``best technologies generally available'' (BTGA). 
The 1986 Amendments to the SDWA changed BTGA to BAT and added the requirement 
that BAT must be tested for efficacy under field conditions, not just under 
laboratory conditions. The legislative history explains that Congress removed 
the term ``generally'' to assure that MCLs ``reflect the full extent of current technology capability'' (S. Rep.
No. 56, 99th Cong., 1st Session at 6 (1985)). EPA has concluded that the statutory term ``best available technology''
is a broader standard than ``best technology generally available'' and that this standard allows EPA to select a technology
that is not necessarily in widespread use, as long as its performance has been validated in a reliable manner. In addition,
EPA believes that the technology selected need not necessarily have been field tested for each specific contaminant
but, rather, that the operating conditions may be projected for a specific contaminant using a field tested technology
from laboratory or pilot systems data. 
Based on the statutory directive for setting the MCLs, EPA derives the 
MCLs based on an evaluation of (1) the availability and performance of 
various technologies for removing the contaminant, and (2) the costs of 
applying those technologies. Other technology factors considered in 
determining the MCL include the ability of laboratories to measure accurately 
and consistently the level of the contaminant with available analytical 
methods. 
EPA's initial step in deriving the MCL is to make an engineering 
assessment of technologies that are capable of removing a contaminant from 
drinking water. EPA reviews the available data to determine technologies that 
have the highest removal efficiencies, are compatible with other water 
treatment processes, and are not limited to a particular geographic region. 
Based on the removal capabilities of the various technologies, EPA 
calculates the level of each contaminant that is achievable by their 
application to large systems with relatively clean raw water sources. (See H.R. Rep. 1185, 93rd Cong., 2nd Sess. at
13 (1974); 132 Cong. Rec. S6287, 
May 21, 1986, statement of Sen. Durenberger.)
When considering costs to control contaminants, EPA analyzes whether the 
technology is reasonably affordable by regional and large metropolitan PWSs 
(See H.R. Rep. No. 931185 at 18 (1974) and 132 Cong. Rec. S6287 (May 21, 
1986) (statement of Sen. Durenberger)). EPA also evaluates the total national 
compliance costs, considering the number of systems that will have to install 
treatment in order to comply with the MCL. The resulting total national costs 
vary depending upon the concentration level chosen as the MCL. The more 
stringent the MCL, the greater the number of systems that may have to install 
BAT to achieve compliance and the higher the national cost.
The feasibility of setting the MCL at a precise level is also influenced by laboratory ability to measure the contaminant
reliably. Because compliance 
with the MCL is determined by analysis with approved analytical techniques, 
the ability to analyze consistently and accurately for a contaminant at the 
MCL is important for enforcing a regulatory standard. Thus, the feasibility 
of meeting a particular level is affected by the ability of analytical 
methods to determine with sufficient precision and accuracy whether such a 
level is actually being achieved. 


2. Treatment Technologies and Costs 


In the July 25, 1990 proposal, EPA identified two technologies as BATs 
under Section 1412 of the SDWA for sulfate: Reverse osmosis (RO) and ion 
exchange (IE). EPA believes that the costs of these technologies to large 
systems are reasonable, and that these technologies are compatible with other 
water treatment processes in different regions of the U.S. These technologies 
and the costs of using them are described as follows: 



