 

Although applicants may target female adolescents aged 1021, provisions must be made in the data collection
plan to disaggregate data for participants aged 1221. Collecting data on females aged 1221 will allow
for comparisons with other SAMHSA programs targeting females. 

In identifying female adolescents who are ``at risk'' for ATOD use, CSAP proposes this framework for considering
risk (See Resnick, 1993): 

Risk factors are: (1) Those environmental forces that have a negative impact on the individual by producing an increased
vulnerability to ATOD use. These include family dysfunction, including childhood physical/sexual abuse and incest;
high risk neighborhoods/environments; and poverty. 

(2) Those visible indicators of problems in individuals, which represent the onset of potentially negative behaviors
related to ATOD use and other negative outcomes. These may often be found in public records, and include poor school
performance and involvement with child protective services, such as out-of-home placement in the foster care system.


Risk factors for the use of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs may be found in six domains: The individual, the family,
the school, peer groups, the neighborhood/community, and society. 

Primary prevention efforts for ATOD use should identify female adolescents who are affected by multiple risk factors
(environmental forces and visible indicators). Secondary prevention efforts should target female adolescents
who may have already initiated ATOD use or have engaged in other problem behaviors such as early sexual activity, truancy,
or running away from home. 

Recommended Approach: CSAP encourages applicants to develop comprehensive programs that will address one or more
of the following questions: 

1. What combination of strategies is most effective in improving the self-image, including body image, and the 
generalized self-esteem and self-efficacy of female adolescents? 

2. What combination of strategies is most effective in developing the competencies or life skills of female adolescents
in such areas as intra/interpersonal communications and problem-solving? 

3. Which combination of strategies is most effective in improving the family functioning and strengthening the families
of female adolescents, and increasing adolescents' levels of parenting skills so that they will be prepared to parent
effectively and appropriately when they have children? 

4. What combination of strategies is most effective in combatting the long-lasting effects of sexual abuse/assault?


5. What combination of strategies is most effective in promoting healthy life styles and life skills (e.g., negotiation,
conflict-handling, self-assertion) among female adolescents? 

These questions are in addition to the ATOD-specific questions listed in the Outcome Evaluation section of Part IV.


Applicants are asked to involve representatives of youth and others in the community to: (1) Identify the risk factors
for ATOD use that are to be addressed in the project and (2) select the appropriate interventions. 

Successful interventions should also impact not only on ATOD use, but on other negative outcomes associated with
ATOD use. Related negative outcomes include adolescent pregnancy and parenting; 

HIV/AIDS and other sexually-transmitted diseases; adolescent mental disorders, including eating disorders and
depression; suicide; violent acts and criminal justice involvement; and homelessness. CSAP is especially interested
in programs which will address physical/sexual abuse, teen pregnancy, and HIV/AIDS and STDs, in addition to ATOD
use. 

Contact for Additional Information: Ulonda B. Shamwell, M.S.W., 
Division of Demonstrations for High Risk Populations, 
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, 
Rockwall II, room 9B03, 
5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, 
(301) 4434564. 



Module C: Alcohol and Other Drug-Related Violence Among High Risk Youth 





Introduction and Background:

 CSAP announces the availability of funds to support projects that demonstrate and evaluate comprehensive strategies
to prevent alcohol and other drug-related (AOD-related) violence among or affecting youth aged 6 to 14. Under this
program priority area, applicants should propose prevention demonstrations directed to youth who are at high risk
for becoming witnesses, victims, or perpetrators of violent acts associated with the use of alcohol and other drugs
(AOD). 

For the purpose of this Announcement, CSAP defines violence as a public health, social, and economic issue that affects
people of all races, ethnicities, and socioeconomic classes with enormous consequences to all Americans. CSAP recognizes
that substance abuse is both correlated with and causes violence and that, in turn, violence give rise to substance
abuse. Thus, substance abuse and violence are inextricably intertwined. Violence may be understood as any act that
causes psychological, emotional, or physical harm to individuals and/or communities, or that causes damage to property.
In this context, violence arises from substance use and abuse, the trade in illicit substances, racism, misogyny,
homophobia, among other factors, and results in homicide; assaults, including rape and sexual assault; spouse abuse
and battering; child physical and sexual abuse; child neglect; suicide; and vandalism and other forms of property
destruction. This broad CSAP definition of violence illustrates the fact that violence affects its victims, witnesses,
and perpetrators. 

CSAP recognizes that violence is linked to a host of social and health problems that plague many communities; however,
the Center is particularly concerned with the relationship of violence to the use and abuse of alcohol and other drugs.





