 

In developing the revised proposal, the agencies sought to address 
these concerns in two principal ways. First, despite substantial simplification in 
data collection compared to the December proposal, the revised proposal would 
provide institutions additional time before the data collection would begin. 
Under the revised proposal, collection of new data elements would not be 
required until July 1, 1995. 
Second, compared to the December proposal, the revised proposal 
eliminates the grace period and instead would provide institutions with 
additional time before assessments under the proposed standards would become 
mandatory. 
The revised proposal would also provide institutions with 
assessment options prior to full implementation of the rule. Even though 
assessments under the proposed standards would not be mandatory until 
July 1, 1996, small institutions would have the opportunity to be examined, at 
their option, under the small bank assessment method anytime after 
July 1, 1995. Anytime on or after July 1, 1995, an institution could also elect 
to submit for approval a strategic plan to achieve satisfactory or better CRA 
performance. Examinations under approved strategic plans could begin 
July 1, 1996. 
Under the proposed transition schedule, the current regulation 
would be repealed in its entirety on July 1, 1996. 


Review 


The agencies recognize that the revised proposal, like the 
December proposal, represents a significant change in existing practices and 
that cautious administration is therefore required. Consultation by financial 
institutions with the agencies on compliance with the new standards and 
procedures will be encouraged, as will liberal use of agency appeals processes. 
The supervisory agencies will engage in an internal review of the effectiveness 
of the new regulations. The agencies contemplate reconsideration of the 
regulations to improve their effectiveness within the next several years. The 
agencies intend for the proposed regulations to require demonstrated 
performance but to impose as little unnecessary compliance burden as possible, 
and the agencies will review the regulations to determine whether they are 
advancing these goals. 


Other Efforts 


In addition to this rulemaking, the agencies will work together to 
improve examiner training and to increase interagency coordination regarding 
application of standards, performance of examinations, assignment of ratings, 
and use of enforcement tools. The agencies will work together to make 
examinations as short in duration as possible, to minimize unnecessary 
compliance burden, and to ensure consistency and reliability in the rating 
process. 


Benefit and Burden of Administrative Compliance Requirements 


With respect to the reporting, disclosure, and other administrative 
compliance requirements in the proposal, the agencies invite comment on 
(1) any administrative burdens that these requirements in the revised proposal 
would place on depository institutions, including small depository institutions 
and customers of depository institutions; and (2) the benefits of these 
requirements in the revised proposal for depository institutions, their customers, 
and their communities. 


Paperwork Reduction Act 




OCC:

 The collections of information contained in this notice of proposed 
rulemaking have been submitted to the Office of Management and Budget for 
review in accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 
(44 U.S.C. 3502(h)). Comments on the collections of information should be 
sent to the Comptroller of the Currency, Legislative, Regulatory, and 
International Activities, Attention: 15570160, 250 E. Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20219, with a copy to the Office of Management and Budget, 
Paperwork Reduction Project (15570160), Washington, DC 20503. 
The collections of information in this proposed regulation are in 
12 CFR 25.25, 25.27, 25.29, 25.42 and 25.43. This information is required to 
evidence national bank efforts in satisfying their continuing and affirmative 
obligation to help meet the credit needs of their communities, including low- 
and moderate-income areas. 






