 

(3) 

Subcontractor clauses flowdown.

 A clause requiring each subcontractor to include a payment clause and an interest penalty clause conforming to the
standards set forth in subparagraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this clause in each of its subcontracts, and to require each
of its subcontractors to include such clauses in their subcontracts with each lower-tier subcontractor or supplier.


(d) 

Subcontract clauses interpretation.

 The clauses required by paragraph (c) of this clause shall not be construed to impair the right of the Contractor or
a subcontractor at any tier to negotiate, and to include in their subcontract, provisions which_


(1) 

Retainage permitted.

 Permit the Contractor or a subcontractor to retain (without cause) a specified percentage of each progress payment
otherwise due to a subcontractor for satisfactory performance under the subcontract without incurring any obligation
to pay a late payment interest penalty, in accordance with terms and conditions agreed to by the parties to the subcontract,
giving such recognition as the parties deem appropriate to the ability of a subcontractor to furnish a performance
bond and a payment bond;


(2) 

Withholding permitted.

 Permit the Contractor or subcontractor to make a determination that part or all of the subcontractor's request for
payment may be withheld in accordance with the subcontract agreement; and


(3) 

Withholding requirements.

 Permit such withholding without incurring any obligation to pay a late payment penalty if_


(i) A notice conforming to the standards of paragraph (g) of this clause has been previously furnished to the subcontractor;
and


(ii) A copy of any notice issued by a Contractor pursuant to subdivision (d)(3)(i) of this clause has been furnished
to the Contracting Officer.


(e) 

Subcontractor withholding procedures.

 If a Contractor, after making a request for payment to the Government but before making a payment to a subcontractor
for the subcontractor's performance covered by the payment request, discovers that all or a portion of the payment
otherwise due such subcontractor is subject to withholding from the subcontractor in accordance with the subcontract
agreement, the Contractor shall_


(1) 

Subcontractor notice.

 Furnish to the subcontractor a notice conforming to the standards of paragraph (g) of this clause as soon as practicable
upon ascertaining the cause giving rise to a withholding, but prior to the due date for subcontractor payment;


(2) 

Contracting Officer notice.

 Furnish to the Contracting Officer, as soon as practicable, a copy of the notice furnished to the subcontractor pursuant
to subparagraph (e)(1) of this clause;


(3) 

Subcontractor progress payment reduction.

 Reduce the subcontractor's progress payment by an amount not to exceed the amount specified in the notice of withholding
furnished under subparagraph (e)(1) of this clause;


(4) 

Subsequent subcontractor payment.

 Pay the subcontractor as soon as practicable after the correction of the identified subcontract performance deficiency,
and_


(i) Make such payment within_


(A) Seven days after correction of the identified subcontract performance deficiency (unless the funds therefor
must be recovered from the Government because of a reduction under subdivision (e)(5)(i) of this clause); or


(B) Seven days after the Contractor recovers such funds from the Government; or


(ii) Incur an obligation to pay a late payment interest penalty computed at the rate of interest established by the
Secretary of the Treasury, and published in the 

Federal Register

, for interest payments under section 12 of the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 611) in effect at the time the
Contractor accrues the obligation to pay an interest penalty;


(5) 

Notice to Contracting Officer.

 Notify the Contracting Officer upon_


(i) Reduction of the amount of any subsequent certified application for payment; or


(ii) Payment to the subcontractor of any withheld amounts of a progress payment, specifying_


(A) The amounts withheld under subparagraph (e)(1) of this clause; and


(B) The dates that such withholding began and ended.


(6) 

Interest to Government.

 Be obligated to pay to the Government an amount equal to interest on the withheld payments (computed in the manner provided
in 31 U.S.C. 3903(c)(1), from the 8th day after receipt of the withheld amounts from the Government until_


(i) The day the identified subcontractor performance deficiency is corrected; or


(ii) The date that any subsequent payment is reduced under subdivision (e)(5)(i) of this clause.


(f) 

Third party deficiency reports

_(1) 

Withholding from subcontractor.

 If a Contractor, after making payment to a first-tier subcontractor, receives from a supplier or subcontractor of
the first-tier subcontractor (hereafter referred to as a ``second-tier subcontractor'') a written notice in accordance
with section 2 of the Act of August 24, 1935 (40 U.S.C. 270b, Miller Act), asserting a deficiency in such first-tier
subcontractor's performance under the contract for which the Contractor may be ultimately liable, and the Contractor
determines that all or a portion of future payments otherwise due such first-tier subcontractor is subject to withholding
in accordance with the subcontract agreement, the Contractor may, without incurring an obligation to pay an interest
penalty under subparagraph (e)(6) of this clause_


(i) Furnish to the first-tier subcontractor a notice conforming to the standards of paragraph (g) of this clause as
soon as practicable upon making such determination; and


(ii) Withhold from the first-tier subcontractor's next available progress payment or payments an amount not to exceed
the amount specified in the notice of withholding furnished under subdivision (f)(1)(i) of this clause.


(2) 

Subsequent payment or interest charge.

 As soon as practicable, but not later than 7 days after receipt of satisfactory written notification that the identified
subcontract performance deficiency has been corrected, the Contractor shall_


(i) Pay the amount withheld under subdivision (f)(1)(ii) of this clause to such first-tier subcontractor, or


(ii) Incur an obligation to pay a late payment interest penalty to such first-tier subcontractor computed at the rate
of interest established by the Secretary of the Treasury, and published in the 

Federal Register

, for interest payments under section 12 of the Contracts Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 611) in effect at the time the
Contractor accrues the obligation to pay an interest penalty.




