 

(4) A reasonable extension of time to establish the required cover may be granted if the county committee determines
that the producer: 
(i) made a good faith effort to meet the deadline for planting such cover; and 
(ii) was prevented from meeting the deadline for reasons beyond the control of the producer. 
(5) CCC may permit all or part of the acreage to be planted to any crop for ACR as may be authorized by CCC. Such list of authorized
crops, if any, will be available in the county ASCS office. 
(6) The perennial cover planted on ACR may be destroyed at the end of the third year if a fall-seeded crop is planted on
the acreage. 
(7) Residue from prior crops and clean till acreage is not considered as an eligible cover for meeting the requirements
of paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section. 
(8) State committees shall establish a final seeding date for cover crops on ACR. 
(9) The ACR acreage may be seeded in the fall to crops which are of a type that, when seeded in the fall in the county in which
the farm is located, normally attain maturity in the next calendar year; 
(10) Failure to establish a required cover crop shall be considered a maintenance default violation according to

part 718 of this title. 
(b) The ACR acreage may be tilled in the fall for spring planting and left bare only if approved in accordance with 
1413.65. 



1413.64 

Nationally approved cover crops and practices for ACR and CU for payment acreages. 


(a) The following are nationally approved cover crops and practices for ACR and CU for payment acreage: 
(1) Annual, biennial, or perennial grasses and legumes, including sweet sorghums, sorghum grass crosses, and sudans,
excluding soybeans, corn, popcorn, sweet corn, grain sorghum, cotton, fruits, and vegetables. 
(2) Barley, oats, rice, wheat, and other small grains, including volunteer stands in which one of the following apply:

(i) The seeds are planted or volunteered too late to reach the hard dough stage, so that clipping or any other disposal
method is not required; 
(ii) The crop is destroyed before reaching the disposition date according to part 718 of this title; or 
(iii) The crop will remain standing in the field, according to paragraph (c) of this section. 
(3) Crop residue from using ``no till'' or ``minimum till'' practices. 
(b) If a producer elects to leave the crop standing in the field, the following requirements apply: 
(1) A request to leave the crop standing shall be filed before the crop disposition date in accordance with part 718
of this title: and 





