 

Section 1357.50Direct Payments to Indian Tribal Organizations (Title IVB, Subpart 2, Family Preservation
and Family Support Services) 



Section 1357.50 is a new section added to propose requirements applicable only to Indian tribes eligible for and administering
grants under title IVB, subpart 2. We considered combining into one section all fiscal and administrative
requirements for Indian tribes under title IVB, subparts 1 and 2 but, as with the State fiscal requirements
in 1357.30 and 1357.32, the statutory requirements for Indian tribes are different in each subpart.
It appeared to be simpler and clearer to put them in separate sections. 

In paragraph (a), we have included the definitions from section 431(a) of the Act for the terms ``Alaska Native organization,''
``Indian tribe,'' and ``tribal organization.'' These are included for clarity; the tribal allotments are computed
based on the first two definitions, and the definition of tribal organization is included because section 434 of the
Act provides that ACF will pay to the tribal organization of the Indian tribe any amount to which the Indian tribe is
entitled under subpart 2. 

Paragraph (b)(1) explains the statutory requirement for eligibility for funds in FY 1994 which is based on the Indian
tribe's FY 1995 allotment. (The FY 1995 allotment must be at least $10,000 for the Indian tribe to be eligible in FY 1994.)
Additional explanation on eligibility was sent to Indian tribes and others in Program Instruction ACYFPI9404,
January 18, 1994. 

Paragraph (c) proposes that, beginning in FY 1995, in order to receive title IVB, subpart 2 funds, an Indian
tribe must submit a comprehensive child and family services plan that meets the requirements applicable to Indian
tribes in 1357.15. 

In order to fund as many eligible Indian tribes as possible under the law, we have proposed in paragraph (d) a process
for adding Indian tribal grantees in FY 1996 through FY 1998. 

For FY 1996, FY 1997, and FY 1998, we propose to calculate allotments as required in section 433 of the Act. Those Indian
tribes whose allotment is at least $10,000 (the minimum for eligibility specified in the law), will be invited to apply.
As in FY 1995, in order to receive funding, the Indian tribe must submit a comprehensive child and family services plan
that meets the requirements applicable to Indian tribes in 1357.15. The statute does not make available 100
percent Federal funds for planning in FYs 19961998. 

We want to point out that while this proposal increases the number of Indian tribes receiving funds, it will decrease
the amount the Indian tribes eligible in the first year (FY 1994) will otherwise receive in FYs 199698. Although
we have received recommendations that funding additional Indian tribes should be our first priority, we also are
concerned that the size of most of the grants to Indian tribes is small. Indian tribes have been creative in the past
in using comparatively small grants to provide services, but we are concerned that smaller grants will be less effective
in helping Indian tribes develop and operate the needed services. We look forward to hearing from the Indian community
on this proposal. 

Another issue about which we have received many recommendations is that of funding consortia of Indian tribes, e.g.,
to permit two or more tribes to apply for funding whose combined total grant would equal $10,000. We have researched
the legislative history and analyzed the statute and can find no basis for funding consortia, given the clear language
of the law. 

Paragraph (e) specifies that the allotments will be computed based on section 433 of the Act. 

We have accepted recommendations from Indian tribes and other Indian advocacy groups to waive certain statutory
requirements. This waiver authority is based on the Secretary's discretion in section 432(b) of the Act to waive any
provision in section 432 that is determined to be inappropriate to Indian tribes, taking into account the resources,
needs, and other circumstances of the Indian tribe. In paragraph (f), we propose to waive three statutory provisions
for Indian tribes: the ten percent limit on administrative costs, the supplantation provision, and the requirement
that a significant portion of funds must be used for both family preservation and family support services. 

We believe that waiving the supplantation and significant portion provisions are reasonable, given the limited
dollars available to the Indian tribes, our desire to reduce inappropriate requirements, and the circumstances
of tribal services programs. We believe that waiving the ten percent administrative cost limitation and allowing
Indian tribes to use their current negotiated indirect cost rates is reasonable based on the need for flexibility
in working with small grantees and our understanding that, in some cases, some service-related costs are reflected
in the indirect cost rates negotiated by some Indian tribes. 

Paragraph (g) reflects the statutory requirement for a 25 percent match rate. Although we received many recommendations
that this provision also be waived, we do not have the authority to do so. Section 432(b) of the Act permits waivers only
of requirements in section 432. The match requirement is in section 434 of the Act. However, we have included in paragraph
(g)(2) a list of three Federal sources of funds which Indian tribes may use as a source of matching funds. 

Paragraph (h) states the time limit on expenditure of funds (section 434(b) of the Act). This means that Indian tribes
must submit their Standard Form (SF) 269 expenditure reports annually, 90 days after the end of the expenditure period,
i.e., by 
December 30 of each year. In addition, paragraph (h) references other applicable fiscal and administrative requirements
(that may be found in the Program Instruction (ACYFPI9404, January 18, 1994)) and which will
be prepared by ACF in the form of assurances for all grantees. 



III. Impact Analysis 



Regulatory Impact Analysis 



Executive Order 12866 requires that regulations be drafted to ensure that they are consistent with the priorities
and principles set forth in the Executive Order. The Department has determined that this rule is consistent with these
priorities and principles. This Notice of Proposed Rulemaking implements statutory authority for a broad consultation
and coordination process leading to the development of a five-year child and family services plan. 





