 

7. Respondents shall indemnify the trustee and hold the trustee harmless against any losses, claims, damages, or
liabilities arising in any manner out of, or in connection with, the trustee's duties under this Order.

8. Within thirty (30) days after appointment of the trustee, and subject to the prior approval of the Commission and,
in the case of a court-appointed trustee, of the Court, respondents shall execute a trust agreement that transfers
to the trustee all rights and powers necessary to permit the trustee to effect the divestiture required by this Order.

9. If the trustee ceases to act or fails to act diligently, a substitute trustee shall be appointed in the same manner
as provided in Paragraph III.A. of this Order.

10. The Commission or, in the case of a court-appointed trustee, the Court may on its own initiative or at the request
of the trustee issue such additional orders or directions as may be necessary or appropriate to accomplish the divestiture
required by this Order.

11. The trustee shall have no obligation or authority to operate or maintain HCA Aiken Regional Medical Center.

12. The trustee shall report in writing to respondents and to the Commission every sixty (60) days concerning the trustee's
efforts to accomplish the divestiture.



IV





It is further ordered

 that, for a period of ten (10) years from the date this Order becomes final, no respondent shall, without the prior approval
of the Commission, directly or indirectly, through subsidiaries, partnerships, or otherwise:





A. Acquire any acute care hospital in Augusta-Aiken; or

B. Permit any acute care hospital it operates in Augusta-Aiken to be acquired by any person that operates, or will operate
immediately following such acquisition, any other acute care hospital in Augusta-Aiken.





Provided, however, that no acquisition shall be subject to this Paragraph IV of this Order if the fair market value
of (or, in case of a purchase acquisition, the consideration to be paid for) the acute care hospital or part thereof
to be acquired does not exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000).



V





It is further ordered

 that, for a period of ten (10) years from the date this Order becomes final, respondents shall not permit all or any substantial
part of any acute care hospital they operate in Augusta-Aiken to be acquired by any other person (except pursuant to
the divestiture required by Paragraph II of this Order) unless the acquiring person files with the Commission, prior
to the closing of such acquisition, a written agreement to be bound by the provisions of this Order, which agreement
respondents shall require as a condition precedent to the acquisition.



VI





It is further ordered

 that, for the purposes of determining or securing compliance with this Order, and subject to any legally recognized
privilege, upon written request and on reasonable notice to respondents made at their principal offices, respondents
shall permit any duly authorized representatives of the Commission:





A. Access, during office hours and in the presence of counsel, to inspect and copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence,
memoranda and all other records and documents in respondents' possession or control relating to any matter contained
in this Order; and

B. Upon five days' notice to respondents and without restraint or interference from respondents, to interview their
officers or employees, who may have counsel present, regarding such matters.



VII





It is further ordered

 that: A. Within sixty (60 days after the date this Order becomes final and every sixty (60) days thereafter until respondents
have fully satisfied the divestiture obligations of this Order, respondents shall submit to the Commission a verified
written report setting forth in detail the manner and form in which they intend to comply, are complying, and have complied
with the Order. Respondents shall include in their compliance reports, among other things that are required from
time to time, a full description of all contacts or negotiations with prospective acquirers for the divestiture required
by this Order, including the identity of all parties contacted. Respondents also shall include in their compliance
reports copies of all written communications to and from such parties, and all internal memoranda, reports, and recommendations
concerning the required divestiture.

B. Annually, beginning on the first anniversary of the date this Order becomes final, and continuing for nine (9) years
thereafter, respondents shall submit a verified report demonstrating the manner in which they have complied and
are complying with this Order.



VIII





It is further ordered

 that respondents shall notify the Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to any proposed change, such as dissolution,
assignment, sale resulting in the emergence of a successor corporation or association, the creation or dissolution
of subsidiaries or affiliates, or any other change in respondents which may affect compliance obligations arising
out of this Order.



