 

15. Hot-work permits shall be issued to prohibit draining and flushing operations in the processing building during
operations that may generate a source of ignition.

16. Draining and flushing operations shall not take place in the processing building when a hot work permit is issued
for repairs in that building.

17. No ignitable waste shall be processed in uncontrolled areas and, during loading and unloading operations, transportation
vehicles containing ignitable substances shall be secured to prevent movement and grounded to reduce the potential
for static discharge.

18. All pumps, hoses, valves, and connections shall be checked by system operators for leaks and ruptures prior to
initiating each draining and flushing operation, and at least once daily by designated inspectors/supervisors
during regular operating hours.

19. Leaking drums shall be placed in overpack drums.

20. Direct ventilation of the processing building shall be provided during the draining and flushing operations
by a wall-mounted exhaust fan located adjacent to the processing area. This fan shall circulate air at 12,000 cubic
feet per minute (

i.e.,

 18 air changes per hour), and shall be capable of operating under auxiliary electric power. 

21. The processing building shall be vented by roof-mounted turbine vents.

22. The processing system shall be provided with a series of interlocks to prevent liquid spills.

23. Inspectors/supervisors shall inspect the processing building and tank areas for spills on a daily basis.

24. A detailed Contingency Plan for managing spills shall be available at the facility. This Plan shall consist of
written procedures established to minimize, contain, mitigate, and expeditiously remove liquid spills (containing
PCBs, ignitable liquids, and combinations thereof) that may occur in the facility. These written procedures shall
be posted near areas where spills are likely to occur, and all employees are to receive documented training annually
on these procedures.



25. All spills shall be cleaned immediately. Small spills shall be removed by using designated sorbents and containers.
Large spills shall be contained using diking materials if necessary. Work shall be performed in diked/curbed areas
where the potential for spills is high.

26. During spill removal, the following safety procedures shall be observed.

a. Contact with the spilled material shall be avoided;

b. Unnecessary personnel shall leave the area;

c. Appropriate protective equipment (described under Condition 9 above) shall be worn;


d. The area shall be ventilated;

e. Personnel exposed in any manner to the spilled material shall be decontaminated thoroughly using eyewashes and
bodywashes available in the processing area; this decontamination shall occur immediately following spill removal;
and

f. Technical advice shall be obtained as necessary.

27. Authorities shall be notified if the spilled material escapes downstream.

28. All tanks containing ignitable waste shall meet American Society for Testing and Materials specifications for
ignitables, and shall be grounded to prevent sparking and potential ignition. These tanks shall be fitted with discharge
valves with fusible links that close in case of a fire emergency. 

29. Storage tanks shall be adequately maintained; these tanks shall be checked prior to pumping ignitable liquids
into the tanks to assure that there is ample space to accommodate the liquid, and that the proper tanks are being filled
with flushed liquids.

Upon receipt of this order, Envirosafe Services, Inc. shall give affected employees notice of the terms contained
herein using the same means required to inform them of the variance application.

This order shall become effective on June 7, 1994, and shall remain in effect until modified or revoked in accordance
with section 6(d) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.




Signed at Washington, DC, this 23d day of May 1994.



<SIGNER>
Joseph A. Dear,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary of Labor.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413716 Filed 6694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 451026M
</BILLING>


