 

135.76 

Filing and processing complaints. 


(a) 

Who may file a complaint.

 The following individuals and business concerns may, personally or through an authorized representative, file
with the Assistant Secretary a complaint alleging noncompliance with section 3: 
(1) Any section 3 resident on behalf of himself or herself, or as a representative of persons similarly situated, seeking
employment, training or other economic opportunities generated from the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance
with a recipient or contractor, or by a representative who is not a section 3 resident but who represents one or more
section 3 residents; 
(2) Any section 3 business concern on behalf of itself, or as a representative of other section 3 business concerns
similarly situated, seeking contract opportunities generated from the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance
from a recipient or contractor, or by an individual representative of section 3 business concerns. 
(b) 

Where to file a complaint.

 A complaint must be filed with the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Washington, D.C., 20410. 
(c) 

Time of filing.

 (1) A complaint must be received not later than 180 days from the date of the action or omission upon which the complaint
is based, unless the time for filing is extended by the Assistant Secretary for good cause shown. 
(2) Where a complaint alleges noncompliance with section 3 and the regulations of this part that is continuing, as
manifested in a number of incidents of noncompliance, the complaint will be timely if filed within 180 days of the last
alleged occurrence of noncompliance. 
(3) Where a complaint contains incomplete information, the Assistant Secretary shall request the needed information
from the complainant. In the event this information is not furnished to the Assistant Secretary within sixty (60)
days of the date of the request, the complaint may be closed. 

(d) 

Contents of complaint

_(1) 

Written complaints. 

Each complaint must be in writing, signed by the complainant, and include: 
(i) The complainant's name and address; 
(ii) The name and address of the respondent; 
(iii) A description of the acts or omissions by the respondent that is sufficient to inform the Assistant Secretary
of the nature and date of the alleged noncompliance. 
(iv) A complainant may provide information to be contained in a complaint by telephone to HUD or any HUD Field Office,
and HUD will reduce the information provided by telephone to writing on the prescribed complaint form and send the
form to the complainant for signature. 
 
(2) 

Amendment of complaint.

 Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. Such amendments may include, but are not limited to, amendments
to cure, technical defects or omissions, including failure to sign or affirm a complaint, to clarify or amplify the
allegations in a complaint, or to join additional or substitute respondents. Except for the purposes of notifying
respondents, amended complaints will be considered as having been made as of the original filing date. 
(e) 

Resolution of complaint by recipient.

 (1) Within ten (10) days of timely filing of a complaint that contains complete information (in accordance with paragraphs
(c) and (d) of this section), the Assistant Secretary shall determine whether the complainant alleges an action or
omission by a recipient or the recipient's contractor that if proven qualifies as noncompliance with section 3. If
a determination is made that there is an allegation of noncompliance with section 3, the complaint shall be sent to
the recipient for resolution. 
(2) If the recipient believes that the complaint lacks merit, the recipient must notify the Assistant Secretary in
writing of this recommendation with supporting reasons, within 30 days of the date of receipt of the complaint. The
determination that a complaint lacks merit is reserved to the Assistant Secretary. 





