 




Aircraft 

means any machine designed to travel through the air above ground without leaving the earth's atmosphere, whether
heavier or lighter than air, including airplanes, balloons, dirigibles, helicopters, and missiles.


Automobile 

means a motor vehicle capable of carrying no more than 12 passengers.


Can 

means any cylindrical, single walled container that is manufactured from metal sheets thinner than 29 gauge (0.0141
in.); with or without a top, cover, spout, or handles; into which solid or liquid materials are packaged.


Can coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more can coating unit(s).


Can coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied onto the surface of cans
or can components.


Coating 

means a material applied onto or impregnated into a substrate for protective, decorative, or functional purposes.
Such materials include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, sealants, adhesives, thinners, diluents, inks,
maskants, and/or temporary protective coatings.


Coating applicator 

means any equipment or device, including but not limited to cloth, rollers, brushes, spray guns, and dip tanks, used
to apply a coating onto or into a substrate.


Coating unit 

means a series of one or more coating applicators and any associated drying areas and/or oven wherein a coating is applied,
dried, and/or cured. A coating unit ends at the point where the coating is dried or cured, or prior to any subsequent
application of a different coating. It is not necessary to have an oven or a flashoff area in order to be included in this
definition.


Coil 

means any continuous metal sheet or strip with thickness of 0.15 mm (0.006 in.) or more that is packaged in a roll or coil.


Coil coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more coil coating unit(s).


Coil coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied onto the surface of flat
metal sheets, strips, rolls, or coils for industrial or commercial use.


Cold cleaning 

means the batch process of cleaning and removing soils from surfaces by spraying, brushing, flushing, or immersion
while maintaining the organic solvent below its boiling point. Wipe cleaning is not included in this definition.


Conveyorized degreasing 

means the continuous process of cleaning and removing soils from surfaces using either cold or vaporized solvents.


Degreaser 

means any equipment or system used in solvent cleaning.


Degreasing facility 

means a facility that includes one or more cold cleaning, open-top vapor degreasing, and/or conveyorized degreasing
processes.


Dry cleaning facility 

means a facility engaged in the cleaning of fabrics using an essentially nonaqueous solvent by means of one or more
solvent washes, extraction of excess solvent by spinning, and drying by tumbling in an airstream. The facility includes,
but is not limited to, washers, dryers, filter and purification systems, waste disposal systems, holding tanks,
pumps, and attendant piping and valves.


Fabric coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more fabric coating unit(s).


Fabric coating unit 

means a web coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating or reinforcing material is applied
on, saturated into, or impregnated into a textile fabric. A fabric printing unit is not considered a fabric coating
unit.


Film coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more film coating unit(s).


Film coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied on, saturated into, or
impregnated into any film substrate; other than paper, fabric, or vinyl; including but not limited to typewriter
ribbons, photographic film, plastic film, magnetic tape, and metal foil.


Flatwood product 

means panels made of wood materials including; but not limited to; plywood, particle board, and hardboard.


Flatwood product coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more flatwood product coating unit(s).


Flatwood product coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied on or impregnated into
a flatwood product.


Flexographic printing 

means the application of words, designs, and pictures to a substrate by means of a roll printing technique in which
the pattern to be applied is raised above the printing roll and the image carrier is made of elastomeric materials.


Flexographic printing press 

means a printing press in which each roll printer uses a roll with raised areas for applying an image such as words, designs,
or pictures to a substrate. The image carrier on the roll is made of rubber or other elastomeric material.


Fountain solution 

means the solution which is applied to the lithographic printing plate to maintain hydrophilic properties of the
nonimage areas.


Graphic arts coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more graphic arts coating units.


Graphic arts coating unit 

means any packaging rotogravure printing, publication rotogravure printing, flexographic printing, lithographic
printing, letterpress printing, laminating, or screen printing unit or any paper, fabric, or film coating unit operated
in conjunction with a printing unit.


