 

170.12 

Program certification. 



(a) The Secretary of Transportation may discharge all responsibilities, or any part of them, pursuant to 23 U.S.C.
117 relative to projects in the IRR program, upon the request of the BIA, by accepting a certification by the BIA of its
performance of such responsibilities. The acceptance of the BIA Certification by the Secretary of Transportation
acknowledges that the BIA road construction program procedures shall be carried out in a manner which will accomplish
the objectives of title 23, U.S.C. The certification may include all or part of the procedures, and may involve all
or part of the field offices, of BIA. The Secretary of Transportation may rescind the BIA Certification of Performance
of Responsibilities under 23 U.S.C. at any time considered necessary. 

(b) The BIA will notify the Secretary of Transportation upon the completion of each construction project. The Secretary
of Transportation shall require an adequate report of the estimated and actual cost of construction, as well as such
other information as is determined necessary. All final inspections on each project will be conducted in accordance
with procedures jointly established by the Secretary and the Secretary of Transportation. 



170.13 

Program analysis. 



To ensure proper implementation of title 23 U.S.C. requirements in the IRR programs, the BIA shall conduct reviews
at the national, Area, and tribal levels. These reviews shall evaluate policy, procedures, operations, and service
delivery and shall make recommendations for improvements and corrective actions in compliance with statutes, manuals,
and policy regarding road construction and road maintenance. The BIA shall also analyze workload, adequacy of staffing,
efficiency of operations, and program effectiveness at each level and report to the Assistant Secretary_Indian
Affairs. A review of support services to road programs shall be performed. The analysis shall assess the efficiency
of program operations; effectiveness of organizational structures and relationships and of operating systems
and procedures; and work force requirements and utilization. It shall assist management in the establishment of
program objectives and provide a mechanism to develop performance measurements; to ensure accountability for the
Highway Trust Funds; and to promote the efficiency, economy, and effectiveness of roads programs. 



170.14 

Right-of-way. 



(a) The procedures for obtaining permission to survey or to grant any necessary right-of-way are governed by 25 CFR
part 169 of this chapter. Prior to any work being done for the construction of road projects, the Superintendent shall
obtain the written consent of the Indian and non-Indian landowners. Where an Indian has an interest in tribal land,
consent shall be obtained in accordance with the policy of the Indian tribe. Right-of-way easements are to be documented
on forms approved by the Secretary. All right-of-way actions shall be in accordance with the requirement of the Uniform
Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act (42 U.S.C. 4601 

et seq.

 as amended), and 49 CFR part 24. 

(b) Prior to construction, right-of-way easements for the project shall be obtained in favor of the public agency
that will be responsible for maintenance and reconstruction of the route. When that agency is the BIA, easements shall
be in favor of the United States, its successors and assigns, with the right to construct, maintain, and repair improvements
thereon and thereover, for such purposes; and with the further right in the United States, its successors and assigns,
to transfer the right-of-way easements by assignment, grant, or otherwise. 

(c) No right-of-way shall be transferred without consultation with the tribal government. 



170.15 

Road design. 



The BIA is responsible for collecting reliable data, designing safe and economical roads, and developing adequate
construction plans, specifications, and estimates. General guidelines will be the latest edition of the relevant
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) publications, ``A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets,'' and the ``Roadside Design Guide''; and the FHWA publications, ``Standard Specifications
for Construction of Roads and Bridges on Federal Highway Projects'' (or approved State specifications) and the ``Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.'' 




