 

3. Opioid Drugs for Treatment of Chronic Intractable Pain._An implantable infusion pump is covered when used to administer
opioid drugs (e.g., morphine) intrathecally or epidurally for treatment of severe chronic intractable pain of malignant
or nonmalignant origin in patients who have a life expectancy of at least 3 months and who have proven unresponsive
to less invasive medical therapy as determined by the following criteria:  
 
&bull;The patient's history must indicate that he/she would not respond adequately to non-invasive methods of pain
control, such as systemic opioids (including attempts to eliminate physical and behavioral abnormalities which
may cause an exaggerated reaction to pain); and  
 
&bull;A preliminary trial of intraspinal opioid drug administration must be undertaken with a temporary intrathecal/epidural
catheter to substantiate adequately acceptable pain relief and degree of side effects (including effects on the
activities of daily living) and patient acceptance.  
 
4. Coverage of Other Uses of Implanted Infusion Pumps._Determinations may be made on coverage of other uses of implanted
infusion pumps if the contractor's medical staff verifies that:  
 
&bull;The drug is reasonable and necessary for the treatment of the individual patient;  
 
&bull;It is medically necessary that the drug be administered by an implanted infusion pump; and  
 
&bull;The FDA approved labelling for the pump must specify that the drug being administered and the purpose for which
it is administered is an indicated use for the pump.  
 
5. Implantation of Infusion Pump Is Contraindicated._The implantation of an infusion pump is contraindicated in
the following patients:  
 
&bull;Patients with a known allergy or hypersensitivity to the drug being used (e.g., oral baclofen, morphine, etc.);
 
&bull;Patients who have an infection;  
 
&bull;Patients whose body size is insufficient to support the weight and bulk of the device; and  
 
&bull;Patients with other implanted programmable devices since crosstalk between devices may inadvertently change
the prescription. 

 
 



Note:

 Payment may also be made for drugs necessary for the effective use of an implantable infusion pump as long as the drug
being used with the pump is itself reasonable and necessary for the patient's treatment.

 
 

The following indications for treatment using infusion pumps are not covered under medicare:  
 
A. External Infusion Pumps._ 
 
1. Diabetes (Effective for Services Performed On or After 1/29/85)._The use of an external infusion pump for the subcutaneous
infusion of insulin in the treatment of diabetes is not covered.  
 
B. Implantable Infusion Pump._  
 
1. Thromboembolic Disease (Effective for Services Performed On or After 9/26/84)._According to the Public Health
Service, there is insufficient published clinical data to support the safety and effectiveness of the heparin implantable
pump. Therefore, the use of an implantable infusion pump for infusion of heparin in the treatment of recurrent thromboembolic
disease is not covered.  
 
Transmittal No. 68. Section 5032. CHANGED IMPLEMENTATION Instructions_Effective Date: For Services Performed
on or After 03/17/94.  
 
Section 5032, Percutaneous Transluminal Angioplasty (PTA), is revised to provide for additional coverage
of this procedure. PTA coverage is expanded to include treatment of atherosclerotic obstructions of vessels in the
upper extremities. The upper extremities do not include head or neck vessels. Clarification is made that PTA is covered
in the treatment of obstructive lesions of the arteriovenous dialysis fistulas through either an arterial or a venos
approach.  
 


5032Percutaneous Transluminal Angioplasty (PTA)  
 




This procedure involves inserting a balloon catheter into a narrow or occluded blood vessel to recanalize and dilate
the vessel by inflating the balloon. PTA is covered to treat the following indications:  
 
&bull;Atherosclerotic obstructive lesions:  
 
 
 


