 

* * * * *


5. Section 563b.7 is amended by removing the last sentence of paragraph (f)(2) and adding two new sentences in its place
to read as follows:


563b.7 

Pricing and sale of securities. 


* * * * * 


(f)*** 
(2) *** No appraiser shall serve as an underwriter or selling agent under the same plan of conversion.
No affiliate of an appraiser may act as an underwriter or selling agent unless procedures are followed and representations
made to ensure that an appraiser is separate from the underwriter or selling agent affiliate and the underwriter or
selling agent affiliate does not make recommendations or in any way impact the appraisal. No appraiser shall receive
any other fee except for the fee for services rendered in connection with such appraisal. 


* * * * * 


6. Section 563b.11 is added to subpart A of part 563b to read as follows: 


563b.11 

Convenience and needs considerations. 


In reviewing an application under this subpart, the Office will examine the extent to which the conversion will affect
the convenience and needs of the communities to be served by the converted savings association. The Office will review
the applicant's record under part 563e of this subchapter. In addition, the Office will scrutinize the business plan
of the applicant. Each applicant must demonstrate that the proposed deployment of proceeds contained in its business
plan will help meet the credit and lending needs of the communities served by the applicant. Also, the Office will consider
other relevant factors relating to the association's performance in meeting the convenience and needs of the community.
Based on an assessment of the applicant's record under part 563e of this subchapter, the applicant's business plan
and other relevant factors, the Office may approve the application, deny the application, or approve the application
on the condition that the applicant improve certain aspects of its CRA performance record or address particular credit
or lending needs of the communities that it serves. 


PART 575_MUTUAL SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANIES 


7. The authority citation for 12 CFR part 575 is revised to read as follows:

 



Authority:

 12 U.S.C. 1462, 1462a, 1463, 1464, 1467a, 1828, 2901. 



8. Section 575.1 is amended by designating the existing text as paragraph (a), by adding a heading to newly-designated
paragraph (a), and by adding a new paragraph (b) to read as follows: 


575.1 

Scope. 


(a) 

Purpose.

 *** 
(b) 

General.

 Except as the OTS may otherwise determine, the provisions of this part shall exclusively govern the reorganization
of mutual savings associations and any related stock issuances, and no mutual savings association shall reorganize
to a mutual holding company or issue minority stock without the prior written approval of the OTS. The OTS may grant
a waiver in writing from any requirement of this part for good cause shown. 
9. Section 575.7 is amended by redesignating paragraph (a)(7) as paragraph (a)(8), and by adding a new paragraph (a)(7),
and by revising paragraph (d)(2) to read as follows: 


575.7 

Issuances of stock by savings association subsidiaries of mutual holding companies. 




