 



c. Benchmark Analyses.

 Another approach to deriving an RfC estimate is the benchmark dose (BMD) approach, which has been described by Crump
(1984) and others (e.g., Kimmel and Gaylor, 1988; Faustman et al., 1994; Allen et al., 1994). A BMD is an estimate of
the dose (the term dose is used interchangeably here with concentration, although the latter is more appropriate
for inhalation exposure) that will produce a specified effect (e.g., a 10% increase in the prevalence of abnormal
scores on a neurobehavioral test in the case of the study by Roels et al. (1992)). The BMD is calculated by fitting a mathematical
model to the available data and obtaining a maximum likelihood estimate of the dose associated with a specified increase
in response (typically 10, 5, or 1%). A lower confidence limit is then calculated for the BMD (usually the 95th percentile),
and the result is denoted as a benchmark dose level (BMDL), which has been proposed as a substitute for a NOAEL in deriving
RfDs or RfCs (Crump, 1984; Barnes et al., 1994). Subscripts designate the effect level (10, 5, or 1%) for which the BMDL
has been calculated, as in BMDL

10

, BMDL

5

, or BMDL

1

. 

A large number of mathematical models could be used for deriving BMDLs, but six frequently used models have been selected
for the present exercise (as discussed in Appendix A). In applying these models to the dataset provided by Roels (1993),
it appears that the models fit the CRD and ACRD data better than the LIRD data. (As explained in Appendix A, it made little
difference whether the LIRD values were obtained from the group data provided in the report by Roels et al. (1992) or
from the individual exposure data supplied by Roels (1993), so the latter LIRD data were used here.) In principle,
LIRD is superior to CRD as a measure of long-term or cumulative exposure. One reason for the difference in goodness
of fit between LIRD and either CRD or ACRD is that two workers with low LIRD values had abnormal eye-hand coordination
responses (exceeding the 95th percentile of control scores). These two subjects appear to have had rather short exposure
durations (0.3 and 0.4 years) and moderately high CRD values (201 &mu;g/m3 each). Thus, these two data points suggest
an LIRD exposure-response relationship that is better fit by a supralinear curve with a power term &lt;1 (see Figures
A3 and A5 in Appendix A) than by the more nearly linear curve such as that produced by the quantal linear
or restricted Weibull model (see Figures A1 and A4 in Appendix A). If CRD or ACRD exposure data are used,
however, the two individuals tend to fall in line better with a linear model (see Figures A7 to A10 in Appendix
A). Another factor contributing to difficulty in fitting the Roels (1993) data with linear models is a tendency for
the prevalence of abnormal eye-hand coordination responses to decline slightly at the highest LIRD, CRD, and ACRD
concentrations (evident in Figures A1 to A6). 

The supralinear exposure-response curve for abnormal eye-hand coordination scores suggests a possible corollary
to the healthy worker phenomenon; namely, the existence of newly employed, relatively sensitive workers vis-&aacute;-vis
long-term, relatively nonsensitive workers. It may be that the two above-noted workers happened to be rather susceptible
to Mn toxicity but had not been employed long enough for their greater sensitivity to become otherwise evident. There
could be a tendency for such workers to move to other types of employment, leaving a greater proportion of relatively
less sensitive individuals among the older workers. Although irregularities of the type posed by the data for these
two workers create complexities for model fitting, it is important to recognize that statistical curve fitting is
secondary to the objective of selecting the most biologically appropriate exposure variable. However, given that
the final results obtained with LIRD, CRD, and ACRD are roughly equivalent, ACRD has been selected for discussion
here because it estimates an average exposure over time and yet provides as good or better goodness of fit as CRD or LIRD
for most of the models considered. 

Of the six models considered, the quantal linear model fits the data reasonably well and is the least complex (see Appendix
A). It also gives equivalent results to the restricted Weibull model for BMDL calculations (although the two models
differ slightly when used in the Bayesian analyses, to be described below). Although much more conservative results
would be obtained if the unrestricted Weibull or unrestricted log-logistic model were used, the NOAEL/LOAEL surrogates
obtained with the latter models are so small as to be practicably incalculable and extend far below the range of actual
measurements. Therefore, the following discussion is focused on the results obtained with the quantal linear model.


In addition to choosing a model, a specified rate of increase in the effect of concern must be selected in using the BMD
approach. This percentage increment is expressed in terms of the effective concentration that would yield the stated
increase. Increases of 10, 5, and 1% in the incidence of abnormal eye-hand coordination scores (as dichotomized by
Roels et al., 1992) have been considered, with the concentrations associated with these levels called ``effective
concentrations'' and designated as EC

1

, EC

5

, and EC

10

, respectively. One guide to the choice of an effect level is that the resulting BMD (before calculating the lower confidence
limit) is preferably near or within the range of observed exposure concentrations (cf. Barnes et al., 1994). Because
the BMD for EC

1

 falls outside this range of observed concentrations, the primary focus in this discussion is devoted to the BMDL

5

 and the BMDL

10

. 

It should be kept in mind that the BMDL represents the lower 95th percent confidence interval for the effective concentration
in question, and therefore the BMDL probably inherently reflects some degree of conservatism. However, the degree
of conservatism obviously varies with the effective concentration for different percentage effect levels and with
the nature of the effect (e.g., severe versus moderate impairment). For the purposes of this assessment, if one treats
the BMDL

10

 derived from the dichotomized (quantal) data of Roels as if it were a minimal (less severe) LOAEL and the BMDL

5

 as if it were a NOAEL, uncertainty factors of 3 and 1, respectively, would be warranted. On this basis, as shown in Figure
1 and in Table A39 of Appendix A for the quantal linear model using ACRD, an RfC estimate of 0.09 &mu;g/m3 would
be obtained by using the quantal BMDL

10

 as if it were a LOAEL and a total uncertainty factor of 300 (10 for intraspecies sensitivity, 10 for database limitations,
and 3 for a minimal severity LOAEL). Similarly, the quantal BMDL

5

 would yield an RfC estimate of 0.1 &mu;g/m3, based on a total uncertainty factor of 100 (10 for intraspecies sensitivity,
10 for database limitations, and 1 for a NOAEL). As applied here, the benchmark approach yields candidate RfC estimates
of 0.09 to 0.1 &mu;g/m3.


