 

(2) Establish standards for the maximum size and location of the wildlife food plots or wildlife habitat; 

(3) Determine which crops on wildlife food plots may be cut and stacked on the wildlife food plots for use by wildlife
in areas that are subject to winter snow conditions that make stacking such wildlife food desirable; and 

(4) Establish fees to assess producers designating such wildlife food plots or habitat on ACR or CU for payment to cover
the cost of a farm visit to verify that the cover is in compliance with program provisions, in accordance with part 718
of this title. 



1413.71 

Insufficient ACR acreage. 



(a) Before the final date for reporting crop acreage as provided in part 718 of this title, producers not having a sufficient
amount of ACR to report may destroy crops on an acreage to designate all or part of the destroyed acreage as ACR acreage.
The acreage must be eligible land as provided in 1413.61. The acreage shall be devoted to an approved cover or
practice in accordance with the provisions of 1413.63, 1413.64, and 1413.65 as soon as practicable
after destruction of the crop. Destruction of the crop does not nullify any failure to fully comply payment reduction
that has already been determined in accordance with part 791 of this title. 

(b) Producers on a farm who report insufficient ACR because they are unable to destroy program crop acreage according
to paragraph (a) of this section, and have more than one participating crop on the farm shall select the crop or crops
to be determined in violation of the program provisions. 



1413.72 

Destroyed crop acreage. 



Operators may substitute for the ACR acreage already designated and reported on form ASCS578, acreages of
small grains or row crops that were destroyed. However, with respect to such substitution of acreages, the following
conditions are applicable. 

(a) The operator must: 

(1) Request the substitution in writing; 

(2) Document such request on form ASCS578; 

(3) Agree that there will be no deficiency payment made with respect to the production from the substituted acreage;

(4) Agree that the substituted acreage shall not be used as planted and considered planted acreage for history purposes
for such crop, and 

(5) Agree that such acreage shall not be used for the establishment of future CAB's on the farm. 

(b) The producer shall: 

(1) Mechanically destroy the reclassified crop; or 

(2) File a request at the time of reclassification to let the crop remain standing according to 1413.64. 

(c) The producer shall pay the cost of a farm visit by a representative of the county committee, according to part 718
of this title, to verify that the acreage has not been harvested. 



