 

Thus, the fact that a centralized market is composed solely of institutional or ``sophisticated'' participants
does not obviate the need to ensure market integrity, price dissemination, and adequate protections against fraud,
manipulation, and other trading abuses by continued Commission regulation and oversight. In this regard, the term
``institutional'' may encompass customers with a wide range of financial experience, acumen and resources. The
Commission believes, moreover, that the Act and Commission regulations serve a vital function, even where such a
market includes only sophisticated participants, in that the regulatory requirements substitute for individualized
credit determinations and permit increased access to the markets by secondary participants and customers. Further,
a premise of the CEA for over 70 years has been that all traders require not only an efficient, but also a fair marketplace
in which to trade, which Congress has previously determined to be best effectuated by a regulatory framework in which
federal regulation is paramount. 


Moreover, notwithstanding the exchanges' arguments to the contrary, since the enactment of the CEA the exchanges
have grown and thrived, not despite, but at least in part, because of the regulatory scheme under which they operate
and the resulting public confidence in the fairness of the markets. The Commission agrees with the commenters who
stated that regulatory safeguards promote public confidence in the integrity of the markets, confidence likely
to be eroded without federal oversight. Accordingly, the Commission is not convinced that a broad exemption of the
kind requested by the exchanges is in the public interest. 

Nevertheless, the Commission has in the past taken into account in fashioning its regulations, granting exemptions,
and establishing policies, whether the general public is excluded from a market or transaction or is permitted to
participate. The Commission considers the exclusion of non-sophisticated market participants as the single most
important rationale supporting the various forms of relief proposed herein. The proposed relief from certain aspects
of exchange regulation should enhance the exchanges' ability to innovate and their competitive posture. Indeed,
the Commission is cognizant, as the exchanges and other commenters noted, that its exemptive authority is ``intended
to promote responsible economic and financial innovation and fair competition.''

18

 In issuing its study on U.S. market competitiveness, the Commission stated that it was committed to keeping its regulatory
programs under continuous review to assure that ``consistent with our responsibilities for market integrity and
customer protection, they: (1) keep pace with changes in the marketplace; and (2) do not unnecessarily impede domestic
exchanges from evolving to remain competitive, especially with regard to the cost of compliance relative to non-U.S.
exchanges.''

19

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


18

</FOOTNAME>
H.R. Rep. No. 978, 102d Cong., 2d Sess. 78 (1992). 


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


19

</FOOTNAME>
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, 

A Study of the Global Competitiveness of U.S. Futures Markets 

2 (April 1994). 


</FOOTNOTE>


To that end, the Commission recognizes that some regulatory controls, such as certain procedures for Commission
review and approval of new instruments, could be streamlined in order to facilitate the introduction of products
and the on-exchange offering of more varied contract designs. More flexibility to permit some customizing of exchange-traded
products also may attract certain institutional participants for which the efficiency of exchange markets and other
protections they afford may be preferable to off-exchange transactions where prices are often opaque and credit
risk is a more profound issue. The Commission also believes that exchange transactions traded by professional traders
may not require the full panoply of regulatory requirements. In that regard, the Commission believes that a more flexible
approach to risk disclosure for products offered to sophisticated market participants may be preferable to existing
requirements. In addition, the Commission preliminarily agrees with the commenters who suggested that certain
registration requirements could be streamlined for professional traders licensed with other financial regulators
to facilitate new entrants to the exchange markets by persons currently selling OTC products to sophisticated customers.
Finally, the Commission preliminarily believes that the long-standing traditional requirements of open and competitive
trading could be relaxed for sophisticated, eligible participants in order to facilitate the execution of large
orders, as long as appropriate post-trade transparency, customer, and 
other market protections from trading abuses are maintained. 



For these reasons, after reviewing the exchanges' petitions and the general comments, the Commission is proposing
to test some ways of giving the exchanges flexibility and greater latitude in order to enhance their ability to devise
innovative responses both to other centralized and to less regulated, non-centralized markets. The Commission
believes that the exemptive relief that it is proposing preserves regulatory safeguards but also acknowledges that
non-centralized markets have a far lower regulatory burden and that several comparable markets of other jurisdictions
provide certain trading mechanism concessions not currently afforded the U.S. futures markets. In that regard,
the Commission proposes a new Part 36, which exempts contracts termed ``section 4(c) contract market transactions''
meeting specified criteria from certain specific requirements and regulations under the Act. There are four main
proposed limitations on the exemption: (1) The duration, (2) the scope, (3) the persons who are eligible to enter into
the transactions, and (4) the transactions which may trade as section 4(c) contract market transactions. The Commission
believes that this proposal strikes the appropriate balance between the need to detect and deter abuses and the need
for an innovative central market tailored to the needs of sophisticated and institutional market participants.
The Commission requests comments concerning the specifics of the proposed criteria for the transactions as well
as the proposed provisions from which the transactions will be exempt. 



