 

VI. Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis 


A. Introduction 


Executive Order 12886 requires a Regulatory Impact Analysis and Regulatory Flexibility Analysis to be prepared
for any regulation that meets the criteria for a ``significant regulatory action.'' One of these criteria, relevant
to this rulemaking is that the rule have an effect on the economy of $100 million or more per year. Based upon the preliminary
analysis presented below, OSHA finds that the proposed standard will constitute a significant regulatory action.

The estimates presented in this Phase 1 Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis demonstrate technological and economic
feasibility of the proposed standard. The analysis provides a non-detailed preliminary count of the affected employees
and buildings, the associated costs, and benefits of the proposed standard provisions. 
OSHA estimates the annual cost of compliance with the IAQ standard to be $8.1 billion, of which the most costly provision
will be for the building systems operation and maintenance, $8.0 billion. The cost for eliminating exposure to ETS
may range from $0 to $68 million depending on whether establishments ban smoking or allow smoking in designated areas.
In order to assess the overall economic impact of the rule, OSHA also estimated the cost savings to employers, or cost
savings that will result from the implementation of the proposed standard. The major forms of these savings are efficiency
and productivity improvements, cost reductions in operations and maintenance, and reduced incidence of property
damage. Cost savings associated with productivity improvements are estimated to be $15 billion annually. 
OSHA preliminarily estimates that the proposed standard will prevent 3.0 million severe headaches and 4.5 million
upper respiratory symptoms over the next 45 years. This is, approximately, 69,000 severe headaches and 105,000 upper
respiratory symptoms per year. These estimates understate the prevalence of building-related symptoms since they
reflect excess risk in only air conditioned buildings. In addition, 5,583 to 32,502 lung cancer deaths and 97,700
to 577,818 coronary heart disease deaths related to occupational exposure to ETS will be prevented over the next 45
years. This represents 140 to 722 lung cancer deaths per year and 2,094 to 13,001 heart disease deaths per year. 


B. Industry Profile 


The environmental concern for air pollution has been largely focussed on questions of outdoor air contamination.
Recently, however, attention has begun to shift to concerns about the quality of air within buildings since people
spend 80 to 90 percent of their time indoors [Ex. 31075H]. 
Indoor air is a variable complex mixture of chemicals and airborne particles. Its composition largely depends on
the outdoor environment (urban or rural area), the shelter itself (age, construction material, electric equipment,
heating, cooling, and ventilation systems), the activities of the occupants (smoking, nonsmoking, cooking by gas,
oil or electricity) and the presence of plants and animals. 
The Industry Profile chapter characterizes the 
building stock and describes the factors that affect indoor air quality. This section also presents the number of
employees who work in buildings whose indoor air will be affected by the proposed standard. 


1. Affected Industries 


The standard covers all OSHA regulated industries: Agriculture, Oil and Gas Extraction (SIC 13), Manufacturing,
Transportation, Communications, Wholesale Trade, Retail Trade, Finance, Insurance and Real Estate and Services.
The scope of the proposal is twofold. The proposed indoor air quality compliance provisions would only cover employers
with non-industrial work environments. This includes public and private buildings, schools, healthcare facilities,
offices and office areas. Coverage also applies to nonindustrial work environments that are part of industrial worksites
(e.g., an office, cafeteria, or break room located at a manufacturing facility). 
The provisions for protecting the nonsmoking employees from exposure to ETS apply to all indoor or enclosed work environments,
in industrial and nonindustrial establishments. This would include maritime, construction, and agricultural
workplaces. 


2. Indoor Contaminants-Sources 



