 

Stationary, area, and mobile sources could be allowed to participate in a common emissions trading market. Programs
involving emissions trading markets are particularly effective at reducing overall costs when individual affected
sources face significantly different emissions control costs. A wider range in control costs among affected sources
creates greater opportunities for cost-reducing trades. Thus, for example, areas which face relatively high stationary
source control costs relative to mobile source control costs benefit most by including both stationary and mobile
sources in a single emissions trading market. 
Programs involving emissions trading markets have generally been designated as either emission allowance or emission
reduction credit (ERC) trading programs. 
The Federal Acid Rain Program is an example of an emission allowance trading program, while ``bubbles'' and ``generic
bubbles'' created under the EPA's 1986 Emission Trading Policy Statement are examples of ERC trading. Allowance
trading programs can establish emission allocations to be effective at the start of a program, at some specific time
in the future, or at varying levels over time. An ERC trading program requires ERC's to be measured against a pre-established
emission baseline. Allowance allocations or emission baselines can be established either directly by the EIP rules
or by reference to traditional regulations (e.g., RACT requirements). In either type of program, sources can either
meet their EIP requirements by maintaining their own emissions within the limits established by the program, or by
buying surplus allowances or ERC's from other sources. 
In any case, the State will need to establish adequate enforceable procedures for certifying and tracking trades,
and for monitoring and enforcing compliance with the EIP. 
The definition of the commodity to be traded and the design of the administrative procedures the buyer and seller must
follow to complete a trade are obvious elements that must be carefully selected to help ensure a successful trading
market that achieves the desired environmental goal at the lowest cost. An emissions market is defined as efficient
if it achieves the environmental goal at the lowest possible total cost. Any feature of a program that unnecessarily
increases the total cost without helping achieve the environmental goals causes market inefficiency. Thus, the
design of an emission trading program should be evaluated not only in terms of the likelihood that the program design
will ensure that the environmental goals of the program will be met, but also in terms of the costs that the design imposes
upon market transactions and the impact of those costs on market efficiency. 
Transaction costs are the investment in time and resources to acquire information about the price and availability
of allowances or ERC's, to negotiate a trade, and to assure the trade is properly recorded and legally enforceable.
All trading markets impose some level of transaction costs. The level of transaction costs in an emissions trading
market are affected by various aspects of the design of the market, such as the nature of the procedures for reviewing,
approving, and recording trades, the timing of such procedures (i.e., before or after the trade is made), uncertainties
in the value of the allowance or credit being traded, the legitimacy of the allowance or credit being offered for sale,
and the long-term integrity of the market itself. Emissions trading programs in which every transaction is different,
such as programs requiring significant consideration of the differences in the chemical properties or geographic
location of the emissions, can result in higher transaction costs than programs with a standardized trading commodity
and well-defined rules for acceptable trades. Transaction costs are also affected by the relative ease with which
information can be obtained about the availability and price of allowances or credits. 
While the market considerations discussed above are clearly important in designing an efficient market to minimize
the transaction costs of such a program, other considerations, such as regulatory certainty, enforcement issues,
and public acceptance, also clearly need to be factored into the design of any emissions trading program. 




