 

(iii) Requirement that borrowers follow REA construction standards and use REA accepted materials, as set forth
in 7 CFR 1710.41, 7 CFR 1710.45, and 7 CFR part 1728;

(iv) Requirement that borrowers maintain, on an ongoing basis, a long-range engineering plan and a construction
work plan, as set forth in 1710.250(b);

(v) Requirement that borrowers set rates for electric service sufficient to maintain certain levels for the Times
Interest Earned Ratio and Debt Service Coverage ratio, as set forth in 1710.114;

(vi) Requirement that certain borrowers maintain an equity development plan, as set forth in 1710.116;

(vii) REA approval of retirements of capital credits in excess of amounts specifically authorized in the mortgage;

(viii) REA approval of borrower investments, loans, guarantees, and other obligations under 7 CFR Part 1717, subpart
N;

(ix) REA requirements on accounting, auditing, irregularities, financial reporting, and access to books and records;

(x) Requirement that borrowers record the mortgage and mortgage amendments;

(xi) Requirement that the mortgagor maintain and preserve the priority lien of the mortgage and defend title to the
mortgaged property;

(xii) Requirements on maintenance and repair of the mortgaged property;

(xiii) Requirements on insurance of the mortgaged property; and

(xiv) REA approval of borrower mergers and consolidations; and

(2) Requirements imposed on borrowers pursuant to statute or regulation and not specifically exempted by paragraph
(c) of this section. See, for example, 1710.122 through 1710.127.

(e) 

Rescission of exemptions if borrower defaults. 

If a borrower is in default with respect to any requirement of its mortgage, loan contract with REA, or any other agreement
with REA that has not been exempted pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section or other REA regulations, upon written
notice to the borrower REA may rescind all or any part of the exemptions granted pursuant to said regulations. The reinstated
requirements and controls will remain in effect until REA determines that they are no longer needed to help ensure
that the security, including the assurance of repayment, for loans made or guaranteed by REA will remain reasonably
adequate.

(f) 

Reinstated controls. 

If REA controls are reinstated because the borrower defaults or its net worth falls below 110 percent of REA debt, such
controls and approval rights will apply to all applicable subsequent actions of the borrower, including without
limitation the amendment of contracts that the borrower entered into while eligible for an exemption under this section.




PART 1717_POST-LOAN POLICIES AND PROCEDURES COMMON TO INSURED AND GUARANTEED ELECTRIC LOANS



3. The authority citation for part 1717 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 7 U.S.C. 901950b; Delegation of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture, 7 CFR 2.23; Delegation of Authority
by the Under Secretary for Small Community and Rural Development, 7 CFR 2.72, unless otherwise noted.




