 



Service Response:

 According to a 1991 study by the GAO, the costs of administering the livestock grazing program by the BLM and Department
of Agriculture (predator control and rangeland grasshopper control) far exceed the fees derived from the ranchers
for their AUMs. 



Issue 58:

 One letter stated that the critical habitat economic analysis should have included the costs associated with implementation
of the recovery plan. A 2006 date for delisting was selected in an arbitrary and capricious manner and designed to limit
the amount of funding the Recovery Team had to report in the Draft Recovery Plan. 



Service Response:

 Implementation of the recovery plan for the desert tortoise is not a cost attributable to designation of critical
habitat. The Draft Recovery Plan was prepared prior to proposing critical habitat and is mandated by the Endangered
Species Act whether or not a species has designated critical habitat. Therefore, its implementation can be considered
a cost of listing the desert tortoise as threatened versus a cost associated with designation of critical habitat.




Issue 59:

 The DOD installations stated that the economic analysis failed to evaluate the costs to the public of relocating base
activities or potential base closures that might result from inclusion in critical habitat. 



Service Response:

 After careful consideration of the activities that occur on the military installations, the Service concluded that
designation of critical habitat should not result in the closure of military bases in the region. The Service maintains
that most training conducted on the bases can be compatible with proper tortoise management and has concluded that
concerns about military bases being rendered unusable due to designation of critical habitat are overstated. Areas
that include existing facilities, or that have been highly degraded (e.g., high-impact bombing ranges), do not contain
constituent elements of tortoise habitat. Therefore, they do not constitute critical habitat. Expansion or relocation
of facilities or activities that may destroy or adversely modify critical habitat within a CHU on a military base (e.g.,
relocation of high impact bombing targets) would require section 7 consultation to determine if the relocation is
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the desert tortoise or destroy or adversely modify its critical habitat.




Issue 60:

 The Service should, on economic grounds, exclude the proposed site of the LLRWR facility in Ward Valley. 




