 


The required value of ``n'' is obtained by successively evaluating this expression for n = 1, 2, 3, ...,
until the value of the formula first drops below 0.05. The table in 200.820(e) of the proposed rule was generated
using this method. 





Several points need to be made about the revised table. First, for less than 20 units total, all units would have to be
tested to get the desired confidence level. Second, the percentage of units to be tested would decrease with increasing
size of the project. Third, it is apparent from the table that for values of ``N'' above 1,006, 5.9 percent of the units
would need to be tested. 



Lower sample sizes may be attractive because of lower testing costs, but that reduces the assurance that units are
not lead-contaminated. The existing procedure does not provide any identifiable level of assurance. Of course,
100 percent assurance can only be achieved by requiring the testing of all the units in a project, at much higher cost.





Other Matters



 
Environmental Impact 





A Finding of No Significant Impact with respect to the environment has been made in accordance with part 50 of this title,
which implements section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, 42 U.S.C. 4332. This Finding
relies in substantial part on an Environmental Assessment prepared for the Lead-Based Paint Interim Guidelines.
The subject Finding of No Significant Impact is available for inspection and copying during regular business hours
in the Office of the Rules Docket Clerk, room 10276, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410. 




Executive Order 12866 





This proposed rule was reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under Executive Order 12866 on Regulatory
Planning and Review, issued by the President on September 30, 1993. Any changes made in the proposed rule subsequent
to its submission to OMB are identified in the docket file, which is available for public inspection as provided under
the section of this preamble entitled ``Addresses.'' 




Regulatory Flexibility Act 





The Secretary, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 605(b)), has reviewed this proposed rule
before publication and by approving it certifies that this proposed rule would not have a significant economic impact
on a substantial number of small entities. The proposed rule is limited to implementation of statutory changes to
the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act; there are no anticompetitive discriminatory aspects of the proposed
rule with regard to small entities and there are not any unusual procedures that would need to be complied with by small
entities. 




Executive Order 12606, the Family 





The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under Executive Order 12506, the Family, has determined that this
proposed rule would not have potential significant impact on family formation, maintenance, and general well-being,
and, thus, is not subject to review under the Order. The function of this proposed rule is to remedy inaccuracies in
existing program regulations and respond to advancements in the field of lead-based paint testing and hazard reduction.





Executive Order 12512, Federalism 





The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under section 8(a) of Executive Order 12612, Federalism, has determined
that the policies contained in this proposed rule do not have federalism implications and, thus are not subject to
review under the Order. The function of this proposed rule would be to remedy inaccuracies in existing program regulations
and respond to advancements in the field of lead-based paint testing and hazard reduction. Issuance of this proposed
rule in no way changes or affects the existing relationships among Federal, State, and local governments. 




Semiannual Agenda of Regulations 





This proposed rule was listed as Item No. 1533 in the Department's Semiannual Agenda of Regulations published on April
25, 1994 (59 FR 20424, 20435) under Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act, and was requested by
and submitted to the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Banking, Finance
and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives under section 7(o) of the Department of Housing and Urban Development
Act. 




List of Subjects 



24 CFR Part 35 





Grant programs_housing and community development, Lead poisoning, Mortgage insurance, Rent subsidies, Reporting
and recordkeeping requirements. 




24 CFR Part 200 





Administrative practice and procedure, Claims, Equal employment opportunity, Fair housing, Housing standards,
Incorporation by reference, Lead poisoning, Loan programs_housing and community development, Minimum property
standards, Mortgage insurance, Organization and functions (Government agencies), Penalties, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Social security, Unemployment compensation, Wages. 




24 CFR Part 280 





Community development, Grant programs_housing and community development, Loan programs_housing and community
development, Low and moderate income housing, Nonprofit organizations, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.





24 CFR Part 291 





Community facilities, Conflict of interests, Homeless, Lead poisoning, Low and moderate income housing, Mortgages,
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Surplus government property. 




24 CFR Part 510 





Lead poisoning, Loan programs_housing and community development, Relocation assistance, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Social security, Urban renewal. 





