 

(b) 

State and local governments.

 To facilitate a State's bookkeeping, SSA will assign a special identification number to each political subdivision
included in a modification to the State's agreement with the Secretary under section 218 of the Act. These numbers
are not used for reporting purposes unless coverage is extended to periods prior to 1987. Then, the special number
will be assigned and used for reporting the pre-1987 wages to SSA. This special number will also be assigned to an interstate
instrumentality if pre-1987 coverage is obtained. SSA will inform the appropriate State or interstate instrumentality
official of the assigned number by sending a Form SSA214CD, ``Notice of Identifying Number.''




3. A new 422.114 is added to read as follows:



422.114 

Annual wage reporting process.



(a) 

General.

 Under the authority of section 232 of the Act, SSA and IRS have entered into an agreement that sets forth the manner by
which SSA and IRS will ensure that the processing of employee wage reports is effective and efficient. Under this agreement,
employers are instructed by IRS to file annual wage reports with SSA on paper Forms W2, ``Wage and Tax Statement,''
and Forms W3, ``Transmittal of Income and Tax Statements,'' or equivalent
 W2 and W3 magnetic media reports. Special versions of these forms for Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa,
the Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands are also filed with SSA. SSA processes all
wage reporting forms for updating to SSA's earnings records and IRS tax records, identifies employer reporting errors
and untimely filed forms for IRS penalty assessment action, and takes action to correct any reporting errors identified,
except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section. SSA also processes Forms W3c, ``Transmittal of Corrected
Income Tax Statement,'' and W2c, ``Statement of Corrected Income and Tax Amounts'' (and their magnetic media
equivalents) that employers are required to file with SSA when certain previous reporting errors are discovered.

(b) 

Magnetic media reporting requirements.

 Under IRS regulations at 26 CFR 301.60112, employers who file 250 or more W2 wage reports per year must
file them on magnetic media in accordance with requirements provided in SSA publications, unless IRS grants the employer
a waiver. Basic SSA requirements are set out in SSA's Technical Instruction Bulletin No. 4, ``Magnetic Media Reporting.''
Special filing requirements for U.S. territorial employers are set out in SSA Technical Instruction Bulletins No.
5 (Puerto Rico), No. 6 (Virgin Islands), and No. 7 (Guam and American Samoa). At the end of each year, SSA mails these
technical instructions to employers (or third parties who file wage reports on their behalf) for their use in filing
wage reports for that year.

(c) 

Processing late and incorrect magnetic media wage transmittals.

 If an employer's transmittal of magnetic media wage reports is received by SSA after the filing due date, SSA will notify
IRS of the late filing so that IRS can decide whether to assess penalties for late filing, pursuant to section 6721 of
the Internal Revenue Code. If reports do not meet SSA processing requirements (unprocessable reports) or are out
of balance on critical money amounts, SSA will return them to the employer to correct and resubmit. In addition, beginning
with wage reports filed for tax year 1993, if 90 percent or more of an employer's magnetic media wage reports have no
social security numbers or incorrect employee names or social security numbers so that SSA is unable to credit their
earnings to its records, SSA will not attempt to correct the errors, but will instead return the reports to the employer
to correct and resubmit (see also 422.120(b)). An employer must correct and resubmit incorrect and unprocessable
magnetic media wage reports to SSA within 45 days from the date of the letter sent with the returned report. Upon request,
SSA may grant the employer a 15-day extension of the 45-day period. If an employer does not submit corrected reports
to SSA within the 45-day (or, if extended by SSA, 60-day) period, SSA will notify IRS of the late filing so that IRS can
decide whether to assess a penalty. If an employer timely resubmits the reports as corrected magnetic media reports,
but they are unprocessable or out of balance on W2 money totals, SSA will return the resubmitted reports for
the second and last time for the employer to correct and return to SSA. SSA will enclose with the resubmitted and returned
forms a letter informing the employer that he or she must correct and return the reports to SSA within 45 days or be subject
to IRS penalties for late filing.

(d) 

Paper form reporting requirements.

 The format and wage reporting instructions for paper forms are determined jointly by IRS and SSA. Basic instructions
on how to complete the forms and file them with SSA are provided in IRS forms materials available to the public. In addition,
SSA provides standards for employers (or third parties who file wage reports for them) to follow in producing completed
reporting forms from computer software; these standards appear in SSA publication, ``Software Specifications
and Edits for Annual Wage Reporting.'' Requests for this publication should be sent to: Social Security Administration,
Office of Financial Policy and Operations, Attention: AWR Software Standards Project, P.O. Box 17195, Baltimore,
MD 21235.






