 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Coast Guard</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>33 CFR Part 117</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[CGD0594072]</RINDOCK>




<RINDOCK>RIN 2115AE47</RINDOCK>



Drawbridge Operations Regulations; Pamunkey River, West Point, VA



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Coast Guard, DOT.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Coast Guard is changing the regulations governing the operation of the Eltham drawbridge, SR 33, across Pamunkey
River, mile 1.0, located in West Point, Virginia, by restricting commercial fishing and crabbing vessels and recreational
vessels from opening the bridge between the hours of 7 a.m. to 9 a.m., 12 noon to 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. The remaining
times those vessels are restricted to opening the bridge on the hour, Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays.



This is intended to provide for regulatory scheduled drawbridge openings to help reduce motor vehicle traffic delays
and congestion on the roads and highways linked by this drawbridge, while still providing for the reasonable needs
of navigation.






</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE: 

This rule is effective on October 7, 1994.



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Ann B. Deaton, Bridge Administrator, Fifth Coast Guard District, (804) 3986222.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:


Drafting Information



The principal persons involved in drafting this document are Bill H. Brazier, Project Officer, and LT Monica L. Lombardi,
Project Attorney, Fifth Coast Guard District.



Regulatory History



On May 20, 1994, the Coast Guard published a Supplemental Notice of Proposed Rulemaking entitled Pamunkey River,
West Point, Virginia, in 

Federal Register 

(59 FR 25474). The comment period ended July 19, 1994. The Coast Guard received three letters commenting on the proposal.
Prior to publishing the Supplemental Notice of Proposed Rule, the Coast Guard also published Public Notice 5818
and the original Notice of Proposed Rulemaking entitled Pamunkey River, West Point, Virginia, in 

Federal Register 

(58 FR 62303). The comment period ended January 10, 1994. The Coast Guard received 66 letters commenting on the proposal.



Background and Purpose



The original Notice of Proposed Rule announced that a proposal was being considered to restrict openings of the Eltham
Bridge to all vessels during morning, noon, and evening rush hours, between the hours of 7 a.m. to 9 a.m., 12 noon to 1
p.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., Monday through Friday; except Federal holidays.

As a result of the proposed rule and the public notice, comments were received from the maritime community and the motoring
public. The motorists all were in favor of the proposed restrictions during peak traffic hours to reduce traffic disruption,
delays, congestion and minor accidents. The commercial marine industry was opposed to restricting the openings,
based on economic impact concerns, safety and tidal navigational requirements.

Following further investigation by the Coast Guard, it was determined that the major cause of traffic congestion
due to bridge lifts for the Eltham Bridge was contributed by commercial fisherman, crabbers and recreational boaters
requesting frequent bridge lifts during rush hour traffic periods. These mariners, for the most part, could pass
through without a bridge lift, by lowering their antennae. The remainder of the maritime industry, consisting of
piloted vessels and large tugs and barges, passing through this bridge is very sporadic. The bridge tender's logs
only reflected 4 or 5 bridge lifts per month for these vessels.

The Virginia Department of Transportation, in an effort to improve this situation, has requested these revised regulations.
It agreed to changing the original request by excluding larger classes of maritime vessels from the restrictions,
and to placing new restrictions on commercial fishing and crabbing vessels and recreational vessels which create
most of the problem.



Discussion of Comments and Change



The three comments received as a result of the Supplemental Notice of Proposed Rule issued by the District Commander
are all in favor of the new restrictions for the Eltham Bridge. No new or additional changes are being made to the regulatory
language of this final rule.



Regulatory Evaluation



This action is not considered a significant regulatory action under Executive Order 12866 and is not significant
under the Department of Transportation Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11040; February 26, 1979). The
economic impact has been found to be so minimal that a full regulatory evaluation is unnecessary.

This opinion is based on the fact that the regulations will not unduly cause a hardship on commercial/military vessels
who will be able to plan their vessel transits around the hours of restriction.



Small Entities



No comments were received concerning small entities or on the economic impact this rule would have on small entities.
Since the impact on these regulations is expected to be minimal, the Coast Guard certifies under 5 U.S.C. 605(b) of
the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. et seq.), that this final rule will not have a significant economic impact
on a substantial number of small entities.

Even though commercial crabbers and small fishing vessel operators would be restricted under the proposed regulations,
the Coast Guard believes the proposed opening schedule for these operators is not unduly restrictive. These vessel
operators can still crab and fish, but they will have to time their requests for openings of the bridge to coincide with
the proposed new schedule. This should not cause any economic hardship. Because it expects the impact of this proposal
to be minimal, the Coast Guard certifies under 5 U.S.C. 605(b) that this proposal, if adopted, will not have a significant
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.



Collection of Information



This rule contains no collection of information requirements under the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et
seq.).



Federalism 



This action has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteria contained in Executive Order 12612,
and it has been determined that this rule does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation
of a Federalism Assessment.



Environment



The Coast Guard considered the environmental impact of this proposal and concluded that under section 2.B.2.g.(5)
of Commandant Instruction M16475.1B, this rule is categorically excluded from further environmental documentation.
A Categorical Exclusion Determination statement has been prepared and placed in the rulemaking docket.



List of Subjects in 33 CFR Part 117



Bridges.



</SUPPLEM>
