 

The 60-day period for public comments commenced on April 1, 1994 and expired on May 30, 1994. The United States received
only one comment on the proposed Final Judgment, a letter from Michael London. As required by 15 U.S.C. 16(b), this
comment is being filed with this response. (Exhibit A).

In his comments, Mr. London expressed concern that the proposed Final Judgment's prohibition on advance price announcements
would deprive consumers of valuable information for making travel plans. Mr. London also expressed concern that
the United States may have filed its lawsuit without sufficient evidence to substantiate its claims against the airlines.
The United States sent Mr. London a letter individually responding to his inquiries regarding the proposed Final
Judgment. The United State's correspondence with Mr. London is also being filed with this response. (Exhibit B).


The Department has carefully considered Mr. London's comments. Nothing in these comments has altered the United
States' conclusion that the proposed Final Judgment is in the public interest.

The proposed Final Judgment provides all of the relief requested in the Complaint against American, Alaska, Continental,
Delta, Northwest, Trans World, the ATP, without the substantial expense of a trial. The relief provided by the proposed
decree will leave these airlines and ATP without the ability to resume the actions that constituted the antitrust
violations. Entry of the proposed Final Judgment is in the public interest.




Respectfully submitted,




Dated: June 17, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Mary Jean Moltenbrey,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Attorney, Antitrust Division.



Exhibit A_Civil Action No. 922854 (SSH)



April 5, 1994.



Assistant Attorney General, Anne K. Bingaman, 


United States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.




Dear Ms. Bingaman: I am writing to you concerning an article that appeared in our local newspaper about a settlement
of price fixing allegations.

There are 2 points about this matter that concern me as both an air traveller and as a citizen.

(1) I have found in the past, the prenotification of fare adjustments very useful in planning airline travel. My travel
agent would scan the computer system for reduced fares to be effective at some future date. I could then plan travel
for a date when that fare would be available.

This would enable me to save money instead of paying a higher current fare. Therefore, instead of injuring the public,
this practice could result in savings over existing fares.

(2) The part that really concerns me and that seems unbelievable is the section of the article that states ``The government
believes that history would make proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt difficult''.

If this paraphrase of your department's statement is correct, it seems a terrible thing that our government would
take action under these circumstances. I always thought that there were Constitutional safeguards that protected
individuals and companies against arbitrary prosecution. If the Justice Department had these doubts, how dare they
waste our tax money and impinge the reputation of companies on such an unsubstantiated charge.

I am a stockholder of one of the airline companies named as a party to the settlement. I believe that unfair and arbitrary
actions of the Justice Department have injured the reputation of the company and therefore my investment. If I believe
that the actions of the Justice Department constitute False Prosecution or the attempt at False Prosecution, what
remedies are available to me?




Very Truly yours,


</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>


Michael London.




</SIGNER>
