 

In the third example, the net asset value of the Qualifying Deposit had risen to $25 million at the withdrawal date,
leaving $15 million (in net asset value) after the withdrawal. In this example, the Guarantee would be reduced by 50%
(i.e., $10 million withdrawn divided by the $20 million Qualifying Deposit). Thus, although $15 million would be
the total net asset value remaining in the client's account under the Agreement after the $10 million withdrawal,
the Guarantee would apply to $10 million of the Qualifying Deposit.
Income on the account would not be currently distributed to the client. Rather, income would be held in the account
until termination of the Agreement and may become part of a new Qualifying Deposit upon renewal of the Agreement. As
discussed above, it is anticipated most Agreements would have a renewable term of one year.
5. The applicant states that the investment management fee negotiated by the Manager with each of its clients does
not change by reason of the Bank's Guarantee. The applicant represents that the Manager offers the client two management
fees: a combined arrangement or a base fee only. The combined arrangement includes (a) a fixed fee of 0.30% per annum
of the net asset value of the client's portfolio, payable quarterly in arrears based on the net asset value of the client's
portfolio as of the end of the quarter (adjusted for additional withdrawals) and (b) a performance schedule fee equal
to 25% of an amount equal to the aggregate net realized and unrealized appreciation in the value of the assets in the
client's portfolio (including net investment income) in excess of a benchmark (the Benchmark) equal to the U.S. 3-month
Treasury bill rate plus 100 basis points.

2

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
The applicant represents that the performance schedule fee component of the combined arrangement will be substantially
the same in all material respects as the performance fee arrangement described in advisory opinion letter 86-21A
issued by the Department on August 29, 1986. That letter concerns the payment of incentive compensation to Batterymarch
Financial Management by employee benefit plans.
The Department expressed its view that, based on the representations contained in the Batterymarch submissions,
the payment of an incentive fee to Batterymarch pursuant to the arrangement described therein would not, in itself,
constitute violations of sections 406(b)(1) or 406(b)(2) of the Act. The Department noted, however, that, because
violations of sections 406(b)(1) and 406(b)(2) could occur in the course of the provision of services by Batterymarch,
the Department was not prepared to rule that the described arrangement, in operation, would not violate those sections.
In any event, the relief provided by this exemption does not extend to the receipt of fees by the Manager pursuant to
the above performance schedule.

</FOOTNOTE>


The performance schedule fee is assessed and billed on the one-year anniversary of the date of the Agreement and at
the end of each calendar quarter thereafter during the term of the Agreement, which may be renewed by written agreement
of the parties. Each assessment of the performance fee is based on the performance of the client's portfolio over the
12 months ending on the last day of the period for which the fee is being paid. If the Agreement terminates at a time other
than at the end of a calendar quarter, the performance fee for such quarter is payable upon termination, based on the
performance of the client's portfolio over the 12 months ending on the termination date. 




