 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Background


Part 210 of Title 31 of the Code of Federal Regulations sets forth the rights and liabilities of the Government, Federal
Reserve Banks, financial institutions and recipients where recipients of Government payments authorize the payments
to be made by the ACH method. The regulations in this part were promulgated in 1975 and revised in 1976, 1984, 1987, 1989,
and 1993.
The Service is revising these regulations to provide the framework necessary to achieve its ACH development strategy
which involves the following three objectives: (1) Broaden the use of the ACH network for payments and collections;
(2) move closer to industry standards to easily expand Government services within existing networks; and, (3) pursue
a paperless environment.
The Service proposes to increase the use of the ACH network by adapting the regulatory framework of Part 210 to the emerging
body of ACH products and services. This requires an expansion of the regulation to cover activities that are, or in
the future may be, handled over the ACH network, including collections and the movement of information related to
monetary transactions. In this way, the Service and Federal program agencies will be in a position to take full advantage
of the ACH network to move as many of the Government's transactions as possible to ACH.
Moving closer to industry standards, as set forth by NACHA through the 

ACH Rules, 

also will enable the Government to expand its use of the ACH network. This will give the Service the flexibility to adopt,
when in the best interest of the Government and consistent with legal requirements, those ACH practices and procedures
that are proven viable in the commercial sector, and to work within industry rulemaking practices to introduce new
practices and procedures. This requires a complete reworking of Subpart A and Subpart B.
The Service, in its pursuit toward a paperless environment, will be able to streamline and automate such diverse payment-related
information processes as change requests, authorization activities, and reclamations. In the past, these have
been expensive paper-based ancillary ACH activities. Advances in the ACH network have shown the efficiency of automating
these processes.
The following methods were used by the Service to determine which revisions to the rules were necessary to achieve
its ACH development strategy. First, an ACH work group was established to identify the major differences between
the Government and private industry. The work group wrote issue papers discussing the differences along with options
for resolving them. Second, a rules impact assessment was developed to determine how the differences in rules affected
financial institutions. The assessment involved asking representatives from financial institutions about the
impact of the current Government ACH rules and procedures, and an analysis of their responses. Third, the Service
conducted a series of Federal agency forums to discuss options to resolve the differences. These efforts provided
the basis for making the proposed revisions.
The Service is proposing:
(1) Clarification of the authorization and revocation processes to offer additional consumer protection and to
facilitate automated or streamlined authorization procedures, including procedures to authorize debits.
(2) Clarification of the liability of participants with regard to authorizations, revocations, prenotification
entries, notification of change entries, and commercial-to-Government entries.

</SUPPLEM>
