 

Saiga tatarica tatarica occurs in two major populations, one in 
Kazakhstan and a second south of the Volga River and northwest of the Caspian 
Sea in the Kalmykian Republic, Russian Federation. By the end of World War I 
this subspecies was near extinction, but began to recover in the 1920's so 
that by the late 1950's the population in Kazakhstan was reported to have 
reached nearly 2,000,000, and in Kalmykia saiga had reportedly increased to 
about 800,000. In the last two decades these numbers have been reduced again, 
fluctuating around 150,000 in Kalmykia and down to about 450,000 in Kazakhstan 
in the last few years. These reductions are reportedly the result of a 
combination of factors including weather, land-use changes, and poaching for 
horns. 

Four comments were received within the comment period. Three comments 
favored listing saiga antelope in Appendix I, while the fourth supported only 
an Appendix II listing. 

The AHA was in favor of an Appendix I listing ``until trade in the 
species can be shown to be non-detrimental to the survival of the species.'' 
They stated that researchers indicate that saiga hunting in Russia has been 
nearly out of control over the last 34 years, implying that this increase is 
due to poaching for horns. 

Defenders supported an Appendix I listing, suggesting that saiga, like 
the rhino, are being threatened by poaching and overhunting for the horn 
trade, and that saiga horn is the most expensive fever-reducing substance used 
in traditional medicines after rhino horn. They stated that saiga are also 
hunted for their meat, fat, and hides. They admitted that status and trade 
data are extremely limited, but that recent aerial surveys indicated a rapid 
rate of decline of saiga populations. They also pointed out the dramatic 
population reductions that can occur among saiga due to extreme weather 
conditions or food shortages. 

The HSUS favored an Appendix I listing for the saiga, also indicating 
the similarity between the use and demand for rhino and saiga horn. From an 
estimated 2 million animals in the 1960's, 

S. t. tatarica 

has plummeted to 
about 800,000 individuals according to HSUS, due apparently to uncontrolled 
hunting in Russia and Kazakhstan for the horns. The HSUS noted that the use 
of saiga horn as a substitute for rhino horn in traditional Chinese medicine 
has been and is likely to increase as pressures to control the trade in rhino 
horn intensify. 

The World Conservation Union's (IUCN) Sustainable Use of Wildlife 
Programme questioned the long-term benefits to saiga to be derived from an 
Appendix I listing. Such a listing for the Russian subspecies would 
technically prohibit commercial trade in the species, thus eliminating its 
value. Local and regional authorities currently would find it nearly 
impossible to implement the controls necessary to sustain saiga populations in 
the absence of obvious and immediate value to the local economy. They 
suggested that the local rural population would probably increase livestock 
numbers in saiga habitat to supplement and replace the value lost from saiga 
as a result of an Appendix I listing, eventually resulting in extirpation of 
the saiga. An Appendix II listing would require the Governments of Russia 
(for the Kalmykia population), Kazakhstan, and Mongolia to implement 
administrative and management procedures that, if adequate, could be 
beneficial to the species. The IUCN group was concerned about the demand for 
saiga horn and possible illegal trade. 

Comments received from the Russian Ministry of Protection of the 
Environment and Natural Resources described the existence of the two major 
populations of 

S. t. tatarica, 

one in Kalmykia of about 150,000 animals and one in Kazakhstan consisting of ``several tens of thousands.'' Hunting
of saiga has been increasingly reduced since about 1984, with only limited sport-hunting now allowed in Kalmykia,
and protected reserves have been established. 
The diminished status of the saiga is due to habitat modifications, changes in 
land use, and illegal hunting. The Ministry favored a listing of saiga 
antelope in Appendix II of CITES. Also, by personal communication, the 
Chinese Ministry of Forestry indicated that they could support an Appendix II 
listing.



