 

(b) 

Subgrantees.

 State or local governments, as those terms are defined for purposes 
of the Single Audit Act, that receive Federal financial 
assistance and provide $25,000 or more of it in a fiscal year 
to a subgrantee shall: 

(1) Determine whether State or local subgrantees have met the audit requirements of the Act and whether subgrantees

covered by OMB Circular A110, ``Uniform Requirements for 
Grants and Other Agreements with Institutions of Higher 
Education, Hospitals and Other Nonprofit Organizations'' have 
met the audit requirement. Commercial contractors (private for profit and private 
and governmental organizations) providing goods and services 
to State and local governments are not required to have a 
single audit performed. State and local governments should 
use their own procedures to ensure that the contractor has complied with laws 
and regulations affecting the expenditure of Federal funds; 

(2) Determine whether the subgrantee spent Federal 
assistance funds provided in accordance with applicable laws 
and regulations. This may be accomplished by reviewing an audit of the subgrantee 
made in accordance with the Act, Circular A110, or through 
other means (e.g., program reviews) if the subgrantee has not 
had such an audit; 

(3) Ensure that appropriate corrective action is taken within six months after receipt of the audit report in 
instance of noncompliance with Federal laws and regulations; 

(4) Consider whether subgrantee audits necessitate 
adjustment of the grantee's own records; and 

(5) Require each subgrantee to permit independent auditors to have access to the records and 
financial statements. 

(c) 

Auditor selection.

 In arranging for audit services, 
2541.360 shall be followed. 



Subpart D_Changes, Property and Subawards 



2541.300 

Changes. 



(a) 

General.

 Grantees and subgrantees are permitted to re budget within the approved 
direct cost budget to meet unanticipated requirements and may 
make limited program changes to the approved project. 
However, unless waived by the awarding agency, certain types 
of post-award changes in budgets and projects shall require the prior written 
approval of the awarding agency. 

(b) 

Relation to cost principles.

 The applicable cost 
principles (see 2541.220) contain requirements for prior 
approval of certain types of costs. Except where waived, those requirements apply to all grants and subgrants 
even if paragraphs (c) through (f) of this section do not. 

(c) 

Budget changes.

_(1) 

Nonconstruction projects.

 Except 
as stated in other regulations or an award document, grantees 
or subgrantees shall obtain the prior approval of the awarding agency whenever 
any of the following changes is anticipated under a 
nonconstruction award: 

(i) Any revision which would result in the need for 
additional funding. 

(ii) Unless waived by the awarding agency, cumulative transfers among direct cost categories, or, if 
applicable, among separately budgeted programs, projects, 
functions, or activities which exceed or are expected to 
exceed ten percent of the current total approved budget, 
whenever the awarding agency's share exceeds $100,000. 

(iii) Transfer of funds allotted for training allowances 
(i.e., from direct payments to trainees to other expense 
categories). 

(2) 

Construction projects.

 Grantees and subgrantees 
shall obtain prior written approval for any budget revision which would result in the need for additional 
funds. 

(3) 

Combined construction and nonconstruction projects.

 
When a grant or subgrant provides funding for both 
construction and nonconstruction activities, the grantee or 
subgrantee must obtain prior written approval from the awarding agency before making 
any fund or budget transfer from nonconstruction to 
construction or vice versa. 

(d) 

Programmatic changes.

 Grantees or subgrantees must 
obtain the prior approval of the awarding agency whenever any of the following actions is anticipated: 

(1) Any revision of the scope or objectives of the 
project (regardless of whether there is an associated budget 
revision requiring prior approval). 

(2) Need to extend the period of availability of funds. 

(3) Changes in key persons in cases where specified in an 
application or a grant award. In research projects, a change 
in the project director or principal investigator shall 
always require approval unless waived by the awarding 
agency. 

(4) Under nonconstruction projects, contracting out, subgranting (if authorized by 
law) or otherwise obtaining the services of a third party to 
perform activities which are central to the purposes of the 
award. This approval requirement is in addition to the 
approval requirements of 2541.360 but does not apply to the procurement of 
equipment, supplies, and general support services. 

(e) 

Additional prior approval requirements.

 The awarding 
agency may not require prior approval for any budget revision 
which is not described in paragraph (c) of this section. 

(f) 

Requesting prior approval.

 (1) A request for prior 
approval of any budget revision will be in the same budget 
formal the grantee used in its application and shall be 
accompanied by a narrative justification for the proposed revision. 

(2) A request for a prior approval under the applicable 
Federal cost principles (see 2541.220) may be made by 
letter. 

(3) A request by a subgrantee for prior approval will be 
addressed in writing to the grantee. The grantee will 
promptly review such request and shall approve or disapprove the request 
in writing. A grantee will not approve any budget or project 
revision which is inconsistent with the purpose or terms and 
conditions of the Federal grant to the grantee. If the 
revision, requested by the subgrantee would result in a change to the 
grantee's approved project which requires Federal prior 
approval, the grantee will obtain the Federal agency's 
approval before approving the subgrantee's request. 



2541.310 

Real property. 



(a) 

Title.

 Subject to the obligations and conditions set forth in this 
section, title to real property acquired under a grant or 
subgrant will vest upon acquisition in the grantee or 
subgrantee respectively. 

(b) 

Use.

 Except as otherwise provided by Federal 
statutes, real property will be used for the originally authorized 
purposes as long as needed for that purposes, and the grantee 
or subgrantee shall not dispose of or encumber its title or 
other interests. 

(c) 

Disposition.

 When real property is no longer needed 
for the originally authorized purpose, the grantee or subgrantee 
will request disposition instructions from the awarding 
agency. The instructions will provide for one of the 
following alternatives: 






