 

A difficult aspect of protecting sensitive security information is that a large number of persons must be aware of
at least portions of the information in order to carry out their duties. These include pilots, flight attendants,
ticket agents, screeners, baggage handlers, and law enforcement officers. Frequently, some of these people are
not direct employees of the air carrier or airport operator, but they do carry out duties for or on behalf of the air carrier
or airport operator. For instance, in many cases, screeners and law enforcement officers are not directly employed
by air carriers or airport operators, but do have important security responsibilities to carry out. This section
is intended to cover all such persons who have access to sensitive security information. It should be emphasized,
however, that airports and air carriers would continue to have the responsibility they now have to protect sensitive
security information. If sensitive security information is released to unauthorized persons, depending upon the
circumstances, the FAA may hold the airport or air carrier, as well as the individual, accountable.

Section 191.5(a) would state the general requirement that disclosure of and access to sensitive security information
shall be restricted to persons with a ``need to know.'' Section 191.5(b) would define ``need to know'' as the requirement
to have knowledge of or access to the information to carry out FAA-approved or directed aviation security duties.
Of course, in the case of foreign air carriers that are owned or operated, or closely regulated, by the foreign government,
various officials in that government have a ``need to know.''

In most cases, the air carrier or airport operator has the discretion to decide who in its organization has a need to
know sensitive security information. There are times, however, when information is so sensitive that extra measures
should be taken to protect it from release to those without a ``need to know.'' The rule would, therefore, provide that
for some specific information the Assistant Administrator may make a finding that only specific persons, or classes
of persons, have an operational need to know.

Section 191.5(c) would require that, if sensitive security information is released to unauthorized persons, the
FAA must be notified. This will permit the FAA to evaluate the risk presented by the release of the information, and
to take whatever action may be needed to mitigate that risk.

Section 191.5(d) alerts persons that violations may result in a civil penalty or other action by the FAA. Under the
FAAct, the FAA may take a broad range of enforcement action for violation of the regulations. The FAA anticipates that
civil penalty action will be considered for a violation of part 191, as it is for violations of parts 107 and 108. However,
the FAA may seek any enforcement action deemed appropriate based on individual circumstances of the case. Further,
the FAA may take action to mitigate or correct the risk posed by the violation. Such actions may include requiring air
carriers or airport operators to change their procedures for protecting security information, or change the security
procedures in place that may have been compromised by unauthorized release of the information.



191.7.

 Proposed 191.7 would incorporate and expand current 191.3, which describes information that is protected
from public disclosure. There is information not specifically mentioned in 191.3 that should be protected.
The FAA now withholds such information from public disclosure based on findings under 191.5 that disclosure
would be detrimental to the safety of persons traveling in air transportation or intrastate air transportation.
Those findings are set forth in written denials of FOIA requests for such information, and in Declarations submitted
to judges to seek protection of information in litigation cases. To better inform the public of the information prohibited
from unauthorized release, the FAA proposes to add this information to 191.7, as described below:

Section 191.7(a) would retain the current requirements to protect any approved or standard security program for
an air carrier, indirect air carrier, airport operator, or foreign air carrier, and that portion of the security program
of the United States Postal Service that relates to security of parcel mail to be transported by air. The FAA proposes
to expand this provision to include any comments, instructions, or implementing guidance pertaining to these security
programs. Generally, these materials reveal some or all of the sensitive information and must be protected the same
as the security programs themselves.

Paragraph (b) would be revised to include any comments, instructions, or implementing guidance pertaining to Security
Directives and Information Circulars.

Paragraph (c) would list any profile used in any security screening process, including persons, baggage, or cargo.
Section 191.3(b) (1) and (2) currently cover any hijacker profile and profile used in baggage screening. This proposal
makes that provision general to cover profiles for screening persons, because there are systems in place to protect
against terrorists and others who might seek to commit criminal violence, not just hijackers. It would also cover
profiles for cargo. Like baggage, cargo is a potential tool for criminal violence that the security rules cover.

Paragraph (d) would include any security contingency plan and comments, instructions, or implementing guidance
pertaining thereto. These plans, when adopted, become part of the security program and are already covered by rules
governing security programs. They are included in 191.7 for emphasis.

The FAA proposes to delete the provisions currently in 191.3(b)(6), pertaining to the technical specifications
for devices for protection against, or detection of, cargo theft, from the rule. Such devices are not directly used
to meet the requirements for civil aviation security under the FAA regulations. Any devices that serve a dual function
of protecting cargo and security are protected under other provisions in this section.

Paragraph (e) would cover the technical specifications of any device used for the detection of any explosive, incendiary,
or deadly or dangerous weapon. It is essentially the same as current 191.3(b)(5), except that the current rule
is worded ``explosive or incendiary device or weapon.'' The proposed rule would use the same wording that is in 108.9(a),
which contains the requirements for air carriers to screen passengers and property for such items.




