 

IV. Summary of Public Comments and Responses 



Comments received on the proposed rule are placed under two separate headings for purposes of this summary. The first
addresses the more general comments associated with the proposal, including those relating to: (1) General implementation
issues of a listing for wastes generated by the wood surface protection industry; (2) technical approaches discussed
in the proposal relating to data sampling methodologies; and (3) various engineering assumptions on which the proposed
listing was based. The second part of this section describes the Agency's response to comments dealing with the risk
assessment methodology used to support the listing determination for these wastes. 



A. General Comments 



Several comments were submitted on the proposed listing of F033 wastes. Four commenters supported the listing in
general and two commenters supported the concentration-based approach in particular. Three commenters opposed
the proposed listing and urged EPA to rely on its authority under FIFRA to control the risks posed by chlorophenolic
formulations. One commenter supported an outright ban on the use of chlorophenolics for wood surface treatment.


Two commenters warned that listing F033 wastes would hinder remediation efforts at contaminated wood surface protection
sites. The Agency agrees with the commenters' point that a hazardous waste listing may provide a disincentive for
owner/operators of surface protection plants to initiate voluntary remediation efforts. The regulation of potentially
large amounts of contaminated soil as listed hazardous waste could delay the start of cleanup due to the administrative
and economic realities of regulatory compliance. 

Three commenters expressed concern over the possibly perceived interchangeability of the proposed 0.1 ppm concentration
level and the Toxicity Characteristic (TC) regulatory level for pentachlorophenol. Although the Agency is not finalizing
the F033 hazardous waste listing, EPA nevertheless wants to make clear that the concentration level proposed in the
F033 listing description was not intended as a regulatory level for any purpose other than defining a waste as F033.
The current regulatory level for pentachlorophenol that defines a waste as hazardous under the TC (100 mg/L) would
not have been affected by this rulemaking in any way had the F033 listing been promulgated today. Levels set for the
TC are obtained by running models which simulate acidic landfill conditions. For the proposed listing, the proposed
0.1 ppm level was calculated using a Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) of 0.001 ppm and a risk analysis using the Agency's
Multi-med model. Multi-med simulates groundwater contamination from specific sources, and for this proposal,
it incorporated variables which are specific to sawmill conditions. The Agency's analysis approximated the dilution
of pentachlorophenate from the time the waste contacts the ground to when it reaches a ground water well. The Agency
did not arrive at the 0.1 ppm level by applying a dilution attenuation factor (DAF) of 100 (as the Agency has done in other
circumstances) to the MCL. Indeed, the Agency did not take a position in the proposal about the use of DAFs in calculating
acceptable risk levels for any constituents. A detailed discussion of the Agency's modeling assumptions and actual
parameters used to generate risk approximations can be found in the docket for the proposed rule. 

One commenter expressed reservations regarding the decontamination procedures promulgated previously for wood
preserving equipment (55 FR 5048250483, December 6, 1990). The Agency is aware that equipment cleaning will
not always prevent cross-contamination. However, it will certainly reduce the amount of contamination that would
occur if no equipment cleaning took place. Although the Agency is not finalizing the proposed F033 hazardous waste
listing, EPA encourages owner/operators of surface protection plants to clean or replace any surface-treating
equipment that was used previously with chlorophenolic formulations upon a switch to non-chlorophenolic chemicals
and properly dispose of the wastes in an environmentally sound manner. Furthermore, the Agency has obtained information
which shows that some new substitute products are more effective if residual chlorophenolic contamination is removed.
Hence, removing sludge and cleaning equipment from previous chlorophenolic use will not only be more environmentally
sound, but may also enhance the new products effectiveness. Methodology on recommended cleaning and operating practices
for surface protectors will be published in the near future by the Agency in a pollution prevention and waste minimization
guidance document. 

One commenter suggested that the proposed operating standards for surface protection plants be codified in part
262 as opposed to parts 264/265. The commenter reasoned that most surface protection plants are only generators and
do not function as treatment, storage, and disposal facilities (TSDFs). However, since the F033 hazardous waste
listing is not being promulgated, this issue is moot and there is no need for special generator requirements. 

Several commenters had specific concerns about the applicability of the proposed F033 listing. Since the Agency
is not finalizing the proposed F033 listing, these concerns are also moot. However, where appropriate, answers specific
to each of these comments have been addressed in the background document of this final rule. 

One commenter questioned the representativeness of the Agency's data on cross-contamination. The commenter stated
that because sites were not randomly selected, there is no true sample representation of the surface protector population.
EPA did not choose sampling sites based on their statistical representativeness. Rather, the sites were selected
as appropriate from what the Agency considered to be typical operating plants. The Agency visited more than 15 surface
protection sites in the Nation (both large and small plants). From the information obtained from these plant tours
and interviews, the Agency developed a view of what it considered typical from an engineering standpoint (

e.g.

 size of equipment, production scale, presence of containment systems, size of storage yards, amount of drippage,
etc). The sites sampled need not represent the entire surface protection industry in terms of the process used and
the degree of cross-contamination present to allow the Agency to demonstrate that wastes from current and previous
use of chlorophenolics at surface protection sites were contaminated with the constituents of concern. These sites
were chosen from information obtained by a questionnaire sent out under the Agency's 3007 RCRA authority. 




