 

Item 18e. Date Signed_Enter the date the application was signed by the authorized representative. 


2. SF 424A_Budget Information_Non-Construction Programs 


This is a form used by many Federal agencies. For this application, Sections A, B, C, E and F are to be completed. Section
D does not need to be completed. 
Sections A and B should include the Federal as well as the non-Federal funding for the proposed project covering the
first year budget period. 
Section A_Budget Summary. This section includes a summary of the budget. On line 5, enter total Federal costs in column
(e) and total non-Federal costs, including third party in-kind contributions, but not program income, in column
(f). Enter the total of (e) and (f) in column (g). 
Section B_Budget Categories. This budget, which includes the Federal as well as non-Federal funding for the proposed
project, covers the first year budget period if the proposed project period exceeds 12 months. It should relate to
item 15g, total funding, on the SF 424. Under column (5), enter the total requirements for funds (Federal and non-Federal)
by object class category. 
A separate itemized budget justification for each line item is required. The types of information to be included in
the justification are indicated under each category. For multiple year projects, it is desirable to provide this
information for each year of the project. The budget justification should immediately follow the second page of the
SF 424A. 
Personnel_Line 6a. Enter the total costs of salaries and wages of applicant/grantee staff. Do not include the costs
of consultants, which should be included on line 6h, Other. 
Justification: Identify the principal investigator or project director, if known. Specify by title or name the percentage
of time allocated to the project, the individual annual salaries, and the cost to the project (both Federal and non-Federal)
of the organization's staff who will be working on the project. 
Fringe Benefits_Line 6b. Enter the total cost of fringe benefits, unless treated as part of an approved indirect cost
rate. 
Justification: Provide a break-down of amounts and percentages that comprise fringe benefit costs, such as health
insurance, FICA, retirement insurance, etc. 
Travel_6c. Enter total costs of out-of-town travel (travel requiring per diem) for staff of the project. Do not enter
costs for consultant's travel or local transportation, which should be included on Line 6h, Other. 
Justification: Include the name(s) of traveler(s), total number of trips, destinations, length of stay, transportation
costs and subsistence allowances. 
Equipment_Line 6d. Enter the total costs of all equipment to be acquired by the project. Equipment is defined as non-expendable
tangible personal property having a useful life of more than one year and an acquisition cost of $5,000 or more per unit.

Justification: Equipment to be purchased with Federal funds must be justified. The equipment must be required to
conduct the project, and the applicant organization or its subgrantees must not have the equipment or a reasonable
facsimile available to the project. The justification also must contain plans for future use or disposal of the equipment
after the project ends. 
Supplies_Line 6e. Enter the total costs of all tangible expendable personal property (supplies) other than those
included on Line 6d. 


