 

Standard No. 111 

Rearview Mirrors: 

Replacement of the passenger's outside rearview mirror, which is convex but does not bear the required warning statement.
Standard No. 114 

Theft Protection: 

Installation of a buzzer microswitch in the steering block assembly, and a warning buzzer.
Standard No. 115 

Vehicle Identification Number: 

Installation of a VIN plate that can be read from outside the left windshield pillar, and a VIN reference label on the
edge of the door or latch post nearest the driver.
Standard No. 118 

Power-Operated Window Systems: 

Rewiring of the power window system so that the window transport is inoperative when the ignition is switched off.
Standard No. 206 

Door Locks and Door Retention Components: 

Replacement of the rear door locks and locking buttons with U.S.-model components.
Standard No. 208 

Occupant Crash Protection: 

(a) Installation of either a U.S.-model seat belt in the driver's position, or a belt webbing-actuated microswitch
inside the driver's seat belt retractor; (b) installation of an ignition switch-actuated seat belt warning lamp
and buzzer; (c) replacement of the vehicle's European driver's side air bag with a U.S.-model air bag; (d) installation
of a U.S.-model knee bolster to augment the vehicle's passive restraint system. The petitioner states that the remaining
components of the vehicle's passive restraint system, consisting of a converter and sensor, have part numbers identical
to those found on the U.S. certified 1993 model 300E.
Standard N. 214 

Side Door Strength: 

Installation of reinforcing beams.
Standard No. 301 

Fuel System Integrity: 

Installation of a rollover valve in the fuel tank vent line between the fuel and the evaporative emissions collection
canister.
Interested persons are invited to submit comments on the petition described above. Comments should refer to the docket
number and be submitted to: Docket Section, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, room 5109, 400 Seventh
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. It is requested but not required that 10 copies be submitted.
All comments received before the close of business on the closing date indicated above will be considered, and will
be available for examination in the docket at the above address both before and after that date. To the extent possible,
comments filed after the closing date will also be considered. Notice of final action on the petition will be published
in the 

Federal Register

 pursuant to the authority indicated below.





Authority: 

15 U.S.C. 1397(c)(3)(A)(i)(I) and (C)(ii); 49 CFR 593.8; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 501.8.



Issued on: May 11, 1994.


<SIGNER>
William A. Boehly,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Administrator for Enforcement.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412682 Filed 52494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491059M
</BILLING>


