 

Under a QAP, each handler and the PPB will develop an individually written plan tailored to each handler's facility.
A contract between the handler and the PPB will also be developed based upon the terms of the QAP. The contract will be
signed at the beginning of the reliability evaluation. Once a handler's QAP is approved, the handler is notified in
writing and the PPB begins verifying the work of the handler's QAP personnel. Such verification may include reviews
of plant sanitation, quality and non-quality product analyses, procedures and/or techniques, case-stamping,
checkloading, condition of container, or other types of procedures normally performed by the PPB. Inclusion of any
or all of these verification procedures will be determined by the operating characteristics of each handler's facility
or facilities. 

In the event deviations from proper QAP procedures are detected by the PPB during the reliability verification process,
the handler will be informed of the problem and corrective action required. If corrective action is taken, the QAP
continues in operation. Continued deviations may result in suspension of QAP approval. The suspension may be permanent
or temporary and may only be restored upon concurrence by the PPB. During any suspension, the handler would be required
to use continuous in-line inspection. 

Establishing a QAP inspection procedure meets marketing order inspection requirements, and provides handlers
with an alternative to continuous in-line inspection (which requires the presence of a PPB inspector during final
processing prior to the packaging of olives). To effectuate this change, paragraphs (a) and (b)(1) of 932.152,
Outgoing regulations, are revised to add authority for handlers to use either the QAP process or continuous in-line
inspection. 

Section 932.52 authorizes sizing of whole pitted olives based upon count-per-pound designations (the actual weight
of individual fruit) or modifications recommended by the committee and approved by the Secretary. Prior to the interim
final rule, 932.152 specified that all processed olives must be sized in accordance with the count-per-pound
designations established for canned whole ripe olives, and further required that such sizing be done prior to pitting.
This final rule provides an alternative method for sizing whole pitted olives to provide handlers with more flexibility
in their operations while ensuring that appropriate size standards are continued for whole pitted olives. 


