 

Authority



This project is authorized under, section 1707(d)(1), Public Health Service Act.



Eligible Applicant



Approximately $4,250,000 is available to support a family and community violence prevention effort. Assistance
will be provided to Central State University of Wilberforce, Ohio, which will serve as the lead entity for the consortium
of 16 Historical and Predominately Black Colleges and Universities, specifically the Consortium for Practicum
and Research on Minority Males/Minority Males Consortium (MINMALES. The Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Minority Health has determined that this consortium is uniquely qualified to receive this award because it is
a pre-existing proven consortium which can respond rapidly to the OMH requirement to complete the award process this
fiscal year. Each institution participating in this existing consortium is already actively involved in on-campus
or in neighborhoods/community based projects that are designed to remedy minority male and family educational and
health problems. Furthermore, all participating institutions are working in an official and coordinated capacity
to focus specifically on violence-related problems faced by minority communities. In addition, the consortium
members are geographically distributed in such a manner that allows them to access and service a large and diverse
number of racial and ethnic minorities.

They have established functional working relationships with community-based organizations, churches, schools,
prisons, etc. *** which demonstrates the existence of a viable network with cultural competence
and existing outreach mechanisms targeting multiple racial and ethnic family populations. This consortium is uniquely
prepared by virtue of its expertise, geographic distribution and existing network to implement a model family domestic
violence program expeditiously. No other applications will be solicited.



Availability of Funds



Approximately $4,250,000 (indirect and direct costs) will be available in Fiscal Year 1994 to fund this cooperative
agreement. The project is expected to begin on September 30, 1994, for a 12 month budget period within a project period
not to exceed 3 years. Continuation awards within the project period will be made on the basis of satisfactory progress
and availability of funds. The funding estimate above may vary and is subject to change.



Background



Violent and abusive behavior exacts a large toll on the physical and mental health of Americans. Child abuse, spouse
abuse, and other forms of intrafamilial violence continue to threaten the health of thousands of American families,
particularly minorities.

In 1986, an estimated 1.6 million children nationwide experienced some form of abuse or neglect. Physical abuse accounted
for the greatest portion of abuse incidents. Studies suggest that between 2 million and 4 million women are physically
battered each year by their partners. On an annual basis, more than 1 million women seek medical assistance for injuries
caused by battering. Also, the vast majority of domestic homicides are preceded by episodes of violence. Domestic
violence is a major context for suicide attempts, substance abuse, and mental illness among women and 45 percent of
mothers of abused children are themselves battered women.

