 

The Department will consider and fund one or more demonstration project(s) that encompass (one or more) aspects of
the following topic areas: (a) A labor market information system that would provide farmworkers with accurate and
timely data concerning crop planting and harvest conditions, employment opportunities, housing conditions and
the availability of supportive services, etc.; (b) a program model that employs work-based learning concepts to
demonstrate a new approach in retraining farmworkers (either in upgraded farmwork employment or in employment opportunities
outside of agriculture); (c) a program model that serves to transition farmworkers into newly emerging fields of
technology_taking into account the barriers faced by farmworkers, while at the same time satisfying the skill and
cognitive needs of the targeted industry; (d) a program model that serves to reinvent the manner in which the hardest
of farmworkers to serve are provided retraining and/or training in areas that will directly impact and enhance their
lives and the lives of their families; (e) a program model that creates an information network linking farmworker
service delivery agents for the purpose of creating a data base that could be used for sharing client information.
This in turn could have the effect of more efficiently and effectively rendering services to the farmworker.

In calling for grant applications, the Department is not limiting or suggesting geographic areas or regions, nor
is the Department limiting the design of projects to those suggested above. Applicants are free to identify the geographic
area in which their proposed demonstration project will be tested. Applicants should also understand that the Department
will exercise its option of funding one or more demonstration projects based on a review and appraisal of those received
under this SGA notice.


Demonstration projects under this initiative may try out new approaches to serving farmworkers and in the process
assess and test new ideas that may integrate the provision of services, classroom training and structured worksite
learning. The demonstration project(s) may establish a fundamental change in the way farmworker organizations
and agents of technical and skill training provide assistance to migrant and seasonal farmworkers.



Part II. Statement of Work




This Statement of Work sets forth the objectives, general specifications and conditions for submission of applications
to conduct a demonstration project for a 12-month base period. Each demonstration project must offer services and
activities, necessary to assist migrant and seasonal farmworkers, preferably, in a combination and format not currently
found in Section 402 programs. The applicant may select one of the models presented below or develop a different model
that addresses the specific problems faced by this target group. The desired services sought under a demonstration
grant through this SGA will include but may not be limited to the following activities and areas of expertise:


*Model 

#

1. The development and dissemination of a labor market system benefiting migrant and seasonal farmworkers.


A proposal under this model should identify the geographic area to be targeted for this demonstration project along
with the rationale for its selection; the manner in which information and data concerning crop planting, harvesting
and related employment opportunities, availability of temporary housing and supportive services will be gathered
and shared; the manner in which those organizations currently serving farmworkers in the targeted area will be utilized
for distribution of information purposes; the form/media in which information will be shared with farmworkers and
the projected number to be reached.




