 

(1) Volunteer services shall be documented and, to the extent feasible, supported by the same methods used by the recipient
for its own employees. 

(2) The basis for determining the valuation for personal service, material, equipment, buildings and land shall
be documented. 

(j) DOE shall specify in the solicitation or in the program rule, if any, any cost sharing requirement. The award document
shall be specific as to whether the cost sharing is based on a minimum amount for the recipient or on a percentage of total
costs. 

(k) If DOE requires that a recipient provide cost sharing which is not required by statute or which exceeds a statutory
minimum, DOE shall state in the program rule or solicitation the reasons for requiring such cost sharing, recommended
or required levels of cost sharing, and the circumstances under which the requirement for cost sharing may be waived
or adjusted during any negotiation. 

(l) Whenever DOE negotiates the amount of cost sharing, DOE may take into account such factors as the use of program
income (see 600.124), patent rights, and rights in data. Foregone fee or profit shall not be considered in establishing
the extent of cost sharing. 


600.124 

Program income. 



(a) The standards set forth in this section shall be used to account for program income related to projects financed
in whole or in part with DOE funds. 

(b) Except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, program income earned during the project period shall be retained
by the recipient and, in accordance with program regulations or the terms and conditions of the award, shall be used
in one or more of the following ways. 

(1) Added to funds committed to the project and used to further eligible project objectives. 

(2) Used to finance the non-DOE share of the project. 

(3) Deducted from the total project allowable cost in determining the net allowable costs on which the share of costs
is based. 

(c) When DOE authorizes the disposition of program income as described in paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section,
program income in excess of any limits stipulated shall be used in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.


(d) In the event that the program regulations or the terms and conditions of the award do not specify how program income
is to be used, paragraph (b)(3) of this section shall apply automatically to all projects or programs except research.
For awards that support research, paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall apply automatically unless the award indicates
another alternative in the terms and conditions, the recipient is subject to special award conditions, as indicated
in 600.114, or the recipient is a commercial organization. 

(e) Unless program regulations or the terms and conditions of the award provide otherwise, recipients shall have
no obligation to the Federal Government regarding program income earned after the end of the project period. 

(f) Unless program regulations or the terms and conditions of the award provide otherwise, costs incident to the generation
of program income may be deducted from gross income to determine program income, provided these costs have not been
charged to the award. 

(g) Proceeds from the sale of property shall be handled in accordance with the requirements of the Property Standards
(See 600.130 through 600.137). 

(h) Unless program regulations or the terms and condition of the award provide otherwise, recipients shall have no
obligation to the Federal Government with respect to program income earned from license fees and royalties for copyrighted
material, patents, patent applications, trademarks, and inventions produced under an award. However, Patent and
Trademark Amendments (35 U.S.C. Chapter 18) apply to inventions made under an experimental, developmental, or research
award. 



600.125 

Revision of budget and program plans. 




(a) The budget plan is the financial expression of the project or program as approved during the award process. It includes
the sum of the Federal and non-Federal share when there are cost sharing requirements. It shall be related to performance
for program evaluation purposes whenever appropriate. 

(b) Recipients are required to report deviations from budget and program plans, and request prior approvals for budget
and program plan revisions, in accordance with this section. 

(c) For nonconstruction awards, recipients shall request prior approvals from the DOE for one or more of the following
program or budget related reasons. 

(1) Change in the scope or the objective of the project or program (even if there is no associated budget revision requiring
prior written approval). 

(2) Change in a key person specified in the application or award document. 

(3) The absence for more than three months, or a 25 percent reduction in time devoted to the project, by the approved
project director or principal investigator. 

(4) The need for additional Federal funding. 

(5) If required by program regulations, the transfer of amounts budgeted for indirect costs to absorb increases in
direct costs, or vice versa. 

(6) The inclusion, unless waived by program regulations or the terms and conditions of award, of costs that require
prior approval in accordance with OMB Circular A21, ``Cost Principles for Institutions of Higher Education,''
OMB Circular A122, ``Cost Principles for Non-Profit Organizations,'' or 45 CFR Part 74 Appendix E, ``Principles
for Determining Costs Applicable to Research and Development under Grants and Contracts with Hospitals,'' or 48
CFR Part 31, ``Contract Cost Principles and Procedures,'' as applicable. 

(7) The transfer of funds allotted for training allowances (direct payment to trainees) to other categories of expense.






