 

The Secretary proposes to amend parts 75 and 76 of title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations as follows: 


PART 75_DIRECT GRANT PROGRAMS 


1. The authority citation for part 75 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 20 U.S.C. 1221e3(a)(1) and 3474, unless otherwise noted.




2. Section 75.129 is amended by revising paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) and adding paragraph (a)(3), to read as follows:



75.129 

Legal responsibilities of each member of the group. 


(a) *** 
(1) The use of all grant funds; 
(2) Ensuring that the project is carried out by the group in accordance with Federal requirements; and 
(3) Ensuring that indirect cost funds are determined as required under 75.564(f). 


* * * * * 


3. Section 75.560 is amended by revising paragraph (b), adding new paragraphs (c) and (d), and revising the authority,
citation at the end of the section, to read as follows: 


75.560 

General indirect cost rates; exceptions. 


* * * * * 


(b) A grantee must have a current indirect cost rate agreement to charge indirect costs to a grant. To obtain an indirect
cost rate, a grantee must submit an indirect cost proposal to the cognizant Federal agency and negotiate an indirect
cost rate agreement. 
(c) The Secretary may establish a temporary indirect cost rate for a grantee that does not have an indirect cost rate
agreement with its cognizant Federal agency. 
(d) The Secretary accepts an indirect cost rate negotiated by a grantee's cognizant Federal agency, but may establish
a restricted indirect cost rate for a grantee to satisfy the statutory requirements of certain programs administered
by the Department. 





(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1221e3(a)(1) and 3474) 




4. Section 75.561 is amended by revising paragraph (c), to read as follows: 


75.561 

Approval of indirect cost rates. 


* * * * * 


(c) The Secretary generally approves indirect cost rate agreements annually. Indirect cost rate agreements may
be approved for periods longer than a year if the Secretary determines that rates will be sufficiently stable to justify
a longer rate period.





(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1221e3(a)(1) and 3474) 




5. Section 75.562 is revised to read as follows: 


75.562 

Indirect cost rates for educational training projects. 


(a) Educational training grants provide funding for training or other educational services. Examples of the work
supported by training grants are summer institutes, training programs for selected participants, the introduction
of new or expanded courses, and similar instructional undertakings, including special research training programs,
that are separately budgeted and accounted for by the sponsoring institution. These grants do not usually support
activities involving research, development, and dissemination of new educational materials and methods. Training
grants largely implement previously developed materials and methods and require no significant adaptation of techniques
or instructional services to fit different circumstances. 
(b) The Secretary determines which grants are educational training grants. 
(c) Indirect cost reimbursement on a training grant is limited to the amount computed by applying the grantee's negotiated
indirect cost rate or a rate of eight percent, whichever is less, to a modified total direct cost base determined by
the Secretary. 
(1) The eight percent limit also applies to cost-type contracts under grants, if these contracts are for training
as defined in this section. 
(2) The eight percent limit does not apply to agencies of State or local governments, including federally recognized
Indian tribal governments, as defined in 34 CFR 80.3. 
(3) Indirect costs in excess of the eight percent limit may not be charged directly, used to satisfy matching or cost-sharing
requirements, or be charged to another Federal award. 
(d) A grantee using the training rate of eight percent is required to have documentation available for audit that shows
that its negotiated indirect cost rate is at least eight percent. 





(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1221e3(a)(1) and 3474)




6. Section 75.563 is revised to read as follows:

