 

(e) Vehicle losses. Vehicles are defined to include automobiles, motorcycles, mopeds, utility trailers, camping
trailers, trucks with mounted camper bodies, motor homes, boats, boat trailers, bicycles, and aircraft. Mobile
homes and other property used as dwelling places are not considered vehicles. Damage to or loss of vehicles and property
properly stored or contained therein may be considered when_
(1) Used in the performance of military duty, if such use was authorized or directed for the convenience of the Government
and provided_
(i) The travel did not include commuting to or from the 
permanent place of duty and, 
(ii) The loss or damage did not arise as a result of a mechanical or structural failure of the vehicle during such usage.

(2) Shipped to, from, or between an overseas area or areas at Government expense in accordance with paragraph (b) of
this section, provided the loss or damage did not arise as a result of mechanical or structural failure of the vehicle
during such shipment. 
(3) Located at quarters or place of lodging as defined in paragraphs (a)(1), (2), and (3) of this section, which for
the purposes of this paragraph includes garages, carports, driveways, assigned parking spaces, and lots specifically
provided and used for the purpose of parking at one's quarters, provided that the loss or damage is caused by fire, flood,
hurricane, or other unusual occurrence, or by theft or vandalism. There is a presumption that vehicle theft or vandalism
occurs off the military installation and is generally not compensable. Claims for theft or vandalism to vehicles
(including property stored inside a vehicle) are only payable when a claimant proves that the theft or vandalism occurred
while the vehicle was located at his or her authorized or assigned quarters (for example, a military police report
indicates broken glass from the window is on the driveway). 
(4) Located other than at quarters on a military installation, provided that the loss or damage is caused by fire, flood,
hurricane, or other unusual occurrence. The term ``military installation'' is used broadly to describe any fixed
land area, wherever situated, controlled, and used by military activities or the DOD. A vehicle that is properly on
the installation should be presumed to be incident to the claimant's service unless the application of such a presumption
would be unreasonable under the particular circumstances, such as visiting a fellow soldier on another military
installation while on leave.
(f) Clothing and articles being worn. Damage to or loss of clothing and articles being worn while on a military installation
or in the performance of military duty may be considered, provided such loss was caused by fire, flood, hurricane,
or other unusual occurrence, or by theft. Spilling battery acid, paint or similar substances on clothing, or breaking
eyeglasses during physical training is not an unusual occurrence. 
(g) Personal property held as evidence. Deprivation of property held as evidence may be considered when, after taking
all circumstances into consideration, the temporary loss of the property will work a grave hardship on the claimant
who is a victim of a crime. 
(h) On-post robberies. Claims for losses due to theft from the person on a military installation by the use of force,
violence, or threat to do bodily harm may be considered. If cognizable under Article 139, the claims should be considered
under subpart I. 


536.166 

Claims not cognizable. 


The following are examples of types and categories of property losses for which compensation will not be allowed:

(a) Property lost or damaged as a result of claimant's 
negligence. Property damaged or lost, in whole or in part, as a result of any negligence or wrongful act of the claimant,
the claimant's spouse or family member, or any agent or employee of the claimant acting in the scope of employment,
is not compensable. Negligence may be defined as failure to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable and prudent
person would have exercised under the same circumstances. 
(b) Property damaged or lost while located at quarters within the United States that were occupied by the claimant
but were neither assigned nor otherwise provided in kind by the Government. 
(c) Intangible property. Loss of property that has no extrinsic and marketable value but is merely representative
or evidence of value, such as non-negotiable stock certificates, promissory notes, bonds, bills of lading, warehouse
receipts, insurance policies, baggage checks, and bank books, is not compensable. Similarly, a claimant may not
be compensated for the inability to use non-refundable tickets or recover lease or utility deposits. Loss of a thesis,
or other similar item, is compensable only to the extent of the out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the claimant in
preparing the item such as the cost of the paper or other materials. No compensation is authorized for the time spent
by the claimant in its preparation or for supposed literary value. 
(d) Incidental expenses and consequential damages. The Act and this chapter authorize payment for loss of or damage
to personal property only. Except as provided in 536.165, consequential damages or other types of loss or incidental
expenses (such as loss of use, interest, carrying charges, cost of lodging or food while awaiting arrival of shipment,
attorney fees, telephone calls, cost of transporting claimant or family members, inconvenience, time spent in preparation
of claim, or cost of insurance premiums) are not compensable. 
(e) Real property. Damage to real property is not compensable. In determining whether an item is considered to be an
item of personal property, as opposed to real property, normally, any movable item is considered personal property
even if physically joined to the land. 
(f) Articles acquired or held for sale or disposition by other commercial transactions on more than an occasional
basis, or for use in a private profession or business enterprise. 
(g) Enemy property or war trophies. 


