 




(2) 

Document security

. Measures shall be taken to maintain 
the security of documents and/or instrumentation by which 
compliance with the inspection requirements is established. 

(y) 

Penalties for test provider(s)

. The test provider(s) 
shall assume full responsibility, with or without actual 
knowledge, for the complete operation of an official emission 
inspection station, including the actions of emission inspectors. 
Failure to comply with the appropriate provisions of this section 
or the provisions prescribed in the agreement between the 
Administrator and the test provider(s) will be considered 
sufficient cause for imposing civil penalties for violation of 
the applicable implementation plan or damages under the contract, 
as applicable. In addition thereto, intentional violations may 
be subject to criminal prosecution where they meet the grounds 
for prosecution under any federal criminal statute. 

(z) 

Penalties for emission inspectors

. 

(1) An emission inspector shall assume full responsibility 
for his/her acts as an emission inspector. Failure to comply 
with the appropriate provisions of this section will be 
considered sufficient cause for suspension of an emission 
inspector's certification. In addition, intentional violations 
may also be subject to criminal prosecution where they meet the 
grounds for prosecution under any federal criminal statute. 
After providing the emission inspector with an opportunity for a 
hearing, the Administrator may impose suspensions or penalties 
upon the emission inspector for the following categories of 
offenses: 

(i) Category 1. 

(A) Issuance or possession of altered, forged, stolen or 
counterfeit certificates of emission inspection. 

(B) Furnishing, lending, giving, selling or receiving a 
certificate of emission inspection without inspection. 

(C) Fraudulent recordkeeping. 

(D) Fraudulent inspection. 

(ii) Category 2. 

(A) Improper recordkeeping. 

(B) Improper inspection. 

(C) Improper assigning of certificate of emission 
inspection. 

(2) 

Duration of suspension

. 

(i) Category 1. 

(A) First offense: 1 year. 

(B) Second offense: permanent. 

(ii) Category 2. 

(A) First offense: 3 months. 

(B) Second offense: 6 months. 

(C) Third offense: 1 year. 

(3) 

Multiple violations

. Violations affecting more than one 
vehicle will be treated as separate violations. 

(4) 

Opportunity for an EPA hearing

. Except for a penalty or 
sanction imposed directly under the terms of the agreement 
between the EPA Administrator and the test provider(s), a person 
charged with a violation of this section shall have the right to 
request a hearing regarding the charges. 



52.2964

Importation of vehicles into California. 



(a) The State of California may not permit California 
residents to register for the first time in California any 
vehicle that was previously registered in another state, unless 
that vehicle was originally certified to the FIP's durable 
vehicle standards for its class. 

(b) California residents may not own and keep a car in 
California that is currently registered in another state. 

(c) As an exception to paragraphs (a) and (b) of this 
section, the State of California may allow recent immigrants to 
California (defined as residents of California for less than 
three months) to register a car, over 7500 miles, that they had 
previously registered for at least three months in another state 
while a resident of that state. 

(d) 

Implementation date

. This program shall be implemented 
on January 1, 1999. 



52.2965

Requirements for engines past their useful life. 



(a) 

General applicability

. Heavy-duty on-highway engines 
certified to applicable engine standards contained in 
52.2966(c) and (d) and nonroad engines certified to applicable 
engine standards contained in 52.2975 (c) and (d) shall be 
subject to the provisions contained in this section. 

(b) 

Definitions and abbreviations

. 
 The definitions and abbreviations of parts 86 and 89 of this 
chapter, the definitions contained in 52.2966(b), and the 
definitions contained in the Clean Air Act apply to this section 
unless a term is also defined in this section. 



Engine configuration

 means a complete set of engine and 
emissions control system parts, components, specifications, 
calibrations, and other items deemed necessary by a engine 
configuration certifier to restore an engine to its original 
configuration or another configuration meeting applicable recall 
emissions standards. 



Useful life renewal

 means the period in years and miles or 
hours specified by the engine configuration certifier over which 
the engine configuration certifier assumes recall liability for 
engines of the certified configuration. 

(c) 

Owner requirements

. An owner of a vehicle or equipment 
equipped with an engine subject to the provisions of this 
section, at all times must be able to demonstrate either: 

(1) That the engine in the vehicle or nonroad equipment 
being registered is within its original useful life, or 

(2) That the engine in the vehicle or nonroad equipment 
being registered is within the useful life renewal period as 
defined by the certifier of the engine's configuration pursuant 
to paragraph (d) of this section. The owner shall make this 
demonstration by presenting the useful life renewal certificate 
furnished by the engine configuration certifier pursuant to 
paragraph (f) of this section. Failure to provide such 
demonstration at time of vehicle or equipment registration shall 
result in the denial of vehicle or equipment registration. 

(d) 

Useful life renewal

. The certifier of an engine 
configuration shall define the useful life renewal period in 
years and miles or hours over which the engine configuration 
certifier accepts liability for an engine(s) that does not 
conform to applicable recall standards. 

(e) 

Useful life renewal certificate

. (1) The certifier of 
an engine configuration shall provide to the owner a certificate 
with each engine that is restored to the certified engine 
configuration. The certificate shall contain the following: 

(i) The useful life renewal period; 



