 

Executive Order 12866 



This proposed rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12866. 



Executive Order 12778 



This proposed rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. States and local jurisdictions
are preempted under the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) and the Poultry Products Inspection Act (PPIA) from imposing
any marking, labeling, packaging, or ingredient requirement on federally inspected meat and poultry products that
are in addition to, or different than, those imposed under the FMIA or PPIA. States and local jurisdictions may, however,
exercise concurrent jurisdiction over meat and poultry products that are outside official establishments for the
purpose of preventing the distribution of meat and poultry products that are misbranded or adulterated under the
FMIA or PPIA, or, in the case of imported articles, which are not at such an establishment, after their entry into the
United States. Under the FMIA and PPIA, States that maintain meat and poultry inspection programs must impose requirements
that are at least equal to those required under the FMIA and PPIA. The States may, however, impose more stringent requirements
on such State inspected products and establishments. 

No retroactive effect will be given to this proposed rule. The administrative procedures specified in 9 CFR 306.5
and 381.35 must be exhausted prior to any judicial challenge of the application of the provisions of this proposed
rule, if the challenge involves any decision of an inspector relating to inspection services provided under the FMIA
or PPIA. The administrative procedures specified in 9 CFR parts 335 and 381, subpart W, must be exhausted prior to any
judicial challenge of the application of the provisions of this proposed rule with respect to labeling decisions.




Effect on Small Entities 



The Administrator has determined that this proposed rule would not have a significant effect on small entities, as
defined by the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601). The proposed regulation would permit the use of health claims
on the labeling of meat and poultry products. Small meat and poultry establishments are exempt from nutrition labeling,
provided the labeling of their products bears no nutrition claims or nutrition information. 

However, small entities with products that currently bear labeling that FSIS is proposing to regulate as a health
claim, e.g. labeling bearing claims that are implied health claims under FSIS's proposed definition of health claim,
may be adversely affected by this regulation. Such labeling would need to be changed to conform to the health claims
regulations. FSIS believes that the number of small firms with products bearing such labeling would not be substantial
because FSIS's current labeling policy does not permit health-related claims which specifically relate foods or
food components to diseases. 

Small manufacturers opting to use health claims on their labeling, as proposed by this regulation, would be required
to comply with the nutrition labeling requirements, thereby, incurring the costs associated with such compliance.
However, the use of health claims on the labeling would be voluntary. Decisions by individual manufacturers on whether
to use such health claims on their product labeling would be based on their conclusions that the benefits would outweigh
the costs of including such health claims on the labeling. 



Paperwork Requirements 



This proposed rule would specify the health claims that would be permitted to be used on the labeling of meat and poultry
products. The proposal would also establish a labeling application process whereby any interested person may submit
a labeling application to FSIS for approval of the use of a health claim not provided for in 9 CFR 317.371 and 381.471.


The proposed labeling application process would require any such labeling application to be submitted in a specific
format and accompanied by the following information: 

(1) An explanation of how the substance conforms to the requirements of 9 CFR 317.314 and 381.414, 

(2) A summary of scientific data justifying the connection of the health claim to the health benefit; 

(3) Analytical data that show the amount of the substance that is present in product candidates for the use of the proposed
health claim, 

(4) A model health claim; and 

(5) Copies of all information supporting the use of the proposed health claim. 

The paperwork requirements contained in this proposal have been submitted to the Office of Management and Budget
for approval under the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

). If you wish to comment on the paperwork burden of this proposed rule, send your comments to: Office of Management
and Budget, Desk Officer for FSIS, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Room 3208, New Executive Office
Building, Washington, DC 20503 and to the Clearance Office, room 404W, USDA Administration Building, Washington
DC 20250. 



Comments 



Interested persons are invited to submit comments concerning this proposal. Written comments should be sent to the
Policy Office and refer to Docket No. 93002P. Any person desiring an opportunity for an oral presentation of
views, as provided by the Poultry Products Inspection Act, should make such a request to Mr. Charles Edwards, so that
arrangements can be made for such views to be presented. A record will be made of all views orally presented. All comments
submitted in response to this proposal will be available for public inspection at the Policy Office from 9 a.m. to 12:30
p.m. and from 1:30 p.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. 






