 

Both DR 7104 and Model Rule 4.2 provide that communications that are ``authorized by law'' are not prohibited
by the rule. Virtually all the states have adopted some version of DR 7104 or Model Rule 4.2 that includes an ``authorized
by law'' exception. As discussed in the ``General Comments'' section, these rules, as substantive regulations duly
promulgated by the Attorney General pursuant to statutory authority, have the force and effect of law. Accordingly,
communications with represented persons that are undertaken pursuant to these rules should be considered ``authorized
by law'' within the meaning of rules adopted by the various states. Such communications should therefore be consistent
with state rules wherever state bar authorities have adopted a rule containing the ``authorized by law'' exception.
Thus, no conflict will arise between state and federal law in those jurisdictions with regard to communications with
represented persons. Similarly, no conflict should arise between this regulation and the federal district court
rules that have adopted an anti-contact rule containing the ``authorized by law'' exception. This regulation therefore
need not give rise to any tension with any provision of state or federal law. 
The Department nonetheless recognizes the likelihood that government attorneys' conduct with respect to contact
with represented persons may continue to be viewed by some as inconsistent with state or local district court rules.
To effectuate fully the provisions of this regulation, it therefore is important that the regulation include a plain
statement by the Department of its intention to preempt and supersede regulation by state courts, state disciplinary
authorities, or federal district courts of 

ex parte

 communications by government attorneys in civil or criminal law enforcement investigations or proceedings. 

See Hillsborough County, Fla.

 v. 

Automated Med. Labs,

 471 U.S. 707, 718 (1985) (``because agencies normally express problems in a detailed manner and can speak through
a variety of means, including regulations, preambles, interpretative statements and responses to comments, we
can expect that they will make their intention clear if they intend for their regulations to be exclusive''). 
There is no indication from any of the comments received of any confusion regarding the breadth of the Department's
intention to displace state and federal law; on the contrary, the comments in this area generally both fully grasped
and took issue with the Department's stated intention to occupy the field. Given the integral importance of the exclusive
enforcement authority to the overall regulatory scheme, however, some revisions have been made to this section to
leave no doubt that it is the express intention of these rules to completely preempt and supersede the operation of
state and local laws or rules as they relate to contacts by government attorneys in civil or criminal law enforcement
investigations or proceedings. Such occupation of the field is necessary to ensure that government attorneys' conduct
respecting contacts with represented persons be subject to uniform regulation and predictable standards, as against
potential variations in individual state and local rules and in interpretations of those rules. 
Accordingly, this regulation completely preempts state or federal court regulation of 

ex parte

 contacts in law enforcement matters by government attorneys and those acting at their direction, with one important
exception. If the Attorney General finds that a Department attorney has committed a ``willful violation'' of any
of these rules, preemption will not apply, and that attorney will be subject to disciplinary proceedings both by the
Department and by the appropriate state disciplinary authorities. 
Several commenters argued that it is inappropriate to preclude an otherwise appropriate state or federal court disciplinary
proceeding when the Department's own rules have been violated. The Department respectfully disagrees. A primary
purpose for this regulation is to remove the substantial burden on federal law enforcement caused by uncertainty
as to what constitutes appropriate conduct by Department attorneys. This uncertainty would not be removed were it
left to the various state and federal district courts to interpret these rules and determine on their own whether they
had been violated in any particular case. For this reason, the Department believes that it is necessary that it retain
exclusive authority to determine whether one of its lawyers has breached these rules, with the important proviso
that, when there is a finding of a willful violation, a state disciplinary authority may also impose sanctions. 
One United States Attorney's Office commented that the meaning of a ``willful violation'' had not been clearly explained
in the previous commentary. In response to this comment, the Department here clarifies that a ``willful violation''
means an intentional and deliberate violation of these rules, as determined by the Attorney General. 




