 

This approach allows taxpayers to alter the timing of income or deductions on a qualifying debt instrument. For example,
a taxpayer expecting a large positive adjustment on a contingent payment debt instrument before the maturity date
can spread the adjustment over the remaining term of the debt instrument by legging into an integrated transaction.
Other approaches to legging in, however, create similar opportunities. For example, an approach that would mark
a qualifying debt instrument to market and defer any built-in gain or loss would present even greater opportunities
for deferral. Requiring mark-to-market gain or loss to be taken into account immediately would provide opportunities
for acceleration. The IRS and Treasury believe that taking the built-in gain or loss into account over the term of the
qualifying debt instrument produces the most reasonable result. To prevent abuse, however, the proposed regulations
include a special rule providing that if a taxpayer legs into an integrated transaction with a principal purpose of
deferring or accelerating income, the Commissioner may treat the qualifying debt instrument as sold or otherwise
terminated and reacquired or reissued on the leg-in date or may refuse to allow integration. 

Legging out of an integrated transaction generally means disposing of or otherwise terminating the 1.12756
hedge or the qualifying debt instrument. If the Commissioner has integrated a qualifying debt instrument and a financial
instrument, the taxpayer is treated as legging out only if the taxpayer ceases to meet the requirements for Commissioner
integration. If a taxpayer legs out, the synthetic debt instrument is treated as sold or otherwise disposed of for
its fair market value and any income, deduction, gain, or loss is taken into account immediately. The component the
taxpayer retains (either the 1.12756 hedge or the qualifying debt instrument) is treated as immediately
reacquired for, or entered into at, its fair market value on the leg-out date. In order to prevent taxpayers from inappropriately
generating tax losses by legging into and immediately legging out of an integrated transaction, the proposed regulations
contain a wash sale rule that disallows losses if the taxpayer legs out within 30 days of legging into an integrated
transaction. 

If a qualifying debt instrument and a 1.12756 hedge are integrated, the instruments are no longer subject
to the rules that govern each instrument separately, except as specifically provided in the regulations or by publication
in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Instead, the instruments are subject to the rules that would govern the synthetic
debt instrument. For example, the qualifying debt instrument and 1.12756 hedge are not treated as part
of a straddle under section 1092, but the interest on the synthetic debt instrument may be subject to the interest capitalization
rules of section 263(g). 

The issue price of the synthetic debt instrument is the adjusted issue price of the qualifying debt instrument. The
issue date of the synthetic debt instrument is the date the 1.12756 hedge is acquired. The term of the
synthetic debt instrument is the period from the issue date of the synthetic debt instrument to the maturity date of
the qualifying debt instrument. If the synthetic debt instrument is a borrowing, its stated redemption price at maturity
is the sum of all amounts paid or to be paid on the qualifying debt instrument and on the 1.12756 hedge,
reduced by all amounts received or to be received on the hedge and any amounts that would be qualified stated interest
on the synthetic debt instrument. If the synthetic debt instrument is a loan, its stated redemption price at maturity
is the sum of all amounts received or to be received on the qualifying debt instrument and the 1.12756
hedge, reduced by all amounts paid or to be paid on the hedge and any amounts that would be qualified stated interest
on the synthetic debt instrument. 

The rules for determining the stated redemption price at maturity are designed to cover situations where payments
on the hedge move inversely to the payments on the qualifying debt instrument. For example, if a holder of a qualifying
debt instrument purchases an option to hedge the debt instrument, the amount paid by the holder must be taken into account
as an adjustment to the instrument's stated redemption price at maturity. 

Separate transaction treatment is required for certain limited purposes. For example, the rules of sections 871(a),
881, 1441, and 1442 must be applied on a separate transaction basis. Similarly, any information reporting rules for
the qualifying debt instrument continue to apply as if the qualifying debt instrument and the 1.12756
hedge were not part of an integrated transaction. The IRS and Treasury request comments on whether the regulations
should specifically provide separate transaction treatment for other purposes. The IRS and Treasury also request
comments on whether rules similar to 1.60451(d)(6)(iii) of the proposed regulations (regarding broker
reporting of an integrated transaction under 1.9885) should be adopted for an integrated transaction
under 1.12756. 

The IRS and Treasury intend to propose rules coordinating 1.12756 with section 475. Comments are requested
on this issue. 



Proposed Effective Date 



In general, the proposed regulations in this document are proposed to be effective for debt instruments issued on
or after the date that is 60 days after the date final regulations are published in the 

Federal Register

. 



Special Analyses 



It has been determined that this notice of proposed rulemaking is not a significant regulatory action as defined in
EO 12866. Therefore, a regulatory assessment is not required. It also has been determined that section 553(b) of the
Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 5) and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 6) do not apply
to these regulations, and, therefore, a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis is not required. Pursuant to section 7805(f)
of the Internal Revenue Code, this notice of proposed rulemaking will be submitted to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy
of the Small Business Administration for comment on its impact on small business. 



Comments and Public Hearing 



Before these proposed regulations are adopted as final regulations, consideration will be given to any written comments
(a signed original and eight (8) copies) that are submitted timely to the IRS. All comments will be available for public
inspection and copying. 

