 

Not all credit transactions secured by a consumer's principal dwelling are subject to the right of rescission. The
TILA exempts home purchase-money loans from the right of rescission. For closed-end credit transactions, the right
also does not apply when a consumer refinances a home-secured loan with the same creditor ( the ``original'' creditor)
and doesn't incur additional debt (no ``new money'' is advanced). Refinancings by a creditor other than the original
creditor, on the other hand, are completely new transactions and are subject to the right of rescission.

In a transaction subject to the right of rescission, a consumer must be given notice of the right to rescind at the time
the consumer becomes legally obligated on the credit transaction. The notice must disclose that the creditor has
a security interest in the consumer's home, that the consumer may rescind, how the consumer may rescind, the effects
of rescission, and the date the rescission period expires.

To rescind a transaction, a consumer must notify the creditor in writing within three business days of the last of three
events: (1) Consummation of the loan ; (2) delivery of the TILA disclosures; or (3) receipt of the required notice of
the right to rescind. The creditor may not disburse any monies or provide services or materials until the three-day
rescission period has lapsed and the creditor is reasonably satisfied the consumer has not rescinded.

A consumer who rescinds the transaction must be returned to his or her original position. Specifically, the creditor
must refund to the consumer all monies paid and terminate its security interest in the consumer's home. Once the creditor
has fulfilled its obligations, the consumer must return any monies or property already delivered to the consumer
in the transaction.

Under present law, a consumer may waive the right of rescission and receive immediate disbursement of the funds only
when the consumer has a bona fide personal financial emergency. While the consumer provides the explanation for the
bona fide personal financial emergency, in practice the lender determines the sufficiency of the explanation. The
Board has not given much guidance as to what constitutes a bona fide personal financial emergency, as that matter is
between the consumer and lender; however, a foreclosure is one example. Given the liability for failure to comply
with the present rescission rules, creditors are generally reluctant to accept consumer waivers.



II. Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994



Section 344 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994, Pub. L. 103325, 108
Stat. 2160, enacted into law on September 23, 1994, directs the Board, in consultation with its Consumer Advisory
Council, consumers, consumer representatives, lenders, and interested parties, to submit recommendations to
the Congress on whether consumers would benefit from the ability to more freely waive the right the rescission in connection
with loans with new creditors to refinance or consolidate debt, where no additional debt is incurred (no ``new money''
is advanced). The Board is publishing this notice to solicit the comment of interested parties on this specific issue.

Waiver of the right to rescind was a topic on the Consumer Advisory Council agenda at its November 1994 meeting. The
Council members expressed many divergent views, and the Council made no specific recommendation to the Board on the
rescission issue. 

Based on the Council discussion, the comments of interested parties, and its own analysis, the Board will present
recommendations to the Congress in March 1995.




By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 15, 1994.



<SIGNER>
William W. Wiles,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of the Board. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9431300 Filed 122094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 621001P
</BILLING>


 
