 

(a) Identicality Requirement. 

Both federal courts that have reviewed the issue have found that failure of a state to promulgate California's fuel
regulations does not violate the section 177 requirement that an adopting state's standards be identical to California's
standards. 

Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association

 v. 

NYDEC,

 17 F.3d 521 (2d Cir. 1994) and 

American Automobile Manufacturers Association

 v. 

Greenbaum,

 No. 9310799MA (D. Mass. October 27, 1993), (the ``New York case'' and the ``Massachusetts case'', respectively).
These decisions are in accord with EPA's position on this matter. The Agency filed a brief as amicus curiae with the
Second Circuit in the New York case, and also filed a later brief as amicus curiae in the First Circuit on the manufacturers'
appeal in the Massachusetts case.

69 

Both briefs have been placed in the docket for this rulemaking. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


69

</FOOTNAME>
The manufacturers later requested that the appeal be withdrawn with regard to all issues except one relating to lead-time,
which is not at issue for EPA's decision whether to approve OTC recommendation but is discussed below in connection
with the model year proposal. On August 3, 1994, the First Circuit granted the manufacturers' request to withdraw
their appeal on these issues. (

AAMA

 v. 

Greenbaum,

 No. 932276 (1st Cir., August 3, 1994.) 

</FOOTNOTE>


California's clean fuel provisions were not part of California's waiver application under section 209. In fact,
state standards that are related to fuel as opposed to emissions of motor vehicles, are not even governed by section
209(a). State fuel provisions are addressed separately in section 211 of the Act, which provides a substantially
different regime for state fuel standards. Under section 211, states may regulate fuels if they can demonstrate to
EPA that such regulation is necessary to meet federal air quality standards, except that California may regulate
fuel without such a demonstration. Therefore, as California has not asked for a waiver for its fuel regulations, nor
is it required to do so under the Act, such standards are not ``standards *** for which a waiver has been
granted'' and thus are not subject to the identicality provisions of section 177. Were the Agency to find that states
must also adopt California's fuel standards to meet the section 177 identicality requirements, then every state
wishing to adopt California's motor vehicle standards would be required to meet not only the requirements of section
177 but also the requirements of section 211, so that it could simultaneously adopt associated fuel controls. EPA
believes that this would be an incorrect interpretation of the Act, given the structure of the Act and its explicit
differentiation between vehicle and fuel requirements. For the reasons provided in this notice and outlined by EPA
in its amicus curiae briefs and by the courts in the New York and Massachusetts cases, EPA proposes to find that no conflict
with section 177 exists on this point. 

(b) Third Vehicle Prohibition. 

EPA also proposes to find that the lack of a clean fuel requirement does not violate the ``third vehicle'' prohibition
of section 177. Manufacturers claim that the difference in sulfur levels between the fuels sold in California and
the northeast would cause deleterious effects on emission control systems on California LEV vehicles, which would
require certain design changes to manage these effects. This, they claim, would require them to manufacture vehicles
for the OTR that would differ from the vehicles they expect to sell for California, and would thus violate section 177's
``third vehicle'' prohibition. 

The manufacturers' arguments fail on several grounds. First, nothing in the OTC recommendation requires any manufacturer
to produce any vehicle different from a California certified vehicle. In fact, the OTC recommendation would require
that any new car sold in the OTR be a California-certified vehicle. Manufacturers are free to sell cars in the OTC that
are identical to those sold in California. Any design changes made by manufacturers would result from a manufacturer's
voluntary decision to effect such a change. There is no third vehicle violation where a manufacturer voluntarily
decides to sell a third vehicle in a state other than California. The court of appeals in the New York case, responding
to a similar ``third car'' challenge by manufacturers regarding ZEVs, found that whatever design change ``the manufacturers
choose to install on cars sold in New York is a marketing choice of theirs and not a requirement imposed by the [state].''


MVMA,

 17 F.3d at 538. 

Second, the ``third vehicle prohibition'' should not be read to apply to every design change, regardless of its nature
or scope. Section 177 uses the phrase ``third vehicle'' to refer to ``a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine different
than a motor vehicle or engine certified in California under California standards.'' This statutory language indicates
that its meaning is tied to the concept of emission certification, 

i.e. 

that ``third vehicle'' should be read to refer to design changes needed to meet certification requirements. This
reading is consistent with the purpose of the third vehicle prohibition, which is to reinforce the identicality requirement
by prohibiting a state from administering standards identical to California's in a way that actually requires conformance
to more stringent standards. 

The term ``third vehicle'' itself suggests it should be so limited. It presumes the existence of ``first vehicles''
and ``second vehicles'' (vehicles that meet federal and California standards, respectively). Congress was plainly
aware that ``first vehicles'' include vehicles with widely differing physical characteristics. For example, ``first
vehicles'' include cars both with and without rear-window defrosters. This makes it clear that vehicles may contain
minor differences in design that are unnecessary to meet emission standards without creating ``third vehicles.''
The legislative history of section 177 confirms that the ``third vehicle prohibition'' does not require physical
identicality of vehicles and that design changes would not create a ``third car violation'' unless they create an
``undue burden'' on manufacturers.

70 

Though one manufacturer has stated in other proceedings that it may need to use a different converter assembly (one
that is bolted, not welded) on vehicles sold in the OTR, the manufacturers have not provided evidence indicating that
significant design changes creating an ``undue burden'' are required to implement the OTC LEV program without California
fuels. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


70

</FOOTNAME>
See 136 Cong. Rec. at S16976 (Oct. 27, 1990) (report appended to the remarks of Senator Baucus; 136 Cong. Rec. at S16903
(Oct. 27, 1990) (Exhibit 1 to remarks of Senator Mitchell); 136 Cong. Rec. at S16954 (Oct. 27, 1990) (statement of Senator
Chafee). 

</FOOTNOTE>


3. ZEV Sales Requirement




EPA proposes to find today that the ZEV sales requirement is not required to ensure consistency with section 177. Therefore,
as the OTC requested inclusion of the ZEV sales requirement only ``to the extent that a Zero Emission Vehicle sales
requirement must be a component of a LEV program adopted under Section 177,'' EPA proposes to approve the OTC recommendation
without the ZEV sales requirement. Individual states within the OTC may at their option include such a requirement
in the programs they adopt.

71

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


71

</FOOTNAME>
The OTC recommendation explicitly recommended that individual states within the OTR be allowed to implement the
ZEV sales mandate if they so choose. EPA believes that incorporation of the ZEV sales mandate into a state's LEV program
is not inconsistent with the requirements of section 177. The court of appeals in the New York case similarly found
that New York's incorporation of the ZEV sales mandate did not violate section 177's prohibition on sales limitations
on California-certified vehicles or section 177's ``third vehicle prohibition.'' 



</FOOTNOTE>

