 




<RINDOCK>[FRL50221]</RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Improving EPA's Indian Program Operations</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

U.S. Environmental protection Agency.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Soliciting public comments on the agency's efforts to enhance Indian program operations.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is soliciting comments from the public on the following potential approaches
for improving the Agency's Tribal operations, including the establishment of a new national Indian Program Office.
To obtain Tribal input into this process, as well as input on future Tribal matters, the EPA Administrator convened
the Tribal Operations Committee (TOC) comprised of Tribal representatives and EPA Senior Managers. EPA is now seeking
broader input on these approaches, and will consider comments received during the public comment period to ensure
that the strongest options have been identified.




PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD: 

Comments must be received by September 12, 1994.




</SUMMARY>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Comments should be sent to Caren Rothstein, Tribal Operations Team, US EPA, Mail Code 1199, 401 M Street SW., Washington,
DC 20460.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Caren Rothstein at 2022607519.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The Environmental Protection Agency has made continual progress in building its Tribal program since issuance of
the Agency's 1984 Indian Policy. In Fiscal Year 1993, approximately $35 million and 165 work years were utilized to
implement EPA Indian programs, either through direct grants to Tribes or through Federal implementation and technical
assistance to Tribes.




Regulations and guidance specific to Tribes have been developed under many of EPA's programs establishing the process
for Tribes to apply for grants and program authorization. Over 90 Treatment in the Same Manner as a State determinations,
formerly referred to as Treatment as a State, have been made under various water programs. Numerous Tribes have submitted
water quality standards for authorization by EPA, and three have already been approved. Many more Tribal applications
are expected in the future for a broad array of EPA programs.

The growth of EPA's Indian program has led to an increased understanding of the seriousness of environmental threats
to human health and the environments within Indian Country by EPA and the Tribes. To promote improved communications
and partnerships with Tribes to address these concerns, the EPA Administrator convened a Tribal Operations Committee
(TOC) to meet with her and other EPA Senior Management as co-regulators, on a regular basis, and to provide Tribal input
into Agency decision making that may affect Tribes.

The TOC is comprised of 18 Tribal representatives, who are either Tribal Leaders or Tribal environmental officials
selected by Tribes within EPA regions. There are Tribal representatives from each of EPA's regions except Region
III, which has no Federally recognized Tribes.

On February 17, 1994, at the first official TOC meeting, the Administrator committed to strengthening the Agency's
Tribal operations and reaffirmed the Agency's 1984 Indian Policy. As one of the first actions for the Tribal representatives
to the TOC and in response to Tribal recommendations, the Administrator authorized a group of Senior Managers from
EPA Headquarters and regions to develop recommendations, in consultation with Tribal representatives to the TOC,
on ways to strengthen EPA's Tribal environmental programs and daily operations.


Over the last few months, the EPA Senior Team, working with the TOC, has identified options for advancing and strengthening
Tribal environmental protection and improving relations between EPA and the Tribes, in the following program areas:
organization, implementation and resource needs.

To ensure constant Tribal input while developing these options, weekly conference calls were held with the TOC. Two
meetings have been held at which the TOC and Team met face-to-face. In addition, early in June 1994, a letter was sent
to all Tribal Leaders providing information on the approaches the Agency was considering, and soliciting additional
comment. These comments have been considered and the Agency hopes to obtain further input through publishing this
Notice.


EPA's Current Indian Program Structure




Under the Agency's current Indian program structure, the central coordination responsibility has been one of many
functions undertaken by the Office of Federal Activities (OFA) in the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance.
OFA is currently the central point of contact for Tribes at Headquarters, and also develops the budget for the General
Assistance Grant Program, works with regions to oversee administration of such grants to Tribes, and fosters overall
coordination between the various offices at Headquarters and the regions.

Responsibility for administering specific programs such as water, air and waste are handled by those program and
regional offices. This includes specifically (but not exclusively) provision of technical assistance, direct
Federal implementation and program development and implementation funds as allowed by law. This will continue to
be necessary because these offices have the technical expertise and the responsibility for developing and administering
program-specific resources, policies, and regulations.


EPA's regional offices interact with each Tribe on matters specific to the Tribes and this should continue even though
a national office will be responsible for the coordination of the Agency's Tribal program. In fact, regions and programs
need to increase their efforts to assist Tribes in addressing environmental issues as part of the effort to enhance
Tribal operations.


Proposed National EPA Indian Operations



Altering the current structure by creating a national office, whose sole responsibility is Tribal operations, would
provide a more consistent and streamlined approach for implementing EPA's Indian Policy. This new Office could also
ensure that Tribal input and concerns are heard and integrated into the Agency's ongoing activities.

The EPA Team identified, in consultation with Tribal representatives to the TOC, key factors, functions and organizational
options to consider in establishing the new office. The Agency is seeking suggestions on functions for the Office
as well as its appropriate title. Among others, titles such as ``National Office of Indian Affairs'' or ``National
Tribal Environmental Management Office'' have been suggested to date.

</SUPPLEM>
