 

24 CFR Part 280 


Community development, Grant programs_housing and community development, Loan programs_housing and community
development, Low and moderate income housing, Nonprofit organizations, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



24 CFR Part 570 


Administrative practice and procedure, American Samoa, Community development block grants, Grant programs_education,
Grant programs_housing and community development, Guam, Indians, Lead poisoning, Loan programs_housing and community
development, Low and moderate income housing, New communities, Northern Mariana Islands, Pacific Islands Trust
Territory, Pockets of poverty, Puerto Rico, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Small cities, Student aid,
Virgin Islands. 


24 CFR Part 572 


Condominiums, Cooperatives, Fair housing, Government property, Grant programs_housing and community development,
Low and moderate income housing, Nonprofit organizations, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 


24 CFR Part 574 


Community facilities, Disabled, Emergency shelter, Grant programs_health programs, Grant programs_housing
and community development, Grant programs_social programs, HIV/AIDS, Homeless, Housing, Low and moderate income
housing, Nonprofit organizations, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Technical assistance.



24 CFR Part 576 


Community facilities, Emergency shelter grants, Grant programs_housing and community development, Grant programs_social
programs, Homeless, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 


24 CFR Part 583 


Community facilities, Employment, Grant programs_housing and community development, Grant programs_social
programs, Handicapped, Homeless, Indians, Mental health programs, Nonprofit organizations, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Technical assistance. 


24 CFR Part 882 


Grant programs_housing and community development, Homeless, Lead poisoning, Manufactured homes, Rent subsidies,
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 


24 CFR Part 889 


Aged, Capital advance programs, Grant programs_housing and community development, Loan programs_housing and
community development, Low and moderate income housing, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



24 CFR Part 890 


Civil rights, Grant programs_housing and community development, Individuals with disabilities, Loan programs_housing
and community development, Low and moderate income housing, Mental health programs, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements. 


24 CFR Part 905 


Aged, Energy conservation, Grant programs_housing and community development, Grant programs_Indians, Individuals
with disabilities, Lead poisoning, Loan programs_housing and community development, Loan programs_Indians,
Low and moderate income housing, Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 


24 CFR Part 961 


Drug abuse, Drug traffic control, Grant programs_housing and community development, Grant programs_Indians,
Grant programs_low and moderate income housing, Indians, Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



24 CFR Part 963 


Grant programs_housing and community development, Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




Accordingly, and under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), subtitle A and parts 92, 219, 280, 570, 572, 574, 576, 583,
882, 889, 890, 905, 961, and 963 of title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations, are amended as follows: 





