 

FSIS is also proposing that the percentage lean statement and the percentage fat statement be contiguous and in lettering
of the same size, type, and on the same color background. 
FSIS is proposing to allow the use of percentage labeling for lean and fat on ground beef and hamburger only. FSIS will
consider expanding the proposed percentage labeling for lean and fat to ground meat from other species and/or ground
poultry, if information submitted during the comment period demonstrates the need and consumer acceptability of
these terms for such products or that differential treatment of ground beef relative to other ground products would
inappropriately restrict informed consumer choice. 
The final nutrition labeling regulations promulgated by FSIS on January 6, 1993, in most instances, did not permit
ground beef and hamburger to be labeled based on a percentage of ``lean.'' As a result of the regulations, manufacturers
and retailers would be prohibited from using the terms ``lean'' and ``extra lean'' in labeling ground beef and hamburger,
unless such products meet the definitions of these terms, as set forth in 9 CFR 317.362 and 381.462. The practice of
labeling ground beef and hamburger based on lean percentages has been allowed by FSIS under the Uniform Retail Meat
Identity Standards since 1973. Under the final FSIS nutrition labeling regulations, which become effective on July
6, 1994, this longstanding practice would become prohibited. 
FSIS has reexamined this unintended consequence, and has concluded that consumers and the goals of nutrition labeling
will best be served if the practice of labeling ground beef and hamburger based on lean percentages is allowed to continue,
with certain restrictions as outlined in this proposed rule. Consumers are widely familiar with the percentage of
lean information. FSIS believes that continuation of the practice will help consumers to select leaner ground beef
and hamburger products. In order to avoid an unintended lapse in the allowed use of lean percentages for ground beef
and hamburger, it is imperative that regulations pertaining to this issue become effective simultaneously with
the overall July 6, 1994, effective date of the FSIS nutrition labeling regulations. The Agency has already reviewed
comments received on the November 27, 1991, proposed rule concerning the continued use of lean percentages. The issue
has been the subject of considerable public discussion. Therefore, FSIS believes that a 45-day comment period is
sufficiently adequate to allow interested parties a meaningful opportunity to comment. 


List of Subjects in 9 CFR Part 317 


Food labeling, Food packaging, Meat inspection. 


Proposed Rule 


For the reasons discussed in the preamble, FSIS is proposing to amend 9 CFR part 317 of the Federal meat inspection regulations
as follows: 


PART 317_LABELING, MARKING DEVICES, AND CONTAINERS


1. The authority citation for part 317 would continue to read as follows: 






Authority: 

21 U.S.C. 601695; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.55. 




2. Section 317.362 would be amended by adding and reserving paragraphs (d) through (f) and adding a new paragraph (g)
to read as follows: 


317.362


Nutrient content claims for fat, fatty acids, and cholesterol content of meat products. 


* * * * * 


(g) A statement of the lean percentage may be used on the labeling of ground beef and hamburger when the product does
not 
meet the criteria for ``low fat'' as defined in 317.362(a)(2): 

Provided, 
(1) That a statement of the fat percentage is contiguous to and in lettering of the same size, type, and on the same color
background as the statement of the lean percentage; and 
(2) That nutrition information for the product is supplied in accordance with 317.345. 




Done at Washington, DC, on May 18, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Patricia Jensen,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Inspection Services.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412578 Filed 52394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3410DMP
</BILLING>


