 

1. The authority citation for part 380 continues to read as follows: 





Authority:

 16 U.S.C. 2431 

et seq.

 



2. Section 380.2 is amended by adding a definition for 

CEMP Entry Permit,

 in alphabetical order, to read as follows: 


380.2 

Definitions. 


* * * * * 




CEMP entry permit

 (CEMP permit) means a permit issued under 50 CFR 380.28 by the Assistant Administrator to a person subject to the jurisdiction
of the United States authorizing the person to enter specially protected sites designated under the authority of
the Convention Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) established by the Commission in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the CEMP Management Plan for the specific site and the terms and conditions contained in the permit.



* * * * * 


3. Section 380.28 is amended by adding text to read as follows: 


380.28 

Procedure for according protection to CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program Sites. 


(a) 

General.

 (1) Any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States must apply for and be granted an entry permit authorizing
specific activities prior to entering a CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) Protected Site designated in
accordance with the CCAMLR Conservation Measure describing the Procedures for According Protection for CEMP Sites.

(2) If a CEMP Protected Site is also a site specially protected under the Antarctic Treaty (or the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes, when it enters into force), an applicant seeking to enter such
a Protected Site must apply to the Director of the National Science Foundation (NSF) for a permit under applicable
provisions of the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 (ACA)(16 U.S.C. 2401 

et seq.

) or any superseding legislation. The permit granted by NSF shall constitute a joint CEMP/ACA Protected Site permit
and any person holding such a permit must comply with the appropriate CEMP Protected Site Management Plan. In all other
cases, an applicant seeking a permit to enter a CEMP Protected Site must apply to the Assistant Administrator for a
CEMP permit in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b) 

Responsibility of CEMP permit holders and persons designated as agents under a CEMP permit.

 (1) The CEMP permit holder and person designated as agents under a CEMP permit are jointly and severally responsible
for compliance with the Act, this part, and any permit issued under this part. 
(2) The CEMP permit holder and agents designated under a CEMP permit are responsible for the acts of their employees
and agents constituting violations, regardless of whether the specific acts were authorized or forbidden by the
CEMP permit holder or agents, and regardless of knowledge concerning their occurrence. 
(c) 

Prohibitions regarding the Antarctic Treaty System and other applicable treaties and statutes.

 Holders of permits to enter CEMP Protected Sites are not permitted to undertake any activities within a CEMP Protected
Site that are not in compliance with the provisions of: 
(1) The Antarctic Treaty, including the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (including
the Protocol on the Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes when it enters into force), as
implemented under by the ACA and any superseding legislation. (Persons interested in conducting activities subject
to the Antarctic Treaty or the Protocol should contact the Office of Polar Programs, National Science Foundation,
4201 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, VA 22230); 
(2) The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals; and 
(3) The Convention and its Conservation Measures in force, implemented under the Act. 
(d) 

Prohibitions on takings.

 Permits issued under this section do not authorize any takings as defined in the applicable statutes governing the
activities of persons in Antarctica. These CEMP permits specifically do not authorize takings or harvesting native
birds, mammals and plants under: 
(1) The ACA (administered by the NSF), 45 CFR part 670, which regulates all activities under the Antarctic Treaty south
of 60 
&cir;S. lat. in Antarctica, and any superseding statute; 
(2) The Act, 50 CFR part 380; 
(3) The Marine Mammal Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 1361 

et seq.

), 50 CFR part 216; 
(4) The Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq.

), 50 CFR part 222; and 
(5) The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (16 U.S.C. 701 

et seq.

), 50 CFR part 10. 
(e) 

Issuance criteria.

 Permits designated in this section may be issued by the Assistant Administrator upon a determination that: 
(1) The specific activities meet the requirements of the Act; 
(2) There is sufficient reason, established in the permit application, that the scientific purpose for the intended
entry cannot be served elsewhere; and 





