 

(b) Notwithstanding the provisions in paragraph (a) of this section, the Deputy Administrator may in accordance
with part 791 of this chapter authorize relief when a participant acting in good faith failed to fully comply with the
program provisions. 



701.13 



Practices carried out with aid from ineligible persons. 



Financial assistance which is made available, or will be made available, to a program participant from a person ineligible
for cost-share assistance under this part for the practice, including aid from a State or Federal agency other than
aid made available under this part, shall be deducted from the program participant's total costs incurred for the
practice for purposes of determining the applicant's eligible reimbursable costs under this part. 



701.14



Division of cost-share assistance. 



(a) The cost-share assistance shall be credited to the participant who performed the practice. If more than one person
contributed to the performance of the practice, the cost-share assistance for the practice shall be divided among
those persons in the proportion that the COC determines they contributed to the performance of the practice. In making
this determination, the COC shall consider the value of the labor, equipment, or material contributed by each person
toward performance. 

(b) The allowance by an eligible person of a credit to another eligible person in the form of an adjustment in rental,
an exchange of cash or other consideration shall not be considered as a contribution to the performance of any practice,
unless ASCS is satisfied that such credit is directly related to the cost of the practice. A person fully reimbursed
through an adjustment in rental, an exchange of cash, or other consideration shall not be considered as having contributed
to the practice performance. 



701.15 



Applying cost-share assistance limitations. 



(a) All or any part of cost-share assistance which otherwise would be due any participant for a program year may be withheld,
or required to be refunded, if, with respect to that program year, the participant has adopted, or participated in
adopting, any scheme or device designed to evade a maximum cost-share limitation. 

(b) The provisions of 7 CFR 1497.109(a), which provide that payments shall be attributed to each member of an entity,
shall apply in determining whether certain individuals or other entities are to be considered as separate persons
for the purpose of applying any maximum payment limitations provided for in this part. 



701.16 



Persons eligible to file application for payment of cost-share assistance. 



Any eligible person as defined in 701.104, 701.202, and 701.302, who bore a part of the cost of an approved
practice, is eligible to file an application for cost-share assistance. For ACP practice WP4, Agricultural Waste
Control Facilities, an eligible person is one who has been in an operation from which the agricultural waste is produced
for at least 5 years. 



701.17 



Time and manner of filing application and required information. 



(a) Participants shall submit to the county office the information needed to establish the extent of the performance
of approved practices and compliance with applicable program provisions. The time limits for submission of such
information shall be established where necessary for efficient administration of the programs. Such time limits
shall afford a full and fair opportunity to those eligible to submit the information within the period prescribed.
At least 2 weeks notice of any general time limit prescribed shall be provided to the public. 

(b) Other means of notification of program availability including radio announcements and individual notices to
the person affected, shall be used to the extent practicable. Notice of such time limits which are applicable to individual
persons, such as time limits for reporting performance of approved practices, shall be issued in writing to the person
affected. Exceptions to the time limits may be made in cases where failure to submit required forms and information
within the applicable time limits is due to reasons beyond the control of the farmer or rancher. 



701.18 



Death, incompetency, or disappearance. 



In case of death, incompetency, or disappearance of any participant, any cost shares due shall be paid to the successor,
determined in accordance with provisions of the regulations in part 707 of this chapter. 



701.19 



Appeals. 



Any person may obtain reconsideration and review of determinations affecting participation in these programs,
in accordance with part 780 of this chapter. 



701.20 



Performance based on advice or action of COC or STC. 



Cases involving performance rendered in good faith in reliance upon action or advice of an authorized representative
of a STC or COC shall be considered according to part 790 of this chapter. 



701.21 



Compliance with regulatory measures. 



Participants who perform practices shall be responsible for obtaining the authorities, rights, easements, or other
approvals necessary to the performance and maintenance of the practices according to applicable laws and regulations.
The participant with whom the cost of the practice is shared shall be responsible to the Federal Government for any
losses it may sustain because such participant infringes on the rights of others or fails to comply with applicable
laws or regulations. 



