 

Clearly, any limits imposed will depend on the risks involved and the substitute and 
application in question. To provide adequate opportunity for comment by the regulated 
community, EPA will complete notice-and-comment rulemaking before promulgating any 
finding that a substitute is acceptable only subject to a narrowed use limit. 
In implementing narrowed use limitations, the Agency has sought to allow agents for 
specific uses that would otherwise be deemed unacceptable. This policy serves the larger 
goal of facilitating the fastest possible transition from ozone-depleting compounds by 
expanding the list of alternatives available to all applications within a sector end-use category. 
EPA recognizes that certain sector end-uses encompass a broad range of applications, 
manufacturing processes and products. Under the acceptable for narrow use category, EPA 
will accept a substitute for use only in certain specialized uses within the broader end-use. 
The intent of the narrowed use limitation is to restrict the use of a substitute that the Agency 
deems unacceptable for the full range of applications or products within a sector end-use 
category. Where a substitute is found acceptable subject to narrowed use limits, general use 
within the relevant end-use is prohibited. 
Before users adopt a restricted agent within the narrowed use limits category, they 
must make a reasonable effort to ascertain that other substitutes or alternatives are not 
technically feasible. Users are expected to undertake a thorough technical investigation of 
alternatives before implementing the otherwise restricted substitute. The Agency expects 
users to contact vendors of alternatives to explore with experts whether or not other 
acceptable substitutes are technically feasible for the process, product or system in question. 
To further assist users in their evaluation, EPA has prepared a list of vendors manufacturing 
other substitutes. Although users are not required to report the results of their investigation to 
EPA, companies must document these results, and retain them in company files for the 
purpose of demonstrating compliance. Both the Vendor List and the Guidance Manual are 
available from the SNAP program, or through EPA's Stratospheric Ozone Protection Hotline. 
In October 1993, the President directed EPA through the Climate Change Action Plan 
(CCAP) to use its authority under section 612 of the Clean Air Act to narrow the uses of 
CFC substitutes with high global warming potential. Because EPA is simultaneously also 
interested in promoting the broader shift away from ozone-depleting compounds, EPA will 
make every effort to assure that these limits on use will be imposed in ways that preserve as 
much flexibility as possible for those trying to move to alternatives. 
In this final rule, EPA has imposed narrowed use limitations on the acceptability of 
perfluorocarbon (PFC) substitutes when used in solvent cleaning, and fire suppression. EPA 
has imposed these limitations because of the high global warming potential and long 
atmospheric lifetimes of the PFC compounds as compared with other alternatives available for 
the same end-uses. Comparable limitations on the use of refrigerants and aerosols containing 
PFCs are also likely to be proposed shortly. In the case of fire suppression and explosion 
protection, EPA has taken the approach of narrowing uses to prevent or delay emissions of 
global warming gases. This is preferable to the outright prohibitions EPA would otherwise be 
authorized to impose where other alternatives are available, because in these limited cases 
users may have no other feasible alternatives to continued reliance on ozone-depleters. 
Through the notice and comment rulemaking process, other companies or vendors will 
be able to scrutinize the proposed narrowed use limits. This may bring to light new 
alternatives or processes of which the user and EPA are unaware, and these new alternatives 
may pose lower overall risks than the substances which have been the subject of the narrowed 
use designation. If an acceptable listing is revoked based on the availability of a new, lower-risk alternative,
companies that have made investments in technology which was earlier 
deemed as having no alternatives available may be granted permission to extend their use for 
a limited period of time, consistent with EPA's grandfathering approach described above in 
section VI.B. 
The Agency has prepared guidance describing additional documentation users should 
include for narrowed use applications. This information includes descriptions of: 
&bull;Process or product in which the substitute is needed; 
&bull;Substitutes examined and rejected; 
&bull;Reason for rejection of other alternatives, e.g., performance, technical or safety 
standards; and/or 
&bull;Anticipated date other substitutes will be available and projected time for 
switching. 
In addition to this basic information, the guidance includes specific data for end-uses 
in each sector. The guidance is available from the SNAP program. 
(4) 

Unacceptable.

 
The Agency has the authority under section 612(c) to prohibit the use of a substitute 
believed to present adverse effects to human health and the environment where alternatives 
that reduce overall risk are available. The Agency will only use this provision where it has 
identified other substitutes that are currently or potentially available and that pose lower 
overall risks. Substitutes will be listed as unacceptable through the rulemaking process. 
(5) 

Pending.

 
The Agency will describe submissions for which the 90-day review period is 
underway and for which EPA has not yet reached a final decision as pending. For all 
substitutes in the pending category, the Agency will contact the submitter to determine a 
schedule for providing the missing information if the Agency needs to extend the 90-day 
review period. EPA will use the authority under section 114 to gather this information, if 
necessary. Again, a delay of the review period will not affect a manufacturer's ability to sell 
a product 90 days after notification of the Agency as described above. 




