 

Analysis of Proposed Consent Order to Aid Public Comment



The Federal Trade Commission has accepted an agreement to a proposed consent order from American Institute of Habit
Control, Inc. (hereinafter ``AIHC'') and its President, Steven Present, marketers of the Present Seminar, a single,
two-and-a-half-hour, group hypnosis session program for smoking cessation and weight loss. The Present Seminar
is offered to the public nationwide by Steven Present at hotel locales.

The proposed consent order has been placed on the public record for sixty (60) days for the reception of comments by
interested persons. Comments received during this period will become part of the public record. After (60) days,
the Commission will again review the agreement and will decide whether it should withdraw from the agreement or make
final the agreement's proposed order.

The Commission's complaint charges that the proposed respondents deceptively advertised: (1) The likelihood of
success in achieving the and maintaining abstinence from smoking cigarettes and weight loss; and (2) the effectiveness
of proposed respondents' smoking cessation methods in leading consumers to abstain from smoking, including the
effectiveness of proposed respondents' programs compared to other smoking cessation programs.



Success



The complaint against AIHC and Steven Present alleges that the proposed respondents made false claims and failed
to possess a reasonable basis for other claims they made regarding the success of their seminar participants in quitting
smoking and achieving and maintaining weight loss.Through advertisements placed in various media in advance of
their seminars, proposed respondents represented that 97 percent of their seminar participants permanently abstain
from smoking after attending those seminars. The complaint alleges that this claim is false.

Proposed respondents further represented through their advertisements that seminar participants: (1) Are cured
of smoking addiction and permanently abstain from smoking cigarettes; (2) are cured of smoking addiction without
experiencing withdrawal, stress or weight gain; and (3) achieve and maintain weight loss.

The Commission believes that these success claims for seminar attendees' smoking cessation, weight loss and maintenance
of achieved weight loss are deceptive because proposed respondents at the time they made the claims did not possess
adequate substantiation for those claims.

The proposed consent order seeks to address the alleged success misrepresentations cited in the accompanying complaint
in three ways. First, the order (Part I.C.) requires proposed respondents to possess a reasonable basis consisting
of competent and reliable scientific evidence substantiating any claim about the performance or efficacy of any
smoking cessation or weight loss program.

Second, the proposed order (Part I.B.) prohibits proposed respondents from representing that 97 percent of their
seminar attendees permanently abstain from smoking after those seminars, unless that is the case.

Finally, the proposed order (Part I.E.) generally prohibits proposed respondents from misrepresenting the performance
or efficacy of any smoking cessation or weight loss program.



Efficacy



The Commission's complaint further alleges that proposed respondents made false claims and failed to possess a reasonable
basis for other claims they made regarding relative ability of their hypnosis program to lead consumers to quit smoking.
AIHC and Steven Present represented through their advertising that the U.S. Surgeon General, in the 1989 U.S. Surgeon
General's Report on Smoking, Reducing the Health Consequences of Smoking; 25 Years of Progress, states that the group
hypnosis method used by respondents is one of the most effective ways to stop smoking. The complaint alleges that this
claim is false, because the cited Report does not state that proposed respondents' hypnosis method is one of the most
effective ways to stop smoking.

Proposed respondents further represented through their advertisements that their single-session, group hypnosis
seminar is more efficacious for smoking cessation than other smoking cessation methods. The Commission believes
that this comparative efficacy claim for proposed respondents' hypnosis program is deceptive because proposed
respondents at the time they made the claim did not possess adequate substantiation for the claim.

To address these efficacy misrepresentations, the proposed order (Part I.A.) prohibits AIHC and Steven Present
from representing that the U.S. Surgeon General, in the 1989 U.S. Surgeon General's Report on Smoking, Reducing the
Health Consequences of Smoking: 25 Years of Progress, states that the group hypnosis method used by respondents is
one of the most effective ways to stop smoking. The proposed order (Part I.D.) further generally prohibits proposed
respondents from misrepresenting the existence, contents, validity, results, conclusions, or interpretations
of any test, study, survey, or report. Finally, the order (Part I.C.) requires proposed respondents to possess and
rely upon competent and reliable scientific evidence substantiating any representation about the relative or absolute
performance or efficacy of any smoking cessation or weight loss program, before they make such a claim.

The purpose of this analysis is to facilitate public comment on the proposed order, and it is not intended to constitute
an official interpretation of the agreement and proposed order, or to modify in any way their terms.



<SIGNER>
Donald S. Clark,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 944964 Filed 3394; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 675001M
</BILLING>


