 




<USBUREAU>Public Health Service</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>RIN: 09052A56</RINDOCK>



Office of Minority Health; Cooperative Agreement for Family and Community Violence; Prevention Demonstration
Program; Notice of Availability of Funds and Request for Application



Introduction



The Office of Minority Health (OMH) announces the availability of Fiscal Year 1994 funds to support a cooperative
agreement with a consortium of Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Specifically, the intent
of this project is to design, develop, implement, and test a series of models that may be effective in preventing minority
male related violence in such communities.

Models developed under this project should address behavioral patterns and environmental influences that may precipitate
violence within the family or the community. Such factors may contribute to dysfunctional patterns of individual
behavior or dysfunctional relationships within families. They include breakdowns in family structure, alcoholism
and drug abuse, lack of economic and job opportunities, educational deficiencies, poverty, and crime. With respect
to domestic violence, these issues may include spousal and child abuse and rape; transmission of violent behavior
to subsequent generations; societal and family relationships.

Multi-purpose family support systems are planned through both linkages and consortiums of campus based centers
and participating official and private community based organizations providing a range of prevention and service
interventions. Interventions will be directed toward several different target populations including primary
school (k5), junior high school (68), and high school as well as young adults, adults, parents, and the
elderly. They will involve, but not be limited to certain common strategies such as target group focused education;
individual counseling, treatment and individually relevant assistance; and referral to public and private agencies,
which includes the college and university based family support center or the participating professionals, institutions
and organizations within the community. The provider system encompasses colleges and university students and faculty,
parents, school officials and teachers, a large array of professionals and official community agencies. The system
is designed to utilize and expand the expertise of these educational institutions and other community resources
in the areas to be addressed. The consortium consists of 16 Historically and Predominantly Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and a number of key public and private entities functioning together to improve the lives of individuals residing
throughout the communities in which they live.

The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention objective
of Healthy People 2000, a PHS-led national activity to reduce morbidity and mortality and to improve the quality of
life. This announcement is related to the priority area of Violence and Abusive Behavior, which includes the following
sub-areas: homicide, suicide, weapon-related deaths, child abuse and neglect, spousal abuse, assault injuries,
suicide attempts by adolescents, physical fighting among youth, weapon-carrying youth and comprehensive violence
programs.



