 

(6) The General Services Administration Acquisition Regulations. 
(7) Federal Property Management Regulations. 
(8) Federal Travel Regulations. 


O. National Aeronautics and Space Administration 


1. Summary of Response Mission 


The role of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in a 
Federal response will depend on the circumstances of the emergency. NASA will be the LFA and will coordinate the initial
response and support of other agencies as agreed to in specific interagency agreements when the launch vehicle or
payload carrying the nuclear source is a NASA responsibility. 


2. Capabilities and Resources 


NASA has launch facilities and the ability to provide launch vehicle and space craft telemetry data through its tracking
and data network. NASA also has the capability to provide limited radiological monitoring and emergency response
from its field centers in Florida, Alabama, Maryland, Virginia, Ohio, Texas, and California. 


3. NASA References 


(1) KHB 1860.1A KSC Ionizing Radiation Protection Program. 
(2) Interagency Agreement between AEC (now DOE) and NASA concerning Isotope SNAP Devices for NASA Space Vehicles
with supplements. 


4. NASA Specific Authorities 


(1) National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, as amended. 
(2) NHB 1700.1 (V1A) Basic Safety Manual. 
(3) 14 CFR 1200 to END ``National Aeronautic and Space Administration.'' 


P. National Communications System 


1. Summary of Response Mission 


Under the National Plan for Telecommunications Support in Non-Wartime 
Emergencies, the Manager, National Communications System (NCS) is responsible for adequate telecommunications
support to the Federal response and recovery operations. The Manager, NCS, will identify, upon the request of the
Senior FEMA Official, a Communications Resource Manager from the NCS/National Coordinating Center (NCC) staff
when any of the following conditions exist: (1) When local telecommunications vendors are unable to satisfy all telecommunications
service requirements; (2) when conflicts between multiple Federal Emergency Communications Coordinators occur;
or (3) if the allocation of available resources cannot be fully accomplished at the field level. The Manager, NCC,
will monitor all extraordinary situations to determine that adequate national security emergency preparedness
telecommunications services are being provided to support the Federal response and recovery operations. 


2. Capabilities and Resources 


NCS can provide the expertise and authority to coordinate the communications for the Federal response and to assist
appropriate State agencies in meeting their communications requirements. 


3. NCS References 


(1) National Plan for Telecommunications Support in Non-Wartime 
Emergencies, September 1987. 
(2) Memorandum of Understanding, GSA and FEMA, February 1989. 
(3) E.O. 12046, as amended, (Relates to the transfer of telecommunications functions), March 27, 1978. 


4. NCS Specific Authorities 


(1) E.O. 12472, Assignment of National Security and Emergency 
Preparedness Telecommunications Functions, April 3, 1984. 
(2) E.O. 12656, November 18, 1988. 
(3) E.O. 12046, as amended, March 27, 1978. 
(4) White House Memorandum, National Security and Emergency Preparedness: Telecommunications and Management
and Coordination Responsibilities, July 5, 1978. 


Q. Nuclear Regulatory Commission 


1. Summary of Response Mission 


The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) regulates the use of 
byproduct, source, and special nuclear material, including activities at commercial and research nuclear facilities.
If an incident involving NRC-regulated activities poses a threat to the public health or safety or environmental
quality, the NRC will be the LFA. In such an incident, the NRC is responsible for monitoring the licensee to ensure that
appropriate protective action recommendations are being made to offsite authorities in a timely manner. In addition,
the NRC will support its licensees and offsite authorities, including confirming the licensee's recommendations
to offsite authorities. 
Consistent with NRC's agreement to participate in FRMAC, the NRC may also be called upon to assist in Federal radiological
monitoring and assessment activities during incidents for which it is not the LFA. 


2. Capabilities and Resources 


(1) The NRC has trained personnel who can assess the nature and extent of the radiological emergency and its potential
offsite effects on public health and safety and provide advice, when requested, to the State and local agencies with
jurisdiction based on this assessment. 
(2) The NRC can assess the facility operator's recommendations and, if needed, develop Federal recommendations
on protective actions for State and local governments with jurisdiction that consider, as required, all substantive
views of other Federal agencies. 
(3) The NRC has a system of direct-reading thermoluminescent dosimeters (TLD) established around every commercial
nuclear power reactor in the country. The NRC can retrieve and exchange these TLDs promptly and obtain immediate readings
onscene. 


3. NRC References 


(1) NRC Incident Response Plan Revision 2 (NUREG0728), NRC 
Office for Analysis and Evaluation of Operational Data, June 1987. 




