 

Operation of the Tehama-Colusa Canal water diversion facilities associated with Red Bluff Diversion Dam before
1990 also adversely affected juvenile winter-run chinook salmon during their outmigration. To improve operation
of the dam and canal and to reduce impacts to juvenile salmonids, including winter-run chinook salmon, the Bureau
installed ``state-of-the-art'' drum screens and a bypass system at the canal headworks in 1990. Studies conducted
to date indicate that the entrainment problem has been greatly diminished by the new screens. FWS is expected to publish
a report in 1993 summarizing the results of monitoring and evaluation studies conducted in 1992. Additional studies,
including monitoring of entrainment and an evaluation of mortality associated with the bypass system is anticipated
in 1993. The February 1993 biological opinion for long-term CVP operations requires the Bureau to develop and implement
a program to evaluate the fish bypass facilities, and correct any identified problems. This evaluation has not been
completed. 
The Bureau, in conjunction with Federal and state fishery agencies, has been evaluating various alternatives to
the existing facilities at Red Bluff Diversion Dam. The Bureau published an appraisal report in 1992 that identified
and analyzed several alternatives for improving fish passage at the dam. Among the four most reasonable alternatives
identified in the appraisal report, two involve installation of a new pumping plant based on the Archimedes screw
design. The Bureau has postponed final selection of a preferred alternative until experimental data are collected
and analyzed from a pilot pumping plant that will be constructed downstream from the dam in 1994. 
The pilot pumping plant that the Bureau has proposed to install at the dam will consist of three large pumps to be located
on the west bank of the Sacramento River immediately downstream from the dam. Two of the pumps will be closed Archimedes
pumps and the third will be a helical style pump, with each having approximately a 100 cfs capacity. This pilot program
is intended to evaluate the pump design and operation, and to allow the Bureau to meet irrigation demands in the Tehama-Colusa
Canal service area while maintaining the dam gates in the raised position. NMFS conducted an ESA section 7 consultation
with the Bureau on the pilot pumping project and issued a biological opinion and incidental take statement in February
1993 which requires the Bureau to conduct an extensive monitoring program to evaluate the effects of fish passage
by the pumps and assess the level of taking. Consultation was reinitiated in June 1993 to address modifications in
the design, construction, and operations of the pumping facility that would delay eventual operation from October
1993 to December 1994. 


Pollution 


Pollution in the Sacramento River has also degraded winter-run chinook salmon spawning and rearing habitat. In particular,
NMFS is concerned about the effects on adult and juvenile winter-run chinook salmon from runoff entering the upper
Sacramento River that is contaminated by heavy metals leached from inactive mining sites at Iron Mountain Mine (IMM).
Heavy metal concentrations from this runoff can reach levels that are lethal to winter-run chinook salmon eggs and
juveniles. Metal-laden runoff that flows from IMM into the Spring Creek drainage is impounded behind the Spring Creek
Debris Dam operated by the Bureau. The Bureau generally operates this dam to control the release of contaminated Spring
Creek flow in conjunction with dilution releases from Shasta and Whiskeytown Reservoirs. The Bureau is expected
to continue controlling releases from Spring Creek Debris Dam in this manner until source control and/or 
cleanup can be achieved. 
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has placed IMM on the Superfund Priority List, and the State of California
and EPA are continuing to evaluate options for the long-term control of contaminants originating from the IMM complex.
Based on an memorandum of Agreement between the Bureau and EPA, the Bureau will develop a plan to enlarge Spring Creek
Debris Dam to provide additional storage for IMM effluent. EPA also issued a Record of Decision on September 30, 1992,
identifying an interim remedial action plan to clean up hazardous substances in the Boulder Creek Operable Unit at
the IMM site. The remedial action involves the collection and treatment of acid mine drainage discharges from the
Richmond and Lawson portals at IMM, and the excavation and capping of existing waste piles that are eroding and discharging
into Boulder Creek and subsequently Spring Creek and the upper Sacramento River. The Richmond and Lawson portals
are the two largest sources of hazardous materials at the IMM site and represent the sources for nearly 40 percent of
the copper and 80 percent of the cadmium and zinc leached from IMM and discharged into tributaries leading to the Sacramento
River. In addition to these activities, the EPA is moving forward with plans to study several remaining sources of
contamination at IMM and identify appropriate remedial actions. 
The 1993 biological opinion to the Bureau also addressed contamination from IMM. The opinion's incidental take statement
requires the Bureau to operate Spring Creek Debris Dam and Shasta Dam so as to minimize the chronic exposure of adult
and juvenile winter-run chinook salmon to heavy metal concentrations and eliminate the potential scouring of metal
laden sediments from Keswick Reservoir. 





