 

EPA's policy is to pursue cleanup of NPL sites using all the appropriate response and/or enforcement actions available
to the Agency, including authorities other than CERCLA. The Agency will decide on a site-by-site basis whether to
take enforcement or other action under CERCLA or other authorities prior to undertaking response action, to proceed
directly with Trust Fund-financed response actions and seek to recover response costs after cleanup, or do both.
To the extent feasible, once sites are on the NPL, EPA will determine high-priority candidates for CERCLA-financed
response action and/or enforcement action through both State and Federal initiatives. EPA will take into account
which approach is more likely to accomplish cleanup of the site most expeditiously while using CERCLA's limited resources
as efficiently as possible.
Although it is a factor that is considered, the ranking of sites by HRS scores does not by itself determine the sequence
in which EPA funds remedial response actions, since the information collected to develop HRS scores is not sufficient
to determine either the extent of contamination or the appropriate response for a particular site (40 CFR 300.425(a)(2),
55 FR 8845). Additionally, resource constraints may preclude EPA from evaluating all HRS pathways; only those presenting
significant environmental risk and sufficient to make a site eligible for the NPL may be evaluated. Moreover, the
sites with the highest scores do not necessarily come to the Agency's attention first, so that addressing sites strictly
on the basis of ranking would in some cases require stopping work at sites where it already was underway. In addition,
certain sites are based on other criteria.
More detailed studies of a site are undertaken in the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (``RI/FS'') that
typically follows listing. The purpose of the RI/FS is to assess site conditions and evaluate alternatives to the
extent necessary to select a remedy (40 CFR 300.430(a)(2)). The RI/FS takes into account the amount of contaminants
released into the environment, the risk to affected populations and environment, the cost to remediate contamination
at the site, and the response actions that have been taken by potentially responsible parties or others. Decisions
on the type and extent of response action to be taken at these sites are made in accordance with 40 CFR 300.415 and 40 CFR
300.430.
After conducting these additional studies, EPA may conclude that initiating a CERCLA remedial action using the Trust
Fund at some sites on the NPL is not appropriate because of more pressing needs at other sites, or because a private party
cleanup already is underway pursuant to an enforcement action. Given the limited resources available in the Trust
Fund, the Agency must carefully balance the relative needs for response at the numerous sites it has studied. It is
also possible that EPA will conclude after further analysis that the site does not warrant remedial action.


RI/FS at Proposed Sites


An RI/FS may be performed at sites proposed in the 

Federal Register

 for placement on the NPL (or even sites that have not been proposed for placement on the NPL) pursuant to the Agency's
removal authority under CERCLA, as outlined in the NCP at 40 CFR 300.415. Although an RI/FS generally is conducted
at a site after it has been placed on the NPL, in a number of circumstances the Agency elects to conduct an RI/FS at a site
proposed for placement on the NPL in preparation for a possible Superfund-financed response action, such as when
the Agency believes that a delay may create unnecessary risks to public health or the environment. In addition, the
Agency may conduct an RI/FS to assist in determining whether to conduct a removal or enforcement action at a site.


Facility (Site) Boundaries


The Agency's position is that the NPL does not describe releases in precise geographical terms, and that it would be
neither feasible nor consistent with the limited purpose of the NPL (as the mere identification of releases), for
it to do so.
CERCLA section 105(a)(8)(B) directs EPA to list national priorities among the known ``releases or threatened releases''
of hazardous substances. Thus, the purpose of the NPL is merely to identify releases of hazardous substances that
are priorities for further evaluation. Although a CERCLA ``facility'' is broadly defined to include any area where
a hazardous substance release has ``come to be located'' (CERCLA section 101(9)), the listing process itself is not
intended to define or reflect the boundaries of such facilities or releases. Of course, HRS data upon which the NPL
placement was based will, to some extent, describe which release is at issue. That is, the NPL site would include all
releases evaluated as part of that HRS analysis (including noncontiguous releases evaluated under the NPL aggregation
policy, described at 48 FR 40663 (September 8, 1983)).
EPA regulations provide that the ``nature and extent of the threat presented by a release'' will be determined by an
RI/FS as more information is developed on site contamination (40 CFR 300.68(d)). During the RI/FS process, the release
may be found to be larger or smaller than was originally known, as more is learned about the source and the migration
of the contamination. However, this inquiry focuses on an evaluation of the threat posed; the boundaries of the release
need not be defined, and in any event are independent of the NPL listing. Moreover, it generally is impossible to discover
the full extent of where the contamination ``has come to be located'' before all necessary studies and remedial work
are completed at a site. Indeed, the boundaries of the contamination can be expected to change over time. Thus, in most
cases, it will be impossible to describe the boundaries of a release with certainty.


