 







<USDEPT>FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>Harleysville National Corporation, et al.; Formations of; Acquisitions by; and Mergers of Bank Holding Companies</DOCTITLE>


The companies listed in this notice have applied for the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company
Act (12 U.S.C. 1842) and  225.14 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.14) to become a bank holding company or to acquire
a bank or bank holding company. The factors that are considered in acting on the applications are set forth in section
3(c) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 1842(c)).
Each application is available for immediate inspection at the Federal Reserve Bank indicated. Once the application
has been accepted for processing, it will also be available for inspection at the offices of the Board of Governors.
Interested persons may express their views in writing to the Reserve Bank or to the offices of the Board of Governors.
Any comment on an application that requests a hearing must include a statement of why a written presentation would
not suffice in lieu of a hearing, identifying specifically any questions of fact that are in dispute and summarizing
the evidence that would be presented at a hearing.
Unless otherwise noted, comments regarding each of these applications must be received not later than March 25, 1994.


A. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia

 (Thomas K. Desch, Vice President) 100 North 6th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19105:


1. Harleysville National Corporation

, Harleyville, Pennsylvania; to acquire 100 percent of the voting shares of Security National Bank, Pottstown, Pennsylvania.


B. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

 (Lloyd W. Bostian, Jr., Senior Vice President) 701 East Byrd Street, Richmond, Virginia 23261:


1. Union National Bancorp, Inc.

, Westminster, Maryland; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of The Union
National Bank of Westminster, Westminster, Maryland.


2. Hinton Financial Corporation

, Hinton, West Virginia; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of The First
National Bank of Hinton, Hinton, West Virginia.


C. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

 (Randall C. Sumner, Vice President) 411 Locust Street, St. Louis, Missouri 63166:


1. Allendale Bancorp, Inc.

, Allendale, Illinois; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of First National
Bank of Allendale, Allendale, Illinois.


2. Community Charter Corporation

, St. Louis, Missouri; to become a bank holding company by acquiring at least 89.4 percent of the voting shares of Missouri
State Bank and Trust Company, St. Louis, Missouri.


D. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

 (James M. Lyon, Vice President) 250 Marquette Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480:


1. Citizens Bank Group, Inc.

, Minnepolis, Minnesota; to merge with Mapleton Bancshares, Inc., Mapleton, Minnesota, and thereby indirectly
acquire The First National Bank of Mapleton, Mapleton, Minnesota.


2. Tysan Corportion

, Minneapolis, Minnesota; to merge with Royalton Bancshares, Inc., Royalton, Minnesota, and thereby indirectly
acquire Royalton State Bank, Royalton, Minnesota.


E. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City

 (John E. Yorke, Senior Vice President) 925 Grand Avenue, Kansas City, Missouri 64198:


1. Peak Banks of Colorado, Inc.

, Nederland, Colorado; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of Peak National
Bank, Nederland, Colorado



Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 24, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Jennifer J. Johnson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Secretary of the Board.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94-4776 Filed 3-1-94; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 6210-01-F
</BILLING>



