 


Box turtles are long-lived, sexual maturity is late, and annual reproduction is low. They exhibit high site fidelity,
which tends to amplify the impacts of habitat fragmentation. The removal of adult turtles from the wild can have a significant
impact on the status of populations. 

A large number of comments were received in response to the January 27, 1994, notice. Twenty-two States responded,
in 16 of which box turtles are protected by State law. None of these responses objected to a proposal to list the box turtle
in Appendix II. Comments from the States noted the continued loss of habitat, illegal collecting, negative impacts
of the pet trade in box turtles, some indications of international trade, and suggestions of declines in some populations.
Of the 298 comments received from individuals, only one did not support the proposal to list box turtles under CITES,
and this one negative comment was made pending the collection of more data. Many of these comments included anecdotal
accounts and observations of population declines, and the occurrence of box turtles for sale in pet stores in the United
States and abroad. Supporting comments were also received on behalf of 23 non-governmental organizations, although
2 of these supported the listing of box turtles conditioned on proper treatment of pet-trade turtles, and more rapid
processing of permit applications. Most of these responses focused on the impacts of the pet trade and poor shipping
conditions. 


 
Based on (1) the large number of box turtles exported from the United States since 1988; (2) an apparent increase in
the demand for box turtles in the international pet trade, particularly since 1984 when the EU banned trade in Mediterranean
land tortoises (

Testudo

 spp.); (3) the reported decline in numbers throughout the range of 

T. ornata

 and 

T. carolina

; (4) an increase in fragmentation of box turtle habitat; (5) the difficulties of implementing State protective laws,
especially when similar protection is not provided in other States; and (6) the increased negative impact of these
factors on species exhibiting low reproductive rates and high site fidelity; the Service has proposed to include
all the populations of box turtles in the genus 

Terrapene

 in Appendix II of CITES, except 

T. coahuila,

 which will remain in Appendix I. 



4. Tarantulas (

Brachypelma

 species). The Service received a proposal from Dr. Robert Wolff of Trinity Christian College, Palos Heights, Illinois
to list all the species in the genus 

Brachypelma

 (also known as 

Euathlus

) in Appendix II. There are about nine species in the genus, and one, 

B. smithi

 the red-kneed tarantula, is presently included in Appendix II. Members of this genus are usually colorful and among
the most sought after tarantulas for the pet trade. The taxonomy of the genus is not well known and identification of
species is often difficult. 



Four responses to the possible listing of 

Brachypelma 

species were received. Although one commenter only supported the inclusion of the genus in Appendix II by implication,
the other three commenters specifically supported this action. The HSUS noted the popularity of 

Brachypelma

 species in the pet trade and the enhanced support of enforcement efforts that this action would provide. TRAFFIC USA
claimed that there is increasing evidence for widespread trade in several species of the genus. TRAFFIC France reported
to TRAFFIC USA increased trade in tarantula species throughout western Europe involving at least four other species
in addition to 

B. smithi.

 The Mexican Government supported the addition of all species of 

Brachypelma

 in Appendix II. The Service has therefore proposed the inclusion of all taxa in the genus 

Brachypelma

 in Appendix II, including but not limited to the following species: 

B. albopilosum, B. angustum, B. auratum, B. boehmei, B. emilia, B. fossorium, B. pallidum, B. sabulosum, B. vagans.

 Any taxa discovered subsequent to this listing and included in the genus 

Brachypelma

 would also be automatically included in Appendix II under this proposed listing action. 

5. Freshwater mussels (family Unionidae). Members of this family occur in their greatest variety throughout the
Southeast and the Midwest of the United States in major river drainage systems including the upper Mississippi River.




