 

13. Section 23.785 is amended by adding introductory text and by revising paragraph (b) to read as follows:



23.785 

Seats, berths, litters, safety belts and shoulder harnesses.


There must be a seat or berth for each occupant that meets the following:


* * * * *


(b) Each forward-facing or aft-facing seat/restraint system in normal, utility, or acrobatic category airplanes
must consist of a seat, a safety belt, and a shoulder harness, with a metal-to-metal latching device as required by
23.1413, that are designed to provide the occupant protection provisions required in 23.562. Other
seat orientations must provide the same level of occupant protection as a forward-facing or aft-facing seat with
a safety belt and a shoulder harness, and must provide the protection provisions of 23.562.


* * * * *


14. Section 23.787 is revised to read as follows:



23.787 

Baggage and cargo compartments.


(a) Each baggage and cargo compartment must:
(1) Be designed for its placarded maximum weight of contents and for the critical load distributions at the appropriate
maximum load factors corresponding to the flight and ground load conditions of this part.
(2) Have means to prevent the contents of any compartment from becoming a hazard by shifting, and to protect any controls,
wiring, lines, equipment or accessories whose damage or failure would affect safe operations.
(3) Have a means to protect occupants from injury by the contents of any compartment, located aft of the occupants and
separated by structure, when the ultimate forward inertial load factor is 9g and assuming the maximum allowed baggage
or cargo weight for the compartment.
(b) Designs that provide for baggage or cargo to be carried in the same compartment as passengers must have a means to
protect the occupants from injury when the baggage or cargo is subjected to the inertial loads resulting from the ultimate
static load factors of 23.561(b)(3), assuming the maximum allowed baggage or cargo weight for the compartment.
(c) For airplanes that are used only for the carriage of cargo, the flightcrew emergency exits must meet the requirements
of 23.807 under any cargo loading conditions.




15. A new 23.791 is added to read as follows:



23.791 

Passenger information signs.


For those airplanes in which the flightcrew members cannot observe the other occupants' seats or where the flightcrew
members' compartment is separated from the passenger compartment, there must be at least one illuminated sign (using
either letters or symbols) notifying all passengers when seat belts should be fastened. Signs that notify when seat
belts should be fastened must:

(a) When illuminated, be legible to each person seated in the passenger compartment under all probable lighting conditions;
and 


