 

One commenter wanted additional language added to section (2)(ii) emphasizing territorial limits and the comparable
technical application by transferee of the original License. 




Response:

 REA has added language to sections (2)(ii) and (2)(iii) to further define the responsibilities of the transferee
and the original License holder. 


One commenter wanted language added to section (2)(ii) to restrict the transfer of the Licensed Software unless the
transfer was authorized in writing by the Licensor. 


It was also requested that the Licensor be allowed a 60 day period to raise any objections to the transfer. 


In addition, it was suggested that if a Company's relationship to the Licensee changes such that it is no longer a subsidiary
of the Licensee then a transfer of the License Agreement is required or the Licensor has the right to terminate the Agreement
and revoke the right to use the Licensed Software. 




Response:

 REA feels that the Licensee should have the right to transfer the Licensed Software to any party who acquires legal
title to the System. 


REA has added language to section (2)(ii) to specify that the Licensor should receive 30 days notice of any transfer.



The obligations of the Licensee and of the transferee who acquires legal title to the System are covered under section
(2)(ii). In addition, REA has added language to section (2)(iii) to emphasize the responsibilities of the Licensee,
therefore, REA does not feel that additional changes are advisable. 


Two commenters felt that the word ``reasonable'' should be changed to ``necessary'' in the first sentence of section
(2)(iii). 


One commenter felt that the word ``rightful'' should be added to the last sentence before the word ``acts''. 


One commenter requested that the following sentence be added to section (2)(iii): ``The Licensee shall not make the
Licensed Software available to any person except its employees on a need to know basis''. 




Response:

 REA feels the word ``necessary'' places too great a burden on the Licensee and that ``reasonable'' provides Licensor
with adequate protection. This requested change has not been implemented. 


The Licensee would not know if information or data that is available to the general public was rightfully released
or not. This requested change has not been implemented. 


REA has added language to restrict Software availability to a need to know basis, however, the words ``its employees''
have not been added. This would restrict the Licensee from obtaining assistance from other sources in the event section
(2)(xi) required enforcement. 


(i) In section (2)(iv), one commenter wanted additional language added to require the Licensee to follow the commenter's
printed procedures for copying the Licensed Software. It was suggested that the phrase ``pursuant to the Licensor's
then current procedures and practices'' be added to section (2)(iv). 


(ii) One commenter wanted the words ``In such reproduction,'' to begin the second sentence and the word ``such'' inserted
between the words ``all'' and ``copies'' in the second sentence to further define the limitation of reproduction
of the Licensed Software. 


(iii) One commenter remarked that there was no need to copy the code since it was contained on non-volatile ROM on the
switch. 




Response:

 (i) REA feels the suggested language regarding current procedures and practices is too vague and could impose unknown
restrictions on the Licensee. This language has not been added to the Software License. 


(ii) The suggested language on limitation of reproduction has been added. 


(iii) REA feels that it is appropriate to be able to copy any Licensed Software/Firmware that is furnished with the
System covered under the Contract for the reasons described in section (2)(iv) of the Software License Agreement.



One commenter remarked that in section (2)(v), activation of nonactivated program instruction steps is a process
by which a non-enabled software feature may be enabled and that, in such cases, additional Right-To-Use fees may apply.





