 

17. Maneuvering Clearances and Hardware 


Q. Is it correct that only the exterior side of the main entry door of covered multifamily dwellings must meet the ANSI
requirements? 
A. Yes. The exterior side of the main entry door is part of the public and common use areas and therefore must meet ANSI
A117.1 1986 specifications for doors. These specifications include necessary maneuvering clearances and accessible
door hardware. The interior of the main entry door is part of the dwelling unit and only needs to meet the requirements
for usable doors within the dwelling intended for user passage, i.e., at least 32 inches nominal clear width, with
no requirements for maneuvering clearances and hardware. (

See

 56 FR 94879488, March 6, 1991, or 24 CFR Ch. I, Subch. A, App. III.) 


18. Doors to Inaccessible Areas 


Q. Is it necessary to provide usable doors when the door leads to an area of the dwelling that is not accessible, such
as the door leading down to an unfinished basement, or the door connecting a single-story dwelling with an attached
garage? (In the latter case, there is a separate entrance door to the unit which is accessible.) 
A. Yes. Within the dwelling unit, doors intended for user passage through the unit must meet the requirements for usable
doors. Such doors would have to provide at least 32 inches nominal clear width when the door is open 90 degrees, measured
between the face of the door and the stop. This will ensure that, if a wheelchair user occupying the dwelling unit chooses
to modify the unit to provide accessibility to these areas, such as installing a ramp from the dwelling unit into the
garage, the door will be sufficiently wide to allow passage. It also will allow passage for people using walkers or
crutches. 


Requirement 4_Accessible Route Into and Through the Unit 


19. Sliding Door 


Q. If a sliding door track has a threshold of 3/4
&rsquo;
&rsquo;, does this trigger requirements for ramps? 
A. No. The Guidelines at Requirement 4 provide that thresholds at doors, including sliding door tracks, may be no higher
than 3/4
&rsquo;
&rsquo; and must be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2. 


20. Private Attached Garages 


(a) Q. If a covered multifamily dwelling has an individual, private garage which is attached to and serves only that
dwelling, does the garage have to be accessible in terms of width and length? 
A. Garages attached to and which serve only one covered multifamily dwelling are part of that dwelling unit, and are
not covered by Requirement 2 of the Guidelines, which addresses accessible and usable public and common use space.
Because such individual garages attached to and serving only one covered multifamily dwelling typically are not
finished living space, the garage is not required to be accessible in terms of width or length. The answer to this question
should be distinguished from the answer to Question 14(c). Question 14(c) addresses parking garages where there
are several garages or stalls located together, either in a separate, detached building, or in a central area of the
building, such as at one end. These types of garages are not attached to, and do not serve, only one unit and are therefore
considered public and common use garages. 


21. Split-Level Entry 


Q. Is a dwelling unit that has a split entry foyer, with the foyer and living room on an accessible route and the remainder
of the unit down two steps, required to be accessible if it is a ground floor unit in a covered multifamily dwelling?

A. Yes. Under Requirement 4, there must be an accessible route into and through the dwelling unit. This would preclude
a split level foyer, unless a properly sloped ramp can be provided. 


Requirement 5_Environmental Controls 


22. Range Hood Fans 


Q. Must the switches on range hood kitchen ventilation fans be in accessible locations? 
A. No. Kitchen ventilation fans located on a range hood are considered to be part of the appliance. The Fair Housing
Act has no requirements for appliances in the interiors of dwelling units, or the switches that operate them. (See
``Guidelines for Requirement 5'' and ``Controls for Ranges and Cooktops'' at 56 FR 9490 and 9492, March 6, 1991, or
24 CFR Ch. I, Subch. A, App. III.) 


Requirement 6_Reinforced Walls for Grab Bars 


23. Type of Reinforcement 


Q. What type of reinforcement should be used to reinforce bathroom walls for the later installation of grab bars? 
A. The Guidelines do not prescribe the type of material to use or method of providing reinforcement for bathroom walls.
The Guidelines recognize that grab bar reinforcing may be accomplished in a variety of ways, such as by providing plywood
panels in the areas illustrated in the Guidelines under Requirement 6, or by installing vertical reinforcement in
the form of double studs at the points noted on the figures in the Guidelines. The builder/owners should maintain records
that reflect the placement of the reinforcing material, for later reference by a resident who wishes to install a grab
bar. 


24. Type of Grab Bar 


Q. What types of grab bars should the reinforcement be designed to accommodate and what types may be used if the builder
elects to install grab bars in some units at the time of construction? 





