 

4.3.2.6. Schedule-controlled behavior.



Another type of second-tier procedure is schedule-controlled operant behavior (SCOB), which involves the maintenance
of behavior 
(performance) by response-dependent reinforcement (Rice, 1988). Different patterns of 
behavior and response rates are controlled by the relationship between response and later 
reinforcement. SCOB affords a measure of learned behavior and with appropriate 
experimental design may be useful for studying chemical-induced effects on motor, sensory, 
and cognitive function. 
The primary endpoints for evaluation are agent-induced changes in response rate or 
frequency and the temporal pattern of responding. Response rate is usually related to an 
objective response, such as lever press or key peck, and differs according to the schedule of 
reinforcement. Response rates are expressed per unit of time. For some classes of 
chemicals, the direction of an effect on response rate can differ between low and high doses. 
Agent-induced changes in temporal pattern of responding can occur independently of changes 
in the rate and require analysis of the distribution of responses relative to reinforcement 
schedule. 
SCOB has been used to study the effects of psychoactive drugs on behavior and is 
sensitive to many neurotoxicants, including methylmercury, solvents, pesticides, acrylamides, 
carbon monoxide, and organic and inorganic lead (Paule and McMillan, 1984; MacPhail 
1985; Cory-Slechta, 1989; Rice, 1988). The experimental animal often serves as its own 
control, and the procedure provides an opportunity to study a few animals extensively over a 
relatively long period. SCOB typically requires motivational procedures, such as food 
deprivation, and training sessions are usually required to establish a stable baseline of 
responding. Because of its sensitivity to neuroactive chemicals, SCOB has great potential for 
use in second-tier assessments. 


4.3.3. Neurophysiological Endpoints of Neurotoxicity 


Neurophysiological studies are those that assess function either directly through 
measurements of the electrical activity of the nervous system (electrophysiology) or indirectly 
through measurements of peripheral organ functions controlled or modulated by the nervous 
system (general physiology) (Dyer, 1987). When performed properly, neurophysiological 
techniques provide information on the integrity of defined portions of the nervous system. 
Many of the endpoints used in animals have also been used in humans to determine chemical-induced alterations in neurophysiological
function. 
The term ``electrophysiology'' refers to the set of neurophysiological procedures that 
study neural function through the direct measurement of the electrical activity generated by 
the nervous system (Dyer, 1987). A variety of electrophysiological procedures are available 
for application to neurotoxicological problems, which range in scale from procedures that 
employ microelectrodes to study the function of single nerve cells or restricted portions of 
them, to procedures that employ macroelectrodes to perform simultaneous recordings of the 
summed activity of many cells. The latter types of procedures have historically been used in 
studies to detect or characterize the potential neurotoxicity of agents of regulatory interest. 
Several macroelectrode procedures are discussed below. 





