 

(v) Cautioning HUD 

not

 to permit 

lenders

 to pay for CLO services (arguing that any payment coming directly or indirectly from a lender should be subject to the
anti-kickback provisions of Section 8 of RESPA). While the 1992 final rule addressed only the issue of fees paid by
borrowers, commenters also discussed the issue of fees paid by lenders for inclusion on CLO systems, in response to
the invitation for such comments in the July 6, 1993, notice. Most commenters referred to such payments as thinly disguised
referral fees. 
(vi) Requiring disclosure that particular CLO listings provide only partial information about available loans.
(A few commenters urged that the CLO fee disclosure form include ``bold print'' disclosing that the same information
could be acquired by the prospective homebuyer ``for free'' by shopping on their own.); 
(vii) Recognizing that CLO services, if performed by a real estate broker or agent for a homebuyer, create a conflict
of interest and a ``potentiality for fraud'' for the broker or agent, whose fiduciary duty is to the 

seller.

 Unified comments from 16 State Attorneys General asserted that the use of CLOs by real estate agents is analogous to
the situation once prevalent in the travel industry:

 

*** where independent travel agents using computer reservation services steered travelers to whichever
airline happened to own the computer system used by the travel agent. Those flights were not always the most convenient
or cheapest for the consumer. Private antitrust enforcement actions were required to rein in these practices.

 

The Attorneys General declared that the economic costs of these airline-industry practices are ``trivial compared
to the costs to consumers if CLOs are used to steer consumers in large numbers to more expensive mortgages than are readily
available [elsewhere] in the market.'' 
(viii) Suggesting that (in defining a CLO system) HUD require equal access to the system by any lender requesting access;

(ix) Urging that fees for CLO services be proscribed because access to lender information has, before, been a free
service performed by real estate agents or brokers; thus CLO charges would ``create a new fee for no real [new] value
or service provided;'' 
(x) Arguing that borrower information achieved through the CLO process was near-worthless, because lenders will
have to reverify any information provided before underwriting loan applications; and 
(xi) Requiring that the CLO disclosure (and acknowledgement) occur before the borrower agrees to use computer loan
origination services. 
In addition to these recommendations from multiple commenters, the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA) recommended
specific modifications to 3500.14(g)(2)(iii): 
(one) Prohibiting the receipt of compensation for operating a CLO by any person who already receives compensation
for the same transaction in another capacity; 
(two) Defining ``computer loan origination services'' in a manner that would require interactive communication
with the computer systems and the listing of multiple lenders upon request and for no charge; and 
(three) If the first two recommendations are not accepted by HUD, requiring that the CLO fee be both disclosed and paid
for before the CLO is accessed. 
The MBA also urged that the rule set out the principle that the mere performance of ``clerical loan origination activities,
most or all of which will have to be repeated by the lender'' does not constitute a service justifying the collection
of a fee. 
(b) 

Comments Supportive of the CLO Provision.

 Comments in support of the CLO provision of the rule were varied. In general, these comments urged retention of the
final rule's disclosure-based authorization of CLOs and CLO charges to borrowers. However, supporters of the CLO
provision and other commenters on the provision expressed considerable sentiment that substantial clarification
of the rule was necessary in this area. 
Several commenters observed that the rule was silent on the question of what disclosure (if any) would be required
if the 

borrower

 was not charged a fee for access to a CLO service. 
One commenter ventured that, evidently, the rule's silence on the issue would indicate that no disclosure would be
required when, for example, the 

lender

 paid CLO-connected fees. While the commenter approved this result, he added that ``further clarification would
be welcome.'' The comment recommended that no separate disclosure be required for lender-pay or for ``no charge''
CLO services_even where it was clear that no-fee CLO systems were being paid for out of loan origination fees or lump-sum
fees that are charged to lenders and mortgage brokers to process and underwrite mortgage loan applications. In these
instances, the commenter maintained, the CLO services were less like traditional settlement services and more like
services purchased by a settlement service provider to help it perform its normal functions_``back office'' loan
origination services. 
In general remarks, the same commenter argued that overregulation of CLO services would stifle innovation and competitiveness.
It was pointed out that one of the major advantages of CLO services was the expansion of housing opportunity ``into
sectors of the U.S. economy not now adequately served by the mortgage lending industry.'' 
Several commenters suggested that, with the very recent revision of 3500.14(g)(2)(iii), the Department
should not make immediate changes, but should allow the marketplace to develop and experiment with CLOs without additional
regulation. However, in a number of instances commenters supportive of the final rule's treatment of CLO services
joined opponents in requesting that HUD provide clarifications of the rule that would: 
(i) Define the term ``computer loan origination services''; 
(ii) Indicate whether payment for CLO services must come solely from borrowers, or whether lender-paid services
are permitted; and 



