 

The Commission agrees with commenters' arguments that educational institutions' commitment to basic research
is largely unique, as it is not driven by the need to develop commercial uses. While there is undoubtedly much basic
research performed outside educational institutions, the Commission does not believe that it is an adequate substitute
for academic research. 

In the Commission's view, a major benefit resulting from educational institutions' use of nuclear reactors and materials
is the production of new knowledge through research, which the Commission would term a ``public good,'' as defined
in economic theory.

2

 Two characteristics of a public good like pure knowledge are its nondepletability and nonexcludability. That is,
one person's acquisition of knowledge does not reduce the amount available to others; further, it is not efficient_and
often is impossible, as a practical matter_to prevent others from acquiring it. These characteristics make it difficult
to recoup the costs of producing pure knowledge. Because the value of a public good may be very great, but the costs of
producing it impossible to recapture, it may be necessary to subsidize that good's production for production to occur
at all. In the Commission's view, that is true of the pure knowledge produced by nonprofit educational institutions,
and the Commission has therefore decided to exempt them from fees. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
The Commission's analysis of this concept was aided by a memorandum prepared by an NRC consultant on the issues of external
benefits and public goods. The memorandum has been placed in the NRC PDR and may be examined by any interested member
of the public. See Memorandum to NRC Staff from Stephen J.K. Walters, Professor of Economics, Loyola College (Md.),
dated January 4, 1994. 

</FOOTNOTE>


Restoring the educational exemption will have additional beneficial consequences. Colleges and universities
not only produce research results and pure knowledge (what we have termed ``public goods''), but also other benefits
of great value to both the nuclear community and society as a whole. For instance, many of the students trained on research
reactors will likely become the next generation of nuclear reactor operators and engineers. The knowledge they gain
from their education in these fields will allow them to operate reactors and other nuclear facilities safely and effectively.
Knowledge attained through education will also be of value to those companies or Government agencies, including
the armed forces, who hire these students to perform nuclear-related work, which often cannot be done without extensive
education in the area. 

3. 

Comment. 

A number of commenters argued, for a variety of reasons, that the educational exemption should not be restored. Some
commenters stated that each licensee should pay its fair share. Others believed that for-profit entities benefit
the public as well and should not be penalized because they generate profits. Certain nonprofit commenters and medical
licensees argued that if the exemption were retained, it should be expanded to include nonprofit institutions and
medical licensees that are not now exempted from fees. A few commenters stated that in certain fields of study, schools
and university hospitals compete with private research laboratories and nonprofit hospitals, respectively, and
thus would receive an unfair subsidy from an annual fee exemption. One commenter went on to argue that such a subsidy
amounted to an unlawful promotion of atomic energy by the NRC. Another commenter requested that the proposed rule
be changed to exempt it from the annual fee, noting that it was the only Federally-owned research reactor not so exempted,
due to the level of its power output. 

A number of other commenters supported restoration of the educational exemption, but believed it should be funded
in a different manner. The two alternatives most popular with commenters were funding the exemption out of general
revenues, which would mean removing it from the fee base, or funding it via a surcharge on all licensees, not just power
reactor licensees. Those commenters favoring removal of the educational exemption from the fee base acknowledged
that such an outcome would require Congressional legislation. 



Response. 

After deliberating over whether the educational exemption should be restored, the Commission believes the wisest
policy decision is to exempt nonprofit educational licensees once again. Since the Commission published its final
rule in July 1993 abolishing the educational exemption, it has devoted an extraordinary amount of time and attention
to the question of whether to reverse that decision. It has reviewed hundreds of letters on the issue, fielded numerous
phone comments and inquiries, and sent staff members to study the issue by visiting college and university licensees.
In the Commission's view, the evidence taken as a whole leans strongly in favor of restoring that exemption, for the
reasons described above: that many educational licensees would be forced to halt their research and educational
activities due to lack of funds if NRC fee subsidies were withdrawn; that those activities would often not be continued
in the private sector, resulting in a serious loss of basic research in numerous areas of study; and that the public
good inherent in the production of knowledge made available to all is worthy of Government support. Such support would
not therefore constitute an unlawful subsidy or promotion of atomic energy. 





