 

Section 6. Equal Opportunity Provisions. 
a. Bidder's Representations. 
The Bidder represents that: 
It has 

XXX

, does not have 

XXX

, 100 or more employees, and if it has, that it has 

XXX

, has not 

XXX

, furnished the Equal Employment Opportunity-Employers Information Report EEO1, Standard Form 100, required
of employers with 100 or more employees pursuant to Executive Order 11246 and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

The Bidder agrees that it will obtain, prior to the award of any subcontract for more than $10,000 hereunder to a subcontractor
with 100 or more employees, a statement, signed by the proposed subcontractor, that the proposed subcontractor has
filed a current report on Standard Form 100. 
The Bidder agrees that if it has 100 or more employees and has not submitted a report on Standard Form 100 for the current
reporting year and that if this Contract will amount to more than $10,000, the Bidder will file such report, as required
by law, and notify the Owner in writing of such filing prior to the Owner's acceptance of this Proposal. 
b. Equal Opportunity Clause. During the performance of this Contract, the Bidder agrees as follows: 
(1) The Bidder will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion,
sex or national origin. The Bidder will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees
are treated during employment without regard to their race, color, religion, sex or national origin. Such action
shall include, but not be limited to, the following: Employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or
recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training,
including apprenticeship. The Bidder agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants
for employment, notices to be provided setting forth the provisions of this Equal Opportunity Clause. 
(2) The Bidder will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the Bidder, state
that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion,
sex or national origin. 
(3) The Bidder will send to each labor union or representative of workers with which it has a collective bargaining
agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice to be provided advising the said labor union or workers' representatives
of the Bidder's commitments under this section, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available
to employees and applicants for employment. 
(4) The Bidder will comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations
and relevant orders of the Secretary of Labor. 
(5) The Bidder will furnish all information and reports required by Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and
by rules, regulations and orders of the Secretary of Labor, or pursuant thereto, and will permit access to its books,
records and accounts by the administering agency and the Secretary of Labor for purposes of investigation to ascertain
compliance with such rules, regulations and orders. 
(6) In the event of the Bidder's noncompliance with the Equal Opportunity Clause of this Contract or with any of the
said rules, regulations or orders, this Contract may be cancelled, terminated or suspended in whole or in part and
the Bidder may be declared ineligible for further Government contracts or federally assisted construction contracts
in accordance with procedures authorized in Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and such other sanctions
may be imposed and remedies invoked as provided in Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation
or order of the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(7) The Bidder will include this Equal Opportunity Clause in every subcontract or purchase order unless exempted
by the rules, regulations or orders of the Secretary of Labor issued pursuant to Section 204 of Executive Order 11246
of September 24, 1965, so that such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. The Bidder will take
such action with respect to any subcontractor purchase order as the administering agency may direct as a means of enforcing
such provisions, including sanctions for noncompliance: Provided, however, That in the event a Bidder becomes involved
in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a result of such direction by the administering
agency, the Bidder may request the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the United
States. 



