 

Removal of Quarantines 


The current regulations (current 82.3(a)(2)(i)) require the disposal of all birds and poultry in the quarantined
area that are infected with END, before we will remove the quarantine. In proposed 82.14, we are proposing that
all infected birds in the quarantined area that have been euthanized, and any other birds and poultry that died of any
other cause other than slaughter, must be disposed of by specified means. This would help ensure that the carcasses
of all birds and poultry infected with END, whether the birds and poultry were euthanized or died of the disease itself,
are disposed of in such a way as to prevent the dissemination of END. 
Current 82.3 requires that the carcasses of the birds and poultry be destroyed, buried, incinerated, or otherwise
properly disposed of as the Deputy Administrator may direct. We are proposing to make several changes in this requirement.
First, we are proposing to allow rendering or composting of the dead birds and poultry. Both rendering and composting
destroy the END virus. Second, we are proposing to delete the words ``otherwise properly disposed of as the Deputy
Administrator may direct.'' The exact meaning of this phrase is not clear. Under the proposed regulations, if a person
wants to dispose of dead birds or poultry, manure, or eggs from infected birds or poultry by using a method the regulations
do not allow, the person may be able to obtain a special permit to do so. (See ``Permits and Special Permits'' below,
regarding proposed 82.12.) 
The current regulations do not include any requirements for disposing of 
eggs, manure, and litter from infected and exposed birds and poultry before we 
remove a quarantine. However, each of these items can potentially spread END. Therefore, we are proposing to amend
the regulations to ensure that these possible sources of END infection are eliminated before we remove a quarantine.
In proposed 82.14(d), we would require either the burial, reduction to ashes by incineration, or rendering
of all eggs from birds and poultry infected with or exposed to END. In proposed 82.14(e), we would require that
all manure and litter from birds and poultry infected with or exposed to END be buried, reduced to ashes by incineration,
composted, or spread on a field and turned under. All of these methods of disposing of eggs, manure, and litter would
destroy the END virus. 
We are proposing to add specific requirements to the regulations for the disposal of articles by burial, composting,
or spreading and turning under. As noted above, burial would be an option for the disposal of birds, poultry, eggs,
manure, and litter. If burial is used for disposal, it would have to be done in the quarantined area in a location that
meets all United States Environmental Protection Agency, State, and local requirements for landfills. The articles
would have to be buried at least 6 feet deep and covered at the time of burial with soil. Requiring burial at least 6 feet
deep would prevent most burrowing animals from coming in contact with the buried material. 
Composting would be an option for the disposal of birds and poultry infected with END, and for the disposal of manure
produced by and litter used by birds or poultry infected with or exposed to END. Because of the difference in the nature
of the material being composted, the procedures for composting birds and poultry would differ from those for composting
manure and litter. 
To compost dead birds and poultry infected with END, the procedures set forth in 82.14(c)(2) of this proposed
rule would have to be followed. These procedures would require the creation of a layered mixture consisting of manure
cake (litter and manure); a carbon source such as straw, peanut hulls, or wood chips; and the birds or poultry. The mixture
would need to sit for two 30-day heating cycles, during which its internal temperature would need to reach at least
140
&cir; F (to kill fly larvae and disease organisms). After the first 30-day heating cycle, the compost pile would have
to be turned over and aerated, to provide the oxygen necessary for the composting bacteria. Following the second 30-day
heating cycle, the mixture would need to be covered with a material that will prevent penetration of air and moisture
for an additional 30-day period. The compost pile would have to be at least 50 yards from any building or pen where poultry
or birds are housed, to guard against wind-borne transmission of material that might be contaminated with END, and
would have to be inaccessible to any poultry and birds. This requirement would also be applied to disposal of manure
and litter by spreading and turning under. 
To compost manure and litter, the procedures set forth in 82.14(e)(2) would have to be followed. The manure
and litter would have to be placed in rows 3 to 5 feet high and 5 to 10 feet at the base, be kept moist, and be kept covered.
The internal temperature of the compost pile would need to rise to at least 140
&cir; F, and the manure or litter would have to be mixed every 10 to 15 days, in order to provide sufficient oxygen to the
composting bacteria. The composted manure or litter could not be utilized for at least 30 days from the time the 140
&cir; F temperature is reached. 
Spreading and turning under would be an option only for the disposal of manure and litter. If the manure and litter is
spread on a field and turned under, the field would have to be in the quarantined area. The manure and litter would have
to be turned over within 24 hours of being spread on the field, and be left undisturbed for at least 30 days after being
turned under, to ensure that the END virus has become inactive. We believe a 24-hour time period for turning the manure
and litter over would be short enough to guard against transmission of the END virus, while providing a practicable
amount of time for completing the process of turning under. 




