 

(A) If the applicant fails to accept the determination of the Administrator and files an answer and requests a hearing,
and the Administrator, after review of the answer, determines the initial determination to be correct, the Administrator
shall file with the Hearing Clerk of the Department the notification, answer, and the request for a hearing, which
shall thereafter be conducted in accordance with the Department's Uniform Rules of Practice. 

(B) The hearing shall be conducted before an administrative law judge with the opportunity for appeal to the Department's
Judicial Officer, who shall make the final determination for the Secretary. Any such determination by the Secretary
shall be conclusive unless, within 30 days after receipt of the notice of such final determination, the applicant
appeals to the United States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which the applicant has its principal place of business
or to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. 

(ii) If the claim is approved, FSIS shall notify the applicant, in writing, and shall also publish in the 

Federal Register

 a final rule amending the regulations to authorize the use of the claim.




4. A new 317.371 would be added to read as follows: 



317.371 

Health claims. 



(a) 

Calcium and osteoporosis

_(1) 

Relationship between calcium and osteoporosis. 

An inadequate calcium intake contributes to low peak bone mass and has been identified as one of the many risk factors
in the development of osteoporosis. Peak bone mass is the total quantity of bone present at maturity, and experts believe
that it has the greatest bearing on whether or not a person will be at risk of developing osteoporosis and related bone
fractures later in life. Another factor that influences total bone mass susceptibility to osteoporosis is the rate
of bone loss after skeletal maturity. An adequate intake of calcium is thought to exert a positive effect during adolescence
and early adulthood in optimizing the amount of bone that is laid down. However, the upper limit of peak bone mass is
genetically determined. The mechanism through which an adequate calcium intake and optimal peak bone mass reduce
the risk of osteoporosis is thought to be as follows. All persons lose bone with age. Hence those with higher bone mass
at maturity take longer to reach the critically reduced mass at which bones can fracture easily. The rate of bone loss
after skeletal maturity also influences the amount of bone present at old age and can influence an individual's risk
of developing osteoporosis. Maintenance of an adequate intake of calcium later in life is thought to be important
in reducing the rate of bone loss particularly in the elderly and in women during the first decade following menopause.


(2) 

Significance of calcium. 

Calcium intake is not the only recognized risk factor in the development of osteoporosis, a multifactorial bone disease.
Other factors including a person's sex, race, hormonal status, family history, body stature, level of exercise,
general diet, and specific life style choices such as smoking and excess alcohol consumption affect the risk of osteoporosis.


(i) Heredity and being female are two key factors identifying those individuals at risk for the development of osteoporosis.
Hereditary risk factors include race: Notably, Caucasians and Asians are characterized by low peak bone mass at maturity.
Caucasian women, particularly those of northern European ancestry, experience the highest incidence of osteoporosis-related
bone fracture. American women of African heritage are characterized by the highest peak bone mass and lowest incidence
osteoporotic fracture, despite the fact that they have low calcium intake. 

(ii) Maintenance of an adequate intake of calcium throughout life is particularly important for a subpopulation
of individuals at greatest risk of developing osteoporosis and for whom adequate dietary calcium intake may have
the most important beneficial effects on bone health. This target subpopulation includes adolescent and young adult
Caucasian and Asian American women. 

(3) 

Requirements. 

(i) All requirements set forth in 
317.314 shall be met. 

(ii) Specific requirements. (A) 

Nature of the claim. 

A health claim associating calcium with reduced risk of osteoporosis may be made on the label or labeling of a meat or
meat food product described in paragraph (a)(3)(ii)(B) of this section; 

Provided

, That: 

(

1

) The claim makes clear that adequate calcium intake throughout life is not the only recognized risk factor in this
multifactorial bone disease by listing specific factors, including a sex, race, and age that place persons at risk
of developing osteoporosis and stating that an adequate level of exercise and a healthful diet are also needed; 

(

2

) The claim does not state or imply that the risk of osteoporosis is equally applicable to the general United States
population. The claim shall identify the populations at particular risk for the development of osteoporosis. These
populations include white (or the term ``Caucasian'') women and Asian women in their bone forming years (approximately
11 to 35 years of age or the phrase ``during teen years or early adult years'' may be used). The claim may also include
menopausal (or the term ``middle-aged'') women, persons with a family history of disease, and elderly (or ``older'')
men and women as being at risk; 

(

3

) The claim states that adequate calcium intake throughout life is linked to reduced risk of osteoporosis through
the mechanism of optimizing peak bone mass during adolescence and early adulthood. The phrase ``build and maintain
good bone health'' may be used to convey the concept of optimizing peak bone mass. When reference is made to persons
with a family history of the disease, menopausal women, and elderly men and women, the claim may also state that adequate
calcium intake is linked to reduced risk of osteoporosis through the mechanism of slowing the rate of the bone loss;



