 

2. The effectiveness of nutritional strategies in preventing and/or reducing childhood lead poisoning; and
3. The effectiveness of education strategies in preventing and/or reducing childhood lead poisoning.


Program Requirements


To fulfill the objectives of this cooperative agreement, an applicant must meet the following requirements:
1. A director who has specific authority and responsibility to carry out the requirements of the project.
2. Demonstrated ability to collect and analyze data needed to fulfill the study objectives.
3. Demonstrated experience in conducting relevant epidemiologic studies.
4. Demonstrated effective and well-defined working relationships within the performing organization and with
outside entities which will insure implementation of the proposed study.
5. Demonstrated access to a laboratory with demonstrated proficiency in performing blood lead (and other laboratory
measurements as indicated in the applicant's study protocol).
6. Demonstrated ability to insure that children identified with elevated blood levels receive appropriate medical
and environmental management through an ongoing childhood lead poisoning prevention program (which need not be
applicant's organization).
7. For applicants proposing to ``evaluate the effectiveness of environmental lead hazard reduction interventions,''
the following additional requirements apply:



&bull;Applicant has responsibility for ongoing lead hazard inspection and reduction activities or must document
a close working relationship with the agency or organization responsible for ongoing lead hazard inspection and
reduction activities. If the applicant does not have direct responsibility for such activities, a letter of support
from the organization with that responsibility is required. Ongoing activities should include the inspection of
residences of children identified with elevated blood lead levels for lead hazards and provide for or insure the reduction
of identified lead hazards.
&bull;The lead hazard identification and reduction program should be based on written guidelines, statutes, or
regulations that specify methods used to inspect dwellings, and identify and reduce lead hazards. Lead hazard reduction
standards should include: acceptable methods of controlling lead-based paint hazards (including dust); requirements
for containment and clean-up of dust and debris generated by the lead hazard control process; and inspection of dwellings
to ensure compliance with applicable lead hazard control standards.





Note:

 Eligible applicants may enter into contracts, including consortia agreements, as necessary to meet the requirements
of the program and strengthen the overall application; however, applicants must perform a substantial portion of
the activities for which funds are requested.


Programmatic Interest Areas


The studies must be in one of these following areas:
1. Prospective studies to evaluate the effectiveness of environmental lead hazard reduction interventions in primary
prevention of childhood lead poisoning (e.g., preventing blood lead levels from increasing). Preferably, these
studies should be done collaboratively with health, housing, and environmental government agencies, and community-based
organizations.
2. Prospective studies to determine the effectiveness of nutritional supplements or dietary changes in preventing
blood lead levels from increasing and/or in reducing blood lead levels in young children.
3. Prospective studies to determine the effectiveness of education of care givers in preventing blood lead levels
from increasing and/or in reducing blood lead levels in young children. Educational activities may include provision
of cleaning or other supplies.


Cooperative Activities


In conducting activities to achieve the purpose of these cooperative agreements, the recipient will be responsible
for conducting activities under A. (Recipient Activities), and CDC will be responsible for conducting activities
under B. (CDC Activities):


A. Recipient Activities


1. Conduct study activities, including: (1) Enrolling eligible study subjects, after obtaining informed consent;
(2) collecting data; (3) ensuring appropriate medical and environmental management of study subjects, and (4) conducting
all other components required for implementation of the study.
2. Enter and maintain data in a computerized database.
3. Analyze collected data and prepare a report of the study findings.


B. CDC Activities


1. Collaborate with the recipient in refining the approved study protocol and the data collection instrument(s),
as appropriate.
2. Provide technical advice on data collection and management.


