 

RCRA permits for new incinerators and boilers and industrial furnaces (BIFs) address four distinct phases of operation
after construction. The four phases are: Shakedown, trial burn, post-trial burn operation, and final operation,
which lasts for the duration of the permit. The permitting authority establishes operating conditions for each of
these phases in the permit. 
The shakedown phase of operation lasts from the initial start up after construction until the trial burn. The shakedown
phase prepares the unit for the trial burn. During this period, possible mechanical difficulties are identified
and the unit reaches operational readiness by achieving steady-state operating conditions immediately prior to
the trial burn. Federal regulations limit the shakedown period to 720 hours of operation using hazardous waste feed;
the permitting authority may allow one additional period of up to 720 hours with cause. Permit conditions limit operations
during this period; the permit sets hazardous waste feed and other waste management practices and requires the facility
to monitor certain key operational indicators. 
The trial burn, which typically lasts several days, is the actual testing that the facility conducts, with permitting
agency oversight, to (1) determine whether a combustion unit can meet the performance standards required by the regulations
and the permit, (2) establish the final facility operating conditions for the term of the permit, and (3) provide data
on which the permit authority can base a risk assessment. The trial burn plan contains the parameters for conducting
a trial burn. The trial burn plan is part of the original permit for new facilities and must be approved by the permitting
agency before the facility can conduct a trial burn. The facility often tests several sets of operating conditions
during the trial burn. The conditions are designed in order to determine the range of operating conditions where the
unit meets the performance standards. For example, the facility may set one trial burn condition to determine what
the maximum hazardous waste feed can be. The trial burn demonstrates the range of operating conditions that allow
the facility to comply with the performance standards. The permit writer uses the results of the trial burn to define
the operating conditions that the facility will operate under during the permit term. 
The post-trial burn phase starts after the trial burn and lasts an average of 3 to 9 months. The permit specifies operating
conditions that apply during this phase. Federal regulations require the permittee to analyze the results of the
trial burn and submit them to the Agency within 90 days of completion of the trial burn, or later if approved by the Director.
Also during this period, the facility may submit, and EPA may process, a permit modification to revise the final operating
conditions to reflect the results of the trial burn and any other information. This phase ends once the permitting
agency and the facility complete all necessary permit modifications and the final operating conditions take effect.

The final operating conditions are effective for the life of the permit, unless the facility's permit is modified
pursuant to 40 CFR 270.41 or 270.42. The permit writer bases the conditions on actual trial burn data that reflect the
conditions under which the facility met the performance standards during the trial burn. 


a. Structure of today's proposal. 

Confusion has existed, at times, over the descriptions of modifications for certain items listed in section L of Appendix
I to 270.42, which covers incinerators and BIFs; in particular, the confusion has concerned changes during
the shakedown period of operation and trial burn. How to interpret these modification classifications may be unclear
in certain situations. In order to avoid further confusion or potential delays in determining these classifications,
the Agency is proposing to reorganize and clarify Section L.7. of Appendix I. 
Currently, Appendix I of 270.42 places items regarding the shakedown period, trial burn plan, and post-trial
burn operation into the same section, i.e., section L.7. EPA believes that placing those items regarding the shakedown
period in one section and items concerning the trial burn plan into another section, along with describing each item
more precisely, will clarify the intent behind each description. This reorganization will make it easier to classify
individual modification requests and ensure that the permitting agency processes the requests under the appropriate
procedures. EPA proposes today that all modifications regarding the shakedown period will remain in section L.7.
and all items regarding the trial burn will move to new section L.8. The existing section L.8. will become section L.9.
An explanation of the proposed revisions to sections L.7. and L.8. of the Appendix follows. 
In this proposal, Class 2 will remain the highest classification for changes to the trial burn and shakedown period
permit conditions. Further, the permitting agency will continue to process many changes under the Class 1 procedures,
with prior Director approval. One reason for these classifications is the short period of operation for both the shakedown
and trial burn phases. The permitting authority must be in a position to respond quickly to requests for changes that
are necessary to ensure thorough testing of the unit. In addition, operating conditions during the shakedown period
are generally more restrictive than the final operation conditions. 


b. Shakedown. 

Appendix I to 270.42 currently classifies modifications addressing the shakedown period for a permitted
combustion unit in items L.7. a. and b. EPA today proposes to simplify item L.7.a. by applying it only during the shakedown
period and moving the references to the trial burn plan and post-trial burn operation to newly proposed section L.8.
The permitting agency should not process under L.7.a. any modifications that are classified in other items in Appendix
I. Today's proposed rule will not change item L.7.b., which allows the Director to authorize an additional 720 hours
of operation as a Class 1 modification. 



