 

3. The Office shall promptly provide publicly available information requested by the Secretariat for reports and
studies under Article 14 of the Agreement, by a National Administrative Office of another Party, or by an Evaluation
Committee of Experts.
4. The Office shall receive, accept for review, and review submissions on labor law matters arising in the territory
of another Party, as set out in Sections F, G, and H.
5. The Office may, at the discretion of the Secretary, initiate a review of any matter covered by the Agreement.
6. The Office may request consultations with the National Administrative Office of another Party in relation to that
Party's labor law, its administration of the law, or labor market conditions in its territory, under Article 21(1)
of the Agreement; as set out in Article 21(2), shall respond to requests for consultations made by another Party under
Article 21(1); and shall participate in consultations conducted under Article 21(3) as appropriate.
7. The Office shall publish periodic and special reports, as set out in Section J, collect and maintain information
on labor law matters involving another Party, and compile materials concerning labor law legislation of another
Party.
8. The Office shall consider the views of committees established under Article 17 or 18 of the Agreement.
9. The Office shall consult with appropriate entities of the U.S. government.
Section D. Cooperation._
1. The Office shall conduct at all times its activities in accordance with the principles of cooperation and respect
embodied in the Agreement. In its dealings with the National Administrative Office of the other Parties and all persons,
the Office shall endeavor to the maximum extent possible to resolve matters through consultation and cooperation.
2. The Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of the National Administrative Office of the appropriate Party
or Parties at all states of the submission and review process set out in Sections G and H in order to obtain information
and resolve issues that may arise.
3. The Office shall assist the Secretary of Labor in developing and implementing cooperative activities under Article
11 of the Agreement, which may include seminars, training sessions, working groups, conferences, joint research
projects (including sectoral studies), and technical assistance, and may be carried out through such other means
as the Parties may agree. In deciding which cooperative activities should be promoted by the Council under Article
11, the Secretary of Labor shall give due regard to the recommendations of the Office.
4. The Office shall receive and consider suggestions for cooperative activities submitted by any person.
Section E. Information._
1. The Secretary shall maintain a reading room where submissions, public files, transcripts of hearings, Federal
Register notices, reports, advisory committee information, and other public information shall be available for
inspection during normal business hours, subject to the terms and conditions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5
U.S.C. 552.

2. Information submitted by a person to the Office in confidence shall be treated as exempt from public inspection
if the information meets the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 552(b). Each person requesting such treatment shall clearly
mark ``submitted in confidence'' on each page or portion of a page so submitted and furnish an explanation as to the
need for exemption from public inspection. If the material is not accepted in confidence it will be returned promptly
to the submitter with an explanation for the action taken.



