 

3. Paragraph (c) of 17.42 is revised to read as follows: 



17.42

Special rules_reptiles.



 * * * * *



(c) 

Threatened crocodilians. 

This paragraph applies to the following species: Saltwater crocodile (

Crocodylus porosus

) originating in Australia or Papua New Guinea and Nile crocodile (

Crocodylus niloticus

).
 
(1) 

Definitions of terms for purposes of this paragraph (c).



(i) 

Crocodilian skin

 shall mean whole or partial skins, flanks, bellies, or chalecos (whether salted, crusted, tanned or partially tanned
or otherwise processed) from any reptile within the Order Crocodylia, which includes the families Alligatoridae
(including caiman), Gavialidae, and Crocodylidae. 

(ii) 

Crocodilian product

 shall mean fully manufactured products which are ready for retail sale without further processing or manufacture
and which are composed, totally or in part, from any reptile within the Order Crocodylia, which includes the families
Alligatoridae (including caiman), Gavialidae, and Crocodylidae. 

(iii) 

Crocodilian parts

 shall mean eggs, meat, body parts other than crocodilian skins and products, and whole specimens, from any reptile
within the Order Crocodylia, which includes the families Alligatoridae (including caiman), Gavialidae, and Crocodylidae.


(iv) 

Country of origin

 shall mean the country from which 
the crocodilian skins or parts were originally exported. 

(v) 

Country of re-export

 shall mean those intermediary countries that import and re-export crocodilian skins and/or products, except that
those countries through which crocodilian skins and/or products are transmitted or transhipped while remaining
under Customs control shall not be considered to be imported or re-exported from the country. 

(2) 

Prohibitions. 

The following prohibitions shall apply to the Nile crocodile (

Crocodylus niloticus

) and saltwater crocodile (

Crocodylus porosus

) originating in Australia or Papua New Guinea: 

(i) 

Unlawful importation and exportation. 

Except as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, it shall be unlawful to import, export, or present for export
or re-export any Nile crocodile (

Crocodylus niloticus

) or saltwater crocodile (

Crocodylus porosus

) or their parts or products from a population listed as endangered, threatened, endangered or threatened by similarity
of appearance, or listed on Appendix I or II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora (CITES or Convention), without appropriate permits required under parts 17 and 23.

(ii) 

Commercial importation. 

It shall be unlawful, in the course of a commercial activity, to deliver, receive, carry, transport, or ship in interstate
or foreign commerce any Nile or saltwater crocodile skins, products or parts imported unlawfully. 

(iii) 

Commercial transactions

. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in interstate or foreign commerce any Nile or saltwater crocodile skins,
products or parts imported unlawfully.
(iv) All offenses defined in this paragraph (c) shall include the attempt to commit, solicitation of another to commit,
or cause to be committed any such offense. 

(3) 

Exceptions.

 The importation, exportation or re- exportation of crocodilian skins, products or parts pursuant to exceptions
listed in this paragraph (c)(3) shall be in compliance with regulations in 50 CFR parts 13, 14, and 23.

(i) 

Import, export or re-export of crocodilian skins. 

The import, export or re-export into the United States of crocodilian skins of Nile crocodiles listed in Appendix
II of the Convention, and of saltwater crocodiles originating in Australia and Papua New Guinea will be allowed without
permits required by 50 CFR part 17 provided the following conditions are met: 


(A) Each crocodilian skin, including both halves of a chaleco, imported into or presented for export or re-export
from the United States after [

date to be 1 year after effective date of the final rule

] must bear an intact, uncut tag from the country of origin in compliance with 50 CFR part 23 including those provisions
implementing the CITES resolution on the universal tagging system; 

(B) The same information as is on the tags shall be given on the export permit, re-export certificate or other Convention
document, or on a separate sheet which shall be considered an integral part of the permit, certificate or document
and which shall be validated by the same issuing authority. 

(C) The importer or exporter shall include a copy of each Convention permit or certificate or identify the Convention
permit/certificate number and date of such permit/certificate from the involved country of origin and each involved
country of re-export for each crocodilian skin imported or presented for export or re-export on the permit or certificate,
or on a separate sheet accompanying the permit/certificate; and 

