 

Effects of Critical Habitat Designation 



Section 4(b)(8) of the Act requires for any proposed or final 
regulation that designates critical habitat a brief description and 
evaluation of those activities (public or private) that may adversely 
modify such habitat or may be affected by such designation. At the time 
of preparation of the revised proposed rule, the Service identified the 
following list of proposed or ongoing actions whose effects likely would 
jeopardize the delta smelt and adversely modify or destroy its critical 
habitat_Central Valley Project operations, State Water Project 
operations, deep water navigation channel dredging, reoperation of 
Folsom Dam, Oroville Dam, and Auburn Dam, Central Valley and State Water 
Project Wheeling Purchase Agreement, San Joaquin Valley Drainage 
Program, Central Valley Project water contract renewals, petition by the 
Bureau for a change in diversion point, South Delta Water Management, 
South Delta Temporary Barriers Project, Stanislaus-Calaveras River Basin 
Water Use Program, Phases 3 and 4 of the Suisun Marsh Project, North 
Delta Water Management Project, West Delta Water Management Project, 
Delta Wetlands Water Storage Project, Los Banos Grandes Reservoir, Los 
Vaqueros Reservoir, Kern Water Bank, full operation of four State Water 
Project pumps, entrainment of fish and thermal pollution by industry 
(e.g., power generation facilities), urban or agricultural nonpoint 
contaminant discharges, in-Delta and Suisun Marsh water diversion, Phase 
2 of the Coastal Aqueduct, and the Delta Levee Subvention Program. 
Since publication of the revised proposed rule, the Service has 
determined through section 7 consultations that the South Delta 
Temporary Barriers Project, deep water navigation channel dredging, Los 
Vaqueros Reservoir Project, and Phase 2 of the Coastal Aqueduct Project 
will not jeopardize the delta smelt. 

The proposed rule to revise the critical habitat designation did not 
identify any proposed actions that might jeopardize the delta smelt 
without adversely affecting critical habitat. In the revised proposed 
rule, the Service did identify (based on section 7 consultation 
experiences) five activities that, depending on the season of 
construction and scale of the project, might result in the destruction 
or adverse modification of critical habitat without necessarily 
jeopardizing the continued existence of the delta smelt. These 
activities were:

(1) Sand and gravel extraction in river channels or marshes; 

(2) Diking wetlands for conversion to farmland and dredging to maintain these dikes; 

(3) Levee maintenance and bank-protection activities, such as riprapping, removal of vegetation, and placement
of dredged materials on levees of banks; 

(4) Operation of the Montezuma Slough Control Structure; and 

(5) Bridge and marina construction. 

Construction and implementation of each of these five actions requires 
authorization by the Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) pursuant to section 
10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899 and section 404 of the CWA and 
therefore are considered Federal actions. In a section 7 consultation 
with the Bureau and the California Department of Fish and Game, 
California Department of Water Resources (DWR), the Service reviewed the 
operation of the Montezuma Slough Control Structure for effects on delta 
smelt. As a result, DWR and the Bureau sponsored an investigation of 
the effects of the operation of the Structure on delta smelt, and DWR 
committed to operate the gates only as required to meet existing Suisun 
Marsh salinity standards. When not operating, the gates on the 
Structure will remain in the raised position. The effect of gate 
operation on delta smelt is currently being studied, and the Service 
will make a determination on the Structure's operations in the near 
future. As to the other actions, the Service will consult with the 
Corps as these actions arise. 

On February 4, 1994, subsequent to the publication of the January 6, 
1994, revised proposed rule to designate critical habitat, the Service 
transmitted to the Bureau a jeopardy biological opinion on the combined 
operation of the Federal and State Water Projects on the delta smelt 
through February 1995. In the 1994 biological opinion, the Service 
determined that the proposed operation of the Federal and State Water 
Projects likely would jeopardize the continued existence of the delta 
smelt and would destroy or adversely modify proposed critical habitat. 
This one-year opinion did not recommend a reasonable and prudent 
alternative that distinguished between the number of days of compliance 
with the 2 ppt criteria to avoid jeopardy and the number of days of 
compliance that would have been required to avoid destruction or adverse 
modification of proposed critical habitat. The Service acknowledges 
that such a distinction may be appropriate in future biological 
opinions. 

Any possible revisions to the biological opinion will recognize 
three major initiatives that will shape the dynamics of future estuarine 
conditions for delta smelt. First, in accordance with a Framework 
Agreement (1994) between the Governor's Water Policy Council of the 
State of California (Council) and Club Fed, the State Board will seek 
agreement with DWR and the U.S. Department of the Interior to operate 
the SWP and CVP to make an equitable contribution to meeting the revised 
water quality standards beginning calendar year 1995. The Board will 
seek this agreement while they are working on a water rights decision to 
allocate responsibility among water rights holders in the Bay-Delta 
watershed. Second, section 7(a)(1) of the Act imposes an affirmative 
obligation on Federal agencies to carry out programs for the 
conservation (recovery) of listed species. With the forthcoming 
issuance of a Delta Native Fishes Recovery Plan, currently in 
preparation, the Service expects that local, State, and Federal agencies 
will fulfill their responsibilities by assisting in the completion of 
tasks and objectives in the plan. Third, and related to number two, the 
scheduled renewal of water contracts (i.e., reopened or expired Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) licenses, expired CVP water 
contracts) will provide an additional opportunity under sections 7(a)(1) 
and 7(a)(2) of the Act to implement Recovery Plan objectives and meet 
EPA's water quality standards. Collectively, these initiatives likely 
will result in a phased improvement to water quality based habitat 
requirements for the delta smelt. Accordingly, the Service anticipates 
that adverse modification or destruction of critical habitat will be 
avoided by operation of the CVP, SWP, and other water management 
facilities with implementation of the above described initiatives. 



Consideration of Economic and Other Factors 



Section 4(b)(2) of the Act requires the Service to consider economic and other relevant impacts of specifying any
particular area to be included within the critical habitat boundary. EPA, in coordination with the Service, included
an analysis of the effects of designation of critical habitat for the delta smelt in its draft Regulatory Impact Assessment
(RIA) for its proposed water quality standards. A summary of that analysis was provided in the revised proposed rule
designating critical habitat for the delta smelt (59 FR 852). 

The Service stated in the revised proposed rule that if the final economic analysis substantially differed from the
draft analysis summarized in the revised proposed rule, a revised analysis would be made available for public comment.
No opportunity for public comment was afforded because the results of the final economic analysis do not substantially
differ from the results of the draft analysis. 

EPA's economic analysis assumes that the economic impact of restricting activities associated with construction
and implementation of major water projects would be attributable to the jeopardy standard imposed by listing the
delta smelt as a threatened species, as opposed to designation of critical habitat. Specifically, the impacts of
designating critical habitat are in addition to the economic and other impacts attributable to (1) listing of the
species, (2) economic effects resulting from conservation actions taken by other Federal agencies under section
7(a)(1) of the Act, and (3) regulatory actions required by other laws. 


