 

Appendix I_Agreement to Hold Separate




This Agreement to Hold Separate (the ``Agreement'') is by and among Columbia Healthcare Corporation, a corporation
organized, existing and doing business under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Delaware, with its principal
place of business at 201 West Main Street, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, and HCA-Hospital Corporation of America,
a corporation organized, existing and doing business under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Delaware, with
its principal place of business at One Park Plaza, Nashville, Tennessee 37203 (collectively and individually referred
to as ``respondents''); and the Federal Trade Commission (the ``Commission''), an independent agency of the United
States Government, established under the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, 15 U.S.C. 41, 

et seq.

 (collectively, the ``Parties'').

Whereas, on or about October 2, 1993, Columbia Healthcare Corporation entered into an agreement to acquire all of
the voting stock of HCA-Hospital Corporation of America (hereinafter the ``Acquisition''); and

Whereas, the Commission is now investigating the Acquisition to determine if it would violate any of the statutes
enforced by the Commission; and

Whereas, if the Commission accepts the attached Agreement Containing Consent Order (``Consent Order'') which would
require divestiture of HCA Aiken Regional Medical Center (``ARMC'') in Aiken, South Carolina, the Commission must
place the Consent Order on the public record for a period of at least sixty (60) days and may subsequently withdraw such
acceptance pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.34 of the Commission's Rules; and

Whereas, the Commission is concerned that if an understanding is not reached, preserving the 

status quo ante

 of the assets and businesses of ARMC during the period prior to the issuance of the Consent Order by the Commission (after
the 60-day public notice period), divestiture resulting from any proceeding challenging the legality of the Acquisition
might not be possible, or might be less than an effective remedy; and

Whereas, the Commission is concerned that if the Acquisition is consummated, it will be necessary to preserve the
Commission's ability to require the divestiture of ARMC as described in Paragraph II of the Consent Order, and the
Commission's right to seek to restore ARMC as a viable independent acute care hospital; and

Whereas, the purpose of this Agreement and the Consent Order is to:

(i) Preserve ARMC as a viable independent acute care hospital pending its divestiture, and

(ii) Remedy any anticompetitive effects of the Acquisition; and

Whereas, respondents' entering into this Agreement shall in no way be construed as an admission by respondents that
the Acquisition is illegal; and

Whereas, respondents understand that no act or transaction contemplated by this Agreement shall be deemed immune
or exempt from the provisions of the antitrust laws or the Federal Trade Commission Act by reason of anything contained
in this Agreement.

Now, therefore, the parties agree, upon understanding that the Commission has not yet determined whether the Acquisition
will be challenged, and in consideration of the Commission's agreement that, unless the Commission determines to
reject the Consent Order, it will not seek further relief from respondents with respect to the Acquisition, except
that the Commission may exercise any and all rights to enforce this Agreement and the Consent Order to which it is annexed
and made a part thereof, and in the event the required divestiture is not accomplished, to seek divestiture of ARMC
as held separate pursuant to this Agreement, as follows:




1. Respondents agree to execute and be bound by the attached Consent Order.

2. Respondents agree that from the date this Agreement is accepted until the earliest of the dates listed in subparagraphs
2.a2.c, they will comply with the provisions of paragraph 3 of this Agreement.

a. Three business days after the Commission withdraws its acceptance of the Consent Order pursuant to the provisions
of Section 2.34 of the Commission's Rules;

b. 120 days after publication in the Federal Register of the Consent Order, unless by that date the Commission has issued
such Order; or

c. The day after the divestiture required by the Consent Order has been completed.

3. Respondents will hold the assets and businesses of ARMC as they are presently constituted separate and apart on
the following terms and conditions:

a. ARMC, as it is presently constituted, shall be held separate and apart and shall be operated independent of respondents
(meaning here and hereinafter, respondents excluding ARMC) except to the extent that respondents must exercise
direction and control over ARMC to assure compliance with this Agreement.

b. Respondents shall not exercise direction or control over, or influence directly or indirectly, ARMC or any of its
operations or businesses; provided, however, that respondents may exercise only such direction and control over
ARMC as is necessary to assure compliance with this Agreement.


