 




<DOCTITLE>Arbitration Panel Decision Under the Randolph-Sheppard Act </DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Department of Education.

 
</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of Arbitration Panel Decision under the 
Randolph-Sheppard Act. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 Notice is hereby given that on August 31, 1991, an arbitration panel rendered a decision in the matter of 

Fred V. Scarpello

 v. 

State of Nebraska, Department of Public Institutions, Division of Rehabilitative Services (Docket No. RS/903).

 This panel was convened by the U.S. Department of Education pursuant to 20 U.S.C. 107d-1(a) upon receipt of the original
complaint filed by petitioner Fred Scarpello on 
January 2, 1990, and subsequently amended on June 3, 1991. The Randolph-Sheppard Act (the Act) creates a priority
for blind individuals to operate vending facilities on Federal property. Under the Act, a blind licensee dissatisfied
with the State's operation or administration of the vending facility program authorized under the Act may request
a full evidentiary hearing from the State licensing agency (SLA). If the licensee is dissatisfied with the State agency's
decision, the licensee may complain to the Secretary, who is then required to convene an arbitration panel to resolve
the dispute. 



FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 A copy of the full text of the arbitration panel decision may be obtained from George F. Arsnow, U.S. Department of Education,
400 Maryland Avenue SW., Room 3230 Switzer Building, Washington, DC. 202022738. Telephone: (202) 2059317.
Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf (TDD) may call the TDD number at (202) 2058298.



</SUMMARY>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 Pursuant to section 107d-2(c) of the Randolph-Sheppard Act, the Secretary publishes a synopsis of arbitration panel
decisions. 


Background 


The complainant, Fred V. Scarpello, is a blind vendor licensed by the Nebraska Department of Public Institutions,
the SLA under the provisions of the Act. Pursuant to a permit approved in 1978 by the U.S. Postal Service and a vendor
operator's agreement between Mr. Scarpello and the SLA, Mr. Scarpello operates a vending facility on the second floor
of the Main Post Office, 1124 Pacific Street, Omaha, Nebraska. 
In 1989, the SLA submitted two applications for permits for the second floor of the Main Post Office. One permit covered
the operation of a ``snack bar facility,'' and attachment ``C'' to that application specified the items to be sold
as ``hot foods and salads.'' The other permit represented an updated permit and covered the items that Mr. Scarpello
was in fact already vending under his current vending agreement. 
The SLA granted the complainant's request for an evidentiary hearing. The issues that Mr. Scarpello wanted the arbitration
panel to address were whether the SLA was splitting his location into two separate locations with separate permits
that would allow for another vendor, and if that were the case, whether he would be entitled to have the additional location
and permit automatically awarded to him. The State hearing officer ruled that the two permits already had been issued
and that the complainant was not jeopardized by the new permits. 
In July, 1990, Mr. Scarpello filed an action in the U.S. District Court for the State of Nebraska against the Director
of the SLA and the U.S. Postal Service requesting that construction and remodeling of the new facilities be halted.
This suit resulted in a settlement agreement and a dismissal of the action without prejudice on September 21, 1990.
The settlement agreement permitted the Postal Service to proceed with planned construction and remodeling of the
second floor lunchroom pursuant to the two permits that already had been approved. However, the parties agreed that
the hot food line would not be implemented pending the outcome of the arbitration panel decision. 


Arbitration Panel Decision 


The arbitration panel ruled that the SLA, by entering into a vending agreement with the Postal Service to provide hot
food service, did not violate the vending agreement between the SLA and Mr. Scarpello and that complainant's license
was not being compromised. The new permit for the second facility described the facility as a ``Snack Bar Facility,''
and the attachments to the Hot Food Permit made it clear that the services provided were different from the complainant's
1978 permit that was being updated. The SLA's decision to move, remodel, and enlarge the location and size of the food
facilities on the second floor of the Main Post Office was in response to requests from postal employees to have an expanded
dining area and to have served hot food different from the vended food that was available. The decision to offer hot
foods and salads also meant that different equipment and facility design would be necessary. 
The Panel rejected complainant's argument that he should be the vendor involved in any vending agreement issued pursuant
to the ``Hot Food Permit'' because it would reduce his income and provide unfair competition. 
The panel ruled that the Hot Food Permit did not provide for a facility similar to that of complainant and that there
is nothing in the Randolph-Sheppard Act or regulations that prohibits competition among blind vendors. The panel
considered that, if the SLA were to have proposed entering into an agreement to provide an identical facility as complainant's,
a different issue would be involved. Accordingly, the panel held that the SLA could enter into a vending agreement
with another blind licensee pursuant to the ``Hot Food Permit.'' 
One panel member dissented, arguing that complainant's original permit and agreement allowed him to serve hot food
and to sell and serve salads prepared off the premises and sold over his counter and from the vending machines. This
panel member believed that any change in the permit should have included a discussion and concurrence by the Committee
of Blind Vendors pursuant to 20 U.S.C. 107(b)(l)(2). This panel member stated that the permit for ``hot food'' service
was in violation of the vending agreement between the SLA and the complainant and that entering into another vending
agreement with a vendor other than Mr. Scarpello violated the Act. 
Complainant Scarpello filed a motion in U.S. District Court for the State of Nebraska on August 14, 1992, seeking judicial
review of the panel's decision. The court ruled in an opinion dated June 13, 1994, that plaintiff (Scarpello) failed
to show that the ``arbitration panel's decision was arbitrary and capricious and insupportable on any rational basis.''
The District Court found that the evidence supported the panel's ruling that Mr. Scarpello's vending permit did not
include ``hot food and salads'' and that his permit was not being split as the result of the SLA receiving a second permit
for another vending location at the same site as plaintiff. Likewise, the court found that the evidence supported
the panel's conclusion that the new permit did not threaten plaintiff's livelihood. The District Court ruled that
plaintiff's complaint should be dismissed and that the arbitration panel decision should be affirmed. 

 

The views and opinions expressed by the panel do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of the U.S. Department
of Education. 



Dated: August 22, 1994.

 

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Howard R. Moses, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Assistant Secretary for Special Education and Rehabilitative Services. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9421137 Filed 82594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 400001P
</BILLING>


