 

Volkswagen and American Honda commented that replaceable 
lens headlamps could be designed to require removal of the 
headlamp from the vehicle in order to replace the lens. This 
would have the effect, desirable to the commenters, of causing 
owners to rely on the vehicle manufacturer's dealers for lens 
replacement. However, causing lens replacement to be more 
expensive and less convenient diminishes the prospect of greater 
headlamp maintenance in states without inspection. Further, 
owners compelled by state inspection to replace parts often 
insist on making their own repairs to minimize their burden. 
Making the task unnecessarily complex only increases the chances 
that the owner will make a poor repair. In the case of HID 
integral beam headlamps, easy removal of the lens without 
disturbing the other components may reduce high voltage hazards 
during owner repairs. The better solution, suggested by the AAMA 
and others, is to adopt durability and environmental requirements 
for replaceable lens headlamps to increase the likelihood that 
relensed headlamps will perform satisfactorily regardless of who 
services them. This solution minimizes the potential loss of 
performance from degraded reflectors and maximizes the potential 
for inexpensive voluntary lens repairs in states without 
inspections. 

The most detailed comments to the question of reflector 
durability were those of Ford Motor Company. They contain a 
comprehensive statement of the reflector durability problem and 
some general guidance concerning appropriate test procedures. 
Ford commented:

 


Replaceable bulb headlamps currently incorporate reflective 
surfaces not specifically designed to withstand direct 
environmental exposure or abrasion. If the condition 
prompting replacement of a lens has resulted in 
contamination or discoloration of the reflector surface 
(e.g., as might occur due to a lens crack or loss of 
integrity of the lens/reflector seal), a degradation in 
photometric performance would be expected, as compared to a 
new replacement headlamp. Attempts to clean a contaminated 
reflector, as by wiping, could result in abrasion to the 
metallized surface, possibly resulting in degraded 
photometric performance and/or increased glare. Ford 
therefore recommends that rulemaking on replaceable lens 
headlamps consider the need for the reflective surfaces of 
replaceable lens headlamps to withstand appropriate 
environmental exposure and cleaning operations.




Ford's recommendations were: 





Ford recommends that headlamps with replaceable lenses, in 
addition to present requirements applicable to replaceable 
bulb headlamps, be subjected to salt-fog, moisture and dust 
exposure without the lens in place. Additionally, the 
reflector surface should be capable of withstanding 
resistance to chemicals that are likely to be used by 
consumers or repair facilities to clean contaminated 
reflector surfaces. Subsequent to appropriate environmental 
and chemical exposure, the reflector should be cleaned 
according to a prescribed procedure. When fitted with a 
lens following exposure and cleaning, the headlamp should be 
capable of meeting the same photometric requirements 
applicable to replaceable bulb headlamps with bonded lenses. 
Aftermarket lens manufacturers should be required to certify 
that any headlamp for which the lens is intended is capable 
of meeting photometric requirements when fitted with a lens 
of that design. Additionally, aftermarket replacement 
lenses should be accompanied with complete instructions for 
properly removing the old lens, cleaning the interior of the 
headlamp body, cleaning and preparing the mating surface on 
the headlamp body and installing the new lens on the 
headlamp body.

 


The durability and environmental requirements for the 
present replaceable bulb headlamps and the deliberations that led 
to them may be useful in considering reasonable requirements for 
the reflectors of replaceable lens headlamps. When the agency 
amended Standard No. 108 to permit replaceable bulb headlamps, it 
was aware that German vehicle inspection data showed significant 
rejections due to dull, corroded and damaged headlamp reflectors. 
Thus, NHTSA promulgated an appropriate test of corrosion 
resistance for replaceable bulb headlamps for use in the United 
States. The lamp assembly must be exposed for ten days in a salt 
spray chamber, with the additional requirement than the bulb be 
removed and the spray deactivated during the last hour of all but 
two test days. The test put a premium on the ability of the lens 
to protect the reflector from the salt spray. It also required a 
degree of direct corrosion resistance exceeding the performance 
of some European headlamps by having the lamps exposed to several 
hours of salty air in the chamber without direct spray. In its 
original form, the rule required that the headlamp pass the 
photometric test at the completion of the corrosion test. The 
post-exposure photometric test was later eliminated because of 
the possibility of salt deposits that could not be removed easily 
from a headlamp with a bonded lens. 






