 

On December 30, 1987, LOOP asked the Coast Guard to make the waiver permanent. On February 8, 1988, the Coast Guard denied
the request on the grounds that future exploration for or extraction of oil or gas might occur within one or both excursion
zones. If such activity took place, the Coast Guard might have to revoke the waiver for the sake of safety.

On January 21, 1992, the Coast Guard published a notice of petition for rulemaking and request for comments in the 

Federal Register

 announcing a request by LOOP that the Coast Guard expand the safety zone that surrounds the deepwater port (57 FR 2236).
LOOP requested that the Coast Guard enlarge the safety zone by adding the two excursion zones and prohibit the erection
of structures within the safety zone. This in effect makes permanent the annual waiver of the requirements of 33 CFR
150.337(a).

The expanded safety zone will include the present excursion zones, broaden the entrance to LOOP, and prohibit the
erection of structures or mobile drilling operations. Enlarging the safety zone will reduce the number of required
vessel maneuverings and eliminate structures from the zone, possibly reducing the risk of accidents and consequent
pollution. This safety zone reflects actual tanker activity at LOOP based on detailed records the Coast Guard has
required LOOP to maintain.

To resolve the potential for conflicting use between the expanded safety zone and oil and gas leases actually within
the new zone, LOOP has agreed to compensate CONOCO, Inc., the lessee of Grand Isle Blocks 53, 58, 59, and 65. CONOCO,
Inc. will then relinquish these blocks to MMS. LOOP will not seek further expansion of the safety zone or oppose any
exploration and production activity outside or adjacent to the expanded safety zone.

On November 2, 1993, in a letter to the Department of Transportation, the MMS stated that it supports the agreement
between LOOP and CONOCO, Inc. MMS stated that it is prepared to prohibit surface occupancy of offshore oil and gas facilities
in the safety zone. However, MMS stated that it may be economically and technically feasible to develop the resources
lying beneath the safety zone by directional drilling. MMS would not prohibit subseabed access provided that surface
facilities are located outside the safety zone. Such subseabed activity would not interfere with vessel activity
in the safety zone.

Under the Deepwater Port Act of 1974, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1509(d)(1)), the Secretary of Transportation is required
to consult with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Interior, and the Secretary
of Commerce prior to issuing the safety zone around any deepwater port for the purposes of navigational safety. The
Coast Guard has informed the noted Departments of the safety zone expansion, and they have taken no exception to the
safety zone as it appears in this final rule.



