 

D. Permitting Hospital Level of Care for Certain Ventilator-Dependent Recipients 



1. Background 



Section 9502(b) of COBRA amended sections 1915(c)(1) and (c)(2)(C) of the Act. These amendments allowed States to
provide home and community-based services to individuals who are ventilator-dependent and who, but for the provision
of home and community-based services, would continue to receive inpatient hospital, NF, or ICF/MR services under
a State's Medicaid plan. (The original statute specified SNF or ICF. OBRA '87 struck out ``SNF'' or ``ICF'' and substituted
``NF'' or ``ICF/MR''.) Thus, sections 1915(c)(1) and (c)(2) of the Act authorized waiver payments for individuals
who require an inpatient hospital level of care, if they enter the waiver program directly from a hospital and are ventilator-dependent.
Prior to this legislation, only persons requiring NF or ICF/MR levels of care could be covered under a home and community-based
waiver program. 

Section 9411(a)(1) of OBRA '86 subsequently amended section 1915(c)(1) of the Act to remove the amendments made by
section 9502(b) of COBRA and added a broader authority to permit States to extend home and community-based services
to individuals who, but for the provision of these services, would require the inpatient hospital level of care. Section
9411(a)(2) of COBRA amended section 1915(c)(2)(B) of the Act to also require the State to provide for an evaluation
of the individual's need for inpatient hospital services prior to permitting the use of home and community-based
services as an alternative to inpatient hospital services. 

In the proposed rule, we revised or added provisions under 441.301(a)(3)(i), (b)(1)(ii), and (b)(1)(iii)(A),
441.302(c)(1), (c)(2)(i), (e), and (f), and 441.303(f)(1), (3), and (5), to incorporate
the provisions of section 1915(c)(2). These provisions extended home and community-based services coverage to
individuals who would otherwise need inpatient hospital care and required States to provide for an evaluation of
the need for inpatient hospital services. In addition, we included a proposed expansion of 441.303(c)(2)
to require States that use a level of care evaluation form other than that used for nursing home placements to assure
us that the outcome of that evaluation form is reliable, valid, and fully comparable to the form used for nursing home
placement. 



2. Provisions of the Final Rule 



We did not receive any comments on these provisions. We have, however, made the following clarifying changes in the
final rule: 

&bull;We substituted ``NF'' or ``ICF/MR'' for ``SNF'' or ``ICF'' to conform the regulations to OBRA '87. 

&bull;We have revised 441.303(c)(2) by substituting ``hospital, nursing facility, or ICF/MR'' for ``nursing
home.'' Level of care evaluation forms from any of these facilities will not need State assurances for reliability
and validity. 



E. Bundling of Services 



1. Background 



We proposed to revise 441.301(b)(4) to require States to describe the services to be furnished under home and
community-based services waivers under section 1915(c) so that each service is separately defined. Multiple services
that are generally considered to be separate services cannot be consolidated under a single definition. Commonly
accepted terms must be used to describe the service and definitions may not be open-ended in scope. 

We received the following comments on the proposed rule: 



Comment:

 Two commenters recommended that States be allowed to combine (bundle) certain services under a single definition
under home and community based services waivers under section 1915(c) for ease of reporting. 



Response:

 We believe that services enumerated in the statute (section 1915(c)(4)(B)), such as personal care or adult day health
services, must stand alone and not be included in a bundled service. In addition, bundling of these services would
not ease the waiver process because the cost of each component of the combined service would need to be computed separately
to show how the single service cost was derived. The bundling of several waiver services into a single service definition
may also unnecessarily restrict an individual's freedom of choice of providers (section 1902(a)(23) of the Act)
by limiting the pool of qualified providers. Bundling would limit the pool of providers able to furnish the bundled
service because fewer providers would be capable of furnishing the broader array of services that result when various
services are combined into bundles. Under a bundling arrangement, a provider must be able to furnish all of the component
services in a bundle to qualify for a provider agreement. We will consider a combined service definition if the State
establishes that the bundling of services will permit more efficient delivery of services and not compromise either
the availability of services or an individual's free choice of providers. If HCFA authorizes the bundling of services,
however, States must continue to compute separately the costs of the component services to support the final cost
of the bundled waiver service for the cost-neutrality formula. 



2. Provisions of the Final Rule 



We have adopted the proposed regulations as final rules with two modifications: 

&bull;We have revised proposed 441.301(b)(4) to specify that HCFA will approve combined service definitions
(bundling) if the definitions will permit more efficient delivery of services and not compromise an individual's
access to or free choice of providers. 


