 

(d) The plan will contain elements that address: 

(1) The specific acreage and CAB's enrolled; 

(2) Acreage and location of the resource-conserving crop for each year of the agreement; 

(3) Scheduling practices for the implementation, improvement, and maintenance of the resource-conserving crop
rotation; 

(4) A description of the farming operations and practices to be implemented and the impact of those practices on: 

(i) Maintenance or enhancement of the overall productivity and profitability of the farm; 

(ii) Erosion, soil fertility, and soil physical properties; 

(iii) Water supplies; and 

(iv) Federal, State, and local requirements designed to protect soil, wetlands, wildlife habitat, groundwater,
and surface water; and 

(5) The coordination of all soil and water resource plans applicable to the enrolled acreage; and 

(6) Other provisions as provided by this part. 



1414.13

Displacement of tenants or lessees. 



(a) In addition to the regulations relating to tenants and sharecroppers as set forth in 1413.107 of this chapter,
agreements and plans that will result in the involuntary displacement of farm tenants or lessees by landowners through
the removal of substantial portions of the farm from production of a commodity shall not be approved. 

(b) In the case of any tenant or lessee who has rented or leased the farm (with or without a written option for annual renewal
or periodic renewals) for a period of 2 or more of the immediately preceding years, the refusal by a landlord, without
reasonable cause other than simply for the purpose of enrollment in the program, to renew such rental or lease shall
be considered as an involuntary displacement in the absence of a written consent to such nonrenewal by the tenant or
lessee. 



1414.14

Successors in interest. 



(a) The successor in interest provisions of 1413.51 of this chapter are applicable to this part, except as otherwise
provided in this section. 

(b) Successors not wanting to continue participation in IFM may terminate the IFM agreement without the assessment
of liquidated damages, after the year in which the succession occurs. 



1414.15

Misrepresentation and scheme or device. 



The misrepresentation and scheme and device provisions set forth in 1413.52 of this chapter are applicable
to this part. 



Subpart C_Bases and Yields 



1414.21

Bases and yields. 



CAB's or farm program payment yields shall not be reduced as a result of the planting of a RCC as part of an RCC rotation
implemented under the IFM. 



1414.22

Reconstitution of farms. 



The reconstitution regulations set forth in part 719 of this title are applicable to this part. 



Subpart D_Resource-Conserving Crop Provisions 



1414.27

Resource-conserving crops (RCC's) on acreage conservation reserve (ACR). 



(a) Acreage devoted to RCC's as a part of an RCC rotation under this program may also be designated as ACR for the purpose
of fulfilling any provisions under any acreage limitation program. The ACR must meet the minimum size and width requirements
as set forth in 1413.61 of this chapter. 


