 

For the off-site waste and recovery operations source 
category, the EPA decided to adapt the definition of ``waste'' 
adopted for the benzene waste operations NESHAP (40 CFR 60 
subpart FF). Based on this definition, the EPA created 
separate terms for ``waste'' and ``recoverable materials'' to be 
used for the off-site waste and recovery operations NESHAP. 
For this rulemaking, the EPA is proposing to define ``waste'' 
as any material generated from industrial, commercial, 
mining, or agricultural operations or from community 
activities that is discarded, discharged, or is being 
accumulated, stored, or physically, chemically, thermally, 
or biologically treated prior to being discarded or 
discharged. The EPA is proposing to define ``recoverable 
material'' for this rulemaking as any material generated from 
industrial, commercial, mining, or agricultural operations 
or from community activities that is recycled, reprocessed, 
reused, or is being accumulated, stored, or physically, 
chemically, thermally, or biologically treated prior to 
being recycled, reprocessed, or reused. Based on these 
definitions, materials affected by this rulemaking include 
those materials determined to be hazardous wastes under the 
RCRA rules, solid wastes that are not hazardous wastes under 
RCRA rules, and secondary materials such as used, surplus, 
and scrap materials that are either recycled for recovery of 
reusable materials or reprocessed for sale as new products. 



B. Subcategorization 



Subcategorization of a source category is sometimes 
appropriate for a rulemaking when industrial segments within 
a source category require application of different types of 
control techniques. In developing today's proposed rule, 
the EPA considered subcategorization of the off-site waste 
and recovery operations source category and decided not to 
propose subcategories for the off-site waste and recovery 
operations NESHAP. 

As described in section III.B of this notice, the EPA 
identified several different industrial segments to be 
included in the off-site waste and recovery operations 
source category. Most of these off-site waste and recovery 
operations facilities are also hazardous waste TSDF (refer 
to section III.C of this notice). However, the quantity and 
type of organic HAP emissions from an off-site waste and 
recovery operations facility are not dependent upon whether 
a particular facility is subject to RCRA hazardous waste 
management rules. As previously described, off-site waste 
and recovery operations facilities can receive materials 
that are not hazardous wastes under the RCRA rules but still 
contain organics listed as HAP under CAA section 112(b). 
Furthermore, common organic HAP control technologies are 
applicable to the operations used at all of the off-site 
waste and recovery operations facility types. There are no 
significant differences in the organic HAP emissions or the 
control technologies applicable to controlling these 
emissions from any of the off-site waste and recovery 
operations facility types. Thus, based upon these factors, 
the EPA concluded that designation of separate subcategories 
for the purpose of developing the off-site waste and 
recovery operations NESHAP is not warranted. 



C. Selection of Emission Points 



For purpose of developing regulatory alternatives which 
could be effectively compared in developing this rulemaking, 
the EPA identified the predominate types of emissions points 
at off-site waste and recovery operations facilities where 
organic HAP emissions occur. Five emission point type 
classifications were designated as follows: tanks, 
containers, land disposal units, process vents, and 
equipment leaks. 




