 

The Office of the General Counsel has determined that these regulations meet the applicable standards provided in
subsections 2(a) and 2(b)(2) of Executive Order 12788. The provisions of this rule will preempt state and local laws
to the extent such state and local laws are inconsistent herewith. The administrative appeal provisions located
at 7 CFR part 400, subpart J must be exhausted before judicial action may be brought.

This action is not expected to have any significant impact on the quality of the human environment, health, and safety.
Therefore, neither an Environmental Assessment nor an Environmental Impact Statement is needed.

By separate rule, 7 CFR 401.119 will be amended to restrict the crop years of application to those prior to the crop year
for which this rule will be effective. FCIC will terminate the provisions of the present policy at the end of the crop
year and remove and reserve the cotton endorsement contained in 7 CFR 401.119.

On Tuesday, May 31, 1994, FCIC published a notice of proposed rulemaking in the 

Federal Register

 at 59 FR 28022 proposing to revise the Common Crop Insurance Regulations by adding new provisions for cotton crop insurance.

Following publication of the proposed rule, the public was afforded 30 days to submit written comments, data, and
opinions. The comments received and FCIC responses are as follows:



Comment:

 Two comments suggested that the crop provisions should not be implemented for the 1995 crop year because:

(1) Crop insurance reform will require many policy changes. Implementation of these crop provisions should be tabled
until reform decisions are reached because impacts on policy terms are not yet clear. Delaying common policy implementation
until it can be implemented in an orderly fashion should be beneficial to everyone concerned; and

(2) The Common Crop Insurance Policy should be thoroughly reviewed and revised as needed before any additional crop
provisions are implemented under it.



Response:

 Program changes necessary to comply with crop insurance reform will have the same effects on either the existing cotton
policy or these Cotton Crop Provisions. Any necessary changes can be made to the Cotton Crop Provisions as easily as
they can be made to the existing policy. FCIC has recently completed a review of the Common Crop Insurance Policy Basic
Provisions (457.8). Any necessary changes required to be made to the Basic Provisions as a result of reform
will be required whether or not the Cotton Crop Provisions have been implemented. Therefore, FCIC does not find it
necessary to delay implementation for either of the reasons stated in the comments.



Comment:

 One comment questioned requirements contained in the definition of ``Practical to replant.'' This definition indicated
that the replanted acreage must have the potential to produce at least ninety percent (90%) of the production guarantee.
The late planting provisions provide production guarantees much lower than the ninety percent (90%) potential requirement
contained in the definition even though the late planted and replanted crop may be planted at the same time. The comment
recommended removing the production potential requirement from the definition of ``practical to replant.''



Response:

 FCIC agrees that the production potential required by the definition of ``practical to replant'' and the production
guarantee for late planted acreage may be inconsistent depending on the time of planting. Acreage initially planted
twenty-five (25) days after the final planting date would have a production guarantee equal to sixty percent (60%)
of the guarantee for timely planted acreage, while the definition of ``practical to replant'' would require acreage
replanted at the same time to have a production potential equal to ninety percent (90%) of the production guarantee.
However, expected yield does have an effect on whether it is practical to replant. The ninety percent (90%) production
potential requirement has been removed from the definition of ``practical to replant.'' However, the expected yield
must be sufficient to cover production costs and must be at a level that growers in the area would normally care for and
harvest.



Comment:

 One comment recommended changing the term ``approved yield'' to ``approved APH yield'' in the definition of ``Production
guarantee'' to correspond with terminology in underwriting procedure.



Response:

 Underwriting procedure contains several methods which may be used to determine approved yields. These include the
use of yields which may not represent actual production history (APH). Using the term ``APH'' could be misleading
to readers not familiar with administrative procedures, and, therefore, will not be used in the crop insurance policy.



Comment:

 Three comments disagreed with the definition of ``Written agreement''. This definition required written agreements
to be requested at least 15 days prior to the sales closing date.

(1) One comment recommended keeping the current deadlines for written agreements as specified in procedures. These
procedures require that requests be made not later than 15 days after the acreage reporting date for most types of written
agreements. Setting a deadline 15 days prior to the sales closing date will either force insureds to submit requests
for written agreements they may not need, or result in uninsurable acreage if requests are not made for all possible
situations. Unnecessary requests will increase paperwork for the insured, agent, FCIC Regional Service Office
and company. The comment also recommended deleting the last sentence of the definition, which required written agreements
to contain all variable terms including, but not limited to, crop variety, guarantee, premium and price election.
The comment indicated it was not necessary to include this information on every written agreement because many written
agreements do not alter these items.

(2) One comment recommended keeping the deadline of 15 days after the acreage reporting date because there are many
instances when it is not known that a written agreement is necessary until the acreage is reported. The comment stated
that the change would be an unreasonable requirement and would create difficulties since the sales closing dates
will be 30 days earlier than in prior years.

(3) One comment stated that it is hard to understand why the written agreement deadline is 15 days prior to the time a
producer has to purchase coverage, and that a more appropriate date should be established. The comment also stated
that the sales closing dates are not listed in the proposed crop provisions. If these are the same date as the cancellation
and termination date, the policy should so indicate.



Response:

 The proposed definition was intended to require that requests for written agreements be made far enough ahead of the
sales closing date to allow the insurer to make the offer, and for the insured to accept the offer, by the sales closing
date. Since the insurance policy is a written contract, both parties must have a meeting of the minds before the contract
is valid. The terms and conditions of the policy must be known by the final date for establishing the insurance contract.
In this program, the final date is the sales closing date. FCIC has determined that some situations may allow written
agreements at other times. FCIC is preparing proposed written agreement regulations which will specify when written
agreements must be completed. Until these regulations have been published, the written agreement must be completed
by the sales closing date, or, in specific instances, a written agreement may be requested or approved after the sales
closing date if the crop is physically inspected and a determination made that the crop has an expectancy of making
the guaranteed yield. No prevented planting liability will be established as a result of any request submitted after
the sales closing date. FCIC does not agree that the final sentence should be deleted. Specifying all variable terms
in the written agreement is necessary to assure a clear understanding of the terms in effect.


