 

8. For assuming certain mortality and expenses risks under the Contracts, First Transamerica will assess a mortality
and expense risk charge at an annual rate of 0.85% of the value of net assets in the Separate Account. Of this amount,
approximately 0.30% represents mortality risk and approximately 0.55% is estimated to be attributable to expense
risks. This charge will not increase. If the mortality and expense risk charge is insufficient to cover actual costs
and assumed risks, the loss will fall on First Transamerica. Conversely, if the charge is more than sufficient to cover
costs, any excess will be profit to First Transamerica. First Transamerica currently anticipates a profit from this
charge. According to Applicants, the mortality risk borne by First Transamerica arises from its contractual obligation
to make annuity payments (determined in accordance with the annuity tables and other provisions contained in the
Contract) regardless of how long all annuitants or any individual annuitant may live. This undertaking assures that
neither an annuitant's own longevity, nor an improvement in general life expectancy, will adversely affect the periodic
annuity payments. First Transamerica also assumes a risk in connection with the payment of death benefits, since
the death benefit could be higher than the account value. The expense risk assumed by First Transamerica is the risk
that administrative costs will be greater than anticipated, or exceed the amount recovered through the administrative
charges.



Applicants' Legal Analysis



1. Sections 26(a)(2)(C) and 27(c)(2) of the 1940 Act require that all payments received under a periodic payment plan
certificate be held by a qualified trustee or a custodian and held under arrangements which prohibit any payment to
the depositor or principal underwriter except for the payment of a fee, not exceeding such reasonable amount as the
Commission may prescribe, for bookkeeping and other administrative services. Applicants request exemptions from
those Sections to the extent necessary to permit the assessment of the charge for mortality and expenses risks in the
manner described in the application.

2. Applicants submit that First Transamerica is entitled to reasonable compensation for its assumption of mortality
and expense risks. Applicants represent that the mortality and expense risk charge under the Contracts is consistent
with the protection of investors because it is a reasonable and proper insurance charge. As described above, in return
for this amount First Transamerica assumes certain risks under the Contracts. The mortality and expense risk charge
is a reasonable charge to compensate First Transamerica for the risk that annuitants under the Contracts will live
longer than has been anticipated in setting the annuity rates guaranteed in the Contracts, for the risk that death
benefit proceeds will be greater than the Account Value, and for the risk that administrative expenses will be greater
than anticipated or exceed amounts derived from the administrative charges.

3. First Transamerica represents that the mortality and expense risk charge is within the range of industry practice
for comparable annuity products. Applicants state that this representation is based upon First Transamerica's
analysis of publicly available information about similar industry products, taking into consideration such factors
as current charge levels, the existence of charge level guarantees, death benefit guarantees, guaranteed annuity
rates and other policy options. First Transamerica will maintain at its administrative offices, available to the
Commission, a memorandum setting forth in detail the products analyzed in the course of, and the methodology and results
of, its comparative survey.

4. Applicants acknowledge that, if a profit is realized from the mortality and expense risk charge, all or a portion
of such profit may be viewed as being offset by distribution expenses. First Transamerica represents that there is
a reasonable likelihood that the proposed distribution financing arrangements will benefit the Separate Account
and the Contract owners. Applicants also represent that the basis for this conclusion is set forth in a memorandum
which will be maintained by First Transamerica at its administrative offices and will be available to the Commission.

5. First Transamerica represents that the Separate Account will only invest in management investment companies
which undertake, in the event any such company adopts a plan under Rule 12b1 to finance distribution expenses,
to have a board of directors (or trustees), a majority of whom are not interested persons of the company, formulate
and approve any such plan under Rule 12b1.



Conclusion



Applicants submit that for the reasons and upon the facts set forth above, their request for exemptions from sections
26(a)(2))C) and 27(c)(2) of the 1940 Act is necessary or appropriate in the public interest and consistent with the
protection of investors and the purposes fairly intended by the policy and provisions of the 1940 Act.




For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, pursuant to delegated authority.



<SIGNER>
Margarate H. McFarland,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 943315 Filed 21194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>


