 

RSPA pipeline safety regulations in 49 CFR 192.613 for natural gas pipelines, and 49 CFR 195.401 for hazardous liquid
pipelines, require an operator to maintain continuing surveillance of its facilities and to correct damage to its
pipeline that could affect the safe operation of the pipeline (such as damage that may result from extreme flood conditions).
If the operator of a natural gas pipeline determines that the pipeline is in unsatisfactory condition and no immediate
hazard exists, the operator must recondition or phase out the segment involved, or reduce the maximum allowable operating
pressure. For hazardous liquid pipelines, if the condition presents an immediate hazard to persons or property,
the operator may not operate the affected part of the system until the unsafe condition is corrected. In summary, if
the operator has reason to believe that flooding has adversely affected, or will adversely affect, its pipeline,
the operator must take corrective or preventative action. 

In addition, operators must consider the application of RSPA's reporting requirements in 49 CFR Part 191, and subpart
B of 49 CFR Part 195, as well as applicable state requirements, that require operators to submit telephonic and written
reports when natural gas or hazardous liquids are released causing damages meeting the reporting thresholds. Finally,
RSPA regulations also require operators to submit reports of safety-related conditions involving potentially
unsafe conditions on natural gas and hazardous liquid pipelines (49 CFR 191.23 and 191.25, and 49 CFR 195.55 and 195.56).

Operators need to direct their resources in a manner that will enable them to determine the potential effects of the
flooding on their systems, and take the following actions as appropriate: 

&bull;Deploy personnel so that they will be in position to take emergency actions, such as shut down, isolation, or
containment. 

&bull;Extend regulator vents and relief stacks above the level of anticipated flooding, as appropriate. 

&bull;Evaluate the accessibility of pipeline facilities that may be in jeopardy, such as valve settings, needed
to isolate water crossings or other sections of a pipeline. 

&bull;Perform frequent patrols, including overflights as appropriate, to evaluate right-of-way conditions at
water crossings during flooding and after waters subside. Determine if flooding has exposed or undermined pipelines
as a result of new river channels cut by the flooding or by erosion or scouring. 





