 

7. The applicant's assessment of the project's consistency with the CDBG program eligibility appropriate standards
and with the national objectives requirements. 

(vi) 

Review Criteria. 

In evaluating and rating economic development projects, HUD will analyze the following factors: 

1. 

Employment: 

The extent to which the proposed project will directly address employment opportunities for low- and moderate-income
persons in the applicant's jurisdiction will be a primary factor in HUD's assessment of program impact. Applicants
are reminded that for an activity to be consistent with the statutory objective of low- and moderate-income benefit,
as a result of the creation or retention of jobs, at least 51 percent of created or retained employment opportunities
must be held by, or made available to, persons from low- and moderate-income families. Applicants must fully document
and describe employment benefits. In addition, applicants should address the following issues: 

a. All employment data must be expressed in terms of full-time equivalents (FTEs). Only permanent jobs may be counted,
and applicants must take into account such factors as seasonal and part-time employment. A seasonal job may be considered
permanent if the season is long enough to be considered the person's principal occupation; permanent part-time jobs
must be converted to the full-time equivalent. 

b. The amount of CDBG assistance required to produce each full-time equivalent job will affect the impact assessment
by HUD. Lower CDBG costs per job are preferable to higher CDBG costs per job. Such assessments of impact will be done
on a comparative basis among all projects submitted, rather than by comparison to a given standard. 

c. The use of CDBG funds to assist a business with transferring to a different community will generally be considered
as having 

no

 employment impact. Exceptions to this rule may include an expansion to the business as a result of, or concurrent with,
the transfer; or if the business can demonstrate that it is infeasible to continue operations at the current site.
If the applicant proposes to assist in a transfer of operations based on an exception to the general rule, HUD should
be contacted early in the planning process to discuss the viability of such a proposal. Failure to do so could result
in the application receiving 0 impact points. 

d. Applicants are encouraged to use CDBG funds for projects that provide as many jobs as possible for individuals that
are currently receiving public assistance. Providing employment to recipients of public assistance will help break
the cycle of dependency and empower low income citizens to take control of their lives. 

2. 

Feasibility. 

A high-impact rating will not be given to projects that are likely to encounter feasibility issues which would hinder
the timely completion of the project. Such issues include, but are not limited to: site control, zoning, public approvals
and permits, infrastructure, environment, and relocation. Applicants should address these and any other applicable
issues and provide documentation where appropriate. 

Applicants 

also must demonstrate 

the reasonable likelihood of the project's success, from both a financial and employment standpoint. An analysis
or market data, which indicates an inordinate risk in the undertaking of the project, will affect the overall rating
of program impact. 

3. 

Leverage. 

Leverage is defined as the amount of private debt and equity to be invested as a direct result of the CDBG-funded activity.
Projects which fully conform with those requirements by providing the maximum feasible level of private investment
will be considered as having appropriate leverage. The extent of firm commitments for private financing will be reviewed
as well as the amount of equity investment. The project will be reviewed to determine whether CDBG funds are replacing
private sources of funds. In order to receive maximum impact CDBG funds may not replace private financing, CDBG assistance
must be limited to the amount necessary to fund the project without replacing CDBG funds for private funds, and equity
funds should bear the greatest risk in the project. 

4. 

Taxes. 

While not a primary factor in the evaluation of impact, projects which will augment the applicant's tax base may have
a positive effect on the rating of program impact. It is recognized, however, that good projects do not always result
in increased tax revenues due to their nature. 

5. 

Repayment. 

Where CDBG repayments are to be made in some manner to the applicant, the proposed use of those repayments for economic
development purposes will be considered. 

6. 

Cost Reasonableness. 

In order to receive a rating greater than the minimal, the costs must be reasonable, i.e. not inflated. 

7. 

Base Closures. 

The Department recognizes that communities facing the loss of a military base may need a well-planned economic development
project to help alleviate the effect of the base closure. Well planned projects that will help successfully alleviate
the economic impact of base closures will tend to have a high impact and rate well in the competition. 

8. 

Empowerment Zones/Enterprise Communities. 

The Department is supportive of using funds from this NOFA to support projects in designated Empowerment Zones and
Enterprise Communities. A project that significantly supports the strategic plan of a designated Empowerment Zone
or Enterprise Community will receive a maximum impact score provided that the other factors for maximum impact are
met. 

