 

(w) Is a claim arising out of an act or omission of any employee of the Government in administering the provisions of
the Trading With the Enemy Act (50 U.S.C. App, sections 131). (See DA Pam 27162, paragraph 88d.)
(x) Is for damages caused by the imposition or establishment of a quarantine by the United States.
(y) Results wholly from the negligent or wrongful act of the claimant or his or her agent. Claims involving comparative
negligence are not barred by this provision.
(z) Arises out of malicious prosecution, abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference
with contract rights.
(aa) Is for damages caused by the fiscal operations of the DA, the Treasury, or by regulation of the monetary system.


536.154 

Compensation.


(a) In determining an appropriate award, the law and custom of the country where the incident occurred will be used
to determine what elements of damages are payable and which individuals are entitled to receive compensation. However,
where the claimant is an inhabitant of another foreign country and only temporarily in the country where the incident
occurred, the quantum of certain elements of damages, such as lost wages and future medical care, may be calculated
based on the law and economic conditions in the country of the claimant's permanent residence. Punitive damages and
interest will not be allowed. Court costs, attorney fees, bail, costs of filing a claim, and similar charges also are
not allowed.
(b) Local law or custom pertaining to contributory or comparative negligence and to joint tortfeasors will be applied.


536.155 

Computation of amount.


(a) The amount allowed will, to the extent possible, be apportioned among claimants as prescribed by local law.
(b) After appropriate compensation for the total damages suffered has been computed, any payment claimant has received
from the tortfeasor, or any joint tortfeasor, will be deducted. This includes amounts collectible from a tortfeasor's
or joint tortfeasor's insurance company or amounts paid by any other third party.
(c) Deductions for insurance. (1) Normally there will be deducted from any award the amount of any applicable insurance
coverage recovered or an amount that can be reasonably expected to be recovered and which has been or will be paid to
the claimant. In this regard, every effort will be made to monitor the insurance aspect of the case and encourage direct
settlement between the claimant and the insurer. (See 536.151(c)(1).)
(2) When efforts under paragraph (c)(1) of this section are of no avail or it otherwise is determined that an insurance
settlement will not be reasonably available for application to the award, settlement may be accomplished without
making a deduction. In such cases, an assignment of the insured's rights against the insurer will be obtained and,
in appropriate cases, reimbursement action will be instituted against the insurer under applicable procedures.
(3) If the reason that an insurance settlement is not available is due to insolvency or bankruptcy of the insurer, no
award will be made until prior consent has been obtained from the Commander, USARCS. In this event, a report on a bankruptcy
will be forwarded without delay setting forth all pertinent information including the alleged reasons for the bankruptcy
and the facts concerning the licensing of the insurer.
(d) Settlements will be stated in the appropriate foreign currency. To determine the proper approval authority,
the settlement or the claimed amount (in claims where a settlement cannot be reached) will be converted to the U.S.
dollar equivalent (based on the annual Foreign Currency Fluctuation Account exchange rate, where applicable) on
the date of the commission's action.
(e) Payment will be made in the currency of the country in which the incident occurred or where the claimant resided
at the time of the incident. However, if the claimant resides in another foreign country at the time of payment, payment
in an amount equivalent to that which would have been paid under the preceding sentence may be made in the currency of
that third country.
(f) No more than 20% of the total cost of an award to the United States may be paid as attorney fees or as a fee by any representative.
This fee limitation should be made a part of all settlement agreements.
(g) In appropriate cases, a commission or other approval authority can require a structured settlement with periodic
or deferred payments if it is feasible to make such arrangements in the country where the claimants reside. Such settlement
are especially appropriate on claims of minors. In cases where the time, duration, amount or need for any element of
future damages is uncertain, the part of the award for such damages may be paid into a reversionary trust with the reversion
to the United States.


Foreign Claims Commissions


536.156 

Appointment and functions.


(a) Claims cognizable under this section will be referred to a foreign claims commission for processing regardless
of the amount claimed. The commander senior Judge Advocate of a command having a command claims service will appoint
necessary foreign claims commissions to acton claims arising within his or her geographic area jurisdiction, and
on claims arising in another geographic area jurisdiction that are transferred by agreement between the commanders
involved. The senior Judge Advocate may delegate this authority to commander or chief of the command claims service.


