 

(i) intends to use English or French in pleadings and oral proceedings before the committee, and 

(ii) requests simultaneous translation of any oral proceedings. 

(2) Where a Party or participant referred to in subrule (1) proposes to rely on a document in the record of the panel review
that is not specified in the Index filed with the Request for an Extraordinary Challenge Committee, the Party or participant
shall file, with the Notice of Appearance, 

(a) the document; and 

(b) a statement identifying the document and requesting its inclusion in the extraordinary challenge record. 

(3) On receipt of a document referred to in subrule (2), the responsible Secretary shall include the document in the
extraordinary challenge record. 

41. (1) Within 10 days after a Request for an Extraordinary Challenge Committee referred to in Article 1904.13(a)(i)
of the Agreement is filed, a panelist against whom an allegation contained in the Request is made and who proposes to
participate in the extraordinary challenge proceeding 

(a) shall file a Notice of Appearance; 

(b) may file, under seal, documents to be included in the extraordinary challenge record relevant to the panelist's
defense against the allegation; and 

(c) may file an 

ex parte

 motion requesting that the extraordinary challenge proceeding be conducted 

in camera

. 

(2) Where a committee issues an order pursuant to subrule 45(1)(a), a panelist who filed documents described in subrule
(1)(b) may, within five days after issuance of the order, withdraw any of those documents. 

(3) Where a panelist withdraws documents pursuant to subrule (2), the committee shall not consider those documents.




Filing and Content of Briefs and Appendices 



42. (1) The Party who has filed the Request for an Extraordinary Challenge Committee and every participant who has
filed a Notice of Appearance under subrule 40(1)(b)(i) shall file a brief, setting forth grounds and arguments in
support of the Request, no later than 21 days after the Request for an Extraordinary Challenge Committee is filed.


(2) Every participant who has filed a Notice of Appearance under subrule 40(1)(b)(ii) shall file a brief, setting
forth grounds and arguments in opposition to the Request for an Extraordinary Challenge Committee, no later than
21 days after the expiration of the time period for filing of briefs referred to in subrule (1). 

(3) The Party who has filed the Request for an Extraordinary Challenge Committee and every participant who has filed
a Notice of Appearance under subrule 40(1)(b)(i) may file a brief, replying to the grounds and arguments set forth
in the briefs filed pursuant to subrule (2), no later than 10 days after the expiration of the time period for filing
of briefs referred to in subrule (2). Reply briefs shall be limited to rebuttal of matters raised in the briefs filed
pursuant to subrule (2). 

(4) Every brief filed under this rule shall be in the form required by rule 43. 

(5) Appendices shall be filed with the briefs. 

43. (1) Briefs shall contain information, in the following order, divided into five parts: 

Part I: 

(a) A table of contents; and 

(b) A table of authorities cited: 

The table of authorities shall contain references to all treaties, statutes and regulations cited, any cases primarily
relied on in the briefs, set out alphabetically, and all other documents referred to except documents from the administrative
record. The table of authorities shall refer to the page(s) of the brief where each authority is cited and mark, with
an asterisk in the margin, those authorities primarily relied on. 

Part II: A statement of the case: 

This part shall contain a concise statement of the relevant facts with references to the panel record by page and, where
applicable, by line. 

Part III: A statement of the issues: 

(a) In the brief of the Party who files the Request for an Extraordinary Challenge Committee, this part shall contain
a concise statement of the issues.






