 

General Permit to Discharge Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 


In compliance with the provisions of the Clean Water 
Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251 

et seq.

; the ``Act''), 
Discharges of uncontaminated groundwater from dewatering 
activities, treated groundwater and incidental storm water, 
which are contaminated with gasoline or aviation fuel, are 
authorized to discharge to waters of the United States 
within the State of Florida in accordance with effluent 
limitations, monitoring requirements and other conditions 
set forth herein. This draft permit consists of Part I, 
Part II, Part III, Part IV, and Part V. This is 
immediately followed by a fact sheet which goes into detail 
concerning the reissuance of this permit. This permit shall become effective on 

XXXXXXXXXX

. This permit and the authorization to discharge shall expire at midnight, Eastern Daylight Savings Time, on 

XXXXXXXXXX

, 19

XXX

. 



<SIGNER>
Allan E. Antley, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Division Director, 
Water Management Division. 
 


Part I 


A. Effluent Limitations and Monitoring Requirements 


Existing Sources and New Dischargers.
1. During the period beginning on the effective date of the permit and 
lasting through the term of this permit, the permittee is authorized 
to discharge treated groundwater and storm water that has been 
contaminated by Automotive Gasoline. It is anticipated that these 
contaminated waters will be treated by air stripping, followed by 
activated carbon adsorption, if necessary, or equivalent treatment 
to meet the following effluent limitations. 
Such discharges shall be limited and monitored by the permittee as 
specified below: 


<TABLE>




1Effluent characteristic

1Discharge limitations 

2Daily avg 

2Daily Max 

1Monitoring requirements 

2Measurement frequency 

2Sample type 




Flow, MGD 
Report 
Report 
Continuous 
Flowmeter. 
Benzene, 

m

g/l 
 
1.0 
1/month 
Grab. 
*Total lead, 

m

g/l 
 
30.0 
1/month 
Grab. 
pH, standard units 
 
See below 
 

Acute whole effluent toxicity 
 
 
See part V 
Grab.

*

Monitoring 

for this parameter is required only when contamination 
results from leaded fuel.

</TABLE>


An LC

50

 of 100% or less in a test of 96 hours duration or less will constitute a violation of Florida Administrative Code (FAC)

(July 11, 1993) 174.244(3)(a) and the terms of this permit. The 
testing for this requirement must conform with Part V of this permit. 
For fresh waters and coastal waters, the pH of the effluent shall 
not be lowered to less than 6.0 units for fresh waters, or less than 
6.5 units for marine waters, or raised above 8.5 units, unless the 
permittee submits natural background data in the NOI request 
confirming a natural background pH outside of this range. If 
natural background of the receiving water, as revealed by sampling 
data from the permittee in the NOI request, is determined to be less 
than 6.0 units for fresh waters, or less than 6.5 units in marine 
waters, the pH shall not vary below natural background or vary more 
than one (1) unit above natural background for fresh and coastal 
waters. If natural background of the receiving water, as revealed 
by sampling data from the permittee in the NOI request, is 
determined to be higher than 8.5 units, the pH shall not vary above 
natural background or vary more than one (1) unit below natural 
background of fresh and coastal waters. The acceptable pH range 
will be included in the letter granting permit coverage and on the 
DMR. The pH shall be monitored once every month by grab sample, or 
continuously with a recorder. (See item I.B.4). 
In accordance with FAC 17302.500(1)(ac)(42593), the discharge 
shall at all times be free from floating solids, visible foam, 
turbidity, or visible oil in such amounts as to form nuisances on 
surface waters. 
Samples taken in compliance with the monitoring requirements 
specified above shall be taken at the following location(s): 
Nearest accessible point after final treatment but prior to actual 
discharge or mixing with the receiving waters. 


</SIGNJOB>
