 

In addition, existing OSHA standard 1910.160 applies certain general controls to the use of fixed extinguishing
systems in occupied workplaces, whether gaseous, dry chemical, water sprinklers, etc., and EPA has not reproduced
those. These include, for example, the requirements for discharge and pre-discharge alarms, and availability of
Self Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) for emergency entry into an area where agent has been 
discharged.
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
29 CFR 459, 1910.160, paragraph (b) includes general provisions to ensure the safety of all fixed extinguishing
systems. Paragraph (c) stipulates requirements for systems with ``potential health and safety hazards to employees''
such as might be posed by gaseous agents.

</FOOTNOTE>


In many occupied areas, total flooding halons can be replaced by improved detection equipment and manually operated
extinguishing systems. Improved detection systems, if they detect fires in their early stages, can alert occupants
to the existence of a fire so they may respond appropriately without discharge of the total flood system. In those cases
in which a total flooding system is deemed necessary, improved detection systems can also reduce false 
alarms that result in the unnecessary discharge of total flooding systems. 

In unoccupied areas, human exposure to potentially toxic substitutes or decomposition products are of less concern.
The key criterion in the SNAP decision process therefore becomes environmental considerations. At the same time,
the Agency must ensure that personnel are not exposed to toxic concentrations of fire protection agents or their decomposition
products when the substances are vented or leak out from the extinguishment area. Precautions must also be taken to
prevent exposures to personnel entering a normally unoccupied area after a discharge. In addition, if there is a possibility
that someone must enter a room while an agent is likely to exceed the NOAEL level, SCBA must be worn. 

Design concentrations for explosion inertion must be higher than for fire suppression. In addition, design concentrations
vary depending on the combustible material being considered. Thus, the system designer must be careful to ensure
that system design precludes unacceptable cardiotoxic or oxygen depletion levels. 

Explosion inertion agents are currently regulated by OSHA through the general duty clause
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
, but use conditions are not explicitly stated as they are for fire suppression systems. However, since design concentrations
for systems protecting against explosion of various gases or flammable liquids may expose personnel to cardiotoxic
levels of inertion agents, it is industry practice to adopt standards provided under OSHA 1910.162. EPA is not intending
to impose new regulations in this area, but defers to current OSHA practice in this regard, with the stipulation that
the NOAEL and LOAEL values identified in this Final Rulemaking are the reference values for exposure limits. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
Public Law 91596, (29 U.S.C. 654), section 3, is known as the ``general duty clause:''

(1) shall furnish to each of is employees employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards
that are causing or are likely to cause, death or serious physical harm to his employees;

(2) shall comply with occupational safety and health standards promulgated under this Act.

</FOOTNOTE>


Until OSHA establishes applicable workplace requirements, total flooding agents are acceptable by the Agency for
use in occupied areas only under the following conditions: 

1. Where egress from an area cannot be accomplished within one minute, the 
employer shall not use the agent in concentrations exceeding its NOAEL. 

2. Where egress takes greater than 30 seconds but less than one minute, the employer shall not use the agent in a concentration
greater than its LOAEL. 

3. Agent concentrations greater than the LOAEL are only permitted in areas not normally occupied by employees provided
that any employee in the area can escape within 30 seconds. The employer shall assure that no unprotected employees
enter the area during agent discharge. These conditions will no longer apply once OSHA establishes applicable workplace
requirements. 

(a) HBFC22B1. HBFC22B1 is acceptable as a Halon 1301 substitute. This agent is subject to the use conditions
delineated in the discussion of total flooding agents in this section. HBFC22B1 can replace Halon 1301 at a
ratio of 1.4 by weight and 1.3 by storage volume, making it technically suitable for use in existing total flood systems.
Its required extinguishing concentration, based on the cup burner test in heptane, is estimated at 4.4 percent, and
its 
design concentration is 5.3 percent. Its explosion inertion concentration is 8.0 percent. The LOAEL for cardiotoxicity
is 1 percent while its NOAEL is 0.3 percent. Its atmospheric lifetime is 7 to 15 years, but its GWP is uncalculated. This
compound is unlikely to be feasible as a total flooding agent in occupied areas because its design concentration exceeds

its cardiotoxic effect level. 

While HBFC22B1 has an ODP of 0.74 and will be phased out on January 1, 1996, the Agency believes that the substance
can serve a useful role in helping users transition away from Halon 1301, which has a much higher ODP, estimated at 10.


This agent was submitted to the Agency as a Premanufacture Notice (PMN) and is presently subject to requirements contained
in a Toxic Substance Control Act (TSCA) section 5(e) Consent Order and associated Significant New Use Rule (40 CFR
721.1296). 


