 



Example 3 for paragraph (l)(5).

 If company A has entered into an agreement to merge with company B in the future, the situation is treated as though the
merger has taken place.




(6) 

Affiliation under voting trusts.

(i) Stock interests held in trust shall be deemed controlled by any person who holds or shares the power to vote such
stock, to any person who has the sole power to sell such stock, and to any person who has the right to revoke the trust at
will or to replace the trustee at will.

(ii) If a trustee has a familial, personal or extra-trust business relationship to the grantor or the beneficiary,
the stock interests held in trust will be deemed controlled by the grantor or beneficiary, as appropriate.

(iii) If the primary purpose of a voting trust, or similar agreement, is to separate voting power from beneficial ownership
of voting stock for the purpose of shifting control of or the power to control a concern in order that such concern or
another concern may meet the Commission's size standards, such voting trust shall not be considered valid for this
purpose regardless of whether it is or is not recognized within the appropriate jurisdiction.

(7) Affiliation through common management.

 Affiliation generally arises where officers, directors, or key employees serve as the majority or otherwise as the
controlling element of the board of directors and/or the management of another entity.

(8) 

Affiliation through common facilities.

 Affiliation generally arises where one concern shares office space and/or employees and/or other facilities with
another concern, particularly where such concerns are in the same or related industry or field of operations, or where
such concerns were formerly affiliated, and through these sharing arrangements one concern has control, or potential
control, of the other concern.

(9) 

Affiliation through contractual relationships.

 Affiliation generally arises where one concern is dependent upon another concern for contracts and business to such
a degree that one concern has control, or potential control, of the other concern.

(10) 

Affiliation under joint venture arrangements.

(i) A joint venture for size determination purposes is an association of concerns and/or individuals, with interests
in any degree or proportion, formed by contract, express or implied, to engage in and carry out a single, specific business
venture for joint profit for which purpose they combine their efforts, property, money, skill and knowledge, but
not on a continuing or permanent basis for conducting business generally. The determination whether an entity is
a joint venture is based upon the facts of the business operation, regardless of how the business operation may be designated
by the parties involved. An agreement to share profits/losses proportionate to each party's contribution to the
business operation is a significant factor in determining whether the business operation is a joint venture.

(ii) The parties to a joint venture are considered to be affiliated with each other 

(11) Exclusions from affiliation coverage.

(i) For purposes of 24.709(a)(2) and paragraph (b)(2) of this section, Indian tribes or Alaska Regional or
Village Corporations organized pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.

), or entities owned and controlled by such tribes or corporations, are not considered 

affiliates

 of an applicant (or licensee) that is owned and controlled by such tribes, corporations or entities, and that otherwise
complies with the requirements of 24.709 (b)(3) and (b)(5) or 24.709 (b)(4) and (b)(6), except that


gross revenues

 derived from gaming activities conducted by affiliated entities pursuant to the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25
U.S.C. 2701 

et seq.

) will be counted in determining such applicant's (or licensee's) compliance with the financial requirements of
24.709(a) and paragraph (b) of this section, unless such applicant establishes that it will not receive
a substantial unfair competitive advantage because significant legal constraints restrict the applicant's ability
to access such 

gross revenues.



(ii) For purposes of 24.709(a)(2) and paragraph (b)(2) of this section, an entity controlled by 

members of minority groups

 is not considered an 

affiliate

 of an applicant (or licensee) that qualify as a 

business owned by members of minority groups and/or women if affiliation

 would arise solely from control of such entity by members of the applicant's (or licensee's) control group who are


 members of minority groups.

 For purposes of this subparagraph, the term minority-controlled entity shall mean, in the case of a corporation,
an entity in which 50.1 percent of the voting interests is owned by 

members of minority groups

 or, in the case of a partnership, all of the general partners are 

members of minority groups

 or entities controlled by 

members of minority groups

; and, in all cases, one in which 

members of minority groups

 have both 

de jure

 and 

de facto

 control of the entity.

(m) 

Publicly Traded Corporation with Widely Dispersed Voting Power.

 A 

publicly traded corporation with widely dispersed voting power

 is a business entity organized under the laws of the United States:

(1) Whose shares, debt, or other ownership interests are traded on an organized securities exchange within the United
States;

(2) In which no person

(i) Owns more than 15 percent of the equity; or

(ii) Possesses, directly or indirectly, through the ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise, the
power to control the election of more than 15 percent of the members of the board of directors or other governing body
of such publicly traded corporation; and

(3) Over which no person other than the management and members of the board of directors or other governing body of such
publicly traded corporation, in their capacities as such, has 

de facto

 control.

(4) The term 

person

 shall be defined as in section 13(d) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (15 U.S.C. 78(m)), and shall
also include investors that are commonly controlled under the indicia of control set forth in the definition of 

affiliate

 in paragraphs (1)(2) through (1) of this section.

(n) 

Qualifying Investor; Qualifying Minority and/or Woman Investor.

(1) A qualifying investor

 is a person who is (or holds an interest in) a member of the applicant's (or licensee's) 

control group

 whose 

gross revenues

 and 

total assets

, when aggregated with those of all other attributable investors and 

affiliates

, do not exceed the 

gross revenues

 and 

total assets

 limits specified in 24.709(a), or, in the case of an applicant (or licensee) that is a 

small business

, do not exceed the 

gross revenues

 limit specified in paragraph (b) of this section.

(2) A 

qualifying minority and/or woman investor

 is a person who is a 

qualifying investor

 under paragraph (n)(1), who is (or holds an interest in) a member of the applicant's (or licensee's) 

control group

 and who is a 

member of a minority group

 or a woman and a United States citizen.

(3) For purposes of assessing compliance with the minimum equity requirements of 24.709(b) (5) and (6), where
such equity interests are not held directly in the applicant, interests held by 

qualifying ivnestors

 and 

qualifying minority and/or woman investors

 shall be determined by successive multiplication of the ownership percentages for each link in the vertical ownership
chain.

(o) 

Preexisting Entity.

 A 

preexisting entity

 is an entity that was operating and earning revenues for at least two years prior to December 31, 1994.

3. Section 24.839 is amended by revising paragraphs (a) and (d) to read as follows:



24.839


Transfer of control or assignment of license.



(a) 

Approval Required.

 Authorizations shall be transferred or assigned to another party, voluntarily (for example, by contract) or involuntarily
(for example, by death, bankruptcy or legal disability), directly or indirectly or by transfer of control of any corporation
holding such authorization, only upon application and approval by the Commission. A transfer of control or assignment
of station authorization in the broadband Personal Communications Service is also subject to 24.711(c),
24.712(d), 24.713(b) (unjust enrichment) and 1.2111(a) of this chapter (reporting requirement).



* * * * *



(d) 

Restrictions on Assignments and Transfers of Licenses for Frequency Blocks C and F.

 No assignment or transfer of control of a license for frequency Block C or frequency Block F will be granted unless_

(1) The application for assignment or transfer of control is filed after five years from the date of the initial license
grant;

(2) The application for assignment or transfer of control is filed after three years from the date of the initial license
grant and the proposed assignee or transferee meets the eligibility criteria set forth in 24.709 at the time
the application for assignment or transfer of control is filed, or the proposed assignee or transferee holds other
license(s) for frequency Blocks C and F and, at the time of receipt of such license(s), met the eligibility criteria
set forth in 24.709;



* * * * *


<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9430075 Filed 12594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 671201M
</BILLING>

