 

Effectiveness (Section 16.16)



The proposal did not provide for the adoption of the Securities Act provisions or the SEC's rules pertaining to when
registration statements become effective. The proposal retained the requirement in former part 16 that no registration
statement, prospectus, or amendment was effective until declared effective by the OCC.

Only one commenter discussed this issue. That commenter urged that the OCC follow the SEC's procedures in this area.
The OCC agrees and the final rule adopts the Securities Act provisions and the SEC's rules on effectiveness. (

See

 discussion under ``Form and Content (16.15)'' in this preamble.)

Under the cross-referenced provisions of the Securities Act, registration statements automatically become effective
20 days after they are filed unless a delaying amendment is filed with the OCC. However, consistent with SEC practice,
the OCC expects all filers to file delaying amendments with their registration statements to prevent the registration
statements from becoming automatically effective. The delaying amendments will ensure that the OCC has adequate
time to review and comment upon filings.




Filing Requirements and Inspection of Documents (Section 16.17)



This section of the proposal specified that issuers must file four copies of all documents with the OCC and required
the OCC to make those documents available for public inspection. The former part 16 required issuers to submit six
copies of most documents. The proposal also specified that all notices or other documents required to be filed by any
section of the Securities Act, the Exchange Act, or a rule of the SEC cross-referenced in part 16, be filed with the OCC.
The final rule adopts this section generally as proposed, with a few technical clarifying changes.




Use of Prospectus (Section 16.18)



Under the proposal, a prospectus or amendment declared effective by the OCC may not be used more than nine months after
its effective date unless the information contained therein is as of a date not more than 16 months prior to the date
of use. This section of the proposal was based on the requirement in section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act (15 U.S.C.
77j(a)(3)) pertaining to the age of information in a prospectus. The proposal provided more time for an offering to
be completed than did former part 16. Former part 16 allowed an offering circular to be effective for a period of only
six months, although the OCC could extend the six month period for two consecutive 90 day periods upon request. In the
event there was a material change after a prospectus has been declared effective, the proposal prohibited use of the
prospectus until an amendment reflecting the change had been filed with and declared effective by the OCC.

The final rule adopts this section generally as proposed, with minor clarifying changes.



Withdrawal or Abandonment (Section 16.19)



The proposed rule allowed filers to withdraw a registration statement and amendments prior to the effective date.
It also stated that the OCC could determine that a registration statement and amendments had been abandoned if they
had been on file for nine months and not become effective. Documents withdrawn or declared abandoned would be so marked
but would remain in the OCC files. The final rule adopts this section as proposed, with minor clarifying changes.





