 

Changes From the Proposed Rule in the Final Rule 


1. The amendatory language to 676.20 in the proposed rule was numbered in such a manner that existing paragraphs
(a)(1) 

Qualified persons 

and (a)(2) 

Vessel categories 

would have been deleted. This was a technical oversight. Paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of 676.20 will remain
as published on November 9, 1993 (58 FR 59375), and will not be amended by this final rule. The amendatory language in
paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of 676.20, which was in the proposed rule published June 28, 1994, (59 FR 33272)
will be incorporated in paragraph (a) of 676.20 of this final rule. 
2. The reference to 676.22 in 676.21(c)(2) was changed to 676.22(j) to indicate the paragraph
of the regulatory text intended to be referenced by the citation. 


Response to Comments 


Twenty-two letters of comments were received regarding the Modified Block Proposal. Twelve letters provided comments
that supported the Modified Block Proposal, eight letters provided comments in opposition, and two letters provided
no comments. These comments, which are summarized and responded to below, were considered during the formulation
of the final rule. 


Comment 1: 

The Modified Block Proposal is overly restrictive, especially to the smaller vessel categories. 


Response: 

Though the Modified Block Proposal will have a larger impact on the smaller vessel categories, the determining factor
of whose QS will be blocked is the amount of catch landed and duration of participation during the qualifying years,
not vessel size. Some owners/lessees of large and small vessels will be issued QS as a block, and some owners/lessees
will be issued unblocked QS. More owners/lessees of smaller vessels will have blocked QS due to smaller harvests during
the qualifying years. 


Comment 2: 

Most of the QS issued in smaller vessel categories will be blocked. The QS in small blocks will have less value, making
those blocks difficult to market. 


Response: 

The response to Comment 1 addresses why most QS issued in smaller vessel categories will be blocked. Any determination
on the value of blocked or unblocked QS, whether in large or small quantities, is purely speculative. Blocked QS may
be more or less valuable than unblocked QS, depending upon market forces. Small blocks, with their lesser overall
dollar value, will make the IFQ Program more accessible to new entrants. Furthermore, the Modified Block Proposal
allows very small blocks to be combined into fishable amounts under the ``sweep-up'' provision. 


Comment 3: 

All QS should be blocked or unblocked. It is inequitable and discriminatory to block some QS and not other QS. 


