 

Section 107(e) of the Act requires that selection of service providers include documentation of compliance with
procurement standards established by the Governor. Section 627.420(a) is expanded by adding a definition of procurement
to mean the process which leads to any award of JTPA funds. Some commenters wondered if the requirements for a determination
of demonstrated performance, contained in 627.422, Selection of Service Providers, applied to vendors.
Based on the definition of service providers, this requirement does apply to vendors. On its surface it may appear
that the requirement for a determination of demonstrated performance goes against the requirements for full and
open competition. Since the overall goal of JTPA is to provide high quality services to eligible participants, the
requirement of the determination of demonstrated performance leads to the meeting of this goal by requiring the selection
of entities that can do the work effectively. This requirement further supports the fiscal accountability and prevention
of fraud requirements of the Act, since demonstrated performance includes such things as a satisfactory record of
integrity. 
Section 627.420(b) further delineates the Act's requirement of full and open competition. A few commenters asked
for definitions of certain terms, such as ``arbitrary action'' and ``overly restrictive specification.'' Since
each procurement action and system must be looked at on a case-by-case basis, the Department thinks that it would be
inappropriate to define these terms. If further definition is required at the State level, the Governor may do so in
the guidelines that he/she establishes. A few commenters were concerned that stricter State procurement codes could
take precedence over Federal regulations. These commenters are correct; the Governor has the discretion to make
the procurement rules more strict. However, the Governor does not have the authority, unless indicated in the law
or regulations, to make a legislative and/or regulatory requirement less strict. One commenter felt that paragraph
(b)(2)(i) should require an identification of quantities to be purchased. This change is made. 
Section 627.420(c) establishes conflict of interest requirements. Although there is a separate subsection that
addresses PIC conflict of interest, PIC's were also included in the subsections that address recipient and subrecipient
conflict of interest. A few commenters correctly pointed out that by inclusion in the latter, it would make it impossible
for companies for which PIC members work to be awarded JTPA funds. This section is amended to remove the reference to
PIC members in paragraph (c)(2) and is reorganized to increase clarity. Paragraph (c)(4), which deals with PIC conflict
of interest is redesignated as paragraph (c)(3) but remains unchanged. Because of the separate treatment of PIC's
and recipients/subrecipients, the portions of paragraph (c)(2), which provide information on when a conflict of
interest would arise for either PIC's or recipients/subrecipients, are moved into a separate paragraph (c)(4).
It should be noted that the phrase ``is about to employ'' in paragraph (c)(4)(iv) also applies to cases of negotiation
for employment. The language is not changed in order to maintain consistency with the OMB Circulars. The original
paragraph (c)(5) is combined with paragraph (c)(1), since both deal with standards of conduct. 
Several commenters submitted comments on 627.420(d). This section is based on OMB Circular A102, and
describes the four procurement methods that are available to JTPA entities. Language is added to 627.420(d)(1)(i),
prohibiting awards from being broken down into several purchases merely to be able to use small purchase procedures.
The Department does not intend that small purchase procedures be used improperly to avoid the more formal competitive
processes. 
The majority of these comments concerned paragraph (d)(4) of the interim final rule (redesignated in the final rule
as (d)(1)(iv)), which provides a listing of the circumstances under which recipients and subrecipients may use the
sole-source method of procurement. One of the circumstances calls for awarding agency approval of noncompetitive
proposals. The final regulations are changed to state that for SDA's, SSG's and subrecipients, the awarding agency
provides authorization; for States, the noncompetitive proposal is approved through the State's normal sole source
approval process. Without this change, States would have had to submit their proposed sole source awards that do not
meet one of the circumstances to the Department of Labor, the awarding agency. 
The amendments require that all sole source awards be justified and documented in writing. When a State or other subrecipient
identifies specific entities that may be sole-source awardees (e.g., the Employment Service for assessment services)
by their subrecipients, the State or other subrecipient that identifies the specific entity is responsible for the
justification and documentation that serves as the basis for that specific sole source selection. 
In regard to both the OJT and classroom training (CRT) sole source exceptions, there was some confusion concerning
the requirement that not only does the procurement have to meet one of the criteria, but also has to be infeasible under
small purchase procedures, sealed bids or competitive proposals. Clearly, OJT and individual CRT placements are
unique in the procurement world. Neither is usually procured through a competitive Request for Proposal (RFP) process.
Although both should be procurable under small purchase procedures, some State rules may not allow this. As a result,
the regulations are revised to allow the sole source procurement of OJT (except awards to brokering contractors)
and individual CRT without having to demonstrate that the three other methods of procurement are infeasible. This
provision of the regulation may be used in the written justification for such sole source authority. 
In regard to the sole source exception for procurement of ``Enrollment of individual participants in classroom training,''
some commenters expressed a concern that this would be used to justify sole source awards for the referral of a number
of individuals to the same classroom training. This exception may be used to justify a sole source award to place an
individual participant in classroom training. If a recipient or subrecipient, over the course of a year, makes sufficient
individual referrals to the point that the small purchase maximum is exceeded (either the level established through
these regulations or the State established level, whichever is lower), they will be expected to compete the requirement
the following year. If it is necessary to procure a class for JTPA participants only, it is not appropriate to use this
sole source exception. It may, though, be appropriate to use small purchase procedures or to justify the sole source
procurement of the class through other exceptions. 





