 

From 1989 through 1992, status surveys were conducted for the spruce-fir moss spider (Harp 1991, 1992). Based on the
results of these surveys, the spider is presently known to exist at only four locations_three sites in North Carolina
and one in Tennessee. Of the four remaining populations, only one appears to be relatively stable. This population
is located along the Avery/Caldwell County line in North Carolina. The other two populations in North Carolina are
located in Swain County. Both of these Swain County populations are extremely small, with only one spruce-fir moss
spider having been found at each of these two sites in recent years (Harp 1991, 1992). The spruce-fir forests at these
two Swain County sites are rapidly declining. The Tennessee population is located in Sevier County. This population
was considered healthy in 1989 but is currently believed to be declining in numbers and is endangered by habitat loss/alteration
(Harp 1992). The high-elevation spruce-fir forests throughout much of the species' historic range are being decimated
by the balsam wooly adelgid (

Adelges piceae

), an exotic insect pest, and possibly by air pollution (acid precipitation) and other factors not yet fully understood.
The death and thinning of the forest canopy results in locally drastic changes in microclimate, including increased
temperatures and decreased moisture leading to desiccation of the moss mats on which the spruce-fir moss spider,
and possibly its prey base, depend for survival. 

The spruce-fir moss spider is not included in the Service's notice of review for animal candidates published in the


Federal Register

 of November 21, 1991 (56 FR 58804). However, because of concerns expressed by some individuals for the spider's status,
the Service contracted in 1990 for a survey of both historic and potential habitat of the species. The results of the
survey, which was completed in 1992, indicate that the spider is undergoing a rapid decline in distribution. Presently
only one relatively stable population is known to survive, and while currently considered to be healthy, this population
is potentially threatened by the same factors that are believed to have resulted in the decline and/or extirpation
of the species elsewhere within its historic range. 

Species appearing in the candidate notices of review are assigned to either category 1, 2 or 3. In conjunction with
the current proposed rule, the Service has approved the spruce-fir moss spider as a category 1 candidate. Category
1 represents those species for which the Service has enough substantial information on biological vulnerability
and threats to support proposals to list them as endangered or threatened species. 

The Service has met and been in contact with various Federal and State agency personnel and private individuals knowledgeable
about the species concerning its status and the need for the protection provided by the Act. On December 31, 1992, the
Service notified appropriate Federal, State, and local government agencies and landowners, in writing, that a status
review was being conducted and that the species might be proposed for Federal listing. A total of ten written comments
were received. The National Park Service, the North Carolina Division of Parks and Recreation, and three private
individuals (including the owner of the site containing the Avery/Caldwell County, North Carolina, population)
expressed strong support for the potential listing of the spruce-fir moss spider as an endangered species. The U.S.
Soil Conservation Service, Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency, Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation,
Tennessee Valley Authority, and the North Carolina Department of Agriculture stated that they had no new or additional
information on the species or threats to its continued existence. No negative comments were received. 



Summary of Factors Affecting the Species 



Section 4(a)(1) of the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq.

) and regulations (50 CFR part 424) promulgated to implement the listing provisions of the Act set forth the procedures
for adding species to the Federal lists. A species may be determined to be an endangered or threatened species due to
one or more of the five factors described in Section 4(a)(1). These factors and their application to the spruce-fir
moss spider (

Microhexura montivaga

) are as follows: 



A. The Present or Threatened Destruction, Modification, or Curtailment of Its Habitat or Range



The spruce-fir moss spider is known to be endemic only to high-elevation spruce-fir forests of western North Carolina
and eastern Tennessee. Historically, the species has been reported from four sites in North Carolina and one in Tennessee.
In North Carolina the species has been recorded from two sites in Swain County, one in Yancey County, and one in Avery
and Caldwell Counties (Coyle 1981, Harp 1992). In Tennessee, the species is known from only one site in Sevier County
(Coyle 1981). 




