 

(vi) Information from which one can calculate the percentage of Federal participation in the cost of the equipment
(not applicable to equipment furnished by the Federal Government). 
(vii) Location and condition of the equipment and the date the information was reported. 
(viii) Unit acquisition cost. 
(ix) Ultimate disposition data, including date of disposal and sales price or the method used to determine current
fair market value where a recipient compensates DOL for its share. 
(2) Equipment owned by the Federal Government shall be identified to indicate Federal ownership. 
(3) A physical inventory of equipment shall be taken and the results reconciled with the equipment records at least
once every two years. Any differences between quantities determined by the physical inspection and those shown in
the accounting records shall be investigated to determine the causes of the difference. The recipient shall, in connection
with the inventory, verify the existence, current utilization, and continued need for the equipment. 
(4) A control system shall be in effect to insure adequate safeguards to prevent loss, damage, or theft of the equipment.
Any loss, damage, or theft of equipment shall be investigated and fully documented; if the equipment was owned by the
Federal Government, the recipient shall promptly notify the grant officer. 
(5) Adequate maintenance procedures shall be implemented to keep the equipment in good condition. 
(6) Where the recipient is authorized or required to sell the equipment, proper sales procedures shall be established
which provide for competition to the extent practicable and result in the highest possible return. 
(g) When the recipient no longer needs the equipment, the equipment may be used for other activities in accordance
with the following standards. For equipment with a current per unit fair market value of $5,000 or more, the recipient
may retain the equipment for other uses provided that compensation is made to the original DOL agency. The amount of
compensation shall be computed by applying the percentage of Federal participation in the cost of the original project
or program to the current fair market value of the equipment. If the recipient has no need for the equipment, the recipient
shall request disposition instructions from DOL. The DOL agency shall determine whether the equipment can be used
to meet the agency's requirements. If no requirement exists within the DOL agency, the availability of the equipment
shall be reported to the General Services Administration by DOL to determine whether a requirement for the equipment
exists in other Federal agencies. DOL shall issue instructions to the recipient no later than 120 calendar days after
the recipient's request and the following procedures shall govern. 
(1) If so instructed or if disposition instructions are not issued within 120 calendar days after the recipient's
request, the recipient shall sell the equipment and reimburse DOL an amount computed by applying to the sales proceeds
the percentage of Federal participation in the cost of the original project or program. However, the recipient shall
be permitted to deduct and retain from the Federal share $500 or ten percent of the proceeds, whichever is less, for
the recipient's selling and handling expenses. 
(2) If the recipient is instructed to ship the equipment elsewhere, the recipient shall be reimbursed by the Federal
Government by an amount which is computed by applying the percentage of the recipient's participation in the cost
of the original project or program to the current fair market value of the equipment, plus any reasonable shipping
or interim storage costs incurred. 
(3) If the recipient is instructed to otherwise dispose of the equipment, the recipient shall be reimbursed by the
awarding agency for such costs incurred in its disposition. 
(4) The DOL agency reserves the right to transfer the title to the Federal Government or to a third party named by the
Federal Government when such third party is otherwise eligible under existing statutes. Such transfer shall be subject
to the following standards: 
(i) The equipment shall be appropriately identified in the award or otherwise made known to the recipient in writing.

(ii) The DOL agency shall issue disposition instructions within 120 calendar days after receipt of a final inventory.
The final inventory shall list all equipment acquired with grant funds and federally-owned equipment. If DOL fails
to issue disposition instructions within the 120 calendar day period, the recipient shall apply the standards of
this section, as appropriate. 
(iii) When DOL exercises its right to take title, the equipment shall be subject to the provisions for federally-owned
equipment. 


95.35 

Supplies and other expendable property. 


