 

Section IIIC4. Experiments Involving Whole Animals 



This section covers experiments involving whole animals in which the animal's genome has been altered by stable introduction
of recombinant DNA, or DNA derived therefrom, into the germ-line (transgenic animals) and experiments involving
viable recombinant DNA-modified microorganisms tested on whole animals. For the latter, other than viruses which
are only vertically transmitted, the experiments may not be conducted at BL1N containment. A minimum containment
of BL2 or BL2N is required. 

Caution_Special care should be used in the evaluation of containment conditions for some experiments with transgenic
animals. For example, such experiments might lead to the creation of novel mechanisms or increased transmission
of a recombinant pathogen or production of undesirable traits in the host animal. In such cases, serious consideration
should be given to increasing the containment conditions. 

Section IIIC4a. Recombinant DNA, or DNA or RNA molecules derived therefrom, from any source
except for greater than two-thirds of eukaryotic viral genome may be transferred to any non-human vertebrate or any
invertebrate organism and propagated under conditions of physical containment comparable to BL1 or BL1N
and appropriate to the organism under study (see Section VB). 

Animals that contain sequences from viral vectors, which do not lead to transmissible infection either directly
or indirectly as a result of complementation or recombination in animals, may be propagated under conditions of physical
containment comparable to BL1 or BL1N and appropriate to the organism under study. Experiments involving
the introduction of other sequences from eukaryotic viral genomes into animals are covered under Section IIIC4b.
For experiments involving recombinant DNA-modified Class 2, 3, 4, or 5 organisms, see Section VA. It is important
that the investigator demonstrate that the fraction of the viral genome being utilized does not lead to productive
infection. A U.S. Department of Agriculture permit is required for work with Class 5 agents (see Section VR
and VT). 

Section IIIC4b. For experiments involving recombinant DNA, or DNA or RNA derived therefrom,
involving whole animals, including transgenic animals, and not covered by Sections IIIC1 or IIIC4a,
the appropriate containment shall be determined by the Institutional Biosafety Committee. 



Section IIIC5. Experiments Involving Whole Plants 



Experiments to genetically engineer plants by recombinant DNA methods, to use such plants for other experimental
purposes (e.g., response to stress), to propagate such plants, or to use plants together with microorganisms or insects
containing recombinant DNA, may be conducted under the containment conditions described in Sections IIIC5a
through IIIC5e. If experiments involving whole plants are not described in Section IIIC5
and do not fall under Sections IIIA, IIIB, or IIIE, they are included in Section IIID.






Note

. For recombinant DNA experiments falling under Sections IIIC5a through IIIC5d,
physical containment requirements may be reduced to the next lower level by appropriate biological containment
practices, such as conducting experiments on a virus with an obligate insect vector in the absence of that vector or
using a genetically attenuated strain.




Section IIIC5a. BL3P (Plants) or BL2P + biological containment is recommended
for experiments involving most exotic (see Section VW) infectious agents with recognized potential for serious
detrimental impact on managed or natural ecosystems when recombinant DNA techniques are associated with whole plants.


Section IIIC5b. BL3P or BL2P + biological containment is recommended for experiments
involving plants containing cloned genomes of readily transmissible exotic (see Section VW) infectious
agents with recognized potential for serious detrimental effects on managed or natural ecosystems in which there
exists the possibility of reconstituting the complete and functional genome of the infectious agent by genomic complementation


in planta. 

Section IIIC5c. BL4P containment is recommended for experiments with a small number
of readily transmissible exotic (see Section VW) infectious agents, such as the soybean rust fungus (Phakospora
pachyrhizi

) and maize streak or other viruses in the presence of their specific arthropod vectors, that have the potential of
being serious pathogens of major U.S. crops. 

Section IIIC5d. BL3P containment is recommended for experiments involving sequences
encoding potent vertebrate toxins introduced into plants or associated organisms. Recombinant DNA containing
genes for the biosynthesis of toxin molecules lethal for vertebrates at an LD

50

 of &lt;100 nanograms per kilogram body weight fall under Section IIIB1 and require NIH/ORDA and Institutional
Biosafety Committee approval before initiation. 

Section IIIC5e. BL3P or BL2P + biological containment is recommended for experiments
with microbial pathogens of insects or small animals associated with plants if the recombinant DNA-modified organism
has a recognized potential for serious detrimental impact on managed or natural ecosystems. 



Section IIIC6. Experiments Involving More than 10 Liters of Culture 


