 

Analysis of Consent Order To Aid Public Comment



The Federal Trade Commission has accepted an agreement, subject to final approval, to a proposed consent order from
respondent Keyes Fibre Company, a Delaware corporation.

The proposed consent order has been placed on the public record for sixty (60) days for reception of comments by interested
persons. Comments received during this period will become part of the public record. After sixty (60) days, the Commission
will again review the agreement and the comments received and will decide whether it should withdraw from the agreement
and take other appropriate action, or make final the agreement's proposed order.

This matter concerns the labeling and advertising of the respondent's Chinet

#

 disposable tableware. The Commission's complaint in this matter charges that the respondent represented without
substantiation that Chinet

#

 disposable tableware will completely break down and return to nature_

i.e., 

decompose into elements found in nature_within a reasonably short period of time after customary disposal; that
Chinet

#

 disposable tableware offers a significant environmental benefit after customary disposal; that Chinet

#

 disposable tableware will completely break down and return to nature within a short enough period of time after customary
disposal to significantly reduce the amount of garbage in landfills; and that Chinet

#

 disposable tableware will completely break down and return to nature significantly faster than other paper plates,
or plastic or foam products, to provide a significant environmental benefit. The complaint further charges that
the respondent falsely represented that Chinet

#

 disposable tableware is compostable through municipal solid waste composting. In fact, the complaint alleges,
while Chinet

#

 disposable tableware is capable of be composted in municipal solid waste composting facilities, the vast majority
of consumers cannot compost the product in this way because there are only a few municipal solid waste composting facilities
nationwide. In addition, the complaint charges that Keyes falsely represented that Chinet

#

 disposable tableware is recyclable after ordinary use. In fact, the complaint alleges, while Chinet

#

 disposable tableware is capable of being recycled, the vast majority of consumers cannot recycle the product because
there are virtually no collection facilities that accept used paper plates for recycling.

The proposed consent order contains provisions designed to remedy the violations charged and to prevent the respondent
from engaging in similar acts and practices in the future.

Part I of the proposed order requires that the respondent cease and desist from representing in the future, in any manner,
directly or by implication, that any of its paper products or packages are degradable, biodegradable, or photodegradable,
or through the use of such terms or similar terms, that any such product or package offers any environmental benefits
when consumers dispose of it as trash that is buried in a sanitary landfill, unless at the time of making such representation,
the respondent possesses and relies upon competent and reliable scientific evidence that substantiates such representation.
This provision includes claims of photodegradation as part of the prospective relief to be obtained, although respondent's
advertising did not include the term ``photodegradable.'' Part I also contains a proviso that allows the respondent
to advertise paper products or packages as degradable without violating Part I of the proposed order. The respondent
may do so if it truthfully represents that such product or package will degrade into usable compost (

e.g., 

soil-conditioning material, mulch) in a safe and timely manner, when disposed of in home compost piles or devices
or in municipal solid waste composting facilities, provided that the respondent complies with Part II of the proposed
order, discussed below, and in addition, the respondent discloses clearly, prominently, and in close proximity
to the claim that such product or package is not designed to degrade in landfills.

Part II of the proposed order requires that the respondent cease and desist from misrepresenting, in any manner, directly
or by implication, with respect to any paper product or package the extent to which any such product or package is capable
of being composted or the extent to which municipal solid waste composting facilities are available. Part II also
contains a proviso that allows the respondent to advertise paper products or packages as compostable without violating
Part II of the proposed order. The respondent may do so if it truthfully represents that such products or packages are
capable of being composted or otherwise being converted into usable compost (

e.g., 

soil-conditioning material, mulch) in a safe and timely manner, when disposed of in home compost piles or devices
or in municipal solid waste composting facilities and discloses clearly, prominently, and in close proximity to
any representation referring or relating to municipal solid waste composting: (1) That such product or package is
compostable where municipal solid waste composting facilities exist, and the current number of municipal solid
waste composting facilities in the U.S.; or (2) that such product or package is compostable in the few communities
with municipal solid waste composting facilities; or (3) the approximate percentage of U.S. communities or the U.S.
population to which municipal solid waste composting facilities are available.

Part III of the proposed order requires that the respondent cease and desist from misrepresenting, in any manner,
directly or by implication, with respect to any paper product or package the extent to which it is capable of being recycled
or the extent to which recycling collection programs are available.

Part IV of the proposed order provides that if the respondent represents in advertising or labeling that any product
or package offers any environmental benefit, it must have a reasonable basis consisting of competent and reliable
evidence, which when appropriate must be competent and reliable scientific evidence, that substantiates the claims.

Part V of the proposed order allows the respondent to use the terms cited in parts I, II and III or similar terms, and not
be in violation of the proposed order, if it is necessary for the respondent to comply with any federal rule, regulation,
or law governing the use of such terms in advertising or labeling.

The proposed order also requires the respondent to maintain materials relied upon to substantiate the claims covered
by the order, to distribute copies of the order to certain company officials, to notify the Commission of any changes
in corporate structure that might affect compliance with the order, and to file one or more reports detailing compliance
with the order.

The purpose of this analysis is to facilitate public comment on the proposed order. It is not intended to constitute
an official interpretation of the agreement and proposed order or to modify in any way their terms.





<SIGNER>
Donald S. Clark,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94126624 Filed 52394; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 675001M
</BILLING>


