 

Marine species, especially deep sea varieties, comprise the majority of seafood consumed in this country. This seafood
has little potential to contain most chemical contaminants at levels of toxicological concern (Ref. 13, p. 6). However,
there are some contaminants that can be present at significant levels, methylmercury in certain species being perhaps
the most notable. Fresh water species, especially nonmigratory bottom feeders, are generally the most exposed to
a variety of chemical contaminants (Ref. 13, p. 6).


6. Decomposition


Finfish are generally regarded as being much more perishable than terrestrial flesh foods (Ref. 14, p. 3). Decomposition
is a problem with seafood products frequently encountered by FDA and is the subject of the majority of regulatory actions
taken by the agency against violative seafood products (Ref. 15). It is largely an economic and aesthetic problem;
however, in some species it can lead to illness because of the formation of scombrotoxin (histamine) during decomposition.
Scombroid poisoning is completely preventable by proper handling, i.e., by proper time and temperature controls.


D. Additional Factors Affecting Safety


Unlike beef and poultry, seafood is still predominately a wild-caught flesh food that frequently must be harvested
under difficult conditions and at varying distances from processing, transport, and retail facilities. There are
nearly 100,000 vessels in the U.S. fishing fleet alone (Ref. 7, p. 22). These conditions, distances, and duration
of fishing trips, can tax any system of controls designed to ensure safety and prevent spoilage.
In addition, several hundred vessels are seagoing processing factories, many of which operate in remote waters.
For regulators, these ships that process at sea can be difficult and expensive to reach while they are operating, and
individual inspectors face hazards such as ship-to-ship transfers on the high seas.
There may be as many as 350 commercially marketed species (Refs. 16; and 19, p. 35). Consumer preferences for one species
over another and significant price differences between species can lead to economic fraud through the substitution
of cheaper species for more expensive ones.
Unlike beef and poultry, seafood is subject to significant recreational harvest. Beyond the 15 pounds of seafood
consumed per capita from commercial channels, an additional 4 pounds may be consumed from recreational sources.
Some recreational catch finds its way into commercial channels as well.
Thus, recreational fishing can have a bearing on the safety of commercial seafood. Commercial fishermen avoid or
are prohibited from harvesting from polluted areas, but recreational fishermen, especially recreational harvesters
of molluscan shellfish, might not be as aware of, or might ignore, local advisories or water closures. Processors
need to be aware of and control the source of their raw materials, and importers must ensure that their shipments are
obtained from acceptable sources.

An additional complicating factor in ensuring the safety of seafood is the fact that no other flesh food is imported
in the quantity, or from as many countries, as seafood. Imports include finished products as well as products to be
further processed domestically. Over 55 percent of seafood consumed in this country is imported. It comes from approximately
135 countries. Several of these countries have advance regulatory structures for seafood safety, but many others
are developing nations that lack structures for seafood regulation comparable to those in more developed nations
(Ref. 35, pp. 113 and 114).
Therefore, it is of utmost importance, that those who handle and process seafood commercially, including importers,
understand the hazards associated with this type of food, know which hazards are associated with the types of products
with which they are involved, and keep these hazards from occurring through a routine system of preventive controls.
The seafood industry, indeed, the food industry as a whole, must be primarily responsible for the safety and quality
of the food that it produces. The regulator's primary role should be to verify that the industry is meeting this responsibility
and to take remedial action when it is not. The alternative of relying solely on Government inspectors to identify
problems and provide solutions would involve enormous costs to the public and would be extremely inefficient, assuming
it could be done at all.
For the most part, seafood processors and importers are not required, through licensure or examination, to understand
seafood hazards as a prerequisite to being able to do business. (There are exceptions. A few States, such as Alaska,
do require processors to conform to HACCP as a condition of doing business (Ref. 17).) While many processors and importers
have such an understanding, this knowledge is not universal. It is not unusual for FDA to receive inquiries about safety
requirements and related matters from those who wish to process or import seafood, or who already do, that indicate
a lack of awareness of hazards specific to their products. Most of the industry does not have HACCP-trained personnel,
and many firms lack dedicated quality assurance personnel (Ref. 18, p. 35).
Seafood processing in the United States is done by several thousand businesses, many of which are small, old, and family
operated (Ref. 19, p. 35). This situation is in contrast to the beef and poultry industries, in which market share is
concentrated among a small number of large processors. Seafood firms tend to be small, fragmented operations sized
in reference to anticipated benefits, because of the significant, uncontrollable risks involved in this business
(Ref. 5, p. 225). Also, because many harvests are seasonal, many of their operations are intermittent (Ref. 20). The
seasonal nature of the industry can affect worker skills and practices relating to safety, while older facilities
and equipment can be more difficult to maintain in terms of adequate sanitation and proper processing and storage
temperatures (Ref. 20).


