 

OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT




<CFRNO>5 CFR Parts 213 and 316</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>RIN 3206AF56</RINDOCK>



Temporary Schedule C Positions



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Office of Personnel Management.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Proposed regulations.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) proposes to revise its regulations which permit agencies to establish temporary
Schedule C positions in order to assist a department or agency head during the period immediately following a change
in presidential administration, when a new department or agency head has entered on duty, or when a new department
or agency is created. Agencies currently differentiate between identical temporary and new temporary Schedule
C positions. They are also subject to an overall limit of new positions they may establish, which was set over 10 years
ago. To simplify the Schedule C appointment process and respond to agency needs, OPM proposes to merge the two temporary
Schedule C authorities into a single temporary appointing authority, and to adjust agencies' position quota to a
more realistic level. OPM is also codifying a requirement in law which deals with the detailing of Schedule C incumbents
to the White House.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments must be received on or before February 6, 1995.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Send or deliver written comments to Leonard R. Klein, Associate Director for Career Entry, Office of Personnel Management,
Room 6F08, 1900 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20415.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Sylvia Cole on 2026060950 (FAX: 2026060390.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Currently, 5 CFR 213.3302 authorizes agencies to establish, without prior OPM approval, temporary Schedule C positions
in order to facilitate the orderly transition of duties during a Presidential transition, changes in department
or agency heads, or changes resulting from the creation of a new department or agency. These temporary positions may
be either (1) identical to existing Schedule C positions (ITC's) if intent to vacate these positions has been put in
writing by management or the present incumbent(s), or (2) new temporary Schedule C positions (NTC's) when it has been
determined that the department or agency heads' needs cannot be met through the establishment of a position identical
to an existing Schedule C position. Individual appointments may be made for up to 120 days, with one extension of an
additional 120 days. It has been OPM policy to permit agencies to make new ITC/NTC appointments up to a year after a Presidential
transition or the agency head comes on board.



In order to maintain a reasonable rate of temporary Schedule C positions within Government, every agency has a quota
of NTC positions it may establish. Current regulations set the limit on the number of NTC positions established by
an agency not to exceed 25 percent of the total number of permanent Schedule C positions authorized for that agency
as of March 31, 1980.

The regulations governing temporary Schedule C appointments have been in effect since 1981 and no longer meet agencies'
needs. In addition to general confusion over the distinction between the two types of temporary Schedule C appointments,
some agencies are finding it increasingly difficult to live within a NTC quota that is based on the number of Schedule
C positions that existed over 10 years ago. During 1993, OPM granted several exceptions to individual agency NTC quotas,
by way of a variation under section 5.1 of civil service rule V, to meet agencies' needs. To facilitate the appointment
process and alleviate processing delays, OPM proposes the following changes:



New Temporary Authority



The ITC and NTC authorities would be replaced by a single temporary transitional Schedule C (TTC) authority to assist
agencies with their staffing needs during a Presidential transition, changes in agency heads, or at the time a new
agency is created. This new authority will incorporate established policy in effect for ITC and NTC appointments,
such as the time limits for making new appointments (within 1 year after the changeover) and the length of individual
appointments (up to 120 days with one 120-day extension). No prior OPM approval would be required to make appointments,
but agencies would be subject to an overall limit on the number of positions they could fill. Agencies would also have
to notify OPM within 5 working days when a position has been encumbered, and within 3 working days when it has been vacated.



Agency Quotas



In order to maintain a reasonable number of temporary Schedule C positions, the number of temporary transitional
Schedule C positions established by an agency could not exceed either 50 percent of the highest number of permanent
Schedule C positions filled by that agency at any time over the previous 5 years, or three positions, whichever is higher.
This would create a fluctuating quota of positions directly related to the agency's Schedule C activity.



Miscellaneous



Since FY 91, the Treasury, Postal Service and General Government Appropriations Act has required agency heads to
certify to OPM, when requesting Schedule C exception, that the agency's Schedule C position was not created solely
or primarily for the purpose of detailing the incumbent to the White House. With the sunset of the Federal Personnel
Manual, we are incorporating this provision of law into the Schedule C regulations. The proposed regulations also
include editorial changes to eliminate an obsolete reference to Schedule C delegation agreements which have not
existed since 1981, and to renumber and change the order of existing paragraphs.

The proposed regulations also contain a conforming amendment to part 316, section 316.403, which deals with provisional
appointments, to change the terminology of ITC and NTC appointments to temporary transitional.



</SUPPLEM>
