 

<IMPORT>




E:GRAPHICSEN11JA94.001



</IMPORT>



For a one year period following the six months after the establishment of the FIPS 1401 validation program,
agencies shall purchase either equipment with validated FIPS 1401 cryptographic modules, or equipment whose
cryptographic modules have been submitted for FIPS 1401 validation. After this period, only FIPS 1401
validated cryptographic modules will be considered as meeting the provisions of this standard. 

Table 2 summarizes the schedule for acquisition of FIPS 140 compliant equipment. For up to three years following June
30, 1994, equipment with cryptographic modules complying to FIPS 140, General Security Requirements for Equipment
Using the Data Encryption Standard (formerly Federal Standard 1027), may be purchased in lieu of equipment with modules
that comply with this standard. These modules either shall have been endorsed by the National Security Agency (NSA)
as complying to Federal Standard 1027, or shall be affirmed in writing by the manufacturer as complying to FIPS 140.
NSA endorsed modules shall have been endorsed prior to December, 1993. A list of endorsed products (NSA Endorsed Data
Encryption Standard (DES) Products List) is available from the NSA. For modules affirmed by the manufacturer as complying
with FIPS 140, a copy of the written affirmation shall have been sent by the manufacturer to the Director of the Computer
Systems Laboratory at NIST prior to June 30, 1994. A list of these methods is available from NIST. 

Equipment purchased under the above conditions may continue to be used for the lifetime of the equipment without the
need for further affirmation or validation for conformance to this standard. 

15. 

Qualifications. 

The security requirements specified in this standard are based upon information provided by many sources within
the Federal government and private industry. The requirements are designed to protect against adversaries mounting
cost-effective attacks on unclassified government or commercial data (e.g., hackers, organized crime, economic
competitors). The primary goal in designing an effective security system is to make the cost of any attack greater
than the possible payoff. 

While the security requirements specified in this standard are intended to maintain the security of a cryptographic
module, conformance to this standard does not guarantee that a particular module is secure. It is the responsibility
of the manufacturer of a cryptographic module to build the module in a secure manner. 

Similarly, the use of a cryptographic module that conforms to this standard in an overall system does not guarantee
the security of the overall system. The responsible authority in each agency shall assure that an overall system provides
an acceptable level of security. 

Since a standard of this nature must be flexible enough to adapt to advancements and innovations in science and technology,
this standard will be reviewed every 5 years in order to consider new or revised requirements that may be needed to meet
technological and economic changes. 

16. 

Waiver Procedure. 

Under certain exceptional circumstances, the heads of Federal agencies may approve waivers to Federal Information
Processing Standards (FIPS). The head of such agency may redelegate such authority only to a senior official designated
pursuant to Section 3506(b) of Title 44, U.S. Code. Waivers shall be granted only when: 

a. Compliance with a standard would adversely affect the accomplishment of the mission of an operator of a Federal
computer system, or 

b. Cause a major adverse financial impact on the operator which is not offset by Government-wide savings. 

Agency heads may act upon a written waiver request containing the information detailed above. Agency heads may also
act without a written waiver request when they determine that conditions for meeting the standard cannot be met. Agency
heads may approve waivers only by a written decision which explains the basis on which the agency head made the required
finding(s). A copy of each such decision, with procurement sensitive or classified portions clearly identified,
shall be sent to: National Institute of Standards and Technology; ATTN: FIPS Waiver Decisions, Technology Building,
Room B154; Gaithersburg, MD 20899. 

In addition, notice of each waiver granted and each delegation of authority to approve waivers shall be sent promptly
to the Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Government Affairs
of the Senate and shall be published promptly in the 

Federal Register

. 

When the determination on a waiver applies to the procurement of equipment and/or services, a notice of the waiver
determination must be published in the Commerce Business Daily as a part of the notice of solicitation for offers of
an acquisition or, if the waiver determination is made after that notice is published, by amendment to such notice.


A copy of the waiver, any supporting documents, the document approving the waiver and any supporting and accompanying
documents, with such deletions as the agency is authorized and decides to make under Section 552(b) of Title 5, U.S.
Code, shall be part of the procurement documentation and retained by the agency. 

17. 

Where to obtain copies. 

Copies of this publication are available for sale by the National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department
of Commerce, Springfield, VA 22161. When ordering, refer to Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
1401 (FIPS PUB 1401), and title. When microfile is desired, this should be specified. Payment may be
made by check, money order, credit card, or deposit account. 

 



<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94539 Filed 11094; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3510CNM
</BILLING>




