 

C. Tax Code and Zoning Provisions 
 


Modifications to existing State or local tax codes, zoning provisions, and land use planning can provide effective
economic incentives. Possible modifications to encourage emissions reductions cover a broad span of programs,
such as accelerated depreciation of capital equipment used for emissions reductions, corporate income tax deductions
or credits for emission abatement costs, property tax waivers based on decreasing emissions, exempting low-emitting
products from sales tax, and limitations on parking spaces for office facilities. Mobile source strategies include
waiving or lowering any of the following for zero- or low-emitting vehicles: vehicle registration fees, vehicle
property tax, sales tax, taxicab license fees, and parking taxes. 



D. Subsidies 
 


A State may create incentives for reducing emissions by offering direct subsidies, grants or low-interest loans
to encourage the purchase of lower-emitting capital equipment, or a switch to less polluting operating practices.
Examples of such programs include clean vehicle conversions, starting shuttle bus or van pool programs, and mass
transit fare subsidies. Subsidy programs often suffer from a variety of ``free rider'' problems. For instance, subsidies
for people or firms who were going to switch to the cleaner alternative anyway lower the effectiveness of the subsidy
program, or drive up the cost of achieving a targeted level of emissions reductions. 



E. Transportation Control Measures 
 


The following measures are the TCM's listed in section 108(f): 

(i) Programs for improved public transit; 

(ii) Restriction of certain roads or lanes to, or construction of such roads or lanes for use by, passenger buses or
high occupancy vehicles; 

(iii) Employer-based transportation management plans, including incentives; 

(iv) Trip-reduction ordinances; 

(v) Traffic flow improvement programs that achieve emission reductions; 

(vi) Fringe and transportation corridor parking facilities serving multiple-occupancy vehicle programs or transit
service; 

(vii) Programs to limit or restrict vehicle use in downtown areas or other areas of emission concentration particularly
during periods of peak use; 

(viii) Programs for the provision of all forms of high-occupancy, shared-ride services; 

(ix) Programs to limit portions of road surfaces or certain sections of the metropolitan area to the use of non-motorized
vehicles or pedestrian use, both as to time and place; 

(x) Programs for secure bicycle storage facilities and other facilities, including bicycle lanes, for the convenience
and protection of bicyclists, in both public and private areas; 

(xi) Programs to control extended idling of vehicles; 

(xii) Programs to reduce motor vehicle emissions, consistent with title II, which are caused by extreme cold start
conditions; 

(xiii) Employer-sponsored programs to permit flexible work schedules; 

(xiv) Programs and ordinances to facilitate non-automobile travel, provision and utilization of mass transit,
and to generally reduce the need for single-occupant vehicle travel, as part of transportation planning and development
efforts of a locality, including programs and ordinances applicable to new shopping centers, special events, and
other centers of vehicle activity; 

(xv) Programs for new construction and major reconstruction of paths, tracks or areas solely for the use by pedestrian
or other non-motorized means of transportation when economically feasible and in the public interest. For purposes
of this clause, the Administrator shall also consult with the Secretary of the Interior; and 

(xvi) Programs to encourage the voluntary removal from use and the marketplace of pre-1980 model year light-duty
vehicles and pre-1980 model light-duty trucks.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946828 Filed 4694; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>


