 

DOE will then conduct public scoping meetings to assist in defining the appropriate scope of the Defense Waste Processing
Facility Supplemental EIS and identifying significant environmental issues to be addressed. DOE representatives
will be available at the meetings to discuss, in informal conversations, the Defense Waste Processing Facility.
These meetings are scheduled at the following times and locations:




May 12, 1994; 14 and 69 p.m.; Coastal Georgia Center for Continuing Education, 305 Martin Luther King
Boulevard (Battlefield Park), Savannah, Georgia.

May 17, 1994; 14 and 69 p.m.; North Augusta Community Center, 495 Brookside Avenue, North Augusta, South
Carolina.

May 19, 1994; 14 and 69 p.m.; Holiday Inn Coliseum at the University of South Carolina, 630 Assembly Street,
Columbia, South Carolina.




Scoping meetings on the Interim Management of Nuclear Materials at the Savannah River Site EIS and the Savannah River
Site Waste Management EIS will be held at the same dates and locations. DOE will publish additional notices of the information
sessions and scoping meetings in the local media in advance of the scheduled dates. 




<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Comments on the scope of the Defense Waste Processing Facility Supplemental EIS, requests to speak at the public scoping
meetings, and requests for copies of the EIS Implementation Plan or draft Supplemental EIS (when available) should
be directed to: Mr. Stephen R. Wright, U.S. Department of Energy, Savannah River Operations Office, P.O. Box 5031,
Aiken, SC 298045031; (803) 7253957 or (800) 2428269. Envelopes should be marked: ``Savannah
River Site Defense Waste Processing Facility Supplemental EIS.''



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Questions regarding the Supplemental EIS should be addressed to: Karen Poore, High Level Waste Division, U.S. Department
of Energy, Savannah River Operations Office, P.O. Box A, Aiken, SC 29802; (803) 7252827.



Questions regarding the DOE NEPA process should be addressed to: Carol M. Borgstrom, Director, Office of NEPA Oversight
(EH25), U.S. Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20855; (202) 5864600
or leave a message at (800) 4722765. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Background


The Savannah River Site occupies approximately 300 square miles adjacent to the Savannah River, primarily in Aiken
and Barnwell Counties in South Carolina. The Site is approximately 25 miles southeast of Augusta, Georgia, and 20
miles south of Aiken, South Carolina. Since its establishment, the mission of the Savannah River Site has been to produce
nuclear materials that support the defense, research, and medical programs of the United States. 

At present, the Savannah River Site is in transition to other missions, which include increased emphasis on waste
management, environmental restoration, and decontamination and decommissioning. With these mission changes
in mind, DOE is examining its integrated waste management program and the suitability of existing and planned facilities.
The Defense Waste Processing Facility is one of the vital components of the waste management program at Savannah River
Site. 

In 1982 DOE published an EIS and a Record of Decision documenting its decision to construct and operate the Defense
Waste Processing Facility, which would immobilize liquid high-level radioactive waste in glass (vitrification).
The vitrified waste would then be encapsulated in stainless steel canisters and stored onsite until a geologic repository
is available for final disposal. DOE then modified the Defense Waste Processing Facility to improve facility efficiency
and safety. A Supplement Analysis was prepared to determine whether modifications as of 1990, primarily the introduction
of the In-Tank Precipitation process and manufacture and disposal of saltstone, required the preparation of a supplement
to the Defense Waste Processing Facility EIS. On the basis of the Supplement Analysis, DOE concluded in 1991 that a
Supplemental EIS was not needed. 

Further modifications to the Defense Waste Processing Facility system have now been proposed and are in various stages
of implementation, including process safety enhancement and a Late Wash Facility. In view of the accumulated changes
and the near-term (estimated 1996) initial operation of the facility, DOE believes that a focused EIS-level review
of the environmental impacts of the facility as now envisioned would be timely and appropriate. 

The specific process and facility modifications that are being implemented in the Defense Waste Processing Facility
system since the Record of Decision include: 

In-Tank Precipitation_The original Defense Waste Processing Facility design used ion exchange to separate soluble
radionuclides from salt solution. Research and development efforts indicated that an in-tank precipitation process
would remove more than 99.9 percent of the radioactivity in salt solution. DOE has incorporated the In-Tank Precipitation
process as a replacement for ion exchange as a Defense Waste Processing Facility modification. 

Saltstone Manufacturing and Disposal_The process of salt solution disposal originally involved dewatering decontaminated
salt solution, mixing it with concrete to form ``saltcrete,'' and burying it in an engineered trench. The present
design would blend decontaminated salt solution from the in-tank precipitation process with a waste concentrate
stream from the F- and H-Area Effluent Treatment Facility, mix it with cement-flyash grout to form ``saltstone,''
and dispose of it in reinforced concrete vaults. 

Late-Wash Facility_This new facility would give precipitate slurry from the In-Tank Precipitation process a final
wash to reduce the concentration of nitrite and radiolysis products. The result would be the ability to process precipitate
in the Defense Waste Processing Facility vitrification process. 

Nitric Acid Introduction_This process would add nitric rather than formic acid to the sludge in the Sludge Receipt
and Adjustment Tank to bring nitrate concentrations to the desired levels. 

Hydrogen Modifications_These modifications to the ventilation system would provide additional dilution air to
components in the vitrification facility to mitigate the potential formation of hydrogen gas in flammable concentrations.


Ammonia Mitigation Modification_The installation of ammonia-reducing scrubbers at several locations in the process
vessel ventilation system would mitigate a potential safety hazard from the accumulation of solid ammonium nitrate.


Benzene Treatment_The proposed treatment option for benzene generated at the Defense Waste Processing Facility
is the Consolidated Incineration Facility. Environmental Protection Agency regulations name incineration as
the current Best Demonstrated and Available Technology for benzene. The Supplemental EIS will evaluate alternatives
to this treatment option for benzene from the Defense Waste Processing Facility. 


</SUPPLEM>
