 

After reviewing the comments received in response to the July 22, 1993, 

Federal Register

 notice, the Department has decided to issue a final rule addressing all aspects of the 

Ohio

 v. 

Interior

 remand other than the assessment of lost nonuse values. The Department is considering revising the type B rule to include
certain standards to improve the reliability of CV when used to calculate lost nonuse values. In order to ensure that
interested parties have an adequate opportunity for review and comment, the Department will soon publish the standards
in a notice of proposed rulemaking. Pending completion of that rulemaking, the Department is temporarily leaving
unchanged the remanded language of the original type B rule concerning assessment of lost nonuse values. 


E. Other Rulemakings 


CERCLA mandates biennial review and revision, as appropriate, of the natural resource damage assessment regulations.
The Department plans to publish an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to begin the biennial update of the type B
rule in July 1994. All aspects of the administrative process and the type B rule will be subject to review during that
update. During the biennial review, the Department will consider ways of ensuring the greatest possible consistency
between its damage assessment regulations and the damage assessment regulations being developed by NOAA. 
Further, the Department plans to publish a proposed rule to revise the type A procedure for coastal and marine environments
in compliance with 

Colorado

 v. 

Interior

 in November 1994. The Department is also developing an additional type A procedure for assessing damages in the Great
Lakes. Like the type A procedure for coastal and marine environments, the type A procedure for the Great Lakes will
incorporate a computer model. The Department expects to publish a proposed rule for the type A procedure for the Great
Lakes in August 1994. 


II. Overview of This Final Rule 


A. Measure of Damages 


The type B rule as originally published on August 1, 1986, provided that damages consisted of the lesser of the cost
of restoring the injured resources or the diminution in the value of the injured resources without restoration. In


Ohio

 v. 

Interior

, the court ordered the Department to revise the rule to reflect the statutory preference for using restoration costs
as the measure of natural resource damages. CERCLA provides that sums recovered in natural resource damage actions
may be used to restore, rehabilitate, replace, or acquire the equivalent of the injured natural resources. The court
used the simple term ``restoration'' costs as shorthand for the cost of performing any of these actions. 880 F.2d at
441. In many cases, trustee officials will likely use damage awards to fund some combination of these actions, rather
than only one. Therefore, the final rule allows trustee officials to recover the costs of restoration, rehabilitation,
replacement, and/or acquisition of equivalent resources in all cases. 





