 


4. The sole source of therapeutically appropriate treatment reasonably accessible to the employee. 



VIII. Employee Assistance Program (EAP)



 The employer shall provide an EAP for employees. The employer may establish the EAP as a part of its internal personnel
services or the employer may contract with an entity that will provide EAP services to an employee. Each EAP must include
education and training on drug use for employees and training for supervisors making determinations for testing
of employees based on reasonable cause. 

A. 

EAP Education Program. 

Each EAP education program must include at least the following elements: display and distribution of informational
material; display and distribution of a community service hot-line telephone number for employee assistance; and
display and distribution of the employer's policy regarding drug use in the workplace. The employer's policy shall
include information regarding the consequences under the rule of using drugs while performing safety-sensitive
functions, receiving a verified positive drug test result, or refusing to submit to a drug test required under the
rule. 

B. 

EAP Training Program. 

Each employer shall implement a reasonable program of initial training for employees. The employee training program
must include at least the following elements: The effects and consequences of drug use on personal health, safety,
and work environment; the manifestations and behavioral cues that may indicate drug use and abuse; and documentation
of training given to employees and employer's supervisory personnel. The employer's supervisory personnel who
will determine when an employee is subject to testing based on reasonable cause shall receive specific training on
specific, contemporaneous physical, behavioral, and performance indicators of probable drug use in addition to
the training specified above. The employer shall ensure that supervisors who will make reasonable cause determinations
receive at least 60 minutes of initial training. The employer shall implement a reasonable recurrent training program
for supervisory personnel making reasonable cause determinations during subsequent years. The employer shall
identify the employee and supervisor EAP training in the employer's drug testing plan submitted to the FAA for approval.




IX. Employer's Antidrug Program Plan



A. 

Schedule for Submission of Plans and Implementation. 

Each employer shall submit an antidrug program plan to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of Aviation Medicine,
Drug Abatement Division (AAM800), 400 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 

2. (a) Any person who applies for a certificate under the provisions of part 121 or part 135 of this chapter after September
19, 1994 shall submit an antidrug program plan to the FAA for approval and must obtain such approval prior to beginning
operations under the certificate. The program shall be implemented not later than the date of inception of operations.
Contractor employees to a new certificate holder must be subject to an FAA-approved antidrug program within 60 days
of the implementation of the employer's program. 

(b) Any person who intends to begin sightseeing operations as an operator under 14 CFR 135.1(c) after September 19,
1994 shall, not later than 60 days prior to the proposed initiation of such operations, submit an antidrug program
plan to the FAA for approval. No operator may begin conducting sightseeing flights prior to receipt of approval; the
program shall be implemented concurrently with the inception of operations. Contractor employees to a new operator
must be subject to an FAA-approved program within 60 days of the implementation of the employer's program. 

(c) Any person who intends to begin air traffic control operations as an employer as defined in 14 CFR 65.46(a)(2) (air
traffic control facilities not operated by the FAA or by or under contract to the U.S. military) after September 19,
1994 shall, not later than 60 days prior to the proposed initiation of such operations, submit an antidrug program
plan to the FAA for approval. No air traffic control facility may begin conducting air traffic control operations
prior to receipt of approval; the program shall be implemented concurrently with the inception of operations. Contractor
employees to a new air traffic control facility must be subject to an FAA-approved program within 60 days of the implementation
of the facility's program. 

3. In accordance with this appendix, an entity or individual that holds a repair station certificate issued by the
FAA pursuant to part 145 of this chapter and employs individuals who perform a safety-sensitive function pursuant
to a primary or direct contract with an employer or an operator may submit an antidrug program plan (specifying the
procedures for complying with this appendix) to the FAA for approval. Each certificated repair station shall implement
its approved antidrug program in accordance with its terms. 

4. Any entity or individual whose employees perform safety-sensitive functions pursuant to a contract with an employer
(as defined in section II of this appendix), and any consortium may submit an antidrug program plan to the FAA for approval
on a form and in a manner prescribed by the Administrator. 

(a) The plan shall specify the procedures that will be used to comply with the requirements of this appendix. 

(b) Each consortium program must provide for reporting changes in consortium membership to the FAA within 10 working
days of such changes. 




