 

The agency does note, however, that in cases where the notice was deemed inadequate by the patent owner or exclusive
patent licensee and where the ANDA applicant subsequently amends the notice, the agency may, if the applicant amends
its ANDA with a written statement that the date of receipt of the amended notification should be considered the date
of receipt of notice, use the date of the amended notification to begin the 45-day statutory period for institution
of an action for patent infringement (see 54 FR 28872 at 28888; see also 314.95(f)). 
55. Two comments addressed return receipts under proposed 314.95(a). One comment would amend the rule to provide
for signed receipts while the second would revise the rule to permit reliance on ``any appropriate federal rule for
transmitting notice to another party or for receipt of such notice.'' 
Under 314.95(e), applicants are required to document receipt of a notice of invalidity or noninfringement
by submitting ``a copy of the return receipt or other similar evidence of the date the notification was received.''
The rule states that FDA will accept return receipts, letters acknowledging receipt by the person provided the notice,
or ``another form of documentation only if FDA has agreed to such documentation in advance.'' Thus, the rule provides
several methods for documenting receipt of a notice, so the comment's recommendations are unnecessary. 
56. One comment asked FDA to clarify when multiple notices might be required. 
Section 314.95(a) requires applicants to send notices to each patent owner and each holder (or its attorney, agent,
or other authorized official) of the approved application under section 505(b) of the act for the listed drug that
is claimed by the patent and for which the applicant is seeking approval (314.95 (a)(1) and (a)(2)). Consequently,
applicants could be obliged to send multiple notices under several situations. For example, a patent owner is usually
an individual whereas the holder of an approved application is often a corporation. The applicant, therefore, would
send one notice to the patent owner and another to the firm holding the approved application. If several patents cover
the listed drug, there may be several different patent owners, so the applicant would be required to provide separate
notices to each patent owner. 
57. Two comments suggested revising proposed 314.95(a)(1) to include the patent owner's name and address
in the Orange Book. 
The patent owner's name and address are printed on each patent. As a result, whenever a prospective applicant examines
a patent to determine whether its proposed product would infringe any of the patent claims, the applicant would have
access to the patent owner's name and address. The comment's suggestion, therefore, is unnecessary. 
58. Several comments asked when and how applicants should send notices under proposed 314.95(b). Two comments
would have an applicant provide a statement to FDA declaring that the applicant ``will give,'' rather than ``has provided,''
notice of certification of invalidity or noninfringement of a patent. These comments explained that the statute
does not specify a time for the notice, so the rule should permit applicants to decide when to send such notices. One
comment would revise the rule to give FDA 30 days to determine whether the ANDA was complete before the applicant would
be required to send a notice of certification of invalidity or noninfringement of a patent. 
The legislative history discussing a notice of certification of invalidity or noninfringement of a patent clearly
states that ANDA applicants should provide notice ``simultaneously with the submission of an ANDA'' and that Congress
did ``not intend that applicants be permitted to circumvent this notice requirement by filing sham ANDA's or ANDA's
which are substantially incomplete'' (see H. Rept. 857, 98th Cong., 2d sess. 24 (1984)). Thus, to permit applicants
to state that they ``will provide'' notice to the patent owner and holder of the approved application would be contrary
to congressional intent. Moreover, such a statement would be redundant relative to that required under 314.94(a)(12)(i)
and would not inform FDA whether notice has, in fact, been provided. With regard to the suggestion of a 30-day deadline
for FDA to respond before an applicant sends notice, FDA believes such a requirement would be impractical. The time
required to review an application may vary depending upon the application's complexity, the review division's workload,
the timing and scope of an applicant's response to FDA's questions or requests, etc. Although FDA intends to review
applications expeditiously, current resources and priorities may not, in all instances, enable the agency to determine
whether an application is sufficiently complete for review to begin within 30 days after receiving the application.
Consequently, FDA declines to adopt the comments. 




