 

The determination of an exposure/health effect relationship requires a constant, well-controlled, and measurable
exposure environment. A high degree of variability in emission properties such as heat, pressure, water vapor, CO,
NOx, CO

2

, total hydrocarbons, and specific chemical composition could complicate the measurement and determination of
the actual exposure levels that occur during toxicology testing. During transient cycles, physical and chemical
properties of the exhaust stream can vary significantly. In addition, a high percentage of emissions are produced
in concentrated spikes (related to the enriched conditions present during accelerations) that result in a series
of alternating high and low level exposures. This variability could be difficult to accommodate in the context of
the inhalation toxicology tests proposed in this rule. Therefore, EPA is considering the use of single-mode (steady
state) operating conditions for generating emissions in the F/FA testing program. 

In addition to reducing variability, non-transient methods might also provide a better simulation of ambient conditions.
Ambient air contains emissions from many thousands of vehicles of varying technologies, age, and state of maintenance.
At any point in time, these vehicles are in different stages of operation under various engine loads. As a collective
average of the emissions from these sources, the ambient air typically varies gradually over a period of hours or days.
In contrast, UDDS emissions vary significantly from second to second. For these reasons, the ambient air actually
resembles a steady state condition more closely than a transient state. 

Another potential advantage of running the test vehicle or engine under single-mode conditions is that it would permit
less sophisticated and less expensive dynamometer equipment (e.g., water-brake dynamometers) to be used for emission
generation. This could help to encourage additional biological testing laboratories to obtain the equipment necessary
for conducting the test exposures required in this program, and might also increase the feasibility of using portable
dynamometers for these purposes. 

On the other hand, the use of a non-transient rather than a transient cycle for generating emissions raises legitimate
concerns that the emission stream could be missing certain toxicologically active species which would ordinarily
be generated in appreciable amounts only during accelerations. However, these concerns might be allayed to some
extent by two other emission generation specifications which EPA is considering: the use of engine-out (non-catalyzed)
rather than tailpipe catalyzed emissions (see section III.A.2, below) and the use of high-load, fuel-enriched operating
conditions. 

To maximize the emission species occuring in the exhaust stream during non-transient operation, EPA is considering
different vehicle/engine operating specifications or emission performance requirements. One approach under
consideration is to specify the speed and throttle requirements, e.g., 25 percent of full throttle at a constant speed
of 20 mph (the average speed of the FTP). An alternative method would be to specify a high load requirement directly
(e.g., 50 percent load at 20 mph). One factor to consider is that the vehicle/engine operating conditions must be achievable
without exceeding the load which a typical well-maintained, modern engine can handle for prolonged periods of time
without breaking down. EPA requests comments and advice on this practical constraint. A different approach would
be to require the modification of electronic computer controls to manage fuel injection so as to achieve a suitably
enriched air/fuel ratio under steady-state operation. Programming a vehicle to operate in open-loop mode is one
example of this approach. 

Rather than specifying the operating conditions to be used during non-transient vehicle/engine operation, EPA
could choose to specify performance criteria which would achieve suitable emission levels. These criteria would
be based on selected exhaust or exposure concentrations of key emissions for biological testing (e.g., CO, total
HC). This approach would allow operators the flexibility to determine the most appropriate vehicle/engine conditions
and/or computer controls needed to obtain an exhaust stream containing the required concentration ranges of specific
emissions. For example, EPA could require that the concentration of total hydrocarbons in the exhaust must exceed
a specified amount and/or that the CO concentration be less than a specified maximum. Because different test vehicles/engines
would be required to meet the same criteria, this approach might reduce the potential test-to-test variability which
might result if EPA were to specify a particular set of operating conditions and require that set to be applied across
all vehicle/engine technologies. 

EPA invites comments on the possibility of using a non-transient cycle rather than the FTP for generating emissions
for biological testing. Specific comments are requested on the effectiveness of the various approaches discussed
above for achieving the desired emission enrichment during steady-state operation. Comments on the specific speed,
throttle, load specifications, computer controls, and/or performance criteria mentioned above are also requested,
and suggestions as to suitable alternative methods or specifications are welcome. Such suggestions will be particularly
helpful if supporting data and rationale are provided. Detailed emission speciation data/profiles contrasting
engine/vehicle operating conditions (e.g., transient versus non-transient, especially under engine-out conditions)
are also solicited. 




