 

There are an estimated 438,200 children who are lost, injured, or otherwise missing each year. Of these, 139,100 cases
are serious enough that the police are called. Almost half involve children under 4. Most of these episodes last less
than a day. A fifth of the children experienced physical harm. Fourteen percent of the children were abused or assaulted
during the episode. 


 

Impact on Children and Families:

 The majority of families of missing children experience substantial psychological consequences and emotional
distress. The level of emotional distress equals or exceeds the emotional distress for other groups of individuals
exposed to trauma, such as combat veterans and victims of rape/assault/other violent crime. Families where the missing
child is subsequently recovered deceased exhibit the highest level of emotional distress. Once home, a third of the
missing children live in constant fear of a reabduction. Almost four-fifths of victims and families of missing children
do not receive mental health or counseling services. 



System Needs 



 

The Missing Children's Assistance Act of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974, as amended
describes services that the Administrator shall consider for funding. They are: establish and operate a national
24 hour toll-free telephone line and operate a national resource center and clearinghouse; coordinate public and
private programs which locate, recover, or reunite missing children with their legal custodians; to disseminate
nationally, information about innovative and model missing children's programs, services, and legislation; provide
technical assistance and training to law enforcement agencies, State and local governments, elements of the criminal
justice system, public and private nonprofit agencies, and individuals in the prevention, investigation, prosecution,
and treatment of the missing and exploited child case and in locating and recovering missing children; periodically
conduct national incidence studies; provide information to lawful use of school records and birth certificates
to identify and locate missing children; and to educate parents, children, and community agencies and organizations
in ways to prevent the abduction and sexual exploitation of children. The following critical issues describe needs
that should be addressed through a Long Range Plan for Title IV. They were the result of two work sessions held for the
purpose of developing this plan. 


 *Training at the community level for agency staffs. Not enough training is available to inform professionals
in a wide range of agencies about the relationship between missing and exploited children's issues and other community
problems. This training should promote the implementation of multi-disciplinary approaches and formal inter-agency
cooperation. 


 *Identifying the missing and exploited children problem in communities. Too many communities do not recognize
in measurable terms the nature and scope of problems of missing children and various forms of child exploitation.
Many communities do not recognize that they have a missing children problem. As a result, system-wide planning for
the allocation of resources does not address issues related to missing and exploited children and their families.



 *Developing executive level commitment. Executives of criminal and juvenile justice agencies who have
responsibility for missing and exploited children cases have not been adequately targeted to receive information
and training related to missing and exploited children. As a result, missing and exploited childrens' issues have
not been given the level of priority necessary to effect change. Insufficient emphasis has been placed on distilling
research and evaluation findings into information that is relevant to policy makers. 


 *Availability of Missing and Exploited Children programs on community and child safety. Community services
for missing children should be integrated into a larger community effort to promote child protection and overall
safety of neighborhoods. Community services should do more to promote child safety through linkages among the wide
range of community agencies that come in contact with missing and exploited children and their families. 


 *Training that provides communities with useful tools. Training should be practical, be targeted to specific
audiences, and provide communities with tools that can be used immediately to assess needs and reduce duplication
in the utilization of resources. 


 *Developing a Missing and Exploited Children Training Plan. A training plan using Title IV funds should be
developed that aligns training products and services to meet specific goals. Training should be used as a tool to market
services funded through Title IV. 


 *Developing methods for dealing with problems of chronic runaway and thrownaway children. This is an extremely
high risk population with which many agencies have little success. Chronic runaway and thrownaway children are very
likely to become missing or exploited. 



