 

The Alternative Motor Fuels Act of 1988 (AMFA) (Pub. L. 100494, October 14, 1988), amended the Motor Vehicle
Information and Cost Savings Act under Section 513_Manufacturing Incentives for Automobiles. AMFA promotes the
use of methanol, ethanol, and natural gas as transportation fuels, and it provides corporate average fuel economy
(CAFE) incentives for the vehicles that can use alternative fuels. AMFA provides CAFE benefits for manufacturers
who produce both dedicated and dual energy alternative fuel vehicles in MYs 1993 through 2004, and the benefits may
be extended through MY 2008. Dual energy automobiles are capable of operating on alcohol and either gasoline or diesel
fuel. Natural gas dual energy automobiles are capable of operating on natural gas and either gasoline or diesel fuel.
A fleet including dual energy automobiles which meets the applicable range or dedicated alternative fuel automobiles
qualify to have their CAFE calculated using a special procedure that considers the petroleum content of the alternative
fuel. Under that procedure, a relatively high fuel economy figure is assigned the vehicles capable of operating on
alternative fuels. Section 513 of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act of 1972, was revised by the Energy
Policy Act of 1992, to expand the definition of manufacturing incentives for automobiles by including gaseous alternative
fuels. 

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) administers the fuel economy calculations for passenger vehicles, including
alternative fuel vehicles. EPA will publish the final rules for alternative fuel vehicles which contain the special
CAFE adjustments for these vehicles. The majority of the manufacturers of these alternative fuel vehicles described
below are awaiting guidance from EPA to receive special CAFE credits. 

In MY 1993, several manufacturers demonstrated the capability of producing alternative fuel vehicles. Although
production of these passenger vehicles was not large, alternative fuels are advantageous in reducing hydrocarbon,
carbon monoxide, and oxides of nitrogen emissions at a relatively low cost and providing higher octane ratings. 

Ford is the only manufacturer that reported a special CAFE calculation for its flexible fuel passenger automobiles.
A flexible fuel vehicle is capable of operating on alcohol, gasoline, or any combination of these fuels from the same
tank and without the driver taking any additional actions. The following alternative fuel vehicles were produced
in MY 1993:

 


&bull;GM manufactured two alternative fuel vehicles: methanol (M85) and ethanol (E85) Luminas. GM projected producing
a total of 500 of these flexible fuel vehicles. The M85 fuel has a content of 85 percent methanol fuel and 15 percent gasoline.
The E85 fuel consists of 85 percent ethanol fuel and 15 percent gasoline. These vehicles have the flexibility to run
either on the alternative fuels or gasoline. 

&bull;Ford included an alcohol flexible fuel passenger automobile in its MY 1993 fleet, which was reported in its
midmodel year report. The Taurus, a midsize passenger car, achieved a fuel economy of 42.4 mpg when adjusted for the
alternative fuel. Ford projected producing 2,000 of these flexible fuel passenger vehicles. 

&bull;Chrysler included two flexible fuel passenger vehicles, Spirit and Acclaim, in its MY 1993 fleet. Chrysler
projected manufacturing a total of 5,427 of these vehicles. The fuel economy for both these flexible fuel passenger
vehicles is 28.2 mpg, when operating on gasoline.

 


After Chrysler and GM receive special CAFE calculations for their alternative fuel vehicles, the current fuel economies
of these companies will increase slightly. The relatively low volumes of these vehicles in the GM and Chrysler fleets
will preclude any significant CAFE adjustment. 



