 

4. The Distributor is a partnership owned equally by American Capital Marketing, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary
of American Capital Management  Research, Inc. (``ACMR''), and PFS Distributors, Inc., an affiliate of Primerica
Financial. ACMR and PFS Distributors, Inc. are indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries of The Travelers Inc. The Distributor,
which is registered as a broker dealer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, acts as principal underwriter to
the Funds.

5. Applicants propose to establish a multiple pricing system (the ``Multiple Pricing System''), which would provide
investors with three alternative means of purchasing shares in the Funds: (a) With a conventional front-end sales
load and subject to a service fee (``Class A shares''); (b) subject to the CDSC for a specified period of time, a distribution
fee, and a service fee (``Class B shares''), with or without a conversion feature; or (c) either with a front-end sales
load or a net asset value and subject, in either case, to a CDSC for a specified period of time, a distribution fee, and
a service fee (``Class C shares''), with or without a conversion feature.
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Applicants presently have no plans for the existing portfolios of the Trust to implement the Multiple Pricing System.
The Trustees of the Trust have approved the implementation of the Multiple Pricing System for the four new portfolios
of the Trust that will be formed in the near future.

</FOOTNOTE>


6. From time to time, the Funds may create additional classes of shares. These additional classes may differ from the
classes specifically described herein only in the following respects: (i) Any such class may be subject to different
rule 12b1 distribution and service fees; (ii) any such class may bear different identifying designations;
(iii) any such class will have exclusive voting rights with respect to any rule 12b1 plan adopted exclusively
with respect to such class, except as provided in condition 15; (iv) any such class may have different exchange privileges;
(v) any such class may be subject to incremental transfer agency costs attributable to such class; and (vi) any such
class may or may not have a conversion feature.

7. The distribution structure for all classes of shares of the Funds will comply with any applicable limitations of
the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. (``NASD'') on asset-based sales charges, including rule 12b1
plan distribution and service fees, which are contained in the NASD's Rules of Fair Practice, as they may be amended
or modified from time to time.

8. On a daily basis, the investment income of a Fund will be allocated 

pro rata

 to each class on the basis of the relative net asset value of the respective classes. All expenses incurred by a Fund
not attributable to a specific class will be allocated 

pro rata

 to each class on the basis of the relative net asset value of the respective classes, except for the expenses of the rule
12b1 plans and incremental transfer agency costs, if any, which will be borne by the class that incurred such
expenses.

9. Investors may purchase Class A shares at their net asset value plus a front-end sales load, which may be reduced for
larger purchases, under a cumulative purchase discount, or under a letter of intent. The sales loads also will be subject
to certain other reductions permitted by rule 22d1 under the Act and as provided in the registration statement
of the Funds. Class A shares will be subject to a service fee under a plan adopted pursuant to rule 12b1, based
upon a percentage of the average daily net assets of the Class A shares.

10. Investors may purchase Class B shares at their net asset value per share without the imposition of a sales load at
the time of purchase. Class B shares will be subject to a distribution fee, payable to the Distributor, at an annual
rate of .75% of the average daily net assets of the class, and a service fee at an annual rate of .25% of the average daily
net assets of the class. In addition, an investor's proceeds from a redemption of Class B shares made within a specified
period of purchase (the ``CDSC Period'') (which could be at least three years, but would not exceed eight years) may
be subject to a CDSC, which is paid to the Distributor. The CDSC is expected to range from 3% to 5% (but can be higher or
lower) on shares redeemed during the first year after purchase, and will be reduced at a rate of 1% (but can be higher
or lower) per year over the applicable CDSC Period.

11. Class C shares will be subject to a distribution fee and a service fee at an annual rate of 0.75% and 0.25%, respectively,
of the average daily net assets of the Class C shares pursuant to a rule 12b1 plan. In addition, an investor's
proceeds from a redemption of Class C shares made within the CDSC Period (expected to be not more than five years) generally
will be subject to a CDSC imposed by the Distributor. The CDSC is expected to be up to 4% (but may be higher or lower) on
shares redeemed during the first year after purchase and will be reduced at a rate of 1% (but can be higher or lower) per
year over the applicable CDSC Period, so that redemptions of shares held after that period will not be subject to a CDSC.




