 

&bull;use of impermeable dropcloths and coverage of all objects within regulated areas
In addition, more specific requirements for NPEs include:

&bull;maintenance of ^0.02 inches water gauge within enclosure

&bull;manometric measurements

&bull;air movement away from employees performing removal work

&bull;smoke testing or equivalent for detection of leaks and air direction

&bull;deactivation of electrical circuits, if not provided with ground-fault circuit interrupters.



Planning the Project



The standard requires that an exposure assessment be conducted before the asbestos job is begun 1915.1001(f)(1).
Information needed for that assessment, includes data relating to prior similar jobs, as applied to the specific
variables of the current job. The information needed to conduct the assessment will be useful in planning the project,
and in complying with any reporting requirements under this standard, when significant changes are being made to
a control system listed in the standard, [see paragraph (k) of this section], as well as those of USEPA (40 CFR Part 61,
subpart M). Thus, although the standard does not explicitly require the preparation of a written asbestos removal
plan, the usual constituents of such a plan, i.e., a description of the enclosure, the equipment, and the procedures
to be used throughout the project, must be determined before the enclosure can be erected. The following information
should be included in the planning of the system:
A physical description of the work area; 
A description of the approximate amount of material to be removed;
A schedule for turning off and sealing existing ventilation systems; Personnel hygiene procedures;
A description of personal protective equipment and clothing to worn by employees;
A description of the local exhaust ventilation systems to be used and how they are to be tested;
A description of work practices to be observed by employees;
An air monitoring plan;
A description of the method to be used to transport waste material; and
The location of the dump site.


Materials and Equipment Necessary for Asbestos Removal


Although individual asbestos removal projects vary in terms of the equipment required to accomplish the removal
of the materials, some equipment and materials are common to most asbestos removal operations.
Plastic sheeting used to protect horizontal surfaces, seal HVAC openings or to seal vertical openings and ceilings
should have a minimum thickness of 6 mils. Tape or other adhesive used to attach plastic sheeting should be of sufficient
adhesive strength to support the weight of the material plus all stresses encountered during the entire duration
of the project without becoming detached from the surface.
Other equipment and materials which should be available at the beginning of each project are:
_HEPA Filtered Vacuum is essential for cleaning the work area after the asbestos has been removed. It should have a
long hose capable of reaching out-of-the-way places, such as areas above ceiling tiles, behind pipes, etc.

_Portable air ventilation systems installed to provide the negative air pressure and air removal from the enclosure
must be equipped with a HEPA filter. The number and capacity of units required to ventilate an enclosure depend on the
size of the area to be ventilated. The filters for these systems should be designed in such a manner that they can be replaced
when the air flow volume is reduced by the build-up of dust in the filtration material. Pressure monitoring devices
with alarms and strip chart recorders attached to each system to indicate the pressure differential and the loss due
to dust buildup on the filter are recommended. 


