 



The state has already submitted a SIP for the South Coast 
demonstrating attainment of the CO NAAQS by the year 2000. This 
demonstration relies primarily on existing state programs for clean 
fuels and vehicles, supplemented by an enhanced motor vehicle 
inspection and maintenance (I/M) program. Since the state has not 
yet developed and submitted legislation and regulations to 
implement an enhanced I/M program, EPA is proposing to complete the 
state's attainment demonstration with a single federal measure: 
the contractor-run I/M program discussed in section III.D.2.c. As 
discussed above, EPA believes that an I/M program is a necessary 
part of the ozone FIPs as well.
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>
 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>
See earlier discussion on I/M.
</FOOTNOTE>


3. Specific Control Measures 


a. 

Stationary/area source measures.

 With few exceptions, industrial and commercial sources in the 
FIP areas are already subject to air pollution controls that match 
or exceed the stringency of rules applied elsewhere in the country. 
In the Sacramento FIP area, however, EPA was able to identify four 
major industrial facilities (Michigan-California Lumber Company; 
Formica Corporation; SierraPine Limited; and Reynold's Metals) for 
which the applicable local regulations do not reflect the minimum 
level of control required nationally. The state and local air 
districts remain under an obligation to adopt and submit ``RACT'' 
regulations for these sources. Since these agencies (specifically, 
Placer County and El Dorado County Air Pollution Control Districts) 
have not yet acted, EPA is today proposing detailed provisions that 
will contribute to attainment in the Sacramento area by 
supplementing the applicable regulations to match available control 
technology. See section III.C.2, and proposed 40 CFR 52.2961(p)(s). 
EPA selected a second set of proposed FIP controls by 
comparing existing air pollution regulations in each FIP area with 
the best existing state or local regulation, on a category-by-category basis. Where a more effective control measure
that could 
provide significant reductions already existed (either as an 
adopted or draft rule), EPA has adapted and proposed the rule for 
federal administration in the applicable FIP areas. Since existing 
South Coast controls are generally the most stringent in the 
country, many of these proposed rules were based on existing SCAQMD 
regulations and are proposed for the Sacramento and Ventura areas. 
In some cases, the proposed FIP rules newly regulate sources in the 
area (e.g., commercial bakeries and municipal landfills in the 
Sacramento FIP area). In other cases, the proposed rules 
significantly strengthen existing regulatory provisions (e.g., 
tighter coatings and solvents limits in Sacramento and Ventura). 
The costs, regulatory strategy, and technical basis of these 
measures are discussed individually in section III.C.3. The 
regulations themselves appear in proposed 40 CFR 52.2961(a)(o) 
and (t)(v). 
EPA is proposing to enforce on a statewide basis a group of 
four area source rules. EPA proposes that they be administered on 
a statewide basis primarily because ensuring compliance only within 
the FIP areas would be relatively ineffective. EPA's rationale for 
statewide control appears in section III.C.4.a. 
The first of these controls simply proposes CARB's existing 
consumer product regulations, which regulate products such as 
detergents, floor finishes and deodorants, and are enforced against 
manufacturers, distributors, and retailers. While the CARB 
regulations have been adopted and enforced by the state for several 
years, California has not yet submitted them to EPA for inclusion 
in the SIP. The proposed FIP measure would make the measures 
federally enforceable, and is discussed in sections II.B.1. and 
III.C.4.c. The proposed regulation is 40 CFR 52.2957. 
The second proposed statewide control is based on a draft CARB 
consumer product rule for the aerosol spray paint category, as well 
as rules developed by SCAQMD and the Bay Area Air Quality 
Management District. Proposed rule 40 CFR 52.2958 would limit the 
VOC content of spray paints that could be sold or used within the 
state. 
The third proposed statewide control deals with one of the 
largest nonmobile sources of VOC: architectural and industrial 
maintenance (AIM) coatings, including most primers, paints, 
lacquers, stains, and specialty coatings used for residential, 
commercial, and industrial purposes. The proposed rule 
progressively tightens restrictions on VOC content in three phases 
of reduction through the year 2003 in order to allow for 
development of additional VOC reduction strategies. The FIP rule 
may be amended if appropriate, in the event that EPA issues a 
national AIM coatings rule. 



