 




<USBUREAU>Federal Railroad Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Petition for a Waiver of Compliance </DOCTITLE>



In accordance with 49 CFR 211.41, notice is hereby given that the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) has received
a request for a waiver of compliance with certain requirements of Federal railroad safety regulations. The individual
petitions are described below, including the party seeking relief, the regulatory provisions involved, the nature
of the relief being requested and the petitioner's arguments in favor of relief. 

Interested parties are invited to participate in these proceedings by submitting written views, data, or comments.
FRA does not anticipate scheduling a public hearing in connection with these proceedings since the facts do not appear
to warrant a hearing. If any interested party desires an opportunity for oral comment, they should notify FRA, in writing,
before the end of the comment period and specify the basis for their request. 

All communications concerning these proceedings should identify the appropriate docket number (e.g., Waiver Petition
Docket No. RSEQ945) and must be submitted in triplicate to the Docket Clerk, Office of Chief Counsel,
Federal Railroad Administration, Nassif Building, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20590. Communications
received before December 1, 1994, will be considered by FRA before final action is taken. Comments received after
that date will be considered as far as practicable. All written communications concerning these proceedings are
available for examination during regular business hours (9 a.m.5 p.m.) in Room 8201, Nassif Building, 400
Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20590. 

The waiver petitions are as follows: 



Sperry Rail, Inc. (SRIX) (Waiver Petition Docket No. RSEQ945) 



The Sperry Rail, Inc., (SRIX) seeks a permanent waiver of compliance from all provisions of 49 CFR part 240, Qualification
Standards for Locomotive Engineers. The SRIX operates 37 self-propelled rail testing cars utilizing their own operators,
and a railroad employee acting as a pilot who is qualified on the physical characteristics and operating rules over
the railroad it is being operated on. The SRIX argues that their operators are well trained and would not benefit from
part 240 certification requirements. The SRIX also argues that the cost of certification would make them non-competitive
due to increased labor costs. 



St. Louis  Chain of Rocks Railroad (SLCR) (Waiver Petition Docket No. RSEQ946) 



The St. Louis  Chain of Rocks Railroad (SLCR) seeks a waiver of compliance from all provisions of 49 CFR Part 240,
Qualification Standards for Locomotive Engineers. The SLCR Railroad is an excursion railroad which operates in
the 
St. Louis, Missouri area. It is a non-profit rail museum and operates over less than three miles of track, fewer than
ten days a year at speeds not exceeding 5 mph.

 


Issued in Washington, D.C. on October 21, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Phil Olekszyk, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Deputy Associate Administrator 
for Safety Compliance and 
Program Implementation. 



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9426693 Filed 102794; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491006P
</BILLING>




