 

14. Section 11.81 is revised to read as follows: 



11.81 

Damage Determination phase_Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan. 



(a) 

Requirement. 

(1) The authorized official shall develop a Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan that will list a reasonable
number of possible alternatives for restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition of equivalent
resources and the related services lost to the public associated with each; select one of the alternatives and the
actions required to implement that alternative; give the rationale for selecting that alternative; and identify
the methodologies that will be used to determine the costs of the selected alternative and, at the discretion of the
authorized official, the compensable value of the services lost to the public associated with the selected alternative.


(2) The Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan shall be of sufficient detail to evaluate the possible alternatives
for the purpose of selecting the appropriate alternative to use in determining the cost of restoration, rehabilitation,
replacement, and/or acquisition of equivalent resources for the injured natural resources and the services those
resources provided, and, where relevant, the compensable value of the services lost to the public through the completion
of the restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition of equivalent resources and their services
to the baseline. 

(b) The authorized official shall use the guidance in 11.82, 11.83, and 11.84 of this part to develop
the Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan. 

(c) The authorized official shall list the methodologies he expects to use to determine the costs of all actions considered
within the selected alternative and, where relevant, the compensable value of the lost services through the recovery
period associated with the selected alternative. The methodologies to use in determining costs and compensable
value are described in 11.83 of this part. 

(d) (1) The Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan shall be part of the Assessment Plan developed in subpart
B of this part. If existing data are not sufficient to develop the Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan
at the time that the overall Assessment Plan is made available for public review and comment, the Restoration and Compensation
Determination Plan may be developed later, after the completion of the Injury Determination or Quantification phases.


(2) If the Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan is prepared later than the Assessment Plan, it shall be
made available separately for public review by any identified potentially responsible party, other natural resource
trustees, other affected Federal or State agencies or Indian tribes, and any other interested members of the public
for a period of no less than 30 calendar days. Reasonable extensions may be granted as appropriate. 

(3) Comments received from any identified potentially responsible party, other natural resource trustees, other
affected Federal or State agencies or Indian tribes, or any other interested members of the public, together with
responses to those comments, shall be included as part of the Report of Assessment, described in 11.90 of this
part. 

(4) Appropriate public review of the plan must be completed before the authorized official performs the methodologies
listed in the Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan. 

(e) The Restoration and Compensation Determination Plan may be expanded to incorporate requirements from procedures
required under other portions of CERCLA or the CWA or from other Federal, State, or tribal laws applicable to restoration,
rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition of the equivalent of the injured resources or may be combined with
other plans for related purposes, so long as the requirements of this section are fulfilled. 

15. Section 11.82 is revised to read as follows: 



11.82 

Damage Determination phase_alternatives for restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition
of equivalent resources. 



(a) 

Requirement. 

The authorized official shall develop a reasonable number of possible alternatives for the restoration, rehabilitation,
replacement, and/or acquisition of the equivalent of the injured natural resources and the services those resources
provide. For each possible alternative developed, the authorized official will identify an action, or set of actions,
to be taken singly or in combination by the trustee agency to achieve the 
restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or 
acquisition of equivalent natural resources and the services those resources provide to the baseline. The authorized
official shall then select from among the possible alternatives the alternative that he determines to be the most
appropriate based on the guidance provided in this section. 

(b) 

Steps. 

(1) The authorized official shall develop a reasonable number of possible alternatives that would restore, rehabilitate,
replace, and/or acquire the equivalent of the injured resources. Each of the possible alternatives may, at the discretion
of the authorized official, consist of actions, singly or in combination, that would achieve those purposes. 

(i) Restoration or rehabilitation actions are those actions undertaken to return injured resources to their baseline
condition, as measured in terms of the physical, chemical, or biological properties that the injured resources would
have exhibited or the services that would have been provided by those resources had the discharge of oil or release
of the hazardous substance under investigation not occurred. Such actions would be in addition to response actions
completed or anticipated pursuant to the National Contingency Plan (NCP). 

(ii) Replacement or acquisition of the equivalent means the substitution for injured resources with resources that
provide the same or substantially similar services, when such substitutions are in addition to any substitutions
made or anticipated as part of response actions and when such substitutions exceed the level of response actions determined
appropriate to the site pursuant to the NCP. 

(iii) Possible alternatives are limited to those actions that restore, rehabilitate, replace, and/or acquire the
equivalent of the injured resources and services to no more than their baseline, that is, the condition without a discharge
or release as determined in 11.72 of this part. 

(2) 

Services provided by the resources

. (i) In developing each of the possible alternatives, the authorized official shall list the proposed actions that
would restore, rehabilitate, replace, and/or acquire the equivalent of the services provided by the injured natural
resources that have been lost, and the period of time over which these services would continue to be lost. 





