 

(4) Indirect cost rate proposals, cost allocations plans, etc. as specified in 74.53(g). 


(c) Copies of original records may be substituted for the original records if authorized by the Secretary. 


(d) The Secretary requests transfer of certain records to its custody from recipients when it determines that the
records possess long term retention value. However, in order to avoid duplicate recordkeeping, the Secretary may
make arrangements for recipients to retain any records that are continuously needed for joint use. 


(e) The Secretary, the Inspector General, Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized
representatives, have the right of timely and unrestricted access to any books, documents, papers, or other records
of recipients that are pertinent to the awards, in order to make audits, examinations, excerpts, transcripts, and
copies of documents. This right also includes timely and reasonable access to a recipient's personnel for the purpose
of interview and discussion related to these documents. The rights of access in this paragraph are not limited to the
required retention period, but shall last as long as records are retained. 


(f) Unless required by statute, the Secretary does not place restrictions on recipients that limit public access
to the records of recipients that are pertinent to an award, except when the Secretary can demonstrate that the records
must be kept confidential and would have been exempted from disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act
(5 U.S.C. 552) if the records had belonged to ED. 


(g) The starting date for retention of the following types of documents (including supporting records) is specified
in paragraphs (g)(1) and (2) of this section: indirect cost rate computations or proposals; cost allocation plans;
and any similar accounting computations of the rate at which a particular group of costs is chargeable (such as computer
usage chargeback rates or composite fringe benefit rates). 


(1) 

If submitted for negotiation

. If the recipient submits to the Secretary or the subrecipient submits to the recipient the proposal, plan, or other
computation to form the basis for negotiation of the rate, then the 5-year retention period for its supporting records
starts on the date of submission. 


(2) 

If not submitted for negotiation

. If the recipient is not required to submit to the Secretary or the subrecipient is not required to submit to the recipient
the proposal, plan, or other computation for negotiation purposes, then the 5-year retention period for the proposal,
plan, or other computation and its supporting records starts at the end of the fiscal year (or other accounting period)
covered by the proposal, plan, or other computation.





(20 U.S.C. 1221e3(a)(1) and 3474; OMB Circular A110) 



Termination and Enforcement 




74.60

Purpose of termination and enforcement. 




Sections 74.61 and 74.62 establish uniform suspension, termination, and enforcement procedures.





(20 U.S.C. 1221e3(a)(1) and 3474; OMB Circular A110) 




74.61

Termination. 



(a) Awards may be terminated in whole or in part only_

(1) By the Secretary, if a recipient materially fails to comply with the terms and conditions of an award; 

(2) By the Secretary with the consent of the recipient, in which case the two parties shall agree upon the termination
conditions, including the effective date and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated. 

(3) By the recipient, upon sending to the Secretary written notification containing the reasons for the termination,
the effective date, and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated. However, if the Secretary
determines in the case of partial termination that the reduced or modified portion of the grant will not accomplish
the purposes for which the grant was made, it may terminate the grant in its entirety under either paragraphs (a)(1)
or (2) of this section. 

(b) If costs are allowed under an award, the responsibilities of the recipient referred to in 74.71(a), including
those for property management as applicable, shall be considered in the termination of the award, and provision shall
be made for continuing responsibilities of the recipient after termination, as appropriate.




(20 U.S.C. 1221e3(a)(1) and 3474; OMB Circular A110) 



74.62

Enforcement. 




(a) 

Remedies for noncompliance. 

If a recipient materially fails to comply with the terms and conditions of an award, whether stated in a Federal statute,
regulation, assurance, application, or notice of award, the Secretary may, in addition to imposing any of the special
conditions outlined in 74.14, take one or more of the following actions, as appropriate in the circumstances:



(1) Temporarily withhold cash payments pending correction of the deficiency by the recipient or more severe enforcement
action by the Secretary. 


(2) Disallow (that is, deny both use of funds and any applicable matching credit for) all or part of the cost of the activity
or action not in compliance. 


(3) Wholly or partly suspend or terminate the current award. 


(4) Withhold further awards for the project or program. 


(5) Take other remedies that may be legally available. 


(b) 

Hearings and appeals. 

In taking an enforcement action, the Secretary provides the recipient an opportunity for hearing, appeal, or other
administrative proceeding to which the recipient is entitled under any statute or regulation applicable to the action
involved. 


