 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 This rule amends 50 CFR 15.11 (b) and (c)_Prohibitions, of the final rule published in the 

Federal Register

, November 16, 1993 (58 FR 60524). 


In the final rule of November 16, 1993, the Service interpreted that Appendix III species are considered CITES-listed
species for the purposes of these regulations only if they originate in the country that listed them in Appendix III.
The Service noted that the listing of a species in Appendix III is a unilateral action by a particular CITES Party, thereby
requiring CITES permits and implementation of CITES permit issuance requirements for that country only; when the
species is found in countries that did not list it in Appendix III, only a certificate of origin is required, stating
that it did not originate in the country that listed the species in Appendix III. Therefore, when the species is found
in countries other than where listed in Appendix III, it is not subject to the same level of CITES controls, and indeed
is only listed in the Appendices to assist the listing state in implementing its domestic legislation. Based on its
understanding of the intent of Congress, the Service implemented a final rule whereby Appendix III species were subject
to the automatic import prohibitions of the law, only if they originated in the listing country. Otherwise, they would
be subject to the discretionary prohibitions of the law. 

The Humane Society of the United States and Defenders of Wildlife brought a civil action against the Secretary of the
Interior in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia challenging that part of 50 CFR 15.11 which
restricts the importation of certain Appendix III exotic birds (

Humane Society of the United States 

v. 

Babbitt, 

Civ. No. 940296, D.D.C., March 29, 1994). A hearing in the District Court took place on March 7, 1994. Plaintiffs
argued that this provision, which was adopted through notice and comment procedures, violates the language of the
Wild Bird Conservation Act of 1992. They sought relief to suspend or invalidate the following exception, contained
in the final rule, to the prohibition on importation of birds listed in the Convention's appendices: ``This paragraph
(b) does not apply to an exotic bird species listed in Appendix III to the Convention that originated in a country that
has not listed the species in Appendix III'' (50 CFR 15.11 (b) (2)). Plaintiffs argued that this provision violates
the plain language of the Act, which bars the importation of ``any'' species listed in ``any'' appendix to the Convention.


On March 29, 1994, U.S. District Judge Louis F. Oberdorfer found the contested regulation to be invalid. [This Court
Order was discussed in a Notice in the 

Federal Register

 published on May 24, 1994.] Therefore, the Service hereby amends 50 CFR 15.11 (b) and (c) to comply with the Court Order.
The Service mandates that all bird species listed in CITES Appendix III (in addition to those in Appendices I or II),
wherever found, cannot be imported into the U.S. unless they are either accompanied by an import permit issued pursuant
to Subpart C of 50 CFR Part 15, or they are included in an approved list. On March 17, 1994, the Service published in the


Federal Register

 (59 FR 12784) a proposed rule that would establish those approved lists. This final rule is a result of the Court Order
discussed in the Notice published in the 

Federal Register

 on May 24, 1994, and is adopted through public notice and comment procedures. Therefore, in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
553(d)(3), the Service has determined that good cause, as reflected by the final Court Order, exists so that this final
rule will be made effective upon publication in the 

Federal Register

. The Service received a total of three comments on the proposed rule preceding this final rule that was published in
the 

Federal Register

 on June 3, 1994 (59 FR 28826). One commenter endorsed the proposed ruling. One commenter supported the original interpretation
by the Service in the WBCA of birds listed in CITES Appendix III, and inquired as to why the Service did not appeal the
decision rendered in the Court Order. The decision not to appeal was made by the Service, the Solicitor's Office, and
the Justice Department after careful deliberation over the legal, policy, and budgetary implications of continued
litigation. The remaining commenter addressed concerns that though valid, were not pertinent to the contents of
the proposed rule. 


Effects of the Rule 


The Service has determined that this final rule is categorically excluded under Departmental procedures in complying
with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). See DOI Departmental Manual, 516 DM 2, Appendix 1, 1.10. The regulations
are procedural in nature, and the environmental effects are judged to be minimal, speculative, and do not lend themselves
to meaningful analysis. The permits and other administrative actions authorized under the WBCA and regulations
will be subject to future NEPA documentation requirements, on a case-by-case basis. 

</SUPPLEM>
