 

Project number 5 (``Project No. 5'') is a 26 MW (net) qualifying cogeneration facility located in California. Project
No. 5 is owned by a California limited partnership in which Cogen Corp. holds, indirectly through wholly-owned subsidiaries,
a 30% interest in the partnership as a general partner. The balance of the partnership interests is held by an unaffiliated
energy project developer and the financing subsidiary of a large industrial corporation.

Project No. 5 provides all of the electric energy required by its steam host, up to 4 MW, and sells the balance of its net
capacity and energy to a California utility under a long-term power purchase agreement. The steam host is an industrial
corporation which purchases steam under a long-term steam sales contract for use in certain manufacturing processes.


Project No. 5 is operated and maintained under a long-term contract with one of the partnership's general partners
which is not affiliated with Cogen Corp. 

Applicants state that Cogen Corp. also has other projects under active development (``Development Projects''),
principally: (i) A 28.5 MW gas-fired QF located in New York for which a power purchase contract with a New York electric
and gas utility has been executed and a steam sales agreement is being negotiated; and (ii) a number of other natural
gas-fired QFs or EWGs, totalling approximately 275 MW, with respect to which proposals to supply electric power have
been submitted in response to utility requests for proposals. The Applicants further state that EII will fund any
preliminary project development costs with respect to the Development Projects either through internally generated
funds or pursuant to further Commission authorization. 

Applicants also request an exception from the requirements of Section 13 of the Act so that EII, either directly or
indirectly through Cogen Corp. and/or its affiliated subsidiaries and partnerships, may provide project management,
administrative and similar services as managing general partner of the projects from time to time and to sublease
the Project No. 4 site to the Project No. 4 partnership in the manner and under such terms and conditions, including
with respect to the fees payable by each project partnership for such services, as may be provided in the related project
partnership agreements and Project No. 4 sublease. 

Moreover, the Applicants state that the amount of such management fees and sublease payments payable to EII by each
project partnership will in no way effect the rates to be paid for each project's energy and capacity by the purchasing
electric utility and thus by the utility's ratepayers, since those rates have been established based upon the purchasing
utility's ``avoided costs'' of obtaining energy and capacity which costs are unrelated to each project partnership's
operating expenses. Accordingly, GPU and EII believe that it is not necessary or appropriate for the protection of
investors or consumers that such management services or sublease arrangements be performed at cost. 

It is stated that each QF project (namely, Project No. 1, Project No. 2, Project No. 3, Project No. 4 and Project No. 5)
is now and will, following the consummation of the proposed transactions, remain a ``qualifying facility'' under
PURPA and the FERC's regulations thereunder.




For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, pursuant to delegated authority.




<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 947081 Filed 32494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>



