 

(d) 

Bonding and insurance. 

Before assuming any management responsibility under its contract, the RMC must provide fidelity bonding and insurance,
or equivalent protection that is adequate (as determined by HUD and the HA) to protect HUD and the HA against loss, theft,
embezzlement, or fraudulent acts on the part of the corporation or its employees.


905.970 

Management specialist.


The RO must select, in consultation with the HA, a qualified Indian housing management specialist to assist in determining
the feasibility of, and to help establish, a RMC and to provide training and other duties in connection with operating
the TOP project. The Housing Management Specialist (Trainer) can be a non-profit organization, the HA or a consultant.


905.971 

Operating subsidy, preparation of operating budget, operating reserves and retention of excess revenues.


(a) 

Calculation of operating subsidy. 

Operating subsidy will be calculated separately for any project managed by a resident management corporation. This
subsidy computation will be the same as the separate computation made for the balance of the projects in the HA in accordance
with subpart J of this part, with the following exceptions: (1) The project managed by a resident management corporation
will have an Allowable Expense Level based on the actual expenses for the project in the fiscal year immediately preceding
management under this subpart. These expenditures will include the project's share of any expenses which are overhead
or centralized HA expenditures. The expenses must represent a normal year's expenditures for the project, and must
exclude all expenditures which are not normal fiscal year expenditures as to amount or as to the purpose for which expended.
Documentation of this expense level must be presented with the project budget and approved by HUD. Any project expenditures
funded from a source of income other than operating subsidies or income generated by the locally owned Indian housing
program will be excluded from the subsidy calculation. For budget years after the first budget year under management
by the resident management corporation, the Allowable Expense Level will be calculated as it is for all other projects,
in accordance with subpart J of this part.
(2) The resident management corporation project will estimate dwelling rental income based on the rent roll of the
project immediately preceding the assumption of management responsibility under this subpart, increased by the
estimate of inflation of resident income used in calculating PFS subsidy.
(3) The resident management corporation will exclude, from its estimate of other income, any increased income directly
generated by activities of the corporation or facilities operated by the corporation.
(4) Any reduction in the subsidy of a HA that occurs as a result of fraud, waste, or mismanagement by the HA shall not affect
the subsidy calculation for the resident management corporation project.
(b) 

Calculation of total income and preparation of operating budget._No reduction. 

(1) Subject to paragraph (c) of this section, the amount of funds provided by a HA to a project managed by a resident management
corporation under this subpart may not be reduced during the three-year period beginning on the date a resident management
corporation first assumes management responsibility for the project.
(2) 

Treatment of technical assistance. 

For purposes of determining the amount of funds provided to a project under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the provision
of technical assistance by the HA to the resident management corporation will not be included.
(3) 

Operating budget. 

The resident management corporation and the HA shall submit a separate operating budget, including the calculation
of operating subsidy eligibility in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, for the project managed by a resident
management corporation to HUD for approval. This budget will reflect all project expenditures and will identify
which expenditures are related to the responsibilities of the resident management corporation and which are related
to functions which will continue to be performed by the HA.
(4) 

Operating reserves. 

(i) Each project or part of a project that is operating in accordance with the ACC amendment relating to this subpart
and in accordance with a contract vesting maintenance responsibilities in the resident management corporation
will have transferred, into a sub-account of the operating reserve of the host HA, an operating reserve. Where all
maintenance responsibilities for the resident-managed project are the responsibility of the corporation, the
amount of the reserve made available to projects under this subpart will be the per unit cost amount available in the
HA operating reserve, exclusive of all inventories, prepaids and receivables (at the end of the HA fiscal year preceding
implementation), multiplied by the number of units in the project operated in accordance with the provisions of this
subpart. Where some, but not all, maintenance responsibilities are vested in the resident management corporation,
the contract may provide for an appropriately reduced portion of the operating reserve to be transferred into the
corporation's sub-account.
(ii) The use of the reserve will be subject to all administrative procedures generally applicable to the Indian housing
program. Any expenditure of funds from the reserve will be for eligible expenditures which are incorporated into
an operating budget subject to approval by HUD.
(iii) Investment of funds held in the reserve will be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of the Financial
Management Handbook, 7475.1 REV, and interest generated will be included in the calculation of operating subsidy
in accordance with subpart J of this part.


