 

(4) The administrative law judge should render a written decision no later than 90 days after the closing of the record.
(5) The decision of the administrative law judge shall constitute final action by the Secretary of Labor unless, within
21 days after receipt of the decision of the administrative law judge, a party dissatisfied with the decision, or any
part thereof, has filed exceptions with the Secretary of Labor specifically identifying the procedures, fact, law,
or policy to which exception is taken. Any exception not specifically urged shall be deemed to have been waived. Thereafter,
the decision of the administrative law judge shall become the decision of the Secretary unless the Secretary of Labor,
within 30 days of such filing, has notified the parties that the case has been accepted for review.
(6) Any case accepted for review by the Secretary of Labor shall be decided within 180 days of such acceptance. If not
so decided, the decision of the administrative law judge shall become the final decision of the Secretary of Labor.


Subpart E_Interagency Agreements


641.501 

Administration.


(a) Federal establishments other than the Department of Labor which receive and use funds under title V or this part
shall submit to DOL project fiscal and progress reports as described in 641.406.
(b) Non-DOL federal establishments which receive and use funds under title V shall maintain the standard records
on individual enrollees and enrollee activities, in accordance with this part.
(c) The Department may provide title V funds to another federal agency by a non-expenditure transfer authorization
or by payments on an advance or reimbursement basis.
(d) In aspects of project administration other than those described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, federal
establishments which receive and use funds under title V may use their normal administrative procedures.


Subpart F_Assessment and Evaluation


641.601 

General.


The Department shall assess each recipient and subrecipient to determine whether it is carrying out the purposes
and provisions of title V and this part in accordance with the Act, this part and the grant or other agreements. The Department
also shall evaluate the overall program conducted under title V or this part to aid in the administration of the SCSEP.
The Department and individuals designated by the Department may make site visits and conduct such other monitoring
activities as determined by SCSEP needs.


641.602 

Limitation.


In arranging for the assessment of a recipient, or the evaluation of a subrecipient, or the evaluation of the overall
program under title V or this part, the Department shall not use any individual, institution, or organization associated
with any project under title V.



Signed at Washington, DC, this 19th day of April, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Robert B. Reich,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of Labor.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 949923 Filed 42594; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 451030M
</BILLING>

