 

&bull;The historical and projected patient to staff ratios and number of machines used for maintenance dialysis
treatments. 

&bull;A computation of the facility's treatment capacity, computed by dividing the maintenance treatments actually
furnished by the total maintenance treatments that could have been furnished (in other words, total stations multiplied
by the number of hours of operation divided by the average length of dialysis) for the year. 
&bull;The geographic boundaries and population size of the facility's service area. 



Section 413.188Payment Exception: Extraordinary Circumstances



We would redesignate 413.170(g)(4) as 413.188 with no changes except for the addition of internal paragraph
coding. 



Section 413.190Payment Exception Self-Dialysis Training Costs

 


In new 413.190, paragraph (a) would repeat the content of existing 413.170(g)(5). To that we would add
the documentation that we would require of a facility requesting a rate exception under this provision. We would require
that a facility justify its exception request by separately identifying those elements contributing to its costs
in excess of the composite training rate. We consider the facility's total costs, cost finding and apportionment,
including its allocation methodology, to determine if costs are properly reported by treatment modality. Exception
requests for a higher training rate will be granted only with respect to those cost components relating to training
such as technical staff, medical supplies, and the special costs of education (manuals and education material).
Overhead and other indirect costs do not generally form a basis for granting an exception. 


The facility must provide the following information to support its exception request: 

&bull;A copy of the facility's training program. 

&bull;Computation of the facility's cost per treatment for maintenance and training sessions including an explanation
of the cost difference between the two modalities. 

&bull;Class size and patients' training schedules. 

&bull;Number of training sessions required, by treatment modality, to train patients. 

&bull;Number of patients trained for the current year and the prior 2 years on a monthly basis. 

&bull;Projection for the next 12 months of future training candidates. 

&bull;The number and qualifications of staff at training sessions. 



Accelerated Training Exception



An ESRD facility may bill Medicare for a dialysis training session only when a patient receives a dialysis treatment
(which normally is three times a week). If an ESRD facility elects to train all its patients using a particular modality
more often than during each dialysis treatment and, as a result, the number of its billable training dialysis sessions
is less than its actual training sessions, the facility may request a composite rate limited to the lesser of the facility's
projected training cost per treatment (CPT) or the CPT the facility would have received in training a patient. For
example, facility x trains patients 5 days a week for a 3-week training period (15 training sessions). Facility Y trains
patients only during a dialysis session, 3 per week, but for a 5-week training period. Both facilities' composite
training rates were determined to be $150 per treatment. Facility X's payment would be adversely affected, since
its payment would be limited to the number of billable training sessions. Facility X's payment would be $1,350 (3 weeks
&times; 3 treatments per week &times; $150) compared to facility Y's $2,250 payment (5 weeks &times; 3 treatments
per week &times; $150). To correct this situation, an exception may be approved (assuming the facility documents
costs) to increase facility X's rate not to exceed $250 per treatment ($2,250 
 9). 



An ESRD facility may bill a maximum per patient of 25 training sessions for hemodialysis training and 15 training sessions
for continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis (CCPD) and continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) training.
To ensure adequate patient training, HCFA presumes a minimum number of training sessions per patient in calculating
exception rates, 15 for hemodialysis and 5 for CAPD and CCPD, where the renal facility's actual experience is less
than the minimum number of training sessions. The minimum and maximum numbers are based on HCFA's national data and
general program statistics. These numbers represent the minimum and maximum number of treatments necessary to adequately
train a patient and have been established to avoid paying any additional costs associated with over-training as well
as assuring that quality of care is not jeopardized by not adequately training a patient. 


For example, a facility trains all its CAPD and CCPD patients in 3 training sessions, and its composite training rate
is determined to be $150. To calculate a facility's training exception rate, the facility's training rate is multiplied
by 15 (the maximum training sessions per patient) and then divided by the facility's actual training sessions, unless
the actual sessions are less than the minimum. Using the facility's actual training sessions, the exception training
rate would be $750 ($150 &times; 15 = $2,250 
 3). However, based on using the minimum of 5 training sessions, the approved training rate would be $450 ($150 &times;
15 = $2250 


&rsquo;

 5). 


To justify an accelerated training exception request, an ESRD facility must document that all training sessions
provided under a particular modality are to be provided during the shorter but more condensed period. The facility
must submit with the exception request a list of patients, by modality, trained during the most recent cost report
period, and the list must include each beneficiary's name, age, and training status (completed, not completed, being
retrained, or in the process of being trained). The total treatments from the patient list must agree with the total
treatments reported on the cost report filed with the request. We propose to deny exception requests that a facility
submits without the above documentation. 




Section 413.192Payment Exception Frequency of Dialysis



We would redesignate paragraph (g)(6) of 413.170 as 413.192 and add the following provisions. 


Existing 412.170(g)(6) specifies that, to qualify for an exception to the prospective payment rate based
on frequency of dialysis, the facility must have a substantial portion of outpatient maintenance dialysis treatments
furnished to patients who dialyze less frequently than three times per week. A facility that furnishes a substantial
portion of outpatient maintenance dialysis services to patients who dialyze less frequently than three times per
week typically has higher costs per treatment because the treatments that are furnished to these patients last longer
and involve higher labor and supply costs. For a facility to qualify as having a substantial portion of outpatient
maintenance dialysis treatments furnished to patients who dialyze less frequently than three times per week, a facility
must be able to document that it has a decrease in treatments in excess of 15 percent, and cost increases due to frequency.
Because the facility is only dialyzing patients twice a week instead of three times, if 100 percent of their patients
dialyze twice a week, the facility would lose 33.3 percent of treatments on an annual basis. HCFA has determined that
15 percent of lost treatments is substantial. 



