 

Scope and Application: Paragraph (a) 


OSHA is proposing that these standards cover all employees under its jurisdiction, including employees in general
industry, shipyards, longshoring, marine terminals, construction, and agriculture. To accomplish this, OSHA
is proposing to publish an identical complete standard for general industry at 29 CFR 1910.1033, for shipyards at
29 CFR 1915.1033, and for construction at 29 CFR 1926.1133. OSHA is proposing to amend section 1910.19 to make it clear
that 1910.1033 is a Subpart Z standard which is incorporated by cross reference into 29 CFR parts 1917 and 1018
for longshoring and marine terminals. OSHA is proposing to amend 29 CFR 1928.21 to indicate that 1910.1033 will be
applicable to agriculture. OSHA requests comments on the scope of the proposal and the formal manner by which the standard
would be incorporated into the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Paragraph (a)(1) proposes to apply all provisions of the standard to ``nonindustrial work environments.'' In addition,
paragraph (a)(2) proposes to further extend coverage of the provisions found in paragraph (e)(1), which address
exposure to tobacco smoke, to all indoor work environments under OSHA's jurisdiction. This includes indoor work
areas on construction sites, shipyards, and agricultural employments. The Agency believes that application of
the proposed provisions under paragraph (e)(1) addressing exposure to tobacco smoke is necessary, appropriate,
and feasible for any indoor or enclosed workplace covered by OSHA. Compliance with the tobacco smoke provisions essentially
entails establishment of a separate enclosure, exhausted directly to the outside, and maintained under negative
pressure where smoking is permitted. OSHA sees no feasibility obstacles in application of these provisions to industrial
as well as nonindustrial work environments. It is not clear to OSHA, however, that the other indoor air quality provisions
of the proposed standard can be feasibly or appropriately applied in typical industrial work environments. These
provisions primarily address means to assure effective functioning of HVAC systems and actions felt necessary to
be taken to maintain good general indoor air quality. Thus, it may not be feasible or appropriate to apply these provisions
to industrial ventilation systems or industrial environments in which control of various industrial contaminant
emissions rather than general air quality is the primary issue. 


Definitions: Paragraph (b) 


The following terms are defined for the purpose of this proposal: ``Air Contaminants'', ``Assistant Secretary'',
``Building systems'', ``Building-related illness'', ``Designated person'', ``Designated smoking area'', ``Director'',
``Employer'', ``HVAC system'', ``Non-industrial work environment'', and ``Renovation and remodeling''. 
The term ``Air contaminants'' refers to substances contained in the vapors from paint, cleaning chemicals, pesticides,
solvents, particulates, outdoor air pollutants and other airborne substances which may cause material impairment
to the health of employees working within the nonindustrial environment. The term ``air contaminants'' informs
the employer that the provisions addressing control of air contaminants apply to airborne substances which may be
within nonindustrial indoor work environments. For purposes of this proposal the definition of air contaminants
may be broader than that used in 29 CFR 1910.1000. Hazardous levels of air contaminants may arise from contaminant
buildup due to inefficient or insufficient general dilution ventilation with outside air, the misapplication of
general dilution ventilation to address strong point sources, indoor activities or operations such as renovation,
remodeling, maintenance, etc. which lead to local source emissions, and entry of outdoor contaminants such as vehicle
exhausts, wastes, stored materials, or pollutants from adjacent industrial facilities. Provisions are proposed
in the standard which require the employer to take measures to address the avenues of contaminant buildup noted above.

The term ``Assistant Secretary'' means the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health, U.S.
Department of Labor, or designee. 
The term ``Building systems'' applies to the heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) system, the potable
water system, the energy management system, and all other systems in a facility which may impact indoor air quality.
This broad definition was necessary to avoid excluding non-HVAC systems which do impact indoor air quality. In the
facilities industry, potable hot water systems are typically considered plumbing systems and not HVAC systems.
Plumbing systems (potable hot water) have been implicated in 

Legionella 

episodes where the water is aerosolized, so excluding plumbing systems from the scope of this standard would have
been unacceptable. This definition also intends to focus operation and maintenance efforts on those systems whose
failure, degradation, or misuse would adversely impact indoor air quality. 
The term ``Building-related illness'' describes specific medical conditions of known etiology which can be documented
by physical signs and laboratory findings. Such illnesses include sensory irritations when caused by known agents,
respiratory allergies, nosocomial infections, asthma, humidifier fever, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, Legionnaires'
disease, and the symptoms and signs characteristic of exposure to chemical or biologic substances such as carbon
monoxide, formaldehyde, chlordane, endotoxins, or mycotoxins. ``Building-related illness'' defines the medical
conditions that, if observed, require evaluation of the facility building systems to determine if they are functioning
properly, and the taking of remedial action where warranted. Building-related illnesses are often potentially
severe and are often traceable to a specific contaminant source such as ETS, microbial growth, and a host of other chemical
or biologic substances which must be attended to mitigate degradation of indoor air quality. 
The term ``Designated person'' means a person who has been given the responsibility by the employer to take necessary
measures to assure compliance with this section and who is knowledgeable in the requirements of this standard and
the specific HVAC system servicing the affected building or office. As noted above a ``Designated person'' must be
knowledgeable in HVAC system functioning. Provisions in the standard propose to require the ``Designated person''
to oversee the establishment and implementation of the IAQ compliance program, and oversee building systems inspection
and maintenance activities, thus this person must have technical expertise in those areas. OSHA believes that there
is a need for central responsibility in affected buildings and facilities [Exs. 3434, 3444b, 3507].
Of course OSHA recognizes that in certain circumstances the ``Designated person'' may merely supervise or coordinate
the activities of outside contractors or shift-workers who have responsibility for maintaining parts of the building
systems. Building systems and other factors affecting indoor air quality are sufficiently complex and unique to
suggest the necessity of appointing a designated person who is on site to act on the employers behalf in this regard.
For example, multiple employers may be engaging in different activities within a facility that affect building system
functioning or air quality and actions by one employer may subject employees of other employers to environmental
hazards. Fragmentation of responsibility and lack of communication has been observed by OSHA in the nonindustrial
workplace. For example, when responding to an indoor air quality/building-related illness complaint, the OSHA
Compliance Officer may need to gather information from a number of responsible facility groups like tenant leasing,
facilities engineering, housekeeping, maintenance, operations, and energy management. These diverse groups
may have little or no central authority and direction especially if they are outside contractors. The designated
person would be in a position to mitigate the consequences of such diversity by being aware and responsible for the
overall environmental conditions in the building or facility. 


