 




<USBUREAU>National Technical Information Service</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Prospective Grant of Co-Exclusive Patent Licenses</DOCTITLE>



This is notice in accordance with 35 U.S.C. 209(c)(1) and 37 CFR 404.7(a)(1)(i) that the National Technical Information
Service (NTIS), U.S. Department of Commerce, is contemplating the issuance of grant co-exclusive licenses in the
United States to practice the invention embodied in U.S. Patent No. 4,616,316 (Serial No. 6-458,312), titled ``Medication
Compliance Monitoring Device Having Conductive Traces upon a Frangible Backing of a Medication Compartment,''
to Medical MicroSystems, Inc., having a place of business in Clarkson Valley, Missouri, and Medical Technology Systems,
Inc., having a place of business in Clearwater, Florida. The patent rights in this invention have been assigned to
the United States of America.

The prospective co-exclusive licenses will be royalty-bearing and will comply with the terms and conditions of 35
U.S.C. 209 and 37 CFR 404.7. The prospective co-exclusive licenses may be granted unless, within sixty days from the
date of this published Notice, NTIS receives written evidence and argument which establish that the grant of the licenses
would not be consistent with the requirements of 35 U.S.C. 209 and 37 CFR 404.7.

The present invention is a medication compliance monitoring system consisting of a blister pack having an array of
plastic blisters defining compartments for medication, with a frangible nonconductive backing sheet having conductive
traces behind the compartments which are respectively ruptured when the medication doses are removed. The blister
pack is detachably connected to an electronic memory circuit via a multi-terminal male connector tab on the backing
sheet, wired to the conductive traces, and a corresponding female connector with terminals wired to the electronic
memory circuit. The electronic memory circuit addresses each individual trace periodically at a constant time interval
over a predetermined extended period of time to determine if it is intact. The electronic memory circuit detects the
ruptures and stores the time data thereof over said extended period of time. During the patient's follow-up visit
a microcomputer is employed to retrieve the dose-removal-time data from the memory circuit; it processes the data
and provides a display of the compliance information. A socket adapter is used to alternately configure the electronic
memory circuit for data acquisition and extraction. The socket adapter is in the form of a multiple-pin jumper plug
engageable in a multi-contact socket connected to the memory circuit. Insertion of the plug configures the memory
circuit for data acquisition. Removal of the plug configures the memory circuit for data retrieval and processing
by the microcomputer. In a typical embodiment there are 42 blisters whose associated conductive traces are addressed
every 15 minutes over an extended time period which may be as much as 85 days.







The availability of S.N. 6458,312 for licensing was published in the 

Federal Register

 Vol. 48, No. 54, p. 11483 (March 18, 1983).

A copy of the instant patent is available for $3.00 (payable by check or money order) from the Commissioner of Patents
and Trademarks, Box 9, Washington, DC 20231.

Inquiries, comments and other materials relating to the contemplated license must be submitted to Neil L. Mark, Center
for the Utilization of Federal Technology, NTIS, Box 1423, Springfield, VA 22151. Properly filed competing applications
received by the NTIS in response to this notice will be considered as objections to the grant of the contemplated license.






<SIGNER>
Douglas J. Campion,







</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Director, Office of Federal Patent Licensing.








</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948346 Filed 4794; 8:45 am]







</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 351004M
</BILLING>







