 

Addendum II identifies previous 

Federal Register

 documents that contain a description of all previously published HCFA Medicare and Medicaid manuals and memoranda.

Addendum III of this notice lists, for each of our manuals or Program Memoranda, a HCFA transmittal number unique to
that instruction and its subject matter. A transmittal may consist of a single instruction or many. Often it is necessary
to use information in a transmittal in conjunction with information currently in the manuals. 
Addendum IV lists all substantive and interpretive Medicare and Medicaid regulations and general notices published
in the 

Federal Register

 during the quarter covered by this notice. For each item, we list the date published, the 

Federal Register

 citation, the title of the regulation, and the Parts of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) which have changed. 
Addendum V sets forth the revisions to the Medicare Coverage Issues Manual that were published during the quarter
covered by this notice. For the revisions, we give a brief synopsis of the revisions as they appear on the transmittal
sheet, the manual section number, and the title of the section. We present a complete copy of the revised material,
no matter how minor the revision, and identify the revisions by printing in italics the text that was changed. If the
transmittal includes material unrelated to the revised section, for example, when the addition of revised material
causes other sections to be repaginated, we do not reprint the unrelated material. 


IV. How To Obtain Listed Material 


A. Manuals 


An individual or organization interested in routinely receiving any manual and revisions to it may purchase a subscription
to that manual. Those wishing to subscribe should contact either the Government Printing Office (GPO) or the National
Technical Information Service (NTIS) at the following addresses: 



Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, ATTN: New Order, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 152507954,
Telephone (202) 7833238, Fax number (202) 5122250 (for credit card orders); or 
National Technical Information Service, Department of Commerce, 5825 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161, Telephone
(703) 4874630. 



In addition, individual manual transmittals and Program Memoranda listed in this notice can be purchased from NTIS.
Interested parties should identify the transmittal(s) they want. GPO or NTIS can give complete details on how to obtain
the publications they sell. 


