 

Closely Related to Banking Standard 



Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with Board approval, engage in any activity
``which the Board after due notice and opportunity for hearing has determined (by order or regulation) to be so closely
related to banking or managing or controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto''. In determining whether a
proposed activity is closely related to banking for purposes of the BHC Act, the Board considers, 

inter alia,

 the matters set forth in 

National Courier Association

 v. 

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,

 516 F.2d 1229 (D.C. Cir. 1975). These considerations are (1) Whether banks generally have in fact provided the proposed
services, (2) whether banks generally provide services that are operationally or functionally so similar to the
proposed services as to equip them particularly well to provide the proposed services, and (3) whether banks generally
provide services that are so integrally related to the proposed services as to require their provision in a specialized
form. See 516 F.2d at 1237. In addition, the Board may consider any other basis that may demonstrate that the activity
has a reasonable or close relationship to banking or managing or controlling banks. Board Statement Regarding Regulation
Y, 49 FR 806 (1984). 

Applicants maintain that the Board previously has determined that the proposed data processing and transmission
services and stored value card services, when conducted within the limitations established by the Board in its regulations
and prior orders, are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. See 12 CFR 225.25(b)(7);


Banc One Corporation, et al.,

 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1158 (1993) (1993 EPS Order). See also Letter dated November 30, 1992, from the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland to Robert E. Mannion, Esq.; Letter dated November 30, 1992, from the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia to Allen L. Raiken, Esq. (1992 EPS Approval Letters). Applicants have stated that they will engage
in the proposed activities in conformity with the limitations established by the Board in Regulation Y, the 1992 EPS
Approval Letters, and the 1993 EPS Order. 

Applicants also maintain that the proposed merchant processing services are operationally and functionally similar
to the permissible nonbanking activities in which they currently engage and are permissible data processing activities
under 225.25(b)(7) of Regulation Y. In addition, Applicants state that the Board previously has approved
similar merchant processing services as a loan servicing activity permissible under 225.25(b)(1) of Regulation
Y (12 CFR 225.25(b)(1)). See 

Citicorp,

 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 549 (1990). 



Proper Incident to Banking Standard 



In order to approve the proposal, the Board must determine that the proposed activities to be conducted by EPS and its
subsidiaries ``can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased
competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources,
decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices.'' 12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8).


Applicants believe that the proposal will produce public benefits that outweigh any potential adverse effects.
In particular, Applicants maintain that the proposal will enhance customer convenience and efficiency. In addition,
Applicants state that the proposed activities will not result in adverse effects such as an undue concentration of
resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. 

In publishing the proposal for comment, the Board does not take a position on issues raised by the proposal. Notice
of the proposal is published solely in order to seek the views of interested persons on the issues presented by the applications,
and does not represent a determination by the Board that the proposal meets or is likely to meet the standards of the
BHC Act. 

Any comments or requests for hearing should be submitted in writing and received by William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551, not later than September 19, 1994. Any request
for a hearing on this proposal must, as required by 262.3(e) of the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 CFR 262.3(e)),
be accompanied by a statement of the reasons why a written presentation would not suffice in lieu of a hearing, identifying
specifically any questions of fact that are in dispute, summarizing the evidence that would be presented at a hearing,
and indicating how the party commenting would be aggrieved by approval of the proposal. The applications may be inspected
at the offices of the Board of Governors, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, or the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.


 


Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 22, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Jennifer J. Johnson, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary of the Board. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9421051 Filed 82594; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 621001P
</BILLING>



