 

While the Department of the Interior program to extinguish or control coal outcrop fires predates SMCRA and is not
funded with AML monies, it and SMCRA's AML program are interrelated. Often the same people are responsible for managing
both the coal outcrop fire and the AML reclamation programs. Funds available through the coal outcrop fire program
may be used to control or extinguish fires in any coal formation, except in any privately owned operating coal mine.
Funds available through the AML program can only be used to control or extinguish fires involving eligible abandoned
mine lands. Section 401(d) of SMCRA states that monies from the AML Fund are only available for the purposes of SMCRA's
Title IV-Abandoned Mine Reclamation.


D. Proposed Rules


OSM published proposed rules (58 FR 68494, December 27, 1993) to its regulations implementing changes enacted as
part of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, Public Law 102486 (Oct. 24, 1992). During the comment period on the proposed
rules, OSM received comments from two state AML programs.
Pursuant to Executive Order 12866, every Federal agency is required within applicable statutory limits to choose
regulatory goals that maximize benefits to society and select the most effective means to achieve these goals. To
this end OSM has received comments and recommendations from the public.
All comments received during the comment period were considered in this rulemaking process, and all substantive
comments received are addressed in the following preamble.


II. Organization


The regulatory revisions are intended to implement the requirements of the Act of August 31, 1954, consistent with
the purposes stated in the Act, its legislative history, and the Secretary's commitment to avoid excessive and burdensome
regulations. These final rules implement changes to the coal formation fire control program which was amended as
part of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, 102486 (Oct. 24, 1992). The material is organized into sections which
comprise 30 CFR Part 880. At the end of each section, any comments received from interested parties are addressed.


III. Final Rules and Disposition of Comments


Part 880 Mine Fire Control


General


To reflect the new legislative provisions in the Energy Policy Act of 1992 pertaining to coal outcrop fires, OSM is
amending Part 880 of Chapter VII, Subchapter R. Part 880 is renamed ``Mine Fire Control'' to reflect the greater geographic
expanse of its provisions. The Abandoned Mine Land Program currently has 23 States and three Indian tribes with approved
programs that are now eligible to participate under the new provisions. The old Title_Mine Fire Control, Appalachia_is
no longer indicative of its provisions. OSM is amending the authority section to: 1) include the Energy Policy Act
of 1992, Pub. L. 102486, and 2) delete Pub. L. 9587 (SMCRA) since none of the authority for the coal formation
fire control program comes from SMCRA.
The current numbering system used in Part 880 is not consistent with that used elsewhere in OSM regulations. Therefore,
the sections have been redesignated as follows:





