 

This proposed rule would not impose additional equipment or personnel costs to the FAA. The acquisition of new radar
tracking systems is a routine cost of upgrading FAA equipment. No additional FAA personnel would be required, because
the temporary suspension of the Mode C transponder requirement is expected to enhance air traffic control (ATC) operational
efficiency by eliminating the need for ATC authorizations at the designated airports. This proposed rule would reduce
the demand on ATC equipment and personnel resources.

This proposed rule is not expected to impose societal costs, in the form of reduced aviation safety. When the FAA initially
published SFAR No. 62, which temporarily suspended the Mode C requirements at the Designated Airports, it did so on
the basis that there was no ATC radar coverage at those Designated Airports. The regulatory evaluation prepared for
that final rule concluded that there would not be any adverse impact on aviation safety, because the full intent of
the Mode C rule had not been realized. Furthermore, such safety would not be realized until ATC radar coverage was extended
to those designated airports, through the installation of the new ASR9 radar.

Since the implementation of SFAR No. 62, ASR9 radar has been commissioned at 10 of the 24 Class B airspace areas.
Under this proposed rule, aviation safety would not be affected adversely for two reasons. First, operations at those
designated airports located within the Mode C veils of the 14 Class B airspace areas not utilizing the ASR9 radar
would be temporarily excluded from the Mode C requirements. Second, operations at those designated airports, located
within the Mode C veils of the 10 Class B airspace areas now equipped with ASR9 radar, would be subject to the requirements
of the Mode C rule when conducted within that associated airspace covered by the extended ASR9 radar coverage.
Operations conducted at those same airports, but below the areas of ASR9 radar coverage, would be exempt from
the Mode C rule. The areas not covered by the ASR9 radar would be defined by a specified ceiling altitude and extend
down to the surface. For example, prior to the installation of ASR9 radar, radar coverage excluded the airspace
above Airport A, from a ceiling of 2000 feet AGL down to the ground. As the result of the installation of ASR9 radar,
the airspace above Airport A, which is not excluded from the enhanced ATC coverage, is from a ceiling of 1000 feet AGL
down to the ground. Under this proposed rule, operations below 1000 feet AGL would be temporarily excluded from the
Mode C requirements, since operations below the altitude of 1000 feet AGL are beyond ATC radar coverage. Thus, the
FAA contends that access to certain outlying airports by aircraft without Mode C transponders can be accommodated
without diminishing Mode C safety benefits, provided the operation is conducted outside radar coverage. When aircraft
operations are confined exclusively to areas of no radar coverage, many of the safety benefits of the Mode C rule cannot
be realized. Further enhancement of the radar tracking system is expected to increase radar coverage, thus extending
the Mode C benefits to more areas outside of the current radar coverage.
For the aviation community, the FAA anticipates that this proposed rule would impose no significant costs on fixed
base operators (FBO's). FBO's represent the most likely group to incur potential costs. When the FAA evaluated the
potential cost impact of SFAR No. 62 on FBO's, it did so on the increased likelihood that some general aviation (GA)
aircraft operators (without Mode C transponders) would relocate to airports outside of the Mode C veil from airports
inside of the Mode C veil. If this relocation activity had materialized, FBO's inside of the Mode C veil would have incurred
lost revenues from decreases in demand for mechanical repairs and related activities from some GA aircraft operators.
After SFAR No. 62 was issued as a notice, the FAA did not receive any comments from FBO's with regard to cost impacts.
Therefore, with no cost impact comments received on SFAR No. 62, this evaluation concludes that the proposed rule
would not have any significant cost impact on any FBO's.


Conclusion


This proposed rule is not expected to impose costs on either the FAA or society. In addition, this proposed rule would
not impose any significant costs on the aviation community (FBO's). The FAA estimates that this proposed rule would
generate benefits in the form of increased convenience to some GA aircraft operators and increased operational efficiency
to FAA air traffic control. Thus, the FAA contends that this proposed rule is cost-beneficial.


Initial Regulatory Flexibility Determination


The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (RFA) was enacted to ensure that small entities are not unnecessarily and disproportionately
burdened by Government regulations. The RFA requires agencies to review rules that may have ``a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities.'' The types of small entities that could be potentially affected
by the implementation of the proposed rule are air taxi operators and FBOs.
In terms of air taxi operators, no cost impacts are anticipated by this proposed rule. This assessment is based on the
FAA's estimation that these operators are already equipped with Mode C transponders. They are, in all likelihood,
based at airports within the Mode C veil which fall within the radar coverage of ATC.
In terms of FBO's, the FAA estimates that this proposed rule would not impose significant costs. This assessment is
based on the belief that FBO's would not experience revenue losses from GA aircraft to airports outside of the Mode
C veil or undesignated airports within the Mode C veil to designated airports specified in this proposed rule. Although
the proposed rule provides access to a Mode C veil, the FAA believes that this proposed rule does not provide GA aircraft
operators with much of an incentive to relocate. This assessment is further supported by the belief that the vast majority
of those GA aircraft operators required to install Mode C transponders acquired them by December 30, 1990 (Phase II
of the Mode C rule for Airport Radar Service Areas). Therefore, the FAA contends that a regulatory flexibility analysis
is not required because this proposed rule would not have a significant economic impact on substantial number of small
entities.


