 

The decision of the Regional Administrator must be based on 
applicable law and on the administrative record, which includes 
the recommended decision of the Presiding Officer. Upon receipt 
of the Presiding Officer's recommended decision, the Regional 
Administrator may either withdraw the field citation, if he 
concludes that the Agency has not sustained its burden of proof, 
or issue an order granting the requested relief, in whole or in 
part. Any decision by the Regional Administrator must be in 
writing, supported by clear reasons based on the administrative 
record and applicable law, and include a statement of the right 
to judicial review and of the procedures and deadlines for 
obtaining judicial review. If the Regional Administrator rejects 
the recommendation of the Presiding Officer, the explanation for 
that rejection must be in writing and made part of the 
administrative record. 
The Regional Administrator's order must include a discussion 
of the applicable penalty factors which were considered in the 
assessment of a penalty under the Act, and set forth the penalty 
assessed. Part 28 would be revised to limit the Regional 
Administrator's authority to issue a default order by excluding 
those based on a default for failure to respond or to request a 
hearing (which would become final, pursuant to section 113(d)(3) 
of the CAA, by operation of law). 
Any order issued by the Regional Administrator becomes 
effective thirty days after issuance, unless either the 
Environmental Appeals Board (the Board) suspends the 
implementation of the order pursuant to its 

sua sponte

 review 
authority, or a judicial appeal is taken pursuant to section 113(d)(4) of the Act. No person may stay the effective
date of 
an administrative order by attempting to appeal it 
administratively. 
The decision of the Regional Administrator to issue a final 
decision constitutes final Agency action (subject to 

sua sponte

 
review by the Board) on its effective date, for purposes of any 
judicial appeal. Withdrawal of the field citation, however, 
would not constitute final Agency action, unless it occurs 
without prejudice. 
The Board, on behalf of the Administrator, is authorized to 
review part 28 rulings by Regional Administrators, 

sua sponte,

 on 
issues of law. The Board may not become involved in factfinding; second guess the penalty amount issued by the Regional
Administrator; or review orders issued on consent. The Agency anticipates that this review authority will be exercised
infrequently, but believes that the authority is necessary to 
ensure consistent Agency positions on the applicable law. 
The Board may withdraw a Regional Administrator's order if 
it determines that the Agency lacks jurisdiction to assess a 
penalty, or if it determines that the Respondent is not liable 
under applicable law. The Board shall remand an administrative 
order if it determines that elements of the Respondent's 
liability are different from those found by the Regional 
Administrator. Under such a remand, the remedy should be 
conformed to the amended conclusions of law. The order shall 
also be remanded if the Board finds that the order fails to 
provide clear reasons for the decision. The Board shall allow 
the Regional Administrator's order to issue unchanged if it finds 
that the order is legally sufficient and it agrees with all 
material conclusions of law. 
Parties are not permitted under part 28 to administratively 
appeal adverse rulings, either to the Regional Administrator or 
to the Environmental Appeals Board. 


Procedural Due Process 


EPA recognizes that the administrative imposition of 
penalties for minor violations of the Act may affect 
constitutionally protected interests of those against whom 
actions have been taken. Part 28 includes precautions to ensure 
that individuals subject to a finding of liability for a civil 
penalty will have all of the protections that due process of law 
requires. These precautions include an impartial Presiding 
Officer; the right to a hearing on liability, with a right of 
cross-examination; and a final Agency action based solely on the 
administrative record and applicable law. For a detailed due 
process discussion concerning part 28, see the July 1, 1991 
proposal at 56 FR 29997 

et seq

. 
The part 28 procedures provide all of the procedure 
necessary to meet constitutional due process requirements under 
the leading Supreme Court case, 

Mathews

 v. 

Eldridge

, 424 U.S. 319 
(1976). In that case, the Supreme Court set out a three-part 
test for determining whether the administrative procedure 
provided to an individual prior to the deprivation of a property 
interest by the government meets the due process requirements of 
the Fifth Amendment. The 

Mathews 

test involves balancing the 
magnitude and nature of the individual interest at stake; the 
benefit of additional procedures in reducing the risk of 
erroneous deprivation of that interest; and the governmental 
interest in not providing such additional procedures. Although 
the part 28 procedures streamline the adjudicatory process 
provided for analogous administrative hearings under the APA, 
those procedures do not eliminate any of the constitutional 
elements of such hearings. The part 28 procedures grant the 
person receiving the field citation a full opportunity to review 
the evidence of minor violations, as well as address the 
propriety of the assessed penalty. Since these procedures allow 
for complete adjudication of liability issues, there would be 
little benefit to the Respondent in more extensive or attenuated 
procedures, and disproportionate cost to the Agency and to the 
public. 
The field citation program will typically address violation 
and penalty issues that are simple and straightforward matters. 
Since these cases should not be complex, their resolution is 
well-suited to the expedited administrative penalty proceedings 
mandated by Congress and included in part 28. For these reasons 
as well as those noted in the July 1, 1991 proposal, EPA believes 
the proposed part 28 procedures would adequately provide for due 
process in the assessment of penalties under the field citation 
authority. 


3. 40 CFR Part 59_Rules Governing Administrative Hearings on 
Field Citations 


The third Agency proposal involves using new procedures for 
conducting administrative hearings requested by persons to whom 
field citations have been issued under section 113(d) of the Act. 


Background 


Section 113(d) of the Act provides that any person to whom a 
field citation is issued may either elect to pay the penalty 
assessment or to request a hearing, in accordance with procedures 
specified in the regulation which implements the field citation 
program. Section 113(d) further provides that the penalty 
assessed in the field citation becomes final unless the person to 
whom it is issued requests a hearing within the time specified in 
the implementing regulation. Section 113(d)(3) explicitly 
provides that the hearing is not subject to the requirements of a 
formal adjudicatory hearing under the Administrative Procedure 
Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. 554 or 556. Instead, the hearing 
must provide a reasonable opportunity to be heard and to present 
evidence. 



Basis for Hearing Procedures 





