 

Finally, irrespective of the method selected, the taxpayer must have prepared documentation articulating the required
analysis at the time that the tax return was filed, and provide such documentation to the Internal Revenue Service
within 30 days of a request for such documentation. 



The Need for Transfer Pricing Analysis and Documentation 



The arm's length standard seeks to mirror the results obtained by unrelated parties in their business dealings. Unrelated
parties analyze the value of property or services prior to selling or buying such property or services in the open market.
However, transactions between related parties do not involve the transfer of goods outside of the related party group.
A transfer price will not affect the total profit ultimately realized by the group but may affect total tax liability.
To ensure that the transfer price a taxpayer reports on its income tax return is determined in a manner consistent with
the arm's length standard, section 6662(e) encourages a taxpayer engaged in related party transactions to prepare
a factual and economic analysis based on reasonably available related party and third party market data that substantiates
the price chosen, and to maintain appropriate documentation of that analysis. 

The experience of the IRS has been that the majority of taxpayers do not provide an explanation of how their intercompany
pricing was established. In many cases examiners' access to a corporation's transfer pricing information is delayed
or denied. Moreover, many taxpayers do not rely upon any form of comparables or other contemporaneous information
either in planning or in defending intercompany transactions. The taxpayer, not having attempted to structure the
transaction in accordance with the arm's length standard, seeks to defend its position on examination by finding
whatever uncontrolled transaction or transfer pricing method provides a result that most closely approximates
the result initially reported. The failure by taxpayers to analyze their intercompany pricing prior to audit increases
controversy between taxpayers and the IRS, as both seek to develop 

post hoc 

analyses of the arm's length character of the transactions. Thus, the failure to apply the arm's length standard in
setting prices for controlled transactions (and the lack of contemporaneous documentation explaining that application)
increases the time spent and expense incurred by both the taxpayer and the IRS in determining whether that result was
consistent with the arm's length standard. Accordingly, these regulations are designed to encourage taxpayers
to make a serious effort to comply with the arm's length standard, report an arm's length result on their income tax
return, document their transfer pricing analyses, and provide that documentation to the IRS upon request. 



Statutory Requirements 



Section 6662(a) imposes a penalty in the amount of 20 percent of any underpayment to which the section applies. Section
6662(b) lists the types of underpayments to which section 6662(a) applies. One such underpayment is an underpayment
attributable to any substantial valuation misstatement under chapter 1 of the Code. 

Section 6662(e) defines a substantial valuation misstatement. These temporary regulations under section 6662(e)
contain the rules for determining whether there is a substantial valuation misstatement attributable to section
482 allocations. A substantial valuation misstatement exists if (1) the transfer price for any property or services
(or for the use of property) claimed on a return is 200 percent or more (or 50 percent or less) of the amount determined
under section 482 to be the arm's length amount (the transactional penalty), or (2) the net section 482 adjustment
exceeds the lesser of five million dollars or ten percent of gross receipts (the net adjustment penalty). 

Section 6662(h) increases the amount of the penalty to 40 percent for both the transactional and the net adjustment
penalties in the case of a gross valuation misstatement. There is a gross valuation misstatement if (1) the price for
any property or services (or for the use of property) claimed on any return in connection with any transaction between
persons described in section 482 is 400 percent or more (or 25 percent or less) of the amount determined under section
482 to be the arm's length amount, or (2) the net section 482 adjustment exceeds the lesser of twenty million dollars
or twenty percent of gross receipts. 



Amounts Excluded From a Net Section 482 Adjustment 



An amount is excluded from the calculation of a net section 482 adjustment if the requirements of 1.66626T(d)(2),
(3), or (4) are met with respect to that amount. If a taxpayer meets the requirements of paragraph (d) of these regulations
with respect to some, but not all of the allocations made under section 482, then for purposes of determining the net
section 482 adjustment, setoffs, as taken into account under 1.4821T(e)(5), must be applied ratably
against all such allocations. 





