 

Both the inbound and outbound lanes for vessels drawing 45
&rsquo; feet of water or less measure 0.75 nautical miles (1500 yards) in width as determined by multiplying the published
standard error of LORANC (0.25 NM) by three. Because of the low-lying coast of the Commonwealth of Virginia
and the lack of prominent landmarks, LORANC remains an acceptable aid to navigation for use in these inbound
and outbound lanes.
The deep water route, for vessels drawing over 45
&rsquo; of water, measures 1300
&rsquo; in width and has a charted natural depth of 50
&rsquo; or greater. As currently planned, the COE will construct the Atlantic Ocean Channel in this location when
funds become available in both the Federal and Commonwealth of Virginia budgets. Due to uncertain economic conditions,
a dredging completion date is unknown.


Discussion of Comments and Changes


Six written comments were received in response to the notice of proposed rulemaking. Five comments fully support
establishment of the traffic separation scheme and the sixth comment offered editorial suggestions. Specific comments
pertaining to other aspects of the proposal are discussed below.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE) advised that due to budgetary consideration in the Commonwealth of Virginia,
dredging of the Atlantic Ocean Channel would be rescheduled to an indefinite time in the future. The COE also pointed
out an error in one of the geographical positions for the inbound traffic lane. This information has been corrected
in the final rule.
One comment, which is not adopted in this final rule, suggested that the draft limitation for use of the deep-water
route be changed to ``vessels drawing 45 feet or more'' while four comments agreed with the proposal to provide vessels
drawing greater than 45 feet exclusive use of the deep-water route.
Five comments strongly objected to the proposal to recommend that all vessels carrying dangerous cargo and petroleum
distillates as cargo use the deep-water route. IMO's Subcommittee on Safety of Navigation also objected to this provision
and amended the U.S. proposal to exclude it from consideration and adoption by the Maritime Safety Committee. Based
on the comments and IMO's action, this proposed recommendation is deleted from this final rule.
Three comments objected to naval aircraft carriers using the deep-water route. In response to the notice of study,
the U.S. Navy requested that it be allowed to use the deep-water route to ensure the continued safe, uneventful transit
of aircraft carriers to and from sea. The Coast Guard and IMO agree that aircraft carrier usage of the deep-water route
will enhance navigation safety and therefore will be permitted.
One comment suggested placement of a buoy near latitude 36
&cir;54.43
&rsquo; longitude 75
&cir;53.2
&rsquo;W to mark lesser water depths adjacent to the inbound traffic lane. The 1500-yard inbound lane, with the use
of LORANC or radar, is sufficient to allow safe passage through the area without the placement of a buoy. Therefore,
this comment is not adopted.
Three comments disagreed with the proposed recommendation that vessels announce their intentions to use the deep-water
route. One comment objected to Channel 16 VHFFM usage because of frequency congestion by other users. Two comments
recommended that vessels call at least one hour prior to entering the deep-water route instead of at the time the vessel
approaches Chesapeake Bay Southern Approach Lighted Whistle Buoy CB on the south end, or Chesapeake Bay Junction
Lighted Buoy CBJ on the north end of the route, as proposed in the NPRM. The Coast Guard realizes that Channel 16 is crowded,
however it is recognized as the distress, safety, and calling frequency in the United States and internationally
as evidenced by IMO's adoption of this recommended practice. If the exchange of additional information is required,
shifting to another VHFFM channel would be appropriate.
Other minor editorial and administrative changes have been made to improve the clarity of this part.


Regulatory Evaluation


This regulation is not a significant regulatory action under section 3(f) of Executive Order 12866 and non-significant
under the DOT regulatory policies and procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979). Vessels have been complying with
the requirements of this rule since IMO implementation on November 16, 1991. No additional costs are associated with
this final rule. The Coast Guard expects the economic impact of this rule to be so minimal that a full Regulatory Evaluation
under paragraph 10e of the regulatory policies and procedures of DOT is unnecessary.


Small Entities


There are no additional costs associated with this final rule as vessels have been using the newly configured southern
approach lanes since it was implemented by IMO on November 16, 1991. Therefore, the Coast Guard certifies under Section
605(b) of the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq

.) that this final rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.


Collection of Information


This rule contains no collection of information requirements under the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq

.).


Federalism


The Coast Guard has analyzed this rule in accordance with the principles and criteria contained in Executive Order
12612 and has determined that this rule does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation
of a Federalism Assessment.
The authority to establish TSSs and shipping safety fairways, where necessary, to provide safe across routes for
vessels proceeding to or from U.S. ports is committed to the Coast Guard by Federal Statute. Therefore, the Coast Guard
does not expect this rule to raise any preemption issues with respect to state actions on the same subject matter.


Environmental Impact


The Coast Guard has determined that this action will not have a significant impact on the environment and that an environmental
impact statement is not necessary. A Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) is on file in the docket for inspection
or copying where indicated under 

ADDRESSES

. Comments received as a result of the NPRM did not address any environmental concerns.





