 

The same commenter also suggests that the words ``significantly impact the safety,'' in proposed 25.1315(c)(2),
be changed to ``reduce the capability'' for consistency with 25.1309(b)(2).
The FAA concurs with this recommendation, and 25.1315(c)(2), now designated as 25.1315(b), has been
revised accordingly.
Several commenters request clarification as to exactly what is meant by the statement that critical functions are
``not affected'' by the lightning encounter.
The FAA concurs that clarification of ``not affected'' is needed; therefore, the final rule has been revised to read,
``not adversely affected'' in an attempt to convey this intent. Although the words ``not affected'' were used in the
proposed rule, the FAA did not intend that the requirement be rigidly applied. The intent of the regulation is to require
lightning protection for systems that perform critical functions to the extent that the critical functions are not


adversely

 affected by the lightning event. Determination of when functions are adversely affected would be made by the cognizant
FAA Aircraft Certification Office based on rational engineering judgment on a case-by-case evaluation of the specified
function and the ``effect'' presented. Literally applying a standard of ``no effect'' would not be reasonable. In
determining compliance with special conditions in past certification programs, the FAA has accepted upsets of a
minor nature that do not result in significant fluctuations of control surface position or engine thrust. Any effect
perceived by the flightcrew would need to be evaluated to ensure that it would not lead to a hazardous condition. For
example, some full authority digital engine control (FADEC) systems are designed with two fully redundant channels,
either of which can control the engine independently. In addition, the logic within the FADEC will monitor each channel
and, by design, switch channels if an anomaly appears on the selected channel. This does not necessarily mean that
the channel is no longer functional or has degraded, because if the backup channel were not functional, the selected
channel would continue in control. Therefore, it would not be considered an adverse effect if a channel transfer in
such a system occurred in accordance with its accepted design when the airplane is exposed to the lightning test waveforms.
However, additional tests may be required to demonstrate that neither channel would be adversely affected when tested
individually. For example, a mode change within a given channel that could result in the loss of a primary thrust setting
parameter, resulting in the possibility of a change in thrust level, would not be acceptable. Internal monitors that
indicate normal operation of critical systems must not be damaged by the effects of lightning.
Other examples of adversely affected critical functions are hazardously misleading primary flight information,
uncommanded flap motion and, of course, loss of primary flight controls in a fly-by-wire airplane.
Determination of adverse effects will be handled on a case-by-case basis subject to the explanation given above.
Perturbations or deviations that exceed tolerances agreed upon in the test plan must be reported to the FAA for evaluation.
The same commenters also suggest that adequate lightning protection is provided if the airplane is still capable
of continued safe flight and landing after the lightning encounter.
The FAA does not agree that the concept of continued safe flight and landing is sufficient. The FAA has concluded that
a higher level of safety is required for systems that perform critical functions when exposed to adverse environmental
conditions. This concept would be violated, for example, if engine failure from an expected environmental condition,
such as a lightning strike, were allowed because any environmental condition that may adversely affect an engine
design must be assumed to affect all the engines on the airplane. For this reason, engines, as installed, must be able
to tolerate these conditions without damage or serious loss of thrust. This same line of reasoning applies to other
systems that perform critical functions. Lightning strikes to airplanes are unpredictable as to their strength,
duration, and number. Therefore, continued safe flight and landing of the airplane after multiple lightning strikes
could not be assured unless systems that perform critical functions have a high degree of tolerance to the expected
lightning strike environment. This basic environmental requirement also applies to other environmental conditions,
such as icing, hail, heavy rain, bird flocks, etc.
One commenter proposes new wording for 25.1315(a) that would allow crew action to restore critical systems
that have been disrupted by lightning induced transients.
The FAA does not concur. Critical function disruption must be automatically restored after the lightning encounter.
Under certain flight conditions, such as during takeoff or landing in instrument meteorological conditions when
the crew workload is high, the crew may not be able to restore the critical function in time to prevent a catastrophic
even from occurring. The FAA allows crew action to restore systems that perform essential functions; however, systems
that perform critical functions must recover automatically.
The majority of commenters do not agree that the test waveforms should be contained in an appendix to part 25, as proposed
in the notice. They contend that this information should be presented in an advisory circular. Several commenters
believe that there will be additional adjustments to the description of the lightning environment as knowledge of
the phenomena increases, and that an advisory circular would be easier to revise than an appendix to the FAR. In addition,
they argue that the FAA should not be legally bound by the criteria in an appendix if a change to the description of the
environment is appropriate.
The FAA concurs that the proposed appendix should not be adopted. As noted by several commenters, the information
contained in the proposed appendix was taken from SAE Report AE4L873, Revision A, entitled ``Protection
of Aircraft Electrical/Electronic Systems Against the Indirect Effects of Lightning,'' dated October 1988. After
the notice was published, the AE4L Committee added clarifications of the environment definition, including some
boundaries on pulse spacing in the multiple burst and multiple stroke environments. These have been incorporated
in Revision B of the SAE document issued in January 1989. Because of the potential for further adjustments in the environment
definition, and because use of the description of the environment set forth in the proposed Appendix J is only one means
of showing compliance with this rule, the FAA concurs that it would be more appropriate to present this information
in an advisory circular. This is also consistent with the FAA's practice of publishing technical guidance/procedures
for implementing a particular regulation in an advisory circular. As noted earlier, the idealized waveforms are
currently covered in AC 20136. Accordingly, proposed Appendix J to part 25 has been removed from the final rule.
However, to provide guidelines as to what is involved in showing compliance with the rule, general criteria are added
to 25.1315 as paragraph (c). A detailed discussion of these criteria is provided in AC 20136.
Two commenters consider the definition of the environment given in the proposed Appendix to be unrealistic and propose
several changes to the idealized test waveforms. 
The FAA does not concur that this definition is unrealistic. The FAA has worked closely with SAE Committee AE4L in developing
the idealized test waveforms that are presented in Revision B of Report AE4L873. The FAA has adopted
these waveforms as acceptable representations of a severe natural lightning environment for certification purposes
and has included them in AC 20136. The proposed changes submitted by the commenters have been forwarded to the
AE4L Committee for consideration. The FAA will consider appropriate changes to the definition of the waveforms in
the AC if the Committee recommends them.


