 

Implementation 



Marketing and Educational Program 



Because PMCPs have not been regulated in the past, the FHWA and state personnel will be providing educational and technical
assistance for these carriers prior to the effective date. The FHWA is seeking comments on the type and scope of educational
and technical assistance that should be provided to assist PMCPs in complying with the FMCSRs. Comments must be received
on or before October 1, 1994. The FHWA will make the materials available to National and State organizations which
represent PMCPs or anyone who requests assistance directly from the FHWA. The FHWA also has Division offices in every
State that can answer questions and provide technical assistance to these carriers upon request. The addresses for
the FHWA Division Offices are listed in appendix D to 49 CFR part 7. 



Effective Date 



PMCPs (business and nonbusiness) will have until January 1, 1995, to meet these requirements. 


Rulemaking Analyses and Notices 



Executive Order 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review) and DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures 



Because this rulemaking has been the subject of substantial congressional and public interest, the FHWA has determined
that this final rule is a significant regulatory action within the meaning of Executive Order 12866 and a significant
regulation under the DOT regulatory policies and procedures. In the Motor Carrier Act of 1984, Congress expanded
the definitions of ``interstate commerce'' and ``commercial motor vehicle'' which expanded the Department of Transportation's
regulatory jurisdiction to include private motor carriers of passengers. Both Congress and the bus industry have
shown a keen interest in the progress of this rulemaking. The safety benefits and opportunities for benefits from
this rule will offset any cost. A regulatory evaluation has been prepared and is available for review in the public
docket. 


Regulatory Flexibility Act 



In compliance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96354, 5 U.S.C. 605(b)), the FHWA has evaluated
the effects of this rule on small entities. Many small entities will be economically impacted by this rulemaking and
some may decide to cease transportation of passengers rather than comply with the safety rules and regulations. However,
the overall impact on small entities will be minimal. The FHWA is exempting the majority of small entities_those defined
as nonbusiness_from the paperwork and recording requirements of this rule. The vast majority of PMCPs are small entities,
especially the non-business carriers. Some of the smallest entities may find it preferable to discontinue their
operations in interstate commerce, and to charter buses for their interstate trips. Private carriers which pay their
drivers are even more likely to consider chartering as an option because of their increased costs for driver salaries
or other compensation. Chartering does not reduce the cost of complying with this rule, but does place an effective
ceiling on how much this rule might cost small entities. Thus, under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act,
the FHWA hereby certifies that this action will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities. 



Executive Order 12612 (Federalism Assessment) 



This action has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteria contained in Executive Order 12612,
and it has been determined that this action does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation
of a federalism assessment. This regulation amends certain parts of the FMCSRs pertaining to the scope and applicability
of the FMCSRs to interstate transportation by PMCPs as authorized by the Motor Carrier Act of 1984. The FMCSRs establish
minimum safety regulations which may be supplemented by the States, provided the State safety laws and regulations
are compatible with the Federal requirements. (See 57 FR 40946, September 8, 1992, which includes the Tolerance Guidelines
for Adopting Compatible State Rules and Regulations.) The statutory basis for Federal regulation of interstate
commerce has been outlined above. Accordingly, it is certified that the policies contained in this document have
been assessed in light of the principles, criteria, and requirements of the Federalism Executive Order. 



Executive Order 12372 (Intergovernmental Review) 



Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Program Numbers 20.217, Motor Carrier Safety, and 20.218, Motor Carrier
Safety Assistance Program. The regulations implementing Executive Order 12372 regarding intergovernmental consultation
on Federal programs and activities apply to this program. 



Paperwork Reduction Act 



The information collection requirements in part 390 of this rule are being submitted to the Office of Management and
Budget for approval under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

 



National Environmental Policy Act 



The agency has analyzed this action for the purpose of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321


et seq.

) and has determined that this action would not have any effect on the quality of the environment. 



Regulation Identification Number 



A regulation identification number (RIN) is assigned to each regulatory action listed in the Unified Agenda of Federal
Regulations. The Regulatory Information Service Center publishes the Unified Agenda in April and October of each
year. The RIN contained in the heading of this document can be used to cross reference this action with the Unified Agenda.




List of Subjects in 49 CFR Parts 390, 391, 393, 395, and 396 



Highway safety, Motor carriers, Motor vehicle safety, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 




Issued on: February 14, 1994. 

 


<SIGNER>
Rodney E. Slater,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Federal Highway Administrator.




In consideration of the foregoing, the FHWA is amending title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, subtitle B, chapter
III, parts 390, 391, 393, 395 and 396 as set forth below.
</SIGNJOB>
