 

(vii) The Service or agencies designated by the Service may take wolves that are designated as ``problem wolves''
(as defined below) that attack livestock (cattle, sheep, horses, and mules or domestic animals or as defined by State
and Tribal wolf management plans approved by the Service) by nonlethal measures, including but not limited to: aversive
conditioning, nonlethal control, and/or moving wolves when 5 or fewer breeding pairs are established, and by previously
described measures. If such measures result in a wolf mortality, it must be demonstrated that such mortality was nondeliberate.
Lethal control of wolves or placing them in permanent captivity will be allowed only after 6 or more breeding pairs
are established in the experimental population area. For depredations occurring on federally managed lands and
any additional public lands identified in State or Tribal wolf management plans and prior to 6 breeding pairs becoming
established, depredating female wolves with pups and their pups will be released at or near the site of capture prior
to October 1. Wolves on private land under these circumstances will be moved to other areas within the experimental
population area. Wolves that attack domestic animals other than livestock, including pets on private land, a total
of 2 times in a calendar year will be moved. All chronic problem wolves (wolves that depredate on domestic animals after
being moved once for previous domestic animal depredations) will be removed from the wild (killed or placed in captivity).
The following three conditions and criteria will apply in determining the problem status of wolves within the nonessential
experimental population area: 

(A) Wounded livestock or some remains of a livestock carcass must be present with clear evidence that wolves were responsible
for the damage and there must be reason to believe that additional losses would occur if the problem wolf or wolves were
not controlled. Such evidence is essential because wolves may feed on carrion they have found and may not be responsible
for the death of livestock. 

(B) Artificial or intentional feeding of wolves must not have occurred. Livestock carcasses not properly disposed
of in an area where depredations have occurred will be considered attractants. On Federal lands, removal or resolution
of such attractants must accompany any control action. Livestock carrion or carcasses on Federal land, not being
used as bait in an authorized control action (by agencies authorized by the Service), must be removed, buried, burned,
or otherwise disposed of such that the carcass(es) will not attract wolves. 

(C) On Federal lands, animal husbandry practices previously identified in existing approved allotment plans and
annual operating plans for allotments must have been followed. 

(viii) Any person may take gray wolves found in an area defined in paragraph ()(6), 

Provided

 that, the take is incidental, accidental, unavoidable, unintentional, and not resulting from negligent conduct
lacking reasonable due care in the course of otherwise lawful recreational activity, and that such taking is immediately
(within 24 hours) reported to the authorized Service or Service-designated authority. Take that does not conform
with such provisions may be referred to the appropriate authorities for prosecution. 

(ix) Service or other Federal, State, or Tribal personnel may be additionally authorized in writing by the Service
to take animals under special circumstances that pose an immediate threat to livestock or property, or when animals
need to be moved for genetic purposes. Wolves may be live captured and translocated to resolve demonstrated conflicts
with ungulate populations or with other species listed under the Endangered Species Act, or when they are outside
the designated experimental population area. Take procedures in such instances would involve live capture and release
to a remote area, or if the animal is clearly unfit to remain in the wild, return to a captive facility. Killing of animals
will be a last resort and will be authorized only if live capture attempts fail or there is some clear danger to human
life. 

(x) Any person with a valid permit issued by the Service under 17.32 may take wolves in the wild in the experimental
population area, pursuant to terms of the permit. 

(xi) Any employee or agent of the Service or appropriate Federal, State or Tribal agency, who is designated in writing
for such purposes by the Service, when acting in the course of official duties, may take a wolf in the wild in the experimental
population area if such action is necessary: 

(A) For scientific purposes; 

(B) To relocate wolves to avoid conflict with human activities; 

(C) To relocate wolves within the experimental population areas to improve wolf survival and recovery prospects;



