 

<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Francisco J. Acevedo, Environmental 
Engineer, Regulation Development Section, Regulation Development Branch 
(5AR18J), United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region 5, 77 West 
Jackson Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois 60604, (312) 8866061. 
Anyone wishing to come to Region 5 offices should first contact Francisco J. Acevedo. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. I/M Program requirements 



Pursuant to the 1977 amendments to the Act, vehicle I/M programs were mandated for certain areas with long standing
air quality problems. The 1990 amendments to the Act expanded the role of I/M programs as an attainment strategy and
required USEPA to develop different performance standards for ``basic'' and ``enhanced'' I/M programs. The performance
standard is the minimum amount of emission reductions a program must achieve, based on a model or benchmark program
design. In addition, the amended Act directed USEPA to address requirements for specific design elements and program
implementation issues for both basic and enhanced I/M programs. The amended Act requires states containing nonattainment
areas to make changes to improve existing I/M programs or implement new ones. Section 182(a)(2)(B) of the Act directed
USEPA to publish updated guidance for state I/M programs, taking into consideration findings of the Administrator's
audits and investigations of these programs. The Act further requires each area required by the Act to have an I/M program
to incorporate this guidance into the SIP. Based on these requirements, USEPA promulgated an I/M regulation on November
5, 1992. (57 FR 52950) 

Under section 182(c)(3) of the Act, areas designated as serious or worse ozone nonattainment areas with 1980 populations
of 200,000 or more, in addition to metropolitan statistical areas with populations of 100,000 or more in the northeast
ozone transport region, are required to meet USEPA requirements for ``enhanced'' I/M programs. These areas were
required to submit a SIP revision to incorporate an I/M program by November 15, 1992. In Illinois, the State must implement
I/M programs in the urbanized areas of the Chicago and East St. Louis ozone nonattainment areas. 

The I/M regulation establishes minimum performance standards for basic and enhanced I/M programs as well as requirements
for the following: Network type and program evaluation; adequate tools and resources; test frequency and convenience;
vehicle coverage; test procedures and standards; test equipment; quality control; waivers and compliance via diagnostic
inspection; motorist compliance enforcement; motorist compliance enforcement program oversight; quality assurance;
enforcement against contractors, stations and inspectors; data collection; data analysis and reporting; inspector
training and licensing or certification; public information and consumer protection; improving repair effectiveness;
compliance with recall notices; on-road testing; SIP revisions; and implementation deadlines. 

For enhanced I/M programs, all requirements must be implemented by January 1, 1995 except that areas switching from
an existing test-and-repair network to a test-only network may phase in that change between January 1995 and January
1996.

 Each state required to implement an I/M program was required to submit by November 15, 1992, a SIP revision (here and
after referred to as the ``I/M committal SIP'') including two elements: (1) A commitment from the Governor or his/her
designee to the timely adoption and implementation of an I/M program meeting all the requirements of the I/M regulation;
and (2) a schedule for adoption of the program, with interim milestones including passage of enabling statutory or
other legal authority and adoption of final regulations. Acceptance of I/M committal SIPs in lieu of full SIPs was
justified by the fact that states could not have been expected to begin development of an I/M program meeting the requirements
of the Act and the I/M regulation until the I/M regulation was adopted as a final rule, which did not occur until November
5, 1992. A complete SIP revision which contained all of the elements identified in the adoption schedule, including
the authorizing legislation and implementing regulations, was to be submitted no later than November 15, 1993. 

On November 11, 1992, the State of Illinois submitted a committal SIP to USEPA. A public hearing on this submittal was
held by the State on October 27, 1992, in Springfield, Illinois. The submittal included a schedule of implementation
and a commitment to the timely adoption and implementation of an I/M program in the Chicago and East St. Louis ozone
nonattainment areas meeting all the requirements of the I/M regulation and the amended Act by November 15, 1993. 

On July 13, 1993, the Illinois General Assembly adjourned without taking the necessary action to enable Illinois
to adopt and implement the I/M provisions mandated by the amended Act and the final I/M rule in Chicago and East St. Louis
ozone nonattainment areas. Failure to provide such authority prevented the State from submitting a complete SIP
revision containing all the required elements of the program by November 15, 1993. On September 28, 1993, USEPA sent
a letter to Illinois Governor Edgar advising him that USEPA had decided to exercise its discretionary authority under
section 110(m) of the Act to impose sanctions at any time once a finding of SIP deficiency is made if necessary legislation
was not adopted during the October 1993 veto session of the Illinois General Assembly. The Illinois General Assembly
reconvened on October 12, 1993, for the fall veto session. During this session which adjourned November 4, 1993, the
legislature failed for the second time to enact the legislation needed to implement the required I/M program meeting
the requirements of the Act in the State of Illinois. After review of the committal SIP, USEPA proposed to disapprove
the commitment on December 2, 1993 (58 FR 63547), based on the failure by the State to meet interim and final milestones
in the schedule contained in the SIP submittal pertaining to the enactment of necessary authority to implement I/M
requirements during the 1993 Illinois General Legislative session. On November 15, 1993, the State of Illinois failed
to meet its commitment to USEPA by failing to submit a full SIP revision for I/M program implementation. 
</SUPPLEM>
