 

(1) Accurate, current and complete disclosure of the financial results of each federally-sponsored project or program
in accordance with the reporting requirements set forth in 600.152. If a DOE award requires reporting on an
accrual basis from a recipient that maintains its records on other than an accrual basis, the recipient shall not be
required to establish an accrual accounting system. These recipients may develop such accrual data for their reports
on the basis of an analysis of the documentation on hand. 
(2) Records that identify adequately the source and application of funds for federally-sponsored activities. These
records shall contain information pertaining to Federal awards, authorizations, obligations, unobligated balances,
assets, outlays, income and interest. 
(3) Effective control over and accountability for all funds, property and other assets. Recipients shall adequately
safeguard all such assets and assure they are used solely for authorized purposes. 
(4) Comparison of outlays with budget amounts for each award. Whenever appropriate, financial information should
be related to performance and unit cost data. As discussed in paragraph (a) of this section, unit cost data is generally
not appropriate for awards that support research. 
(5) Written procedures to minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds to the recipient from the U.S. Treasury
and the issuance or redemption of checks, warrants or payments by other means for program purposes by the recipient.
To the extent that the provisions of the Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA) (Pub. L. 101453) govern, payment
methods of State agencies, instrumentalities, and fiscal agents shall be consistent with CMIA Treasury-State Agreements
or the CMIA default procedures codified at 31 CFR Part 205, ``Withdrawal of Cash from the Treasury for Advances under
Federal Grant and Other Programs.'' 
(6) Written procedures for determining the reasonableness, allocability and allowability of costs in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable Federal cost principles and the terms and conditions of the award. 
(7) Accounting records including cost accounting records that are supported by source documentation. 
(c) Where the Federal Government guarantees or insures the repayment of money borrowed by the recipient, the Contracting
Officer, at his or her discretion, may require adequate bonding and insurance if the bonding and insurance requirements
of the recipient are not deemed adequate to protect the interest of the Federal Government. 
(d) The Contracting Officer may require adequate fidelity bond coverage where the recipient lacks sufficient coverage
to protect the Federal Government's interest. 
(e) Where bonds are required in the situations described in 600.121 (c) and (d), the bonds shall be obtained
from companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties, as prescribed in 31 CFR Part 223, ``Surety
Companies Doing Business with the United States.'' 
(f) Individuals whose financial management systems do not meet the minimum standards of 600.121 (b) shall
maintain a separate bank account for deposit of award or subaward funds. Disbursements by the recipient or subrecipient
from this account shall be supported by source documentation such as canceled checks, paid bills, receipts, payrolls,
etc. 


600.122 


Payment. 


(a) Payment methods shall minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds from the United States Treasury
and the issuance or redemption of checks, warrants, or payment by other means by the recipients. Payment methods of
State agencies or instrumentalities shall be consistent with Treasury-State CMIA agreements or default procedures
codified at 31 CFR Part 205. 
(b) Recipients will be paid in advance, provided they maintain or demonstrate the willingness to maintain: 
(1) Written procedures that minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds and disbursement by the recipient,
and 
(2) Financial management systems that meet the standards for fund control and accountability as established in 600.121.
Cash advances to a recipient organization shall be limited to the minimum amounts needed and be timed to be in accordance
with the actual, immediate cash requirements of the recipient organization in carrying out the purpose of the approved
program or project. The timing and amount of cash advances shall be as close as is administratively feasible to the
actual disbursements by the recipient organization for direct program or project costs and the proportionate share
of any allowable indirect costs. 
(c) Whenever possible, advances shall be consolidated to cover anticipated cash needs for all awards made by the DOE
to the recipient. 
(1) Advance payment mechanisms include, but are not limited to, Treasury check and electronic funds transfer. 
(2) Advance payment mechanisms are subject to 
31 CFR Part 205. 
(3) Recipients may submit requests for advances and reimbursements at least monthly when electronic fund transfers
are not used. 
(d) Requests for Treasury check advance payment shall be submitted on SF270, ``Request for Advance or Reimbursement,''
or other forms as may be authorized by OMB. This form is not to be used when Treasury check advance payments are made to
the recipient automatically through the use of a predetermined payment schedule or if precluded by special DOE instructions
for electronic funds transfer. 
(e) Reimbursement is the preferred method when the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section cannot be met. DOE
may also use this method on any construction agreement, or if the major portion of the construction project is accomplished
through private market financing or Federal loans, and the Federal assistance constitutes a minor portion of the
project. 
(1) When the reimbursement method is used, DOE shall make payment within 30 days after receipt of the billing, unless
the billing is improper. 





