 

4. 

Instructions on Call. 

Respondents are requested to nominate blocks within the Call area that they would like to be considered for inclusion
in proposed OCS Lease Sale 148. Nominations must be depicted on the Call map by outlining the area(s) of interest along
block lines. Respondents are asked to submit a list of whole and partial blocks nominated (by OPD designations) to
facilitate correct interpretation of their nominations on the Call map. Although the identities of those submitting
nominations become a matter of public record, the individual nominations are deemed to be proprietary information.



Respondents are also requested to rank areas nominated according to priority of interest (e.g., Priority 1 (high),
Priority 2 (medium), or Priority 3 (low)). Areas nominated that do not indicate priorities will be considered Priority
3. Respondents are encouraged to be specific in indicating areas or blocks by priority. Blanket priorities on large
areas are not useful in the analysis of industry interest. The telephone number and name of a person to contact in the
respondent's organization for additional information should be included in the response.



Comments are sought from all interested parties about particular geologic, environmental, biological, archaeological,
or social and economic conditions, conflicts, or other information that might bear upon potential leasing and development
in the Call area. Comments are also sought on potential conflicts with approved local coastal management plans (CMP's)
that may result from the proposed sale and future OCS gas and oil activities. If possible, these comments should identify
specific CMP policies of concern, the nature of the conflicts foreseen, and steps that MMS could take to avoid or mitigate
the potential conflicts. Comments may be in terms of broad areas or restricted to particular blocks of concern. Those
submitting comments are requested to list block numbers or outline the subject area on the large-scale Call map.



Nominations and comments must be received no later than 45 days following publication of this document in the 

Federal Register

 in envelopes labeled ``Nominations for Proposed Chukchi Sea Lease Sale 148,'' or ``Comments on the Call for Information
and Nominations for Proposed Chukchi Sea Lease Sale 148,'' as appropriate. The original Call map with indications
of interest and/or comments must be submitted to the Regional Supervisor, Leasing and Environment, Alaska OCS Region,
Minerals Management Service, 949 East 36th Avenue, room 603, Anchorage, Alaska 99508-4302.



5. 

Use of Information from Call. 

Information submitted in response to this Call will be used for several purposes. First, responses will be used to
help identify the areas for potential gas and oil development. Second, comments on possible environmental effects
and potential-use conflicts will be used in the analysis of environmental conditions in and near the Call area. The
third program for this Call is to assist in the scoping of the EIS and the development of alternatives to the proposed
action for analysis. The NOI to prepare an EIS is included later in this document. Fourth, comments may be used in developing
lease terms and conditions to ensure safe offshore gas and oil activities. Fifth, comments may be used to point out
potential conflicts between offshore gas and oil activities and the State's CMP.



6. 

Existing Information. 

The Information Base Review (IBR) step was completed in March 1993. The purpose of the IBR is to evaluate the availability
and quality of information relevant to decisions on this proposed Sale.


The IBR for Chukchi Sea Sale 148 included publication of a Request for Interest and Information in December 1992, with
comments due by the end of January 1993, and Information Transfer Meetings in Anchorage, Alaska, in January 1993.
On the basis of the information analyzed during the review process, a determination was made that there is sufficient
information and interest to proceed with the Call.



The National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences is conducting a study on environmental information
for gas and oil leasing decisions in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas, and Navarin Basin OCS Planning Areas. This study,
expected to be completed in the first quarter of 1994, will examine information needs, costs of obtaining information,
potential improvements in the management and prediction of environmental effects that may result from acquiring
additional information, and alternatives to conducting additional studies. The conclusions of this report can
be considered, along with information received in response to the Call and scoping efforts, in subsequent decisions
in the prelease process.



An extensive environmental, social and economic studies program has been under way in this area since 1975. The emphasis
has been on: geologic mapping; environmental characterization of biologically sensitive habitats; endangered
whales and marine mammals; physical oceanography; ocean-circulation modeling; and ecological effects of gas and
oil activities. A complete listing of available study reports and information for ordering copies may be obtained
from the Records Manager, Alaska OCS Region, at the address stated under Description of Area. The reports may also
be ordered directly from the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Technical Information Service, 5285 Port Royal
Road, Springfield, Virginia 22161 or by telephone at (730) 487-4650. 



In addition, a program status report for continuing studies in this area may be obtained from the Chief, Environmental
Studies Section, Alaska OCS Region, at the address stated under Instructions on Call or by telephone at (907) 271-6620.





