 

On November 5, 1992 (57 FR 52950), the USEPA published a final rule (I/M Rule) establishing I/M requirements pursuant
to section 182. On June 28, 1994 the USEPA published a proposal to amend requirements pertaining to SIP submissions
for areas required to implement a basic I/M program that submit, and otherwise qualify for approval of, a redesignation
request (``Proposed I/M Redesignation Rule''). The authority for that amendment is discussed in that proposal.

The I/M Redesignation Rule proposes to allow areas that have requested redesignation to attainment, and are otherwise
eligible to obtain approval of the request, to defer adoption and implementation of otherwise applicable requirements
established in the originally promulgated I/M rule. For such areas, the USEPA does not believe it is necessary to revise
or adopt new regulations which are not essential for clean air, and which would not be implemented after redesignation
occurred because they are not necessary for maintenance. The proposed rule applies only to areas that by virtue of
their air quality classification are required to implement a basic I/M program and that submit and obtain approval
of a redesignation request. 
For such areas, the I/M Redesignation Rule proposes that the I/M component of the I/M SIP contain the following four
criteria: 

(1) Legislative authority for basic I/M meeting all the requirements of subpart S such that implementing regulations
can be adopted without any further legislative action, 

(2) A provision in the SIP providing that basic I/M be placed in the contingency measures portion of the maintenance
plan upon redesignation, 

(3) a contingency measure consisting of a commitment by the Governor or his/her designee to adopt regulations to implement
the I/M program in response to a specified triggering event, and 

(4) a commitment that includes an enforceable schedule for the adoption and implementation of a basic I/M program
including appropriate milestones in the event the contingency measure is triggered. 

In this rulemaking, the USEPA is considering Michigan's I/M submittal based on the proposed I/M requirements for
areas otherwise eligible for redesignation. If the State's redesignation request is not otherwise eligible for
approval at the time the USEPA takes final action on it, or if the proposed I/M requirements for redesignation are not
codified, Michigan's submittal will be judged by the current I/M approvability criteria as detailed in the USEPA's
final I/M rule promulgated on November 5, 1992. 

As discussed in the Proposed I/M Redesignation Rule, while the USEPA considers the redesignation request, the State
continues to be required to meet all the current SIP submission requirements including fully adopted rules and specific
implementation deadlines as required under 40 CFR 51.372 of the I/M Rule. If the State does not comply with these
requirements, it could be subject to sanctions pursuant to section 179. If the redesignation request is approved,
any sanctions already imposed or any sanctions clock already triggered would be terminated. 



II. Finding of USEPA Review


On November 15, 1993 the State submitted a redesignation request including I/M as a contingency measure for the Detroit-Ann
Arbor area to the USEPA. 


