 

The Department's ``Guidelines for Fruit, Vegetable, and Specialty Crop Marketing Orders'' specifies that 110 percent
of recent years' sales should be made available to primary markets each season before recommendations for volume
regulation are approved. This goal is met by the establishment of a final percentage which releases 
100 percent of the computed trade demand and the additional release of reserve raisins to handlers under ``10 plus
10'' offers. The ``10 plus 10'' offers are two simultaneous offers of reserve pool raisins which are made available
to handlers each season. For each such offer, a quantity of raisins equal to 10 percent of the prior year's shipments
is made available for free use. 
Pursuant to 989.54(a) of the order, the Committee which is responsible for local administration of the order,
met on August 16, 1993, to review shipment and inventory data, and other matters relating to the supplies of raisins
of all varietal types. The Committee computed a trade demand for each varietal type for which a free tonnage percentage
might be recommended. The trade demand is 90 percent of the prior year's shipments of free tonnage and reserve tonnage
raisins sold for free use for each varietal type into all market outlets, adjusted by subtracting the carryin of each
varietal type on August 1 of the current crop year and by adding to the trade demand the desirable carryout for each varietal
type at the end of that crop year. As specified in 989.154, the desirable carryout for each varietal type shall
be equal to the shipments of free tonnage raisins of the prior crop year during the months of August, September, and
one half of October. If the prior year's shipments are limited because of crop conditions, the total shipments during
that period of time during one of the three years preceding the prior crop year may be used. In accordance with these
provisions, the Committee computed and announced a 199394 trade demand of 282,909 tons for Natural (sun-dried)
Seedless raisins. 
As required under section 989.54(b) of the order, the Committee met on October 5, 1993, and computed and announced
a preliminary crop estimate and preliminary free and reserve percentages for Natural (sun-dried) Seedless raisins
which released 85 percent of the trade demand since field prices had been established. The preliminary crop estimate
and preliminary free and reserve percentages were as follows: 387,947 tons, and 62 percent free and 38 percent reserve.
Also at that meeting, the Committee computed and announced preliminary crop estimates and preliminary free and reserve
percentages for Dipped Seedless, Oleate and Related Seedless, Golden Seedless, Zante Currant, Sultana, Muscat,
Monukka, and Other Seedless raisins. On November 15, 1993, the Committee decided that volume control percentages
only were warranted for Natural (sun-dried) Seedless raisins, which would remain at 62 percent free and 38 percent
reserve. It determined that the supplies of the other varietal types would be less than or close enough to the computed
trade demands for each of these varietals or could be substituted to relieve anticipated shortages in some size ranges
of Natural (sun-dried) Seedless raisins used for baking. In view of these factors, volume control percentages would
not be necessary to maintain market stability. 
Pursuant to 989.54(c), the Committee may adopt interim free and reserve percentages. Interim percentages
may release less than the computed trade demand for each varietal type. Interim percentages for Natural (sun-dried)
Seedless raisins of 73.75 percent free and 26.25 percent reserve were computed and announced on January 13, 1994.
That action released most, but not all, of the computed trade demand for Natural (sun-dried) Seedless raisins. 
Under 989.54(d) of the order, the Committee is required to recommend to the Secretary, no later than February
15 of each crop year, final free and reserve percentages which, when applied to the final production estimate of a varietal
type, will tend to release the full trade demand for any varietal type. 





