 



The Performance Evaluation Program Committee. 

This committee 
shall determine the requirements for the Performance 
Evaluation Program. The committee shall generate the 
standards for the Performance Evaluation Samples, provide 
criteria for selection of the provider of the Performance 
Evaluation Samples, and provide and update the protocol for 
the use of Performance Evaluation Program in the accreditation 
of laboratories. 



The On-Site Assessment Committee. 

This committee shall 
establish the training and experience requirements of the 
assessors; establish the frequency of inspections; and 
generate the procedures for on-site visits. 



The Accreditation Process Committee. 

This committee shall 
establish and develop modifications for the accreditation 
process including the requirements for accreditation; 
procedural requirements for suspension, revocation and denial 
of accreditation; relative roles and responsibilities of 
laboratories; and appeal processes. The Committee considers 
matters concerning reciprocity of accreditation. 



The Regulatory Committee. 

This committee provides the 
Standing Committees with current information on Federal 
regulations which affect the testing that the laboratories do. 
The Regulatory Committee annually presents a report for 
Conference action. Its scope embraces all matters regarding 
the development and interpretation of uniform laws and 
regulations; the study and analysis of bills for legislative 
enactment; and the establishment and maintenance of published 
guidelines and other effective means of encouraging uniformity 
of interpretation and application of laboratory accreditation 
laws and regulations. This committee shall develop language 
which shall assist the states in the preparation and adoption 
of standardized statutes and regulations. 



1.3.3.2The Administrative Committees 



The Administrative Committees, with the exception of the 
Contributors Committee, shall consist of members appointed 
from the active membership. The functions and the 
responsibilities of the Administrative Committees are 
described below. 



The Nominating Committee. 

The Nominating Committee annually 
presents a slate of nominees for all elective offices at the 
national annual conference. 



The Conference Management and Funding Committee. 

This 
committee sets annual membership fees and conference 
registration fees, manages the logistical details of the 
interim meetings and annual conferences, prepares an annual 
budget for the Conference to be submitted for approval to the 
Board of Directors, and publicizes the interim meetings and 
annual conferences. The Treasurer shall be an ex-officio 
member of this committee. 



The Membership Committee. 

This committee initiates membership 
invitations and publicizes the Conference to prospective 
members. The committee also provides coordination and 
participation of Contributors in all affairs of the 
Conference. 



The Fiscal Auditing Committee. 

This committee is responsible 
for the conduct and review of the annual audit of the 
Conference and shall report such findings to the Board of 
Directors. It also audits the Treasurer's books annually. 


The Liaison Committee.

 This committee shall provide liaison 
with other federal agencies such as the Department of Energy 
and the Department of Defense. In addition this committee 
shall provide liaison with other national and international 
standard setting bodies such as the National Institutes of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) and the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO). The function of this 
committee is to provide and solicit information and develop a 
spirit of cooperation between NELAC and outside organizations. 



