 

(6) The SSA Committees are responsible for the 
following: 
(i) SSA Committees are charged with recommending 
high-need jurisdictions and award amounts within the State. When selecting jurisdictions with demonstrated need,
the National Board encourages the consideration of counties incorporating or adjoining Indian reservations. The
SSA Committee has 25 working days to notify the National Board in writing of its selections and the appropriate contact
person for each area.






Note:

 The minimum award amount for a single jurisdiction is $1,000 and only whole-dollar amounts can be allocated.

 

(ii) Notification to the National Board of selection criteria that were used to determine which jurisdictions within
the State was selected to receive funds. 
(iii) The National Board will then notify these jurisdictions directly. 
(iv) In the event that funds are not claimed by SSA jurisdictions, SSA Committees may recommend that other jurisdictions
receive the reallocated funds. 
(d) 

Local Board.

 (1) Each area designated by the National Board to receive funds shall constitute a Local Board. In a local community
where there are affiliates of the United Way of America, The Salvation Army, the National Council of Churches of Christ
in the U.S.A., Catholic Charities, U.S.A, Council of Jewish Federations, and the American Red Cross, which are represented
on the National Board, they must be invited to serve on the Local Board. The National Board mandates that if a jurisdiction
is located within or encompasses a federally recognized Indian reservation, a Native American representative must
be invited to serve on the Local Board. All Local Boards are required to include in their membership a homeless or formerly
homeless person. Local Boards should seek recommendations from LROs for an appropriate representative. The County
Executive/Mayor, appropriate head of local government or his or her designee will replace the FEMA member. An agency's
own governing board is not an acceptable substitute for a Local Board. Local Boards are encouraged to expand participation
and membership by inviting or notifying minority populations, other private non-profit organizations and 
government organizations; the jurisdiction should be geographically represented as well. 
The members of each Local Board will elect a chair. Local Board membership is not honorary; there are specific duties
the board must perform. If a member cannot regularly attend meetings, the member should be replaced by the member's
designated agency. If a member must be absent from a meeting, the member's organization may designate an alternate.

(2) If a locality has not previously received funding and is now designated as being in high need, the National Board
has designated the local United Way to constitute and convene a Local Board as described above. If there is no local
United Way, or it does not convene the board, the local American Red Cross, the local Salvation Army, or a local government
official will be responsible for convening the initial meeting of the Local Board. 
If a locality has previously received National Board 
funding, the former chairman of the Local Board will be contacted regarding any new funding the locality is designated
to receive. 
Each award phase is new; therefore, the Local Board is a new entity in every phase. The convener of the Local Board must
ask each agency to designate or redesignate a representative every program year. 
(3) The Local Board must establish and follow regular procedures. The National Board encourages Local Boards to hold
at least two meetings: a meeting to allocate the grant and a second to monitor LRO activities. A majority of members
must be present for the meeting to be official. (Attendance and decision-making minutes be kept). Meeting minutes
must be approved by the Local Board at the next meeting. They must 
also be available to the National Board, Federal authorities, and the public on request. 
(4) The Local Board will have 25 working days after the notification of the award selection by the National Board in
which to advertise and promote the program and consider all private voluntary and public organizations for participation,
including those on Indian reservations. Consideration must be given to any agency providing or capable of providing
emergency food and shelter services, not only those represented on the Local Board or affiliates of State or national
organizations. Advertising must take place prior to the Local Board's allocation of funds. Failure to advertise
properly will delay processing of the jurisdiction's board plan. 
(5) The Local Board selects and recommends which local organizations should receive grants and the amounts of the
grants. Since member agencies of the Local Board may also apply for funding, care must be taken that every applicant
is judged by common, consistent criteria. Local Board members should strive to use sound judgement and fairness in
their approach. The Local Board should be prepared to justify an allocation of one-third (1/3) or more of its total
award to a single LRO. 






Note:

 The minimum grant per LRO is $300 and only whole-dollar amounts may be allocated. 



(6) Local Boards are responsible for monitoring LROs that receive over $100,000 in Federal funds and ensure that they
comply with the Single Audit Act, OMB Circular A133. 




