 

(5) Training or technical assistance for an individual with disabilities, or, where appropriate, the family of an
individual with disabilities.
(6) Training or technical assistance for professionals (including individuals providing educational rehabilitative
services), employers, or other individuals who provide services to, employ, or are otherwise substantially involved
in the major life functions of an individual with a disability.
(c) 

Attention deficit disorder (ADD). 

As used to define students, encompasses attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and attention deficit disorder
without hyperactivity. The essential features of this disorder are developmentally inappropriate degrees of inattention,
impulsiveness, and hyperactivity.
(1) A diagnosis of ADD may be made only after the child is evaluated by appropriate medical personnel, and evaluation
procedures set forth in this part (appendix B to this part) are followed.
(2) A diagnosis of ADD, in and of itself, does not mean that a child requires special education; it is possible that a
child diagnosed with ADD, as the only finding, can have his or her educational needs met within the regular education
setting.
(3) For a child with ADD to be eligible for special education, the Case Study Committee, with assistance from the medical
personnel conducting the evaluation, must then make a determination that the ADD is a chronic or acute health problem
that results in limited alertness, which adversely affects educational performance. Children with ADD who are eligible
for special education and medically related services will qualify for services under ``Other Health Impaired''
as described in Criterion A, paragraph (h)(1) of this section.
(d) 

Autism. 

A developmental disability significantly affecting verbal and non-verbal communication and social interaction
generally evident before age 3 that adversely affects educational performance. Characteristics of autism include
irregularities and impairments in communication, engagement in repetitive activities and stereotyped movements,
resistance to environmental change or change in daily routines, and unusual responses to sensory experiences. The
term does not include children with characteristics of the disability of serious emotional disturbance.
(e) 

Case Study Committee (CSC). 

A school-based committee that determines a child's eligibility for special education, develops and reviews a child's
individualized education program (IEP), and determines appropriate placement in the least restrictive environment.
A CSC is uniquely composed for each child. Participants on a CSC must include:
(1) The designated representative of the Section 6 School Arrangement, who is qualified to supervise the provision
of special education. Such representative may not be the child's special education teacher.
(2) One, or more, of the child's regular education teachers, if appropriate.
(3) A special education teacher.
(4) One, or both, of the child's parents.
(5) The child, if appropriate.
(6) A member of the evaluation team or another person knowledgeable about the evaluation procedures used with the
child.
(7) Other individuals, at the discretion of the parent or the Section 6 School Arrangement, who may have pertinent
information.
(f) 

Child-find. 

The ongoing process used by the Military Services and a Section 6 School Arrangement to seek and identify children
(from birth to 21 years of age) who show indications that they might be in need of early intervention services or special
education and related services. Child-find activities include the dissemination of information to the public and
identification, screening, and referral procedures.
(g) 

Children with disabilities ages 521 (inclusive). 

Those children ages 521 years (inclusive), evaluated in accordance with this part, who are in need of special
education as determined by a CSC and who have not been graduated from a high school or who have not completed the requirements
for a General Education Diploma. The terms ``child'' and ``student'' may also be used to refer to this population.
The student must be determined eligible under one of the following four categories:
(1) 

Criterion A. 

The educational performance of the student is adversely affected, as determined by the CSC, by a physical impairment;
visual impairment including blindness; hearing impairment including deafness; orthopedic impairment; or other
health impairment, including ADD, when the condition is a chronic or acute health problem that results in limited
alertness; autism; and traumatic brain injury requiring environmental and/or academic modifications.


