 

B. Pollution Prevention Benefits 


EPA's progress over the years in improving environmental quality through its media-specific pollution control
programs has been substantial. Over the past two decades, standards for pollution control concentrated to a large
extent on ``end-of-pipe'' treatment or land disposal of hazardous and nonhazardous wastes. Although none of the
treatment standards in today's rule require waste minimization or recovery, these are viable options for facilities
to choose to use to comply with universal treatment standards. For example, facilities may choose to reduce the generation
of wastes and/or treat certain metal-containing wastes by using high temperature metal recovery (HTMR), which has
been shown to be effective for treating many metal bearing wastes. 


C. Relationship of Best Demonstrated Available Technology (BDAT) Treatment Standards to Initiatives To Strengthen
Federal Controls Governing Hazardous Waste Combustion Devices 


On May 18, 1993, EPA Administrator Browner announced additional steps that would be pursued to protect public health
and the environment by further encouraging reduction in the amount of hazardous wastes generated in this country
and strengthening federal controls governing hazardous waste incinerators and other combustion devices. With
the announcement, the Draft Hazardous Waste Minimization and Combustion Strategy (also referred to as the Draft
Strategy) was released, upon which the Agency has sought broad national dialogue. Among other things, the Draft Strategy
called for a national review of the relative roles of hazardous waste combustion and source reduction in hazardous
waste management. 
Since release of the Draft Strategy, the Agency has pursued a wide variety of activities. For example, EPA released
in May 1994 a draft technical report entitled ``Combustion Emissions Technical Resource Document''. This report
provides EPA's preliminary technical analysis of best operating practices and achievable emission levels with
regards to emissions of dioxin and particulate matter from existing hazardous waste incinerators, and boilers and
industrial furnaces (BIFs) burning hazardous wastes, based on data already submitted to EPA. The report was also
released to provide for early pre-proposal dialogue on the types of additional controls and emission limits that
should be adopted for hazardous waste combustion units. In another action, the Agency announced its proposed permitting
and public participation rule. This rule would amend EPA's RCRA regulations to provide earlier and more effective
opportunities for public participation in the RCRA permitting process. The rule also proposes tighter standards
for the interim period immediately after a facility trial burn is completed but before a final permit determination
is made. 
Today's rule provides the Agency with another opportunity to address the objectives of the Draft Strategy. In particular,
this rule specifies a series of new treatment standards that must be met before hazardous wastes are land disposed.
As in previous LDR rules, the standards for hazardous organic constituents are, in many cases, based on the performance
of combustion technology. In the proposed rule, the Agency solicited comments and data on whether other treatment
technologies, especially recycling technologies, can achieve these or comparable treatment levels. EPA also solicited
comment on whether the levels should be modified so as to allow and encourage the use of non-combustion treatment technologies.

It remains EPA's primary objective in hazardous waste management to reduce the amount of hazardous waste that is generated
so as to minimize the need to treat and dispose of hazardous waste. A wide range of waste minimization activities are
underway, including development of the National Plan for Hazardous Waste Minimization released in draft on May 23,
1994 as part of the Draft Strategy. However, for those hazardous wastes that are still produced and are disposed, the
waste must be treated (see RCRA section 3004(m)). 
While the Agency has concerns with combustion devices that are not properly designed and operated, particularly
if they do not fully control toxic metals and organics (including products of incomplete combustion (PICs)), the
Agency also believes that combustion technologies, if properly designed and operated, do minimize threats to human
health and the environment for many waste streams. Several commenters agree with the Agency on this point. In fact,
these commenters (including environmental groups) argue that relaxing the treatment standards to reduce the amount
of treatment otherwise achieved via combustion could actually increase threats to human health and the environment,
and thus violate EPA's statutory requirements under 3004(m). In addition, it has also been argued that loosening
the treatment standards will not necessarily result in less combustion because the regulated community may still
choose to rely on combustion to meet the standards. Commenters also suggested that loosening the treatment standards
will actually act as a disincentive to seek pollution prevention alternatives. This latter point seems to have merit
in that based on some preliminary analysis of the land disposal restrictions program by the Agency, the existing treatment
standards have raised the cost of hazardous waste management substantially and have been a factor in reducing the
amount of hazardous waste generated. 
To address those combustion facilities that are not operated properly, the Agency will continue its aggressive inspection
and enforcement program to bring the facilities back into compliance with all requirements and to impose penalties.
In addition, the Agency is actively engaged with all interested parties in discussions on upgrading combustion regulations.
EPA is considering, as part of this upcoming rulemaking, revising the controls on dioxin and furan emissions, particulate
matter, and toxic metals. In the course of the rulemaking, the public will have the opportunity to comment on the Agency's
proposals. As noted earlier, EPA is already seeking public comment on its preparatory work for this rulemaking to
upgrade combustion regulations through release of the Combustion Emissions Technical Resource Document, this
past May. 
Several commenters indicated that the LDR treatment standards should not be based on combustion performance because
this will encourage combustion over other treatment alternatives. Although the Agency is willing to look at alternative
technologies, such technologies must still achieve levels of performance that satisfy the dictates of RCRA section
3004(m). Also, we must have some assurance that any alternative treatment method is done safely. No information or
data was provided by these commenters on the issues of the effectiveness or safety of the alternative treatment technologies
or limits, or that such alternatives would be equally or more protective of human health and the environment. (As EPA
has stated many times, the Agency specifies concentration levels as the treatment standards rather than mandated
methods of treatment because this provides maximum flexibility in the selection of treatment technology that may
be used.)

