 

11. The Applicants represent that, except to the extent that exemptive relief has been obtained from the Commission
pursuant to this or any other applicable exemptive application, all charges under the Policies will comply with all
of the applicable limitations, terms, conditions and requirements of the 1940 Act and the rules promulgated thereunder.
To the extent permitted by the 1940 Act and the rules thereunder, the sales and administrative charges under the Policies
may be reduced in the case of sales to a class of associated individuals or to a trustee, employer, or similar entity
where the Companies anticipate that the sales to members of the class will result in lower than normal sales or administrative
expenses.



Applicants' Legal Analysis



1. Section 27(a)(3) of the 1940 Act generally provides that the amount of sales charge deducted from any of the first
twelve monthly payments on a periodic payment plan certificate may not exceed proportionately the amount deducted
from any other such payment, and that the amount deducted from any subsequent payment may not exceed proportionately
the amount deducted from any other subsequent payment.

2. With limited exceptions, Rule 6e3(T)(b)(13)(ii) grants an exemption from Section 27(a)(3), provided
that the proportionate amount of sales charge deducted from any payment during the contract period does not exceed
the proportionate amount deducted from any prior payment.

3. With respect to sales charges deducted from other than premiums, Rule 6e3(T)(d)(1) provides in pertinent
part, and with limited exceptions, that Rule 6e3(T)(b)(13)(ii) shall be deemed to be satisfied if the amount
of sales load deducted pursuant to any method permitted under Rule 6e3(T)(d) does not exceed the proportionate
amount of sales load deducted prior thereto pursuant to the same method.



A. Front-End Sales Charge Limitation



1. The Companies will not impose the 4% front-end sales charge upon the amount of any premium payments received in any
Policy year that is in excess of the target premium for that year. Consequently, the front-end sales charge may apply
to some premium payments and not to others. The Applicants request an exemption from Section 27(a)(3) and Rules 6e3(T)
(b)(13)(ii) and (d)(1) (also referred to herein collectively as the ``stair-step provisions'') to the extent necessary
to permit this sales charge structure.

2.The Applicants represent that the sales charge deducted from the first target premium paid under a Policy in any
Policy year, as compared with the absence of such a charge deducted from premiums in excess thereof, in part reflects
the fact that lower overall distribution costs (

e.g.

, commissions paid to sales persons) are incurred in connection with such excess premiums over the life of the Policies.
To deduct a sales charge from the excess premiums would generate more revenue than either Company believes is necessary
to adequately defray such expenses. The Applicants submit that the structure of the front-end sales load under the
Policies provides a significant benefit to Policy owners by passing through to them lower distribution costs with
respect to excess premiums.
<FOOTCITE>4</FOOTCITE>
 The Applicants further submit that it would not be in the interest of Policy owners to require the deduction from excess
premiums of a sales charge that is higher than the Applicants deem necessary.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
4

</FOOTNAME>
The Applicants submit that the flexibility in the timing and amount of premium payments afforded Policy owners are
desirable features. The Applicants also note that, subject to the other exemptive relief requested in the application,
the Policies would continue to comply with all of the other sales charge limitations and requirements in Rule 6e3(T),
even if the front-end sales charge were deducted from all premium payments. Such a front-end charge structure, however,
also would clearly be less favorable to Policy owners than that provided under the Policies.

</FOOTNOTE>


3. In addition, the Applicants represent that the proposed sales load structure would not deduct large amounts of
front-end sales charges so early in the life of the Policy that an investor redeeming in the early periods would recoup
little of his or her investment, a perceived abuse of periodic plan certificates identified by Commission staff in
past no-action letters.
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>


See, e.g.

, Western Reserve Life Insurance Co. (avail. Aug. 28, 1987); United Investors Life Insurance Co. (avail. July 9, 1987).

</FOOTNOTE>


4. The Applicants represent that the sales charge structure under the Policies is relatively straightforward and
easily understood, as compared with that of many other variable life insurance policies that are currently being
offered. The Applicants further represent that owners of Policies will benefit from the sales charge structure of
the Policies, and that the prospectuses for the Policies will contain disclosure informing owners how to minimize
sales charge deductions from premiums paid.

5. The Applicants submit that the Commission has indicated that the policies underlying the ``stair-step'' requirement
in Rule 6e3(T) would not be contravened by fluctuations in sales load which result from factors beyond the control
of Policy issuers (such as the Companies),
<FOOTCITE>6</FOOTCITE>
 and that this principle is equally applicable in the present circumstance.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
6

</FOOTNAME>
Investment Company Act Release No. 15651, at note 139 (Mar. 30, 1987).

</FOOTNOTE>


B. Front-End Sales Charge Reduction for Large Policies



1. Each Company will waive a portion of any sales charge that otherwise would be deducted from premiums paid on a Policy
with a current sum insured of at least $250,000. The continuation of this waiver is not contractually guaranteed,
and the waiver may be withdrawn or modified by each Company at any time.

2. Under certain circumstances, the Policy owner may take action that results in a Policy's sum insured being reduced
after issue. For example, under certain of the available death benefit options, a partial withdrawal of the Policy's
cash surrender value reduces the sum insured on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Because the waiver of a portion of the front-end
sales charge applies only when the current sum insured is at least $250,000, and because the waiver is not guaranteed,
it is possible that the reduction could apply at some times with respect to a given Policy and not at subsequent times
with respect to the same Policy. The Applicants request an exemption from Section 27(a)(3) and Rules 6e3(T)
(b)(13)(ii) and (d)(1) to the extent necessary to permit this sales charge structure.

3. The Applicants submit that reduction of these charges will not unduly complicate the sales charge structure, and
represent that the operation of the sales charge reduction will be fully disclosed in the prospectuses pertaining
to the Policies. The Applicants submit that the reduction will clearly be of benefit to those Policy owners to whom
it applies.



C. CDSC Structure



1. The maximum CDSC under the Policies is 26% of premiums paid in each of the first three Policy years that are not in excess
of one base Policy target premium. Premiums paid in excess of one year's base Policy target premium in any of the first
three Policy years are not subject to any CDSC. Thus, the CDSC may apply to some premium payments made during the first
three Policy years, but not to others. This could be interpreted to be prohibited by Section 27(a)(3) and Rules 6e3(T)
(b)(13)(ii) and (d)(1).

2. The Applicants represent that they could have structured their 26% CDSC to apply to all premiums up to three base
Policy target premiums, regardless of when paid. The Applicants further represent that although that structure
would comply with all provisions of the 1940 Act and the rules promulgated thereunder (subject only to the other exemptive
relief requested herein), it would result in a higher CDSC for Policy owners who pay excess premiums in at least one
of the first three Policy years, or who pay a total of less than three base Policy target premiums during the first three
Policy years. The Applicants submit that the CDSC structure under the Policies is more favorable to purchasers than
would be the case if, as generally contemplated by Rule 6e3(T), the amount of sales charge with respect to any
premium payments did not depend on the year in which such payments were made.

3. The Applicants represent that the CDSC with respect to the first base Policy target premium in each of the first three
Policy years, as compared with the absence of such a charge with respect to any premiums in excess thereof paid during
those first three years, in part reflects the fact that lower overall distribution costs (

e.g.

, commissions paid to sales persons) are incurred in connection with such excess premiums. The Applicants submit
that to impose a CDSC upon such excess premiums paid during any of the first three Policy years would generate more revenues
than either Company believes is necessary to adequately defray such expenses.

4. The Applicants submit that all of the arguments set forth above concerning the inapplicability of the front-end
sales charge to premiums paid in excess of specified amounts during any Policy year equally support the inapplicability
of the CDSC to premiums paid in excess of one base Policy target premium during any of the first three Policy years. The
Applicants submit that Policy owners will benefit from the sales charge structure, and represent that the prospectuses
for the Policies will contain disclosure informing owners how to minimize the amount of CDSC with respect to the premiums
they pay.

5. If a Policy were surrendered during the second Policy year, the maximum total sales charge (including both the 4%
front-end charge and the 26% CDSC) would be 60% of base Policy target premiums paid to date. Imposition of the full CDSC
in such a case could cause the total sales charges to exceed the amount permitted by Rule 6e(3)(T)(b)(13)(v)(A), as
applied pursuant to Rule 6e3(T)(d)(1)(i)_

i.e.

, 40% of the first two guideline annual premiums paid under a Policy.


