

(4) Nonappropriated fund and related activities. (AR 2151).

(b) Tort and contract claims, insurance and litigation involving nonappropriated fund activities. (AR 2151).

(c) Annexation of Army lands. (AR 40525).

(d) Communications, transportation, and utility services administrative proceedings. Any contracting officer
or other Army official responsible for the acquisition of communications, transportation, utilities (gas, electric,
water and sewer), or military mail services, who becomes aware of any action or proceeding of interest to the Army,
will promptly refer the matter to the SJA or legal adviser, who will take the actions prescribed in 516.17 of
this part. Examples of actions requiring referral follow: new or amended rates, regulations, or conditions of service;
applications for authority to discontinue or initiate service; changes in electromagnetic patterns causing adverse
communications interference; or, zoning proposals affecting historic or aesthetic preservation. In addition,
the SJA or legal adviser will transmit the following to Regulatory Law Office:

(1) The names and addresses of any parties intervening and the substance of their positions.

(2) Names of government users affected by any change.

(3) Copy of any proposed rates, rules, or regulations.

(4) A recommendation whether the Army should intervene in the action or proceeding. If intervention is recommended,
provide a memorandum to support the recommendation.

(e) Legal proceedings overseas. Foreign communications, transportation, and utility service proceedings need
not be reported. In other legal proceedings instituted in a foreign country, the SJA or legal adviser will take the
actions prescribed in 516.17 of this part.

(f) Maritime claims. Admiralty and maritime claims within the purview of Chapter 8, AR 2720, which have been
investigated and processed under AR 5519 or other applicable regulations, will be referred to USARCS.

(g) Army and Air Force Exchange Service litigation. The SJA or legal adviser will send a copy of all documents relating
to litigation against AAFES to General Counsel, AAFES, P.O. Box 660202, Dallas, TX 752660202.

(h) Bankruptcy. Reports of bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings shall be made in accordance with this regulation
and AR 37103.



516.23 

Litigation reports.



The SJA or legal adviser will prepare a litigation report when directed by HQDA. The report will contain the following
sections: Statement of Facts; Setoff or Counterclaim; Responses to Pleadings; Memorandum of Law; Witness List;
and, Exhibits.

(a) Statement of Facts. Include a complete statement of the facts upon which the action and any defense thereto are
based. Where possible, support facts by reference to documents or witness statements. Include details of previous
administrative actions, such as the filing and results of an administrative claim. If the action is predicated on
the Federal Tort Claims Act, include a description of the plaintiff's relationship to the United States, its instrumentalities,
or its contractors. Also include a statement whether an insurance company or other third party has an interest in the
plaintiff's claim by subrogation or otherwise and whether there are additional claims related to the same incident.

(b) Setoff or Counterclaim. Discuss whether setoff or counterclaim exists. If so, highlight the supportive facts.

(c) Responses to Pleadings. Prepare a draft answer or other appropriate response to the pleadings. (See Figure C1,
to this part). Discuss whether allegations of fact are well-founded. Refer to evidence that refutes factual allegations.

(d) Memorandum of Law. Include a brief statement of the applicable law with citations to legal authority. Discussions
of local law, if applicable, should cover relevant issues such as measure of damages, scope of employment, effect
of contributory negligence, or limitations upon death and survival actions. Do not unduly delay submission of a litigation
report to prepare a comprehensive memorandum of law.

(e) Potential witness information. List each person having information relevant to the case and provide an office
address and telephone number. If there is no objection, provide the individual's social security account number,
home address, and telephone number. This is ``core information'' required by Executive Order No. 12778 (Civil Justice
Reform). Finally, summarize the information or potential testimony that each person listed could provide.



