 




<DOCTITLE>Financial Assistance Award: Underground Injection Practices Research Foundation</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Department of Energy, Metairie Site Office.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of intent.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Department of Energy (DOE), Metairie Site Office, announces that pursuant to 10 CFR 600.7(b)(2)(i) (A) and (D)
it intends to make a Non-Competitive Financial Assistance Award (Grant) through the Pittsburgh Energy Technology
Center to the Underground Injection Practices Research Foundation.




</SUMMARY>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



U.S. Department of Energy, Pittsburgh Energy Technology Center, Acquisition and Assistance Center, P.O. Box 10940,
MS 921118, Pittsburgh, PA 15236, Attn.: Mary Beth J. Pearse, Telephone: (412) 8924949.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The UIPRF has proposed a two-task project relating to Class II injection well operations in various states throughout
the country. Task I of the proposed project is designed to extend the implementation of a Risk-Based Data Management
System (RBDMS) in four states. Alaska, Mississippi, Montana, and Nevada would be given assistance with converting
data from existing data management systems; coding and internal testing of the RBDMS; preparing documentation,
training, and technology transfer; and project management. Task II of the proposed project would offer assistance
in conducting four regional training seminars related to Area of Review (AOR) investigations and environmental
compliance.



The Underground Injection Practices Council (UIPC) was formed in 1983 to work with various federal agencies, state
underground injection control (UIC) officials, municipal and county officials, representatives of environmental
groups, industry, scientists, and others on safe and effective methods for waste disposal. The UIPC, through its
Research Foundation, conducts a comprehensive program of original research and data collection and serves as a clearinghouse
for information on underground injection. The UIPC also conducts a variety of educational programs and serves as
a forum for the development of more sound regulations and technical standards. 


Greater emphasis is currently being placed on the ability of states to justify their regulatory decisions, with interest
in developing reliable procedures for assessing the risks posed by oil and gas injection wells increasing rapidly.
Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, agencies that implement UIC programs are required to prevent subsurface injection
that endangers an underground source of drinking water (USDW). 

The UIPRF just completed a grant from DOE that involved the investigation of state environmental, oil, and gas data,
and data management systems that pertain to underground injection control. The primary goal of this research was
to increase the base of technical and environmental knowledge related to the application of the UIPRF model that has
been developed to assess the risk of injection water contaminating a USDW. The project involved four major tasks:
(1) Conducting an inventory and needs assessment of the database management systems of the 21 states that have primacy
to supplement the UIC requirements for Class II wells, (2) conducting investigations of six state's data management
system capabilities and making hardware and software improvements, (3) conducting a Technical Symposium on Class
II injection wells relating to the application of the UIPRF model that was developed to assess risk of injection water
contaminating USDWs, and (4) conducting investigations of four states' data management system capabilities and
making hardware and software improvements. Task I of the current project proposed by UIPRF seeks to expand upon Task
IV of the just-completed grant by extending the implementation of the RBDMS in four states (Alaska, Mississippi,
Montana, and Nebraska). These states will be given assistance with converting data from existing data management
systems, coding and testing RBDMS, preparing documentation, and training efforts. 

In accordance with 10 CFR 600.7(b)(2)(i) criteria (A) and (D), a noncompetitive Financial Assistance Award to the
UIPRF has been justified. This effort is a continuation of the just-completed grant and opening up a continuation
effort to competition would have a significant adverse effect on continuity of the activity. The Applicant has exclusive
domestic capability to perform this activity successfully, based upon the unique technical expertise of the UIPRF
which will ensure maximum utilization of existing state, federal, industry and commercial sources of data necessary
to complete the study. This effort therefore is considered suitable for noncompetitive financial assistance and
would not be eligible for financial assistance under a solicitation, and a competitive solicitation would be inappropriate.


DOE funding for this research is estimated to be $499,745 for the duration of the project. These funds will be used to
pay for the reasonable cost of research staff, administrative support personnel, consultants, experts, and printing
costs as necessary for the research project.




Dated: March 28, 1994.


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Richard D. Rogus,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Contracting Officer.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948235 Filed 4594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 645001PM
</BILLING>


