 



Issue 7: 

Many comments were received expressing concerns that any recovery measures implemented for white sturgeon would
adversely affect other species in the Kootenai River basin. These resident species include the Idaho State sensitive
burbot or ling, westslope cutthroat trout, and the bull trout. For example, concerns were expressed that future changes
in Libby Dam operations to benefit white sturgeon could reduce bull trout access to spawning streams and impact reservoir
productivity affecting reservoir bull trout populations. Some respondents believe that future Kootenai River
flow management schemes, developed for the benefit of Kootenai River white sturgeon spawning and recruitment, could
also reduce the hydroelectric systems flexibility to provide ``federally-mandated flows'' for listed salmon stocks
downstream in the mid-Columbia River, and cause direct and indirect impacts to resident fish species in Lake Koocanusa
behind Libby Dam. 


Service response: 

The Service agrees that these are valid concerns. Concerns regarding the possible adverse environmental and non-biological
effects from implementing future recovery measures cannot be considered in a decision to list a species. However,
these concerns are important in developing recovery measures that take into account environmental effects to other
species. The Service will fully consider the environmental effects and consequences of implementing future recovery
measures for Kootenai River white sturgeon. 


Issue 8: 

Several commenters requested that the Service prepare an environmental assessment or environmental impact statement
under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for the proposed listing action. For example, Scott Orr of the
Montana House of Representatives believes that NEPA is required for the Service to ``*** fully disclose
its understanding of what the status of the white sturgeon really is. It would provide the public with the same information
the Service has and it would allow the public to completely understand the reasoning behind any decision the Service
may make.'' Additionally, Direct Services Industries, Inc., also maintains that the interim flow strategy developed
for white sturgeon spawning and recruitment as described in the proposed rule ``*** would constitute
a major federal action significantly affecting the quality of the environment, which would necessitate preparation
of an EIS under NEPA.'' 



Service response: 

As discussed in the NEPA section of this rule, it has been determined that such analyses are not required in connection
with regulations adopted pursuant to section 4(a) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. A notice outlining
the Service's reasons for this determination was published in the 

Federal Register

 on October 25, 1983 (48 FR 49244). The Service will consider economic and other environmental factors during the analysis
of critical habitat designation and in development of a recovery plan. Federal actions to implement a recovery plan
would be subject to NEPA analysis at the time they are proposed. 


Issue 9: 

Two respondents believe that if the Kootenai River population of white sturgeon is provided protection under the
Act, it should be listed as threatened instead of endangered. Specifically, without defined threshold criteria
to distinguish between a threatened or endangered status, ``*** it will be difficult to develop delisting
criteria to rebuild the Kootenai River white sturgeon population.'' 


Service response: 

The proposal to list the Kootenai River population of white sturgeon as endangered was based on an assessment of the
best scientific and commercial information available at the time. In making this final listing determination, the
Service has considered the current status of the fish, including population demographics, and continued lack of
successful reproduction and recruitment since the mid-1970's. The population had declined to an estimated 880 individuals
in 1990, and possibly declined to around 785 individuals in 1993 based upon BPA's (1993) recent estimates. The population
may be reaching the age of reproductive senescence, since for most sturgeon species females reproduce between the
ages of 15 to 25 years (Doroshov 1993). Although the continuing lack of natural flows affecting sturgeon juvenile
recruitment is considered the primary threat to its continued existence, other factors are also contributing to
the wild populations' decline. See the ``Summary of Factors Affecting the Species'' section for a more complete discussion
on the factors affecting the white sturgeon's decline. Consequently, the Service has determined that this distinct
population of white sturgeon is in danger of extinction throughout its range and therefore fits the Act's definition
of an endangered species. 


Issue 10: 

In comments on the proposed rule, BPA stated that two Libby Dam operational decisions cited as examples of other uses
taking priority over the needs of Kootenai River white sturgeon need further clarification. Additionally, BPA believes
the proposed rule also misinterpreted the level of cooperation between the Service and other State, Federal, Canadian
agencies and the Kootenai Indian Tribe in forming the White Sturgeon Technical Committee in June 1992 to address Kootenai
River white sturgeon issues. Specifically, the statement that ``*** Based on discussions and recommendations
by the Kootenai River Sturgeon Technical Committee, the Service adopted an interim flow proposal as the basis of any
prelisting Conservation Agreement ***''. 


Service response: 

The two operational decisions in question were described in Factor D of the ``Summary of Factors Affecting the Species''
section of the proposed rule. The first example occurred during early June 1992. BPA required that water be stored
behind Libby Dam for recreational purposes (not as part of an energy exchange as stated in the proposed rule) at the
request of B.C. Hydro. As a result, flows dropped from nearly 20,000 cubic feet per second (cfs) to 4,000 cfs (566 cubic
meters per second (cms) to 113 cms) in the Kootenai River during the critical spawning period. At that time, three mature
female sturgeon tagged with ultrasonic transmitters were staging in the suspected spawning reach near Bonners Ferry
when suitable temperature and possibly adequate flow conditions were present. Subsequent to the flow reduction
no eggs or larvae or other evidence of spawning were reported for the 1992 sturgeon spawning season. 




