 

(3) If the recipient determines that there is merit to the complaint, the recipient will have sixty (60) days from the
date of receipt of the complaint to resolve the matter with the complainant. At the expiration of the 60-day period,
the recipient must notify the Assistant Secretary in writing whether a resolution of the complaint has been reached.
If resolution has been reached, the notification must be signed by both the recipient and the complainant, and must
summarize the terms of the resolution reached between the two parties. 

(4) Any request for an extension of the 60-day period by the recipient must be submitted in writing to the Assistant
Secretary, and must include a statement explaining the need for the extension. 

(5) If the recipient is unable to resolve the complaint within the 60-day period (or more if extended by the Assistant
Secretary), the complaint shall be referred to the Assistant Secretary for handling. 

(f) 

Informal resolution of complaint by Assistant Secretary

_(1) 

Dismissal of complaint. 

Upon receipt of the recipient's written recommendation that there is no merit to the complaint, or upon failure of
the recipient and complainant to reach resolution, the Assistant Secretary shall review the complaint to determine
whether it presents a valid allegation of noncompliance with section 3. The Assistant Secretary may conduct further
investigation if deemed necessary. Where the complaint fails to present a valid allegation of noncompliance with
section 3, the Assistant Secretary will dismiss the complaint without further action. The Assistant Secretary shall
notify the complainant of the dismissal of the complaint and the reasons for the dismissal. 

(2) 

Informal resolution. 

Where the allegations in a complaint on their face, or as amplified by the statements of the complainant, present a
valid allegation of noncompliance with section 3, the Assistant Secretary will attempt, through informal methods,
to obtain a voluntary and just resolution of the complaint. Where attempts to resolve the complaint informally fail,
the Assistant Secretary will impose a resolution on the recipient and complainant. Any resolution imposed by the
Assistant Secretary will be in accordance with requirements and procedures concerning the imposition of sanctions
or resolutions as set forth in the regulations governing the HUD program under which the section 3 covered assistance
was provided. 

(3) 

Effective date of informal resolution. 

The imposed resolution will become effective and binding at the expiration of 15 days following notification to recipient
and complainant by certified mail of the imposed resolution, unless either party appeals the resolution before the
expiration of the 15 days. Any appeal shall be in writing to the Secretary and shall include the basis for the appeal.


(g) 

Sanctions. 

Sanctions that may be imposed on recipients that fail to comply with the regulations of this part include debarment,
suspension and limited denial of participation in HUD programs. 

(h) 

Investigation of complaint. 

The Assistant Secretary reserves the right to investigate a complaint directly when, in the Assistant Secretary's
discretion, the investigation would further the purposes of section 3 and this part. 

(i) 

Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. 

No recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any person or business
because the person or business has made a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in an investigation,
proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of complainants shall be kept confidential except to the extent
necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any investigation, hearing or judicial
proceeding arising thereunder. 

(j) 

Judicial relief. 

Nothing in this subpart D precludes a section 3 resident or section 3 business concerning from exercising the right,
which may otherwise be available, to seek redress directly through judicial procedures. 
(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 25290043.)



Subpart E_Reporting and Recordkeeping 



135.90 

Reporting. 
 


Each recipient which receives directly from HUD financial assistance that is subject to the requirements of this
part shall submit to the Assistant Secretary an annual report in such form and with such information as the Assistant
Secretary may request, for the purpose of determining the effectiveness of section 3. Where the program providing
the section 3 covered assistance requires submission of an annual performance report, the section 3 report will be
submitted with that annual performance report. If the program providing the section 3 covered assistance does not
require an annual performance report, the section 3 report is to be submitted by January 10 of each year or within 10
days of project completion, whichever is earlier. All reports submitted to HUD in accordance with the requirements
of this part will be made available to the public. 
(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 25290043.) 



135.92 

Recordkeeping and access to records. 
 


HUD shall have access to all records, reports, and other documents or items of the recipient that are maintained to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this part, or that are maintained in accordance with the regulations
governing the specific HUD program under which section 3 covered assistance is provided or otherwise made available
to the recipient or 
contractor. 



