 

B. Acquire any assets currently used for or previously used for (and still suitable for use for) the (1) clinical development
or (2) manufacture and sale of tetanus or diphtheria vaccines in the United States;

C. Acquire more than 1% of the stock, share capital, equity, or other interest in any concern, corporate or noncorporate,
presently engaged in, or within the two years preceding such acquisition engaged in, the (1) clinical development
or (2) manufacture and sale in the United States of a vaccine to protect humans against rotavirus disease; or

D. Acquire any assets currently used for or previously used for (and still suitable for use for) the (1) clinical development
or (2) manufacture and sale in the United States of a vaccine to protect humans against rotavirus disease.



IX.



Reports





It is further ordered,

 That:

A. Within sixty (60) days after the date this Order becomes final and every six (6) months after the date this Order becomes
final until AHP has fully complied with the provisions of Paragraphs II, IV, V and VI of this Order, AHP shall submit
to the Commission a verified written report setting forth in detail the manner and form in which it intends to comply,
is complying, and has complied with these Paragraphs of this Order. AHP shall include in its compliance reports, among
other things that are required from time to time, a full description of the efforts being made to comply with these Paragraphs
of this Order, including a description of all substantive contacts or negotiations for accomplishing the divestitures
and entering into the Divestiture Agreement required by this Order, including the identity of all parties contacted.
AHP shall include in its compliance reports copies of all written communications to and from such parties, all internal
memoranda, and all reports and recommendations concerning the Divestiture Agreement required by Paragraph II of
this Order.

B. One (1) year from the date this Order becomes final and annually for the next nine (9) years on the anniversary of the
date this Order becomes final or until the Acquirer or New Acquirer, as applicable, has obtained all necessary FDA
approvals to manufacture Tetanus and Diphtheria Vaccines for sale in the United States, whichever is later, and at
such other times as the Commission may require, Respondent shall file a verified written report with the Commission
setting forth in detail the manner and form in which it has complied and is complying with this Order.



X.



Access





It is further ordered,

 That, for the purpose of determining or securing compliance with this Order, and subject to any legally recognized
privilege, upon written request and on reasonable notice to Respondent, Respondent shall permit any duly authorized
representatives of the Commission:

A. Access, during office hours and in the presence of counsel, to inspect and copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence,
memoranda and other records and documents in the possession or under the control of Respondent, relating to any matters
contained in this consent order; and

B. Upon five (5) days' notice to Respondent, and without restraint or interference from Respondent, to interview
officers or employees of Respondent, who may have counsel present, regarding such matters.



XI.



Corporate Change





It is further ordered,

 That Respondent shall notify the Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to any change in Respondent such as dissolution,
assignment or sale resulting in the emergence of a successor, the creation or dissolution of subsidiaries or any other
change that may affect compliance obligations arising out of the Order.



XII.



Sunset





It is further ordered,

 That, notwithstanding any other provision of this Order, this Order shall terminate twenty years from the date this
Order becomes final.



