 

PART 1079_MILK IN THE IOWA MARKETING AREA 



1. Section 1079.30 is amended by revising paragraphs (a) and (c) and removing paragraph (d), to read as follows: 



1079.30 



Reports of receipts and utilization. 



* * * * * 



(a) Each handler described in 1079.9(a), (b), and (c) shall report for each of its operations the following
information: 
(1) Product pounds, pounds of butterfat, pounds of protein, and pounds of solids-not-fat other than protein (other
solids) contained in or represented by: 

(i) Receipts of producer milk, including producer milk diverted by the handler; 

(ii) Receipts of milk from handlers described in 1079.9(c); and 

(iii) Receipts by transfer or diversion of bulk fluid milk products from pool plants; 

(2) Product pounds and pounds of butterfat contained in: 

(i) Receipts of fluid milk products not included in paragraph (a)(1) of this section and bulk fluid cream products
from any source; 

(ii) Receipts of other source milk; 

(iii) Inventories at the beginning and end of the month of fluid milk products and products specified in 1079.40(b)(1);
and 

(3) The utilization or disposition of all milk, filled milk, and milk products required to be reported pursuant to
this paragraph. 



* * * * * 



(c) Each handler not specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall report with respect to its receipts and
utilization of milk, filled milk, and milk products in such manner as the market administrator may prescribe. 

2. Section 1079.31 is amended by revising paragraph (a) to read as follows: 



1079.31 


Payroll reports. 



(a) On or before the 22nd day after the end of each month, each handler described in 1079.9(a), (b), or (c) shall
report to the market administrator its producer payroll for such month in the detail prescribed by the market administrator,
showing for each producer the information described in 1079.73(e). 



* * * * * 



3. Section 1079.50 is amended by revising the section heading, introductory text and paragraph (a), and adding paragraphs
(e) through (k) to read as follows: 



1079.50 


Class and component prices. 



Subject to the provisions of 1079.52, the class prices per hundredweight of milk containing 3.5 percent butterfat
and the component prices for the month shall be as follows: 

(a) 

Class I price. 

The Class I price for the month per hundredweight of milk containing 3.5 percent butterfat shall be the basic formula
price for the second preceding month plus $1.55. 



* * * * * 



(e) 

Class I differential price.

 The Class I differential price shall be the difference between the current month Class I and Class III prices (this
price may be negative). 

(f) 

Class II differential price.

 The Class II differential price shall be the difference between the current month Class II and Class III prices (this
price may be negative). 

(g) 

Skim milk price.

 The skim milk price per hundredweight, rounded to the nearest cent, shall be the Class III price less an amount computed
by multiplying the butterfat differential by 35. 

(h) 

Butterfat price.

 The butterfat price per pound, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth cent, shall be the Class III price plus an amount
computed by multiplying the butterfat differential by 965 and dividing the resulting amount by one hundred. 

(i) 

Protein price.

 The protein price per pound, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth cent, shall be 1.32 times the average monthly price
per pound for 40-pound block Cheddar cheese on the National Cheese Exchange as reported by the Department. 


