 

Current 82.4 prohibits the interstate movement from any quarantined area of poultry and birds that are not
being moved to a Federally inspected slaughtering establishment, and also prohibits the interstate movement from
any quarantined area of hatching eggs, carcasses, parts of carcasses, and litter. We propose to replace this general
prohibition with a list of specific articles prohibited from being moved interstate from a quarantined area (see
proposed 82.4(a)). We propose to prohibit: (1) live birds and poultry infected with or exposed to END; (2) dead
birds and dead poultry, including any parts of the birds and poultry, that are infected with END; (3) any eggs from birds
or poultry infected with END; (4) hatching eggs from birds or poultry exposed to END; and (5) litter and manure from
birds and poultry infected with END. This list does not include some articles that are prohibited under the current
regulations_

viz

, carcasses and parts of carcasses of birds and poultry in a quarantined area that are not known to be infected with END,
and hatching eggs from birds and poultry in a quarantined area that are not known to be either infected with or exposed
to END. We believe that the restrictions we are proposing to place on the interstate movement of these articles from
a quarantined area (discussed below) would allow them to be moved interstate without significant risk of spreading
END. 

Additionally, we are proposing to specify in 82.4(c) that the regulations would not apply to the interstate
movement of birds, poultry, and other articles from a quarantined area if the interstate movement is made by the United
States Department of Agriculture for purposes of research or diagnosis. We believe this provision is necessary to
allow the Department to efficiently diagnose an outbreak of END and to conduct research relating to END. 



Interstate Movement of Live Birds 



The current regulations in 82.4(c) allow the interstate movement from quarantined areas of birds that are
``personal pets'' and that are not known to be infected with or exposed to any communicable disease of poultry. We are
proposing to set forth these provisions in proposed 82.5(a), with several changes. The current regulations
require in several places that the birds be in the owner's ``possession'' or ``personal possession.'' We believe
this wording does not clearly convey our intent. We do not consider it necessary for the birds to be in physical proximity
to the owner at all times. Rather, we consider it necessary for the owner to be responsible for the location and disposition
of the birds. Therefore, we are proposing to replace the terms ``possession'' and ``personal possession'' with the
requirement that the birds be under the owner's ``ownership and control.'' 

The current regulations require ``immediate'' notification of Federal or State officials if any pet birds that have
been moved interstate from a quarantined area show signs of disease or die. We believe the term ``immediate'' might
be confusing, and, therefore, are proposing that the notification be made within 24 hours of the bird's dying or showing
clinical signs of sickness. We believe that 24 hours allows a reasonable period of time for notification, without
creating a significant risk that the disease will spread during that period. 



Interstate Movement of Live Poultry 



The current regulations restrict the interstate movement of live poultry from a quarantined area (see current 82.4(a)),
and require that they 
be moved to a Federally inspected slaughtering establishment for ``immediate'' slaughter. We are proposing to amend
these requirements (see proposed 82.5) to extend this provision to birds as well as poultry. While in most cases
birds other than poultry would not be moved to slaughter, such movement could occur in the case of ratites (e.g., ostriches),
which can be used commercially after slaughter. 

We are also proposing to require that the birds or poultry be accompanied by a permit and be slaughtered within 24 hours
of arrival at the recognized slaughtering establishment. Shipments of poultry normally arrive at slaughtering
facilities at night or early in the morning. (Currently, birds other than poultry are not being shipped to slaughter.)
They are kept under cover until the facility can handle them in turn. We believe that 24 hours provides the facility
with a reasonable amount of time to slaughter birds or poultry moved there, without posing a significant risk of disease
spread. Allowing a lengthier period of time before slaughter would unnecessarily increase the risk of END contamination
of personnel and equipment at the slaughtering establishment, and thus increase the risk that END would be carried
outside the establishment. 

We are also proposing to require that the shipment of birds or poultry be covered in such a way so as to prevent feathers
and other debris from blowing or falling off the means of conveyance. Additionally, we are proposing to require that,
except for emergencies, the birds and poultry not be unloaded until arrival at the destination listed on the permit.
We would consider events such as accidents, vehicular failure, or natural disasters to be emergencies. We believe
that each of these provisions is necessary to guard against the possibility of disease spread while the birds or poultry
are being transported. 



Interstate Movement of Dead Birds and Dead Poultry 





