 

Commenters views regarding the incentives and disincentives inherent in corporate ``or'' pricing primarily fall
into three basic positions:

(1) Although groups disagreed among themselves on how to calculate various cost-based transmission rates, most
Muni/Coops, most Regulatory/Government entities, most NUGs/IPPs, and some others do not believe in allowing any
incentives, or premiums above cost-based rates, properly calculated. Most of these commenters agreed that, when
a monopoly resource is involved, such incentives amount to allowing ``monopoly rents.'' Transmission is and will
remain a natural monopoly, therefore, no incentive is needed beyond recovery of the transmitting utility's prudently-incurred
costs and a fair return on its invested capital. Premiums allow the transmission monopolist a competitive advantage
in the generation market. Furthermore, there is no need for incentives with the passage of the transmission provisions
of the Energy Policy Act; the legal requirement to provide transmission service is sufficient incentive.

(2) Most NUGs/IPPs believe the current incentives provided by the incremental pricing part of the ``or'' policy are
appropriate. However, many of these commenters oppose pricing based on opportunity costs (as monopoly rents for
a constrained system).

(3) Those advocating ``and'' pricing, such as most IOUs and some Others, believe that further incentives are needed.
The current ``or'' policy does not sufficiently compensate utilities for all costs of providing service, thus effectively
requiring native load customers to subsidize transmission customers. If utilities are forced to absorb potential
cost underrecovery and the risk associated with the ``or'' pricing methodology, then the rate of return should be
adjusted to reflect greater risks assumed by engaging in third party wheeling transactions.



3. Incremental Cost Pricing



Under the Commission's current corporate ``or'' policy, third-party transmission users may be required to pay the
incremental cost of a grid expansion if the incremental cost of the expansion is greater than corporate-average embedded
cost. Such incremental pricing can be structured in one of two ways_a 

contract

 approach in which each user pays the incremental cost of the upgrade it occasions, and an 

average

 incremental price based on the average cost of all upgrades to the transmission system for a group of users.

Most, though not all, commenters believe that contract pricing is the preferred pricing model. IOUs in particular
favor contract pricing because it provides more certainty that a utility's revenue requirements are fully recovered.
If incremental pricing increases the risk of less than full revenue recovery, either shareholders or residual customers
will bear the extra risks. Most wholesale customers also appear to favor contract pricing, though some have concerns
that contract pricing, with different prices for each user, may result in price discrimination. These commenters
suggest that similarly situated customers should have the same price, but have different notions of what this would
mean.

For many of the difficult practical issues associated with incremental pricing, there is no consistent position
taken by all or even most members of any interest group that supports incremental cost pricing. For example, many commenters
believe that average incremental cost pricing gives the wrong price signal to both the transmission owner and user.
These commenters are concerned that the average incremental cost price does not signal the true cost of the transmission
service. A few commenters argue that this will result in underbuilding of the transmission system. Others suggest
that this may result in overbuilding, although IOUs in particular doubt this result, given the difficulties inherent
in siting, certification and construction of new transmission facilities.

Additionally, commenters are split on the issue of administrative costs and other implementation problems that
may result under each pricing model. Some commenters argue that contract pricing entails maintaining separate contracting
provisions for each user, with attendant high costs. Other commenters suggest that average incremental cost pricing
is more difficult, given the need to estimate incremental costs, and the problems associated with changing average
incremental rates as a result of incremental cost changes. One commenter suggests that it is simply not possible to
reconcile average incremental pricing with an embedded cost transmission revenue requirement.

Several commenters suggested that it would be appropriate to allow utilities some flexibility to adopt either incremental
cost pricing approach. The challenge for the Commission would be to determine under what conditions such flexibility
would be warranted, in order to protect both the third-party transmission users and the remaining wholesale and retail
customers from being charged for inappropriate costs. Other commenters suggest that some experimentation may be
in order. If the Commission chooses to allow such experimentation, it may learn a great deal about the magnitude of
the practical problems, as well as potential solutions for those problems.




