 

If all foreign refiners sending gasoline to the U.S. established accurate and verifiable baselines, and concerns
about tracking refinery of origin and other compliance concerns were resolved, then it has been agreed, those baselines
and the gasoline produced under them clearly and easily would lead to the air quality benefits expected from conventional
and reformulated gasoline. This might be considered the ``ideal'', or best possible result. As described earlier,
however, there is considerable doubt about whether accurate, verifiable, and enforceable baselines can be expected
for 

all

 foreign refiners. 

The Final Rule addresses these problems in effect by requiring all foreign refiners to produce gasoline using the
statutory baseline_those cleaner than the statutory baseline are allowed to degrade down to that baseline, while
those dirtier than the statutory baselines are required to clean up to that baseline. While the Final Rule would not
allow the average quality of foreign produced gasoline to degrade below the statutory baseline, it might in fact require
that foreign gasoline be cleaner on average than would be required if all refiners did establish individual baselines.

10

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


10

</FOOTNAME>
This would occur if the average quality of all gasoline imports in 1990 was dirtier than the statutory baseline. 

</FOOTNOTE>


One concern regarding the approach used in the Final Rule is that it treats all foreign refiners as a class (by assigning
the statutory baseline to all imported gasoline), yet the factors that led to grouping foreign refiners as a class
may not apply equally to all foreign refiners. The result of the class approach to resolving the foreign refiner baseline
issue could be considered unfair to any particular foreign refiner who would be able to accurately establish refinery
baselines, and who would be able to establish with certainty the refinery of origin for gasoline imported into the
United States. On the other hand, and as has been discussed above, allowing each foreign refiner to choose whether
to establish individual refinery baselines creates the potential for gaming with consequent adverse environmental
effects. The challenge for EPA, then, is to create a regulatory mechanism for imported gasoline baselines that is
as fair as possible to each foreign refiner, but that also achieves the environmental goals intended for reformulated
gasoline. 

The proposed revisions would allow certain foreign refiners the option to petition for the right to establish individual
baselines under carefully controlled circumstances. As discussed above, this proposed scheme has a potential for
adverse air quality effects, in comparison to the current Final Rule, because some importers would have an option
as to which baseline would apply to imported reformulated gasoline. Presumably, foreign refiners and their U.S.
importer business partners would elect to seek to establish individual foreign refinery baselines only if the foreign
refinery produced gasoline in 1990 that was ``dirtier'' than the statutory baseline alternative to an individual
foreign refinery baseline. In the case of foreign refineries that produced gasoline in 1990 that was ``cleaner''
than the statutory baseline, on the other hand, the foreign refiners and their U.S. importer business partners presumably
would use the less stringent and less costly statutory baseline option. EPA's ``gaming'' concern would result from
these likely decisions by ``dirtier'' and ``cleaner'' foreign refiners. The potential adverse air quality consequence
would result from the volume of imported gasoline during 1995 through 1997 that would use a ``dirtier''-than-statutory
baseline, and the loss to the U.S. gasoline pool during 1995 through 1997 of gasoline produced to meet a ``cleaner''-than-statutory
baselines. There may or may not be an adverse air quality impact in relation to the ``ideal'' scenario described above,
depending on whether the average quality of gasoline imported from foreign refiners in 1990 was different from the
statutory baseline and how much reformulated gasoline is imported in 1995 through 1997. 






