 

(F) Falsification, including false certifications, of any 
document pertaining to the performance of any loan collection 
activity, including activity that is not required by the HEA or 
applicable program regulations. 
 (3) If the Secretary begins an emergency action against a 
third-party servicer, the Secretary may also begin an emergency 
action against any institution under whose contract a third-party 
servicer commits the violation. 
 (d)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section, after an emergency action becomes effective, an 
institution or third-party servicer, as applicable, may not_
(i) Make or increase awards or make other commitments of 
aid to a student under the applicable Title IV, HEA program; 
 (ii) Disburse either program funds, institutional funds, or 
other funds as assistance to a student under that Title IV, HEA 
program; 
 (iii) In the case of an emergency action pertaining to 
participation in the Federal Stafford Loan, Federal PLUS, or 
Federal SLS Program_
(A) Certify an application for a loan under that program; 
 (B) Deliver loan proceeds to a student under that program; 
or 
 (C) Retain the proceeds of a loan made under that program 
that are received after the emergency action takes effect; or 
 (iv) In the case of an emergency action against a 
third-party servicer, administer any aspect of any institution's 
participation in any Title IV, HEA program. 
 (2) If the initiating official withdraws, by an emergency 
action, the authority of the institution or servicer to commit, 
disburse, deliver, or cause the commitment, disbursement, or 
delivery of Title IV, HEA program funds, or the authority of the 
servicer to administer any aspect of any institution's 
participation in any Title IV, HEA program, except in accordance 
with a particular procedure specified in the notice of emergency 
action, the institution or servicer, as applicable, may not take 
any action described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section except 
in accordance with the procedure specified in the notice. 
 (e)(1) Upon request by the institution or servicer, as 
applicable, the Secretary provides the institution or servicer, 
as soon as practicable, with an opportunity to show cause that 
the emergency action is unwarranted or should be modified. 
 (2) An opportunity to show cause consists of an opportunity 
to present evidence and argument to a show-cause official. The 
initiating official does not act as the show-cause official for 
any emergency action that the initiating official has begun. The 
show-cause official is authorized to grant relief from the 
emergency action. The institution or servicer may make its 
presentation in writing or, upon its request, at an informal 
meeting with the show-cause official. 
 (3) The show-cause official may limit the time and manner 
in which argument and evidence may be presented in order to avoid 
unnecessary delay or the presentation of immaterial, irrelevant, 
or repetitious matter. 
 (4) The institution or servicer, as applicable, has the 
burden of persuading the show-cause official that the emergency 
action imposed by the notice is unwarranted or should be modified 
because_
(i) The grounds stated in the notice did not, or no longer, 
exist; 
 (ii) The grounds stated in the notice will not cause loss 
or misuse of Title IV, HEA program funds; or 
 (iii) The institution or servicer, as applicable, will use 
procedures that will reliably eliminate the risk of loss from the 
misuse described in the notice. 
 (5) The show-cause official continues, modifies, or revokes 
the emergency action promptly after consideration of any argument 
and evidence presented by the institution or servicer, as 
applicable, and the initiating official. 
 (6) The show-cause official notifies the institution or 
servicer, as applicable, of that official's determination 
promptly after the completion of the show-cause meeting or, if no 
meeting is requested, after the official receives all the 
material submitted by the institution in opposition to the 
emergency action. In the case of a notice to a third-party 
servicer, the official also notifies each institution that 
contracts with the servicer of that determination. The 
show-cause official may explain that determination by adopting or 
modifying the statement of reasons provided in the notice of 
emergency action. 
 (f)(1) An emergency action does not extend more than 30 
days after initiated unless the Secretary initiates a limitation, 
suspension, or termination proceeding under this part or under 
34 CFR part 600 against the institution or servicer, as 
applicable, within that 30-day period, in which case the 
emergency action continues until a final decision is issued in 
that proceeding, as provided in 668.90 (c) or (f), as applicable. 
 (2) Until a final decision is issued by the Secretary in a 
proceeding described in paragraph (f)(1) of this section, the 
continuation, modification, or revocation of the emergency action 
is at the sole discretion of the initiating official, or, if a 
show-cause proceeding is conducted, the show-cause official. 
 (3) If an emergency action extends beyond 180 days by 
virtue of paragraph (f)(1) of this section, the institution or 
servicer, as applicable, may then submit written material to the 
show-cause official to demonstrate that because of facts 
occurring after the later of the notice by the initiating 
official or the show-cause meeting, continuation of the emergency 
action is unwarranted and the emergency action should be modified 
or ended. The show-cause official considers any written material 
submitted and issues a determination that continues, modifies, or 
revokes the emergency action. 






