 

II. Summary of Today's Proposal 


A. Organobromine Chemicals Industry Overview 


The organobromine chemical-producing industry in the U.S. is geographically limited by the location of underground
bromide-bearing brine deposits. The only major deposits of this type in the United States are located in Michigan
and Arkansas. Organobromine chemicals are no longer produced on a large scale in Michigan. EPA identified two firms
in southern Arkansas that produce the organobromine chemicals listed in the EDF consent decree. These two firms account
for 95% of all organobromine chemical production in the U.S. 
The source of all bromine produced currently in the U.S. is the brine deposit in the Smackover Formation in Union, Lafayette,
and Columbia Counties, Arkansas. Total demand for bromine has fallen 25% since 1979 and domestic bromine production
fell by four thousand metric tons between 1991 and 1992, so there is little incentive for the construction of new bromine
extraction plants. In addition, all of the mining rights for bromine-bearing brines in these counties are controlled
by two corporations. According to the U.S. Bureau of Mines, these deposits are likely to satisfy domestic demand for
sixty years. For these reasons, EPA believes that it is very improbable that any new producers using substantially
different technologies will enter the organobromine chemicals industry during the next several decades. 
At the time of the first industry study in 1984, ethylene dibromide (EDB) was the most important product of the organobromines
industry. EDB was used together with tetraethyl lead in additives designed to increase the octane rating of gasoline.
Other industry products included methyl bromide, used as a soil fumigant, and brominated fluorocarbons, which are
sold mainly as fire-extinguishing agents. 
During the decade that has elapsed since the original industry study, the product mix has changed, due primarily to
the advent of several environmental regulatory programs. Vehicles requiring unleaded gasoline were introduced
to the U.S. market in 1971, and the phase-out of leaded gasoline is now almost complete. Other nations have instituted
similar programs, though on different timetables, which has reduced demand for EDB. The use of methyl bromide as a
soil fumigant has been restricted because of the toxicity of this material. Two of the important brominated fluorocarbons,
Halon 1211 and Halon 1301, are being phased out of production under the terms of the Montreal Protocol on Substances
that Deplete the Ozone Layer, to which the United States is a signatory.
The majority of organobromine chemicals manufactured currently are sold as flame retardants. Most of these are solid
compounds that are incorporated into polymer mixes. The polymers then are used to manufacture a variety of household
and industrial products, including electronic circuit boards, television and computer cases, and packaging and
insulating foam. Smaller volume organobromine chemicals are produced by four smaller firms. The principal uses
for these products are as reagent chemicals and pharmaceutical intermediates. These low volume chemicals are produced
on a batch basis with annual production often being a few batches per year. 



B. Description of Processes Used, Wastes Generated, and Waste Management Practices Employed 



1. Processes Used and Wastes Generated 



As discussed above, EPA conducted engineering site visits at four organobromine-producing firms, based on the information
received from RCRA Section 3007 questionnaires. Two of these four firms have direct access to sources of elemental
bromine (

i.e., 

the underground brine deposits) and use it to produce substantial volumes of organobromine flame retardants. All
other firms in the industry purchase elemental bromine and use it to produce smaller volumes of special-purpose pharmaceutical
and chemical intermediates. Frequently, these items are produced under contract for the pharmaceutical firms.

The processes at the two major sites also differ from those at the smaller producers with respect to waste management
practices. The smaller producers manage all of their solid wastes as hazardous and ship them off site to incinerators
or landfills operating in accordance with the standards promulgated under authority of RCRA Subtitle C. Generally,
their production contracts call for the wastes to be sent to the firms ordering these chemicals. The pharmaceutical
firms then incinerate these wastes from the organochemical production process. 
Because bromine is an element and cannot be destroyed by chemical transformations, the production processes at the
major facilities are designed to make the most effective use of all bromine extracted from the brine. As a result, there
are many bromine/bromide recovery processes built into the operation. A generalized description of the wastes and
management practices at the major sites follows. 




