 

The Secretary recognizes that the approach to significantly increased gatekeeping activity outlined in the statute
for the three members of the triad is a new one. This approach will require leadership in both implementation and evaluation
if it is to achieve the effectiveness that Congress intended. The Secretary will take steps to assure that the various
responsibilities of the triad members are carried out in a manner that, in fact, results in the identification of institutions
that should not be eligible to participate in the Title IV, HEA programs, on the basis of either the quality of education
they offer or their inability to handle program funds. At the same time, the Secretary is committed to carrying out
the responsibility for coordinating the activities of the triad members that are inherent in the statute in a manner
that causes the least burden to institutions participating in the Title IV, HEA programs. 
To these ends, the Secretary is committed to effective management of the gatekeeping function. The Secretary will
review carefully the applications of accrediting bodies and the standards and operating plans proposed by State
Postsecondary Review Entities (SPREs) under the State Postsecondary Review Program to insure that they meet the
requirements of the statute and these regulations and will enable these triad agencies to fulfill their statutory
purposes. The Secretary will also place a priority on the completion of the ``Postsecondary Education Participation
System,'' the Department's new integrated data base, which will contain the information that the Secretary generates
in the course of the Secretary's oversight of institutions participating in Title IV, HEA programs. The Secretary
will use the data base to inform accrediting bodies and SPREs of actions taken by the Secretary so that they may in turn
carry out their responsibilities. This expanded data base is also critical to the Secretary's effective selection
of institutions for program review. 
Monitoring the results of the gatekeeping process is a very important key to effective management. The Secretary
will evaluate the activities of accrediting agencies, SPREs, and the Department to determine their effectiveness
in improving the integrity of institutions participating in Title IV programs and will take such steps as may be indicated
to improve the results. Finally, as provided in the statute, the Secretary will seek the advice and counsel of the National
Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and Integrity in evaluating the effectiveness of the triad. 
The Secretary believes that the approach best suited to achieving the objectives of the statute is a complementary
one, with each member of the triad focusing its evaluation on its obligations within the context of the HEA. Thus, the
focus for accrediting agencies is the quality of education or training provided by the institutions or programs they
accredit. States, in addition to providing the legal authority to operate within the state required for participation
in the Title IV, HEA programs, will review institutions that meet certain statutory review criteria related to institutional
performance in the Title IV, HEA programs. The focus of the Secretary's evaluation of institutions is on the administrative
and financial capacity of those institutions to participate in the Title IV, HEA programs. 
While the functions and responsibilities of each of the triad members are generally different, the statute does require,
in some instances, that all members of the triad evaluate similar areas. For the most part, the principle of complementary
functions will lead to the members evaluating those same areas from different perspectives for different purposes.
For example, all three of the triad members are required to examine the finances of an institution. If each looks at
financial strength from a perspective complementary to that of the others, accrediting agencies would focus principally
on the capacity of the institution to continue to offer programs at a level of quality sufficient to meet accrediting
agency standards and to fulfill the institution's mission over a 510 year period of accreditation. The emphasis
of a review by a SPRE would be on whether or not the institution possesses the full range of resources needed to serve
students currently attending the institution. The Secretary's responsibilities focus on the institution's finances
in light of its ability to provide the services described in its official publications and statements, to provide
the administrative resources necessary to comply with its Title IV, HEA program responsibilities, and to meet all
of its financial obligations, including, but not limited to, refunds of institutional charges and repayments to
the Secretary for liabilities and debts incurred in programs administered by the Secretary. 



