 

(a) 

Payment in full.

 A settlement authority may settle a medical care or property damage claim by recovering the full amount the Government's
claim as a lump sum, through installment payments, or as a repair in kind on a property damage claim. An offer for the
full amount of available insurance would not ``pay in full'' a claim asserted for a greater amount, and the RJA would
have to follow compromise procedures.
(b) 

Compromise.

 (1) If there are difficulties in recovering on a medical care or property damage claim (as defined by part 103 of the
Federal Claims Collection Standards), a settlement authority may accept less than the amount asserted from a tortfeasor
or insurer for the convenience of the government. Acceptable bases for compromise for the convenience of the government
include inability of the tortfeasor to pay, insufficient insurance, probability that the government will be unable
to prove its case, or collection costs which are not commensurate with the amount being compromised.
(2) If the injured party or the injured party's attorney requests waiver or compromise of a medical care claim, a settlement
authority may accept an amount less than the amount asserted to equitably apportion the available funds and avoid
undue hardship to the injured party. To do so, the settlement authority must consider the fair value of the injured
party's claim, the future value of care provided by the United States, and the potential recovery available. In evaluating
a request, the settlement authority may consider an offer by the injured party's attorney to reduce his or her fee,
but should not make this a condition for granting a request. Prior to approval of any compromise based on undue hardship,
the injured party must provide the following information: 
(i) Detailed information on what funds are available for recovery.
(ii) Reasonable value of the injured party's claim for permanent injury, pain and suffering, decreased earning power,
and any other items of special damages.
(iii) Military, VA, and Social Security disability, and any other Government benefits accruing to the injured party.
(iv) Probability and amount of future medical expenses of the Government and the injured party.
(v) Present and prospective assets, income, and obligations of the injured party and those dependent on him or her.
(vi) A statement regarding the financial condition of the debtor.
(c) 

Termination of collection action.

 If there are difficulties in recovering on a medical care or property damage claim (as defined by 4 CFR part 104.3 of
the Federal Claims Collection Standards), a settlement authority may close the claim without recovery for the convenience
of the Government. Acceptable bases for terminating collection action include lack of legal merit to the claim, lack
of evidence to substantiate the claim, costs of recovery which will exceed the amount recoverable, or inability to
locate the debtor in instances where the likelihood of collection is too remote to justify retention of the file.
(d) 

Waiver.

 If the injured party or the injured party's attorney requests waiver or compromise of the government's claim, a settlement
authority may close a medical care claim without recovery where collection of any part of the government's claim will
result in undue hardship to the injured party. Prior to granting a request for waiver, the settlement authority will
consider the factors outlined in 536.229(b)(2) and require the injured party to provide the items listed in
536.229(b)(2) (i) through (vii). Property damage claims cannot be ``waived.''


536.230 

Litigation.


If a tortfeasor or insurer refuses to settle, or if an injured party's attorney improperly withholds funds, the RJA
must consider litigation to protect the interests of the United States. Litigation is particularly appropriate
if a particular insurer consistently refuses to settle claims, or if the Government's interests are not adequately
represented on a large claim.
(a) RJA's must maintain close contact with local U.S. Attorney's offices to ensure that these offices are willing
to initiate litigation on cases. RJA's are encouraged to obtain appointments as Special Assistant U.S. Attorneys.
(b) In order to directly initiate or intervene in litigation, an RJA must prepare a litigation report and formally
refer the case through the Affirmative Claims Branch, USARCS and the Litigation Division, OTJAG (as required by AR
2740, chapter 5) to the U.S. Attorney. While the RJA should attempt to initiate litigation well before the expiration
of the statute of limitations, the RJA may contact USARCS telephonically if statute of limitations problems necessitate
quick action on a case. The RJA should also contact USARCS if a U.S. Attorney is reluctant to pursue an important case.
An injured party's attorney may represent the Government's interest in litigation without any special coordination.
(c) The Department of Justice requires all cases involving damage to government property of $200,000 and under to
go through the Department of Justice Central Intake Facility in Silver Spring, Maryland, before going to a United
States attorney for litigation. Forward the agency referral package cover sheet and all documentation normally
provided to the U.S. Attorney on all such cases to USARCS, which in turn will forward them to the Central Intake Facility
through the Litigation Division, Office of the Judge Advocate General, as appropriate.


