 

(b) 

Certifications by HA. 

Only upon making the determination described in 960.507(a)(4) of this part will the Department approve a plan.
Further, the Department will not make such a determination unless the plan contains a written statement, signed by
an authorized officer or other agent of the HA, certifying that: 
(1) The dwelling units proposed to be allocated to Officers are situated so as to place the Officers in close physical
proximity to other residents; 
(2) No resident families will have to be transferred to other dwelling units in order to make available the units proposed
to be allocated to Officers; 
(3) The dwelling units proposed to be allocated to Officers will be rented under a lease that contains the terms described
in 960.509 of this part; and 
(4) The number of dwelling units proposed to be allocated to Officers under the plan does not exceed the limits set forth
in 960.507(c) of this part or, in the alternative, any units so allocated in excess of the applicable maximum
number are vacant units for which there are no Eligible Families. This certification on the part of the HA satisfies
the requirements of 960.507(a)(4)(ii) and (iii) of this part. 
(c) 

Unit allocation table. 

For purposes of the certification required by 960.507(b)(4) of this part, the following table sets forth the
maximum number of units to be allocated to Officers as a function of the total number of units under management by the
HA: 


<TABLE>





Unit Allocation Table 

1Total units under management 
1Units to be allocated 



500999 
5 
10004999 
10 
50009999 
15 
10,000+ 
20 

</TABLE>


The maximum number of units to be allocated by HAs with less than 500 units under management will be determined by the
Field Office on a case by case basis. 



(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB control number 25770185.) 


960.509 

Special rent requirements and other terms and conditions. 


The HA shall lease units to Officers under a lease agreement that is consistent with the requirements of this section
and 24 CFR part 966. The requirements of this section shall take precedence if there is any inconsistency between them
and 24 CFR part 966. 
(a) 

Reasonable rent. 

The lease shall provide for a reasonable rent, which may be a flat amount not related to the Officer's income. The HA
should attempt to establish a rent that will provide an incentive to Officers to reside in the units but that is also
consistent with the limited loss of income requirement of 960.507(a)(4)(ii) of this part. As required in 960.507(a)(1)
of this part, the plan must state facts and circumstances (such as, the rent that would ordinarily be charged for the
unit, the HA's annual maintenance cost for the unit, the degree of difficulty in attracting Officers to reside in the
unit, the extent of the crime problem in the development, and the anticipated benefits of the Officer's presence)
that demonstrate the reasonableness of the rent amount. 
(b) 

Continued employment. 

The lease shall provide that the Officer's right of occupancy is dependent on the continuation of the employment that
qualified the Officer for residency in the development under the plan. The lease also shall provide that the Officer
will move out of the leased unit within a reasonably prompt time, to be established by the lease, after termination
of employment. 


960.511 

Applicability of the annual contributions contract; effect on the Performance Funding System. 


(a) 

Annual contributions contract. 

Except to the extent that eligibility requirements are exempted under 960.505 of this part, public housing
units occupied by Officers in accordance with a plan submitted and approved under this subpart will be subject to the
terms and conditions of the annual contributions contract (ACC) between the HA and the United States of America. This
subpart does not override any of the terms and conditions of the ACC except insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of this subpart. 
(b) 

Performance funding system. 

For purposes of the operating subsidy under the Performance Funding System (PFS) described in part 990, subpart A
of this chapter, dwelling units allocated to Officers in accordance with this subpart are excluded from the total
unit months available, as defined in 990.102 of this chapter. Also for purposes of the operating subsidy under
the PFS, the full amount of any rent paid by Officers in accordance with this subpart is included in other income, as
defined in 990.102 of this chapter. HAs may receive operating subsidy for one unit per housing development
to promote economic self-sufficiency services or anti-drug programs, including housing police officers and security
personnel. An HA may request consideration of such units in its calculation of operating subsidy eligibility through
the appropriate local HUD Office. 



Date: July 20, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
Michael B. Janis, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
General Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9418692 Filed 8194; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 421033P 
</BILLING>


