 

The commenter also provided information stating that the annual cost of applying the part 121 supplemental carrier
pilot flight, duty, and rest requirements to flight attendants would be $1.75 million. The added cost of 20 flight
attendants would be $489,000. Hotel expenses would be $679,000; per diem costs would be $244,000; training would
cost $6,000; and administrative costs would be $34,000. Finally, the annual cost of deadheading flight attendants
back to their place of domicile would be $289,000.

Based upon their total cost estimate, the cost per added flight attendant would be $1.75 million divided by 20 additional
flight attendants, or about $87,000 per flight attendant. If this commenter did not have to incur the costs for deadhead
tickets, then the added cost would be $72,600 per flight attendant.

The FAA contends that these cost estimates represent the costs associated with replacing the existing crew. The cost
estimates do not appear to represent the costs associated with augmenting the existing crew with additional flight
attendants. An air carrier whose goal is profit maximization and cost minimization would choose the least costly
means of achieving compliance with the proposed rule, and, in most cases, that appears to be the crew augmentation
option.

RAA asserted that the final rule would impose costs based on the fact that some aircraft would fly longer than 14 hours
and full. The FAA contacted this commenter and asked a clarifying question on the number of times that an aircraft would
fly more than 14 hours full. The commenter was unable to provide information to substantiate this assertion, and therefore,
while a problem may exist, the FAA is unable to determine the magnitude of it.

The FAA received additional information from a NACA member (American Trans Air) stating that, to calculate annual
costs, they multiplied the average number of block hours in the fleet by the percentage of flight hours the NPRM is expected
to affect. The product is the total number of affected block hours.

The number of affected block hours was then divided by the expected number of flight attendant utilization hours,
which varies by aircraft type, and multiplied by the number of flight attendants to compute crew requirements. Based
on this calculation, 20 additional flight attendants would be needed to meet the requirements of the proposed rule.
This commenter then multiplied the number of additional flight attendants by their annual salary, including fringe
benefits and training, to arrive at a cost estimate of $372,000. Administrative costs of $80,000 were added. 

The FAA received additional clarification that the percentage of flight hours was based upon the commenter's examination
of all flights that exceeded 14 hours. The commenter did not look at flights of 14 to 16 hours, 16 to 18 hours, or 18 to 20
hours.

The commenter divided the number of affected block hours by the expected flight attendant utilization hours (Boeing
727, 60 hours; Boeing 757 and Lockheed L1011, 56 hours). The commenter did not know how many duty periods this
represented. After multiplying this number by the number of flight attendants needed to complete crew requirements,
the commenter concluded that 20 additional flight attendants would be needed to augment its flights.

The $13,000 annual salary represents a flight attendant's first-year salary without overtime. The 20 percent benefits
estimate represents the company's portion of employee benefits.

To the extent practicable, the cost information provided by commenters was used to revise the cost estimates in the
final regulatory evaluation.



Recordkeeping Costs



Several commenters provided the FAA with information on recordkeeping. The Air Transport Association estimated
that air carriers would incur a one-time expense for computer system program modifications of $2.0 million to $3.0
million. Delta Air Lines stated that the one-time cost of software computer changes, including recordkeeping, would
be $367,200. American Trans Air, a member of the National Air Carrier Association, stated that administrative costs
would be $80,000, approximately $54,000 of which would be the cost to program and upgrade software, and $26,000 of
which would be the cost of data entry and associated labor.



FAA Response



Because of limited supporting documentation, a wide variation between commenters' estimates, and the difficulty
of ascertaining what portion of the recordkeeping costs could be attributed to the implementation of this final rule
versus the cost to upgrade current systems, the FAA stands by its original recordkeeping cost estimate.



Summary of Benefits and Costs



The FAA estimates that the cost of compliance with the requirements of this final rule will be $42.7 million, discounted.

Although benefits cannot be quantified, the FAA concludes that the establishment of flight attendant duty period
limitations and rest requirements are warranted, because they will contribute to an overall enhancement of transport
category airplane safety and utility that will both promote and enhance the U.S. air transportation system.



Final Regulatory Flexibility Determination



The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (RFA was enacted by Congress to ensure that small entities are not unnecessarily
and disproportionately burdened by Federal regulations. The RFA requires a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis if
a proposed rule would have ``a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.'' FAA Order
2100.14A outlines FAA's procedures and criteria for implementing the RFA.



