 

2. The activity will not have a direct impact on employment opportunities for persons from low- and moderate-income
households. 
3. The completion of the project will result in no Public Benefits or will be detrimental to the community. 
4. No other investment will be triggered by the use of CDBG funds for this activity. 
5. Project does not support the strategic plan of a designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community. 
(2) 

Program impact_comprehensive program grants.

 Comprehensive programs must address a substantial portion of the identifiable community development needs of a
defined area(s). The extent to which activities are coordinated will be a major consideration in the evaluation of
program impact. In defining an appropriate area for comprehensive treatment, applicants should consider the severity
of condition within the area and the resources to be provided. The impact is greatest where community development
needs will be substantially addressed over a reasonable period of time. Exceptions to the requirement that activities
be concentrated within a defined area or areas may be made if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed program
represents a reasonable means of addressing the identified needs. 
HUD will assess the impact of the program for each of the four program design criteria selected, based on the factors
described below. Applicants must describe fully the extent to which the program will address each criterion selected.
HUD will compare all programs which address a particular 
criterion. The best proposal for that criterion will be the standard by which all others will be judged, although that
proposal will not necessarily be awarded a significant impact. 
Assignment of Program Impact points for a Comprehensive Grant application is a two-step process. First, the potential
of the proposed program of activities to achieve the results intended by each selected criterion when considered
in relation to other communities selecting the same criterion is assessed. A numerical value is assigned, based on
the following:



The results would have insignificant impact_0 Points 
The results would have minimal impact_2 Points 
The results would have a moderate impact_4 Points 
The results would have a maximum impact_8 points 



After each of the four criteria selected by an applicant is rated and a value assigned, the values are summed. A minimum
of 12 points will be required at this stage in order for the application to be eligible for further consideration. A
score of less than 12 points indicates that the proposed activities would have insufficient impact to warrant funding.

Following this process, the actual points for impact are determined by dividing each applicant's Program Impact
Score by the highest Program Impact Score achieved by any applicant and multiplying the result by 400. 
Listed below are the ten design criteria and the standards which HUD has developed to evaluate each criterion. The
applicant must select and address four of the criteria. In addition to these standards, the Submission Requirements
and Review Criteria for Economic Development Projects under the Single Purpose Program apply in determining the
eligibility and rating for economic development proposals that are a part of a Comprehensive Program. It is particularly
important that applicants fully address the economic development criteria should Criteria 5 and 6 be selected. 
(a) 

Criterion 1_Supports Comprehensive Neighborhood Conservation, Stabilization, Revitalization, New Housing
Construction or Promotes Homeownership.

 The applicant must describe the degree to which the identified needs of a defined area or areas will be addressed in
a coordinated manner. In defining an area or areas, applicants should examine carefully the extent of needs and the
resources available to address those needs. Where an area has not been defined, the applicant should describe fully
the appropriateness of implementing activities on a community-wide basis. 
In evaluating the impact of the proposed program, HUD will examine the following factors: 



_Nature and severity of neighborhood needs. 
_Extent to which needs will be addressed. 
_Amount of funds required to implement neighborhood activities. 
_Extent to which activities are coordinated to address housing, public facility and economic development needs.
Program impact will be the greatest where a substantial portion of the needs within a defined area will be met. 
_Extent to which the project promotes fair housing choice in homeownership among protected classes. 
_Extent to which the project supports the strategic plan of a designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community.




The strongest consideration for housing rehabilitation programs is given to those applicants which have designed
their housing programs by taking into account both structural conditions and appropriate financing mechanisms.
The proposed program should be structured in a way to be marketable, given income and structural characteristics
of the neighborhood area. The physical needs of residential or mixed use properties must be well stated and documented
in terms of substandardness. Applicants will be expected to maximize the leveraging of private funds, encourage
the participation of local financial institutions, and develop realistic program guidelines. Private funds available
from financial lending sources should be established. If leveraging is infeasible, the applicant must fully document
that fact. The most effective housing programs will be those which will address a substantial portion of the identified
needs, while maximizing the impact of Federal funds.




