 

What will be the impacts on wetlands, and riparian areas?
What will the impacts be on the water quality and chemistry?
What will be the economics of the proposed action?
How will the proposal affect the roadless character of certain areas?
How will the local economies be affected by the proposal?
The Forest Service is seeking information and comments from Federal, State, and local agencies as well as individuals
and organizations who may be interested in, or affected by the proposed action. The Forest Service invites written
comments and suggestions on the issues related to the proposal and the area being analyzed. Information received
will be used in preparation of the Draft EIS and Final EIS. For most effective use, comments should be submitted to the
Forest Service within 30 days from the date of publication of this Notice in the 

Federal Register

. Preparation of the EIS will include the following steps:




1. Define the purpose of and need for action.
2. Identify potential issues.
3. Eliminate issues of minor importance or those that have been covered by previous and relevant environmental analysis.
4. Select issues to be analyzed in depth.
5. Identify reasonable alternatives to the proposed action.
6. Describe the affected environment.
7. Identify the potential environmental effects of the alternatives.




Steps 2, 3, and 4 will be completed through the scoping process.

Step 5 will consider a range of alternatives developed from the key issues. One of these will be the ``No Action'' alternative.
Other alternatives will consider various methods, levels and locations of harvest, regeneration, and related road
development/improvement in response to issues, and non-timber objectives.

Step 6 will describe the physical attributes of the area to be affected by this proposal, with special attention to
the environmental factors that could be adversely affected.

Step 7 will analyze the environmental effects of each alternative. This analysis will be consistent with management
direction outlined in the Forest Plan. The direct, indirect, and cumulative effects of each alternative will be analyzed
and documented. In addition, the site specific mitigation measures for each alternative will be identified and the
effectiveness of these mitigation measures will be disclosed.

The approximate boundary of the area covered for this analysis will be from the southern Forest boundary along White
Mountain north along Skyline Drive to the Ferron and Sixmile drainages.

The proposed management activities would be administered by the Sanpete and Ferron Ranger Districts of the Manti-La
Sal National Forest in Sanpete and Sevier Counties, Utah.

Agency representatives and other interested people are invited to visit with Forest Service officials at any time
during the EIS process. Two specific time periods are identified for the receipt of formal comments on the analysis.
The two comment periods are, (1) during the scoping process, the next 30 days following publication of this Notice
in the 

Federal Register

, and (2) during the formal review period of the Draft EIS.

The Draft EIS is estimated to be filed with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and available for public review
in June, 1994. At this time the EPA will publish an availability notice of the Draft EIS in the 

Federal Register.

