 

Expenses incidental to the handling and disposition of the damaged commodity shall be paid by the Cooperating Sponsor
unless it is determined by the Agricultural Counselor or Attache that the damage could not have been prevented by the
Cooperating Sponsor under the terms of the Program Agreement. Actual expenses incurred, including third party costs,
in effecting any sale may be deducted from the sales proceeds and, except for monetization programs, the net proceeds
shall be deposited with the U.S. Disbursing Officer, American Embassy, with instructions to credit the deposit to
an appropriate CCC account as determined by CCC. In monetization programs, the gross proceeds shall be deposited
in the special interest bearing account and after approved costs related to the handling and disposition of damaged
commodities are paid, remaining funds used for purposes of the approved program. The Cooperating Sponsor shall promptly
furnish to the Agricultural Counselor or Attache a written report of all circumstances relating to the loss and damage.
The report and any supplemental report shall include a certification by a public health official or other competent
authority of the exact quantity of the damaged commodity disposed of because it was determined to be unfit for the use
authorized in the Program Agreement. A report must also be provided to the Chief, Debt Management Division, KCFMO,
of action taken to dispose of commodities unfit for authorized use.



1499.17 

Liability for loss, damage, or improper distribution of commodities_claims and procedures.



(a) 

Fault of Cooperating Sponsor prior to loading on ocean vessel.

 If the Cooperating Sponsor fails to have a vessel for loading at the U.S. port of export in accordance with the agreed
shipping schedule, the Cooperating Sponsor shall immediately notify KCCO, Chief, Export Operations Division.
CCC will determine whether the commodity shall be: Moved to another available outlet; stored at the port for delivery
to the Cooperating Sponsor when a vessel is available for loading; or disposed of as CCC may deem proper. The Cooperating
Sponsor shall take such action as directed by CCC and shall reimburse CCC for expenses incurred.

(b) 

Fault of others prior to loading on ocean vessel.

 When any damage or loss to the commodity occurs which is attributable to a warehouseman, carrier, or other person between
the time title is transferred to a Cooperating Sponsor and the time the commodity is loaded on board vessel at designated
port of export, the Cooperating Sponsor shall immediately notify KCFMO, Chief, Debt Management Office. The Cooperating
Sponsor shall promptly assign to CCC any rights to claims which may accrue as a result of such loss or damage and shall
promptly forward to CCC all documents pertaining thereto. CCC shall have the right to initiate, prosecute, and retain
the proceeds of all claims for such loss or damage.

