 

(3) None of the disqualifying levels identified in paragraph (a)(4) of this section is exceeded in the poultry product,
unless specific alternative levels have been established for the substance in 381.471; or, unless the Administrator
has permitted a claim despite the fact that a disqualifying level of a nutrient is present in the product based on a finding
that such a claim will assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices, and, in accordance with the regulation
in this Part that makes such a finding, the labeling bears a referral statement disclosing the nutrient(s) that exceeds
the disqualifying level as follows: ``See [appropriate panel or Nutrition Facts] for information about [nutrient
requiring disclosure] and other nutrients.'' The statement shall be in easily legible boldface print or type, in
distinct contrast to other printed or graphic matter, that is no less than that required for net quantity of contents,
except where the size of the claim is less than two times the required size of the net quantity of contents statement,
in which case the referral statement shall be no less than one-half the size of the claim but no smaller than one-sixteenth
of an inch. 
(4) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(3) of this section, no substance is present at an inappropriate level as determined
in the specific provision authorizing the claim in 381.471. 
(5) The label does not represent or purport that the food is for infants and toddlers less than 2 years of age, except
if the claim is specifically provided for in 381.471. 
(6) Except where provided for in other regulations in this Part, the poultry product contains 10 percent or more of
the Reference Daily Intake or the Daily Reference Value as defined in 381.409 for vitamin A, vitamin C, iron,
calcium, protein, or fiber per reference amount customarily consumed prior to any nutrient addition, except the
basis for meal-type products as defined in 381.413(l) shall be per labeled serving size prior to any nutrient
addition. 
(f) 

Applicability.

 The requirements of this section apply to poultry products intended for human consumption that are offered for sale.

7. A new 381.470 would be added to read as follows: 

381.470

Labeling applications for health claims. 


(a) Any interested person may submit a labeling application to FSIS for approval of the use of a particular health claim
in the labeling of a poultry product. The labeling application shall be submitted in quadruplicate, except that the
supporting documentation may be submitted on a computer readable disk. Contents of the disk should be in a standard
format, such as ASCII format. (Applicants interested in submitting a disk should contact the Director, Product Assessment
Division, Regulatory Programs, FSIS, Washington, DC 20250 for details). If any part of the material submitted is
in a foreign language, it shall be accompanied by an accurate and complete English translation. The labeling application
shall state the applicant's post office address. 
(b) Pertinent information will be considered as part of an application on the basis of specific reference to such information
submitted to and retained in the files of FSIS. Such information may include any findings, along with the basis of the
findings, of an outside panel with expertise in the subject area. However, any reference to unpublished information
furnished by a person other than the applicant will not be considered unless use of such information is authorized
(with the understanding that such information may in whole or in part be subject to release to the public) in a written
statement signed by the person who submitted it. Any reference to published information shall be accompanied by reprints
or easily readable copies of such references. 
(c) If nonclinical laboratory studies accompany a labeling application, the applicant shall include, with respect
to each nonclinical study included with the application, either a statement that the study has been conducted in compliance
with the good laboratory practice regulations as set forth in part 58 of chapter I, title 21, or, if any such study was
not conducted in compliance with such regulations, a brief statement of the reason for the noncompliance. 
(d) If clinical or other human investigations accompany a labeling application, the applicant shall include, with
respect to each clinical investigation included with the application, either a statement that the investigation
was conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional review set forth in part 56 of chapter I, title
21, or was not subject to such requirements in accordance with 21 CFR 56.104 or 56.105, and that it was conducted in compliance
with the requirements for informed consent set forth in part 50 of chapter I, title 21. 
(e) All data and information in a health claim labeling application are available for public disclosure after the
notice of filing of labeling application is issued to the applicant 
(381.470(j)(2)), except that clinical investigation reports, adverse reaction reports, product experience
reports, consumer complaints, and other similar data and information shall only be available after deletion of:

(1) Names and any information that would identify the person using the poultry product. 
(2) Names and any information that would identify any third party involved with the report, such as a physician or hospital
or other institution. 
(f) Labeling applications for a health claim shall be submitted to the Director, Food Labeling Division, Regulatory
Programs, Food Safety and Inspection Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC 20250 and shall include
the following data and be submitted in the following form: 







(Date) 




Name of applicant 
Post office address 
Subject of the labeling application




The undersigned, 

XXXXX

 submits this labeling application pursuant to 9 CFR 381.470 with respect to (statement of the substance and its health
claim). 






