 

In seeking to provide States with the flexibility to implement emissions trading programs effectively, the final
EIP rules retain the proposed requirement for the State to establish appropriate administrative procedures for
conducting, approving, verifying, recording, and tracking trades. As part of an EIP program, these procedures would
then be reviewed by the EPA in the course of EPA review of the SIP revision incorporating the EIP into the SIP. Thus, the
EIP does not necessarily envision single-source SIP revisions for each trade conducted in the context of an EPA-approved
generic emissions trading program. Of course, EPA approval of such programs is predicated on the program containing
all the appropriate environmental safeguards that are required by the EIP rules. One such safeguard is the inclusion
of program audits, to be conducted by the State, to evaluate program implementation and track program results. The
EIP rules require that the State provide post-audit reports to the EPA, and that the State commits to implement timely
programmatic revisions or other measures necessary for the successful operation of the program. Additionally,
the rules require that State and Federal enforceability must be preserved, such that when ERC's generated within
an emissions trading program are used to offset increases in emissions from other sources, the EIP must contain a mechanism
for ensuring State and Federal enforceability of the measures taken to generate the credits. 
 
The EPA is currently developing additional guidance on such issues associated with banking of ERC's. The EPA intends
to complete this additional guidance as quickly as possible, and, in the interim, to work with States developing EIP's
involving banking of ERC's. 
 


3. Regional and Interstate Trading 

 

Neither the proposal nor final rules specifically address the issue of regional and interstate emissions trading.
Several commenters raised this issue, however, particularly in the context of trading of emissions offsets. Most
such commenters felt that the EPA should encourage interstate trading by establishing consistent rules and prohibiting
States from creating interstate barriers. One State group felt that the final rules should provide for the fullest
possible implementation of trading strategies on a regional basis within the Northeast Ozone Transport Region.
One environmental group urged that the final rules remind States of the statutory geographical constraints on trading.

 
The EPA has developed some preliminary guidance on this issue as it relates to NO

x

 offsets in the Northeast Ozone Transport Region.

17

 Additional guidance on interstate or regional trading will be developed in the context of the EPA's working with interested
States in program development activities. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


17

</FOOTNAME>
This guidance is contained in a March 31, 1993 letter from Mr. John Seitz, Director of the EPA's Office of Air Quality
Planning and Standards, to Mr. Bruce Carhart, Executive Director of the Ozone Transport Commission, which includes
all or portions of the northeastern States from Washington, DC, to the New England States. This letter is available
in the docket for this rule. 
 
</FOOTNOTE>


V. Administrative Requirements 
 


A. Executive Order 12866 
 


Under Executive Order 12866, (58 FR 51735 (October 4, 1993)) the Agency must determine whether the regulatory action
is ``significant'' and therefore subject to OMB review and the requirements of the Executive Order. The Order defines
``significant regulatory action'' as one that is likely to result in a rule that may: 
 
(1) Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector
of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local, or tribal
governments or communities; 

(2) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another Agency; 
 
(3) Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations
of recipients thereof; or 
 
(4) Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles
set forth in the Executive Order.'' 
 
It has been determined that these rules are not a ``significant regulatory action'' under the terms of Executive Order
12866. This action was submitted to OMB for review. Changes made in response to OMB suggestions or recommendations
will be documented in the public record. 
 


B. Paperwork Reduction Act 
 


These rules do not contain any information collection requirements subject to review by the OMB under the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. 3501, 

et seq. 



C. Regulatory Flexibility Act 
 


The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 and applicable EPA guidelines revised in 1992 require Federal agencies to
identify potentially adverse impacts of Federal rules upon small entities. Small entities include small businesses,
organizations, and governmental jurisdictions. In instances where significant impacts are possible on a substantial
number of these entities, agencies are required to perform a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (RFA). 

This rule does not of itself impose any requirements on small entities, nor require or exclude small entities from
any EIP's which may be implemented in the future. As a result, the EPA has determined that these rules will not 
have a significant impact on a substantial number of small entities. 
 
Therefore, as required under section 605 of the RFA, 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., 

I certify that these rules do not have a significant impact on a substantial number of small entities. 




