 

GPS provides two levels of service: Standard Positioning Service (SPS) and Precise Positioning Service (PPS). SPS
is the standard level of positioning, velocity, and timing accuracy that is available to any user on a continuous worldwide
basis. The horizontal positioning accuracy of this service is 100 meters (2 distance root mean squared (drms), 95%
probability) and 300 meters with 99.99% probability. PPS will be limited to authorized U.S. and allied Federal government
and military users and to those civil users who can satisfy U.S. requirements. These requirements are: the use must
be in the U.S. national interest; the user must meet specific GPS security requirements; and a reasonable alternative
to the use of PPS must not be available. Unauthorized users will be denied access to PPS through encryption of the signals.
PPS military user equipment will provide horizontal positioning accuracy of 21 meters (2 drms). The SPS is affected
by a process called Selective Availability (SA), which degrades the basic accuracy of the SPS through adjustment
and encryption of some of the signals and data.
One of the shortcomings of GPS for civil navigation use is its problem meeting integrity requirements. Integrity
is the ability of a system to provide timely warnings to users when the system should not be railed upon for navigation.
According to DOD's concept of operation, GPS satellites are monitored more than 95 percent of the time by a network
of five monitoring stations spread around the world. The information collected by the monitoring stations is processed
by the GPS Master Control Station (MCS) and used to periodically update the navigation message, including the satellite
health message, transmitted by each satellite. The health message is transmitted as part of the GPS navigation message
for reception by both PPS and SPS users. Additionally, satellite operating parameters such as navigation data errors,
signal availability failures, and certain types of satellite clock failures are monitored internally within the
satellite. If such internal failures are detected, users are notified within six seconds. Other failures detectable
only by the control segment may take from 15 minutes to several hours before users are notified of a problem. This is
unsatisfactory for many modes and phases of navigation, and, from the maritime perspective, it is particularly deficient
for the harbor and harbor approach (HHS) phase of navigation. The integrity required for HHA navigation will be provided
through augmentation of the GPS SPS by the Coast Guard's Differential GPS (DGPS) service, now being implemented.
As with Loran-C and Transit (the Navy Navigation Satellite System), the GPS should not be used by itself in or near restricted
waters. As described above, the accuracy of the system is not monitored continuously and it may take 26 hours
to be aware of a problem or fix a problem with a satellite. Additionally, mariners need to be aware of the real accuracy
of the system. GPS receivers may produce a latitude and longitude position that appears accurate to several decimal
places, which may mislead a mariner to believe the system is really that accurate. GPS SPS will only give an accuracy
to within 100 meters, with 95% probability. That means that the mariner can be anywhere within a 100 meter radius of
the position indicated by the receiver. It also means that 5% of the time, the actual position could be greater than
100 meters from the indicated location. Mariners must constantly be aware of this and navigate with due caution, using
all means available, most importantly in more restricted locations such as harbor and harbor approach areas.
The FRP outlines navigation accuracies required for the different phases of navigation. While the Ocean and Coastal
phases have been satisfied for some time, the harbor and harbor-approach phase requirements have been unattainable
with existing systems. Additionally, a similar need for higher accuracy exists for other Coast Guard missions such
as positioning aids to navigation and Vessel Traffic Services. DGPS is a solution to all of these needs.

