 

K.2. 

Comment. 

One commenter questioned how, where to, and when the 
spent fuel and casks will go? How does the decommissioning of NUHOMS affect 
the reactor decommissioning plan if no repository is sited and the pool must 
remain open? Another commenter expressed concern that after the operating 
facility has been decommissioned, the spent fuel pool may not be available for 
use in recovery of a breached DSC. 



Response. 

The Commission determined in the Waste Confidence 
decisions that sufficient repository capacity will be available, in the first 
quarter of the 21st century, to accept spent fuel that is already in storage 
or that will be generated during the lifetime of the reactor licensed by NRC. 
In addition, the Commission determined that spent fuel can be safely stored at 
reactors until it is disposed. The bases for these determinations are 
extensively discussed in the Waste Confidence decisions 
(54 FR 39765; September 28, 1989 and 49 FR 34658; August 31, 1984) and remain 
applicable today. 

To operate the dry spent fuel storage area under the provisions of the 
general license, a license to possess or operate a nuclear power reactor under 
10 CFR Part 50 is required. If the reactors were decommissioned and the 
license terminated, and if the spent fuel were to remain on site, a specific 
license issued under 10 CFR 72.40 would be required. At the time of 
application for a specific license and before the Part 50 license was 
terminated, the licensee would have to address the subject of how the fuel 
will be repackaged for shipment to an MRS or repository. (None of the casks 
now listed in 10 CFR 72.214 are approved for transportation). Decommissioning 
and termination of a Part 50 license for a given reactor site must take into 
account the proper disposal of any spent fuel. 

L. A number of positive and negative comments were received about the 
application of 10 CFR 72.48 or Item 9 of the Certificate of Compliance to 
general licensees. 


L.1. 

Comment. 

Several commenters questioned the application of 
10 CFR 72.48 to Certificate of Compliance holders for use by a general 
licensee. Some commenters believe that this regulation is being 
inappropriately applied to general licensees and cask vendors. These 
commenters believe that the regulation was intended to apply to site-specific 
licenses issued under 10 CFR 72.40 only. One commenter cited the parallel 
application of 10 CFR 50.59 to 10 CFR Part 50 licensees. Any changes to the 
Certificate of Compliance and the supporting SAR and SER need public input 
using the rulemaking process. Who would make the decisions in using the terms 
``unreviewed safety questions,'' ``significant increase,'' and ``significant 
environmental impact''? Other commenters liked this addition, stating that 
non-safety-significant changes can be made in a timely and cost effective 
manner. Several commenters supported the incorporation of item number 9 
(in 72.48 type language) in the draft Certificate of Compliance. One 
commenter wanted similar provisions made for general license holders with 
recordkeeping requirements applicable to the general license rather than the 
certificate holder. Changes requiring an amendment to the certificate should 
be initiated by the certificate holder only. 



Response. 

The NRC will not allow changes in the Certificate of 
Compliance under 10 CFR 72.48. However, the general licensee may make changes 
in the SAR under 10 CFR 72.48, unless it involves an unreviewed safety 
question, a significant increase in occupational exposure, or a significant 
unreviewed environmental impact. The general licensee must make the 
determinations, in the first instance, that are necessary for application of 
10 CFR 72.48. The licensee must also retain its evaluations on its records 
(which are subject to NRC review). 


Supporting this application of 10 CFR 72.48 to the general license are 
the words of 10 CFR 72.48(a)(1) which provides as follows: ``The holder of a 
license issued under this part may: (i) Make changes in the ISFSI *** 
described in the Safety Analysis Report, *** (iii) *** without prior 
Commission approval, unless the proposed change, test or experiment involves a 
change in the license conditions incorporated in the license, an unreviewed 
safety question, a significant increase in occupational exposure, or a 
significant unreviewed environmental impact.'' Also supporting the 
interpretation is 10 CFR 72.210 which provides as follows: ``A general license 
is hereby issued for the storage of spent fuel in an independent spent fuel 
storage installation at power reactor sites to persons authorized to possess 
or operate nuclear power reactors under Part 50 of this chapter.'' The NRC 
staff is considering a rulemaking to amend NRC regulations to explicitly state 
that 10 CFR 72.48 applies to general licensees. 


L.2. 

Comment. 

One commenter stated that the CFR is silent on how a 
vendor can change a cask SAR and certificate after the final rule. It should 
be made clear for the vendor that this cask SAR (CSAR) is generic for all 
United States sites. All seismic, control component, distance, changes in 
length and weight, changes in transfer devices, etc., need to be clearly 
defined in the proposed rulemaking for the cask and the CSAR before public 
comment. Who would be liable if a utility requested the vendor to change a 
certified cask design? 




