 

1. To replace an incompatible level of unrestricted use of the O'Malley River area during key bear use periods, with
a compatible recreational opportunity which would protect and conserve brown bear populations. 

2. To develop and maintain a program that provides the general public a safe and professional guided bear viewing opportunity,
that is consistent with Refuge management objectives and policies established in the Comprehensive Conservation
Plan. 

The program proved popular with the public; in 1992, 88 persons participated. The Service was satisfied that both
program goals were adequately met. 

The O'Malley Bear Viewing Program is designed to increase wildlife viewing opportunities for the public. The brown
bears of Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge offer unique and highly desirable opportunities for viewing; opportunities
that are most safely and effectively provided by a structured viewing program. 

Structured wildlife viewing programs have been used successfully as a conservation management tool and to enhance
public use opportunities elsewhere in Alaska. The best known program is conducted at the McNeil River State Game Sanctuary
by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. The McNeil River program has gained a worldwide reputation for quality bear
viewing, and competition for permits is so intense that applicants have less than an 8 percent chance of obtaining
a permit. Another popular bear viewing program is conducted at Brooks Camp in Katmai National Park. The number of visitors
at Brooks Camp is not limited except by availability of lodge and campground facilities. Use of these facilities during
peak visitation periods is presently at or beyond capacity and the National Park Service may limit the number of visitors
in the future. A third bear viewing program is located at Pack Creek on Admiralty Island and is cooperatively managed
by the U.S. Forest Service and Alaska Department of Fish and Game. Permits are required to visit Pack Creek; during
1993 the Forest Service announced that the number of visits to Pack Creek will be limited. 

Experience at McNeil River State Game Sanctuary has demonstrated that brown bears are least disturbed by human activity
that is consistent and predictable. Studies at the Brooks Camp and Pack Creek bear viewing programs have confirmed
that unpredictable human activity causes some bears to avoid important habitat. Inconsistent human activity has
also been shown to cause conflicts between people and bears. At the McNeil River Sanctuary, implementation of a structured
bear viewing program increased bear use and at the same time reduced the incidence of bear/human conflicts. 

Successful reduction of conflict, through implementation of a structured brown bear viewing program at O'Malley
River, will require control of public use and access. Restriction of public use and access to anyone not participating
in the viewing program will promote a quality wildlife experience for participants and reduce the potential for serious
and incompatible conflicts between refuge visitors and bears. Public use and access would be restricted only seasonally,
from June 25 to September 30. These dates were selected because it is the time period when the greatest number of bears
are concentrated in the O'Malley River area to feed on the seasonal salmon runs that provide a critical component of
their diet. Consequently, this is the period bears are most vulnerable to adverse impacts from excessive and unpredictable
human use.



The Service has issued a permit, under which a private operator will conduct the O'Malley Program, for the period 19941998.
The program will be thoroughly evaluated during 1994 and, if successful, will be continued. If unsuccessful, the
program will be discontinued but the public use closure would be retained to protect feeding bears from incompatible
disturbance. 



Statutory Authority 



In accordance with the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 668dd), the Secretary
is authorized under such regulations as he may prescribe to permit the use of any area within the National Wildlife
Refuge System for any purpose whenever he determines that such uses are compatible with the major purposes for which
such areas were established. 


The Refuge Recreation Act of 1962 (16 U.S.C. 460k) authorizes the Secretary to administer such areas for public recreation
as an appropriate incidental or secondary use only to the extent that it is practicable and not inconsistent with the
primary purposes for which the area was established. 

Section 304 of ANILCA requires the Secretary to prescribe such regulations and impose such terms and conditions as
may be necessary and appropriate to ensure that any activities carried out on a national wildlife refuge in Alaska
under any permit or easement granted under any authority are compatible with the purposes of that refuge. 

Section 1306 of ANILCA permits the Service to provide visitor facilities in the refuge if compatible with the unit's
purpose. 

This rule is being generated to help structure public use. Adequately regulated public use is consistent with and
will not interfere with the refuge purposes delineated above, and is thus compatible with the purposes for which Kodiak
National Wildlife Refuge was established according to 16 U.S.C. 668(dd). 



Request for Comments 



A public hearing on this proposed rule was advertised in Alaska and held on April 26, 1994, at Kodiak High School, Kodiak,
Alaska. Department of Interior policy is, whenever practicable, to afford the public a meaningful opportunity to
participate in the rulemaking process. A 60 day comment period is specified in order to both facilitate public input
and move forward to protect important refuge resources. Accordingly, interested persons may submit written comments
concerning this proposed rule to the persons listed above under the heading ADDRESSES. All substantive comments
will be reviewed and considered. 



Paperwork Reduction Act 



This rulemaking does not contain information collection requirements that require approval by the Office of Management
and Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

 



Environmental Considerations 



This rulemaking is categorically excluded under 40 CFR 1508.4 from the requirements of the National Environmental
Protection Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 43214347) as an administrative action that will have no potential for causing
substantial environmental impact. 



Economic Effect 



Implementation of the proposed rule will seasonally close two tenths of one percent (.02%) of Kodiak Refuge lands,
to commercial operators and public use not connected with the organized bear viewing program. Observations by refuge
personnel indicate that commercial use of the closure area has historically been steady. All use (commercial and
non-commercial) was estimated to have averaged 266 user days during 1989 and 1990, and 353 user days during 1991. These
levels of use will clearly be exceeded by the amount of commercial use (minimum of 480 user days) that will be allowed
under terms of a permit authorizing the bear viewing program. Thus, a net gain of commercial use is expected to occur.
Also, at least a portion of the commercial use previously occurring in the closure area will simply be displaced to
another location and therefore not lost to the local economy. 

Changes in use of the resource will have no significant effect on national income. Private income will be enhanced,
but dollar amounts will be small and have insignificant impact on the local economy. Agency costs for monitoring the
closure and the bear viewing commercial operation will be approximately $40,000 less than that expended during fiscal
year 1992 for program operation by the government. 

This rulemaking was not subject to Office of Management and Budget review under Executive Order 12866. In addition,
a review under the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

) has been done to determine whether the rulemaking would have a significant effect on a substantial number of small
entities, which include businesses, organizations or governmental jurisdictions. This proposed rule would have
minimal effect on such entities. 



