 

Section 402.51, Reporting




In this section, we revised the reporting requirements to provide for funds awarded under 402.34. Since all
SLIAG-related costs will have been submitted to, and accepted by, the Department by March 15, 1995, we attempted to
keep reporting as simple as possible by not requiring that States with unreimbursed SLIAG-related costs submit an
additional annual cost report after July 31, 1995.




Comment




One commenter suggested that the rule be revised to allow States to submit reports on their SLIAG-related costs by
September 28, 1995. The commenter suggested that this change would be necessary if the regulation were also revised
to allow States to continue to identify, document, and submit SLIAG-related costs for reimbursement until June 30,
1995.



Response



As we have noted above, we believe that the amount of time we have allowed in the regulation for documenting and submitting
SLIAG-related costs is both adequate and equitable. Since States will not be allowed to submit additional SLIAG-related
costs to the Department after March 15, 1995, we have not incorporated this suggestion in the final rule.



Effective Date



This rule is effective upon publication. While this rule would not normally be effective until 30 days after its publication,
we have found, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(3) that good cause exists for waiving the waiting period for this rule. Specifically,
we have determined that an immediate effective date is necessary to provide States with adequate notice of the procedures
which will be used to reallocate unexpended SLIAG funds as mandated by IRCA. If the effective date for this rule is delayed,
States may not have sufficient time to gather and submit to the Department the cost information which is integral to
the reallocation process. Accordingly, we have found that the usual 30 day waiting period is impracticable and unnecessary.




Regulatory Procedures



Executive Order 12866



Executive Order 12866 requires that regulations be reviewed to ensure that they are consistent with priorities and
principles set forth in the Executive Order. The Department has determined that this rule is consistent with these
priorities and principles. An assessment of the costs and benefits of available regulatory alternatives (including
not regulating) demonstrated that the approach taken in the regulation is the most cost-effective and least burdensome
while still achieving the regulatory objectives.



Paperwork Reduction Act




This rule imposes no new reporting or recordkeeping requirements, and therefore, no approvals are necessary under
section 3504 of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96511).



Regulatory Flexibility Act



The Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96354) requires the Federal government to anticipate and reduce the
impact of regulations and paperwork requirements on small entities.

The primary impact of this rule is on State governments. Therefore, we certify that this rule will not have a significant
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities because it affects the reallocation and reallotment of
SLIAG funds to State governments. Thus, a regulatory flexibility analysis is not required.




(Catalogue of Federal Domestic Assistance Program No. 93.565, State Legalization Impact Assistance Grants)



List of Subjects in 45 CFR Part 402



Administrative cost, Aliens, Allocation formula, Allotment, Education, Grant programs, Immigration, Immigration
Reform and Control Act, Public assistance, Public health assistance, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,
State Legalization Impact Assistance Grants.




Dated: October 27, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Mary Jo Bane,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Children and Families.




Dated: December 15, 1994.


</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
Donna Shalala,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services.

</SIGNJOB>
