 

Evaluation Criteria for Basic Core Capacity (Total 100 Points) 



1. Evidence of Need and Understanding of the Problem: (20 Points)



Evaluation will be based on: 

a. The applicant's description and understanding of the disabilities problem in the State as evidenced by estimates
of incidence and/or prevalence, demographic indicators, scope of disabilities and their severity, and costs associated
with specific disabilities; 

b. The applicant's description of current prevention activities within the State. This description should address
available resources, populations-at-risk, knowledge gaps, current relationships and potential to enroll other
organizations in support of the project, and the applicant's assessment of program effectiveness; 

c. The applicant's understanding of the impact of secondary conditions in the State and the applicant's description
of its future capacity to re-direct the program to the prevention of secondary conditions. 



2. Technical Approach and Core Capacity: (35 Points) 



Evaluation will be based on: 

a. The capability of the applicant to ensure that the basic components of core state-level capacity will be promoted
and implemented, including the rationale for the selection of the targeted disability group(s); 

b. The proposed plan to establish and operate the office of disabilities prevention, and ensure its capability to
function as a coordinating focus and provide technical assistance throughout the State; 

c. The plan to establish the advisory body including its organizational composition and intended impact on policy,
planning, and oversight for prevention activities; including an indication of how it will complement other such
councils in the State; 

d. The approach to develop and implement the State strategic plan for the prevention of disabilities; 

e. The reasonableness, feasibility, and logic of the designed project objectives, including the overall work plan,
timetable for accomplishment, and the strength of the proposed evaluation plan; 

f. The described preventive services for low income and minority populations and how access for persons with disabilities
to project services, opportunities, and facilities will be achieved. 



3. Surveillance: (25 Points) 



Evaluation of this criteria will be based on demonstration of the applicant's core epidemiologic capacity to conduct,
facilitate, analyze, and/or assess surveillance data in functional limitations and the targeted disability group(s),
including its design, methods for collection, quality assurance program, timelines for analysis or determinants
of data quality and gaps, collaborative support and intra/inter-agency agreements for data sharing, data linkage,
access and analysis potential, and dissemination capacity. This also includes the capability to conduct expanded
surveillance and/or epidemiologic studies as part of basic state-level core activities. 



4. Community Interventions: (15 Points) 



Evaluation will be based on the applicant's description of planning efforts and anticipated methods to design, facilitate,
offer technical assistance, and/or 
conduct and evaluate health promotion and other community intervention projects under its core capacity. 



5. Cost-Sharing: (5 Points) 



This criteria will be evaluated on evidence of personnel and financial contributions to the project. 



6. Budget Justification/Adequacy of Facilities: (Not Scored) 



Evaluation of the proposed budget will be based on the reasonableness, concise and clear justification, and consistency
with the intended use of cooperative agreement funds. 



Evaluation Criteria for Special Prevention Projects (100 Points) 



1. Evidence of Need: (10 Points) 



Evaluation will be based on the description and documentation of need for the project and the importance of how the
proposed activity relates to that need, including its basis in data sources, and support or endorsement by an advisory
function, public health leadership, and/or other State priorities. 



2. Project Description: (30 Points) 



Evaluation will be based on the description of the project; the appropriateness and specificity of goals, objectives,
and timelines; and the applicant's potential for achieving the expected results. 



3. Technical Approach: (30 Points) 



Evaluation will be based on the description of the methods to be used to implement the project, staff qualifications
and resources available, commitments and support to be provided from collaborating organizations, and how the core
functions will be used to support the special prevention project. 



4. Evaluation Plan: (30 Points) 



Evaluation will be based on the methods presented to measure specific outcomes and evaluate the entire project including
the proposed use and dissemination of results. 



5. Budget Justification: (Not Scored) 



This includes the reasonableness, appropriateness, and clarity of the budget request including the necessary documentation
of facilities and resources to be applied to support the proposed project. 



Funding Priorities 



Subsequent to decisions for basic state-level core capacity awards, funding for special prevention projects will
consider geographical balance and distribution among all targeted disability groups. 



