 

Regulatory Impact Analysis 


Need for Action 


This action is required as a result of the Mickey Leland Childhood Hunger Relief Act which amends the Food Stamp Act
of 1977, as amended, to include provisions that would: (1) Simplify the household definition; (2) establish eligibility
for children who live with their food stamp eligible parents in a drug or alcohol rehabilitation center; (3) exclude
from resources the value of vehicles used to transport fuel or water; (4) increase the fair market value exclusion
of vehicles for determining a household's resource limit; (5) exclude certain general assistance vendor payments;
(6) exclude the earnings of students under age 22 who live with their parents; (7) increase the maximum amount of the
dependent care deduction; (8) eliminate the current Federally imposed limit and require State agencies to establish
a statewide limit on the dependent care reimbursement paid to participants in the Food Stamp Employment and Training
Program; and (9) require proration of benefits only in the initial month of certification. 


Benefits 


This action would increase the number of potentially eligible food stamp recipients and would increase the benefit
level of certain households that are affected by these provisions. 


Costs 


It is estimated that this action would increase the cost of the Food Stamp Program by approximately $7 million in Fiscal
Year 1994; $110 million in Fiscal Year 1995; $132 million in Fiscal Year 1996; $187 million in Fiscal Year 1997; and
$207 million in Fiscal Year 1998. 


Background 


On January 4, 1994, the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) published a notice in the 

Federal Register

 announcing a public hearing on January 20, 1994. The public hearing was scheduled to provide an opportunity for State
agencies, advocacy groups, and other interested parties to engage in public dialogue on issues concerning the regulatory
provisions that are to be published in connection with the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (Act) amendments made by the Mickey
Leland Childhood Hunger Relief Act, Chapter 3, Title XIII, Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, Pub. L. 10366,
enacted August 10, 1993 (Leland Act). All provisions of the Leland Act pertinent to the Food Stamp Program (Program)
were included as topics of dialogue during the public hearing, including the provisions contained in this proposed
rulemaking. 


Simplifying the Household Definition for Households with Children and Others 


When the Food Stamp Act of 1977 was enacted, the concept of a ``household'' was defined as: (1) An individual living
alone; (2) an individual living with others but customarily purchasing food and preparing meals for home consumption
separate and apart from the others; (3) an individual who is a boarder living with others and paying reasonable compensation
to the others for meals for home consumption; (4) a group of individuals living together for whom food is customarily
purchased in common and for whom meals are prepared together for home consumption; or (5) a group of individuals who
are boarders, living with others and paying reasonable compensation to the others for meals for home consumption.
Separate household status was not granted to a spouse of a household member, or to children under 18 years of age under
the parental control of a member of the household. 
Section 101 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (Pub. L. 9735) amended section 3(i) of the Act to
provide that parents and children living together could be considered as separate households if they purchase and
prepare meals separately, but only if at least one parent is 60 years of age or older or is disabled. The final rule to
implement this revision was published on March 28, 1986 (51 FR 10764). 
Section 142 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1982 (Pub. L. 97253) amended section 3(i) of the Act
to provide that siblings living together had to be included in the same household unless at least one of the siblings
is elderly or disabled and they purchased and prepared their meals separately. The Department construed the term
``siblings'' to include natural, adopted, half or step-siblings. The final rule to implement this revision was published
on March 28, 1986 (51 FR 10764). 
In July 1987, section 802 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (Pub. L. 10077) (McKinney Act)
amended section 3(i) of the Food Stamp Act to provide an exception to the parent-child rule which allows three generations
living together to form two separate households if the parent with minor children and the minor children are purchasing
and preparing meals separately from the minor children's grandparent(s). The McKinney Act also provided an exception
to the sibling rule which allowed two siblings living together to form two separate households if one sibling is a parent
of minor children in residence and the parent and minor children purchase and prepare meals separately from the parent's
sibling. The Department considered children under 18 years of age who are under the parental control of an adult household
member to be minors. In addition, section 802 of the McKinney Act specifically provided that such households be subject
to reexamination at least once every six months. Accordingly, the Department published a final rule at 58 FR 58444
to implement these provisions. 
Section 13931 of the Leland Act amended section 3(i) of the Food Stamp Act to require that persons who live together
and purchase food and prepare meals separately may apply as separate households, except for (1) spouses who live together,
(2) parents and their children 21 years of age or younger (who are not themselves parents living with their children
or married and living with their spouses), and (3) children (excluding foster children) under 18 years of age who live
with and are under the parental control of a person other than their parent. These groups shall be treated as a group
of individuals who customarily purchase and prepare meals together for home consumption even if they do not do so.
The parent/child and siblings provisions of 7 CFR 273.1(a) are no longer valid. The provision of section 3(i) of the
Act which grants separate household status to individuals who are 60 years of age or older and unable to purchase food
and prepare meals, was not changed. 






