 

26. Section 1210.402 is amended by revising paragraph (a); removing in paragraph (b) the phrase ``or first handling''
and adding in its place ``, first handling or importing''; and removing in paragraph (b) the phrase ``1210.403''
and adding in its place ``1210.403 and 1210.404'' to read as follows: 


1210.402 

Voter and board member nominee eligibility. 


(a) All producers and handlers within a district may participate in their district convention for the purpose of nominating
candidates for appointment to the Board: 

Provided, 

That a producer who both produces and handles watermelons may vote for handler member nominees and serve as a handler
member nominee only if the producer purchased watermelons from other producers, in a combined total volume that is
equal to 25 percent or more of the producer's own production or the combined total volume of watermelons handled by
the producer from the producer's own production and purchases from other producer's production is more than 50 percent
of the producer's own production; and 

Provided further, 

That if a producer or handler is engaged in the production or handling of watermelons in more than one State or district,
the producer or handler shall participate within the State or district in which the producer or handler so elects in
writing to the Board and such election shall remain controlling until revoked in writing to the Board. For the purpose
of participation in initial nominating conventions, such election shall be made in writing, at the address provided,
to the Department official identified in the call for a district convention. 


* * * * * 


27. A new undesignated center heading and Section 1210.404 are added to read as follows: 


Importer Members 


1210.404 

Importer member nomination and selection. 


(a) The Board shall include one or more representatives of importers, who shall be appointed by the Secretary from
nominations submitted by watermelon importers. Importers' representation on the Board shall be proportionate
to the percentage of assessments paid by importers to the Board, except that at least one representative of importers
shall serve on the Board if importers are subject to the Plan. Nominations for importer positions that become vacant
shall be made by importers at nomination conventions or by mail ballot. 
(b) The initial nomination of importer members shall be made not later than 90 days after the Plan is amended. 
(c) There shall be two individuals nominated for each vacant position. The importer receiving the highest number
of votes for a vacancy shall be the first choice nominee, and the importer receiving the second highest number of votes
shall be the second choice nominee submitted to the Secretary. 
(d) Any individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, association, cooperative or any other entity
which is engaged in the production, first handling or importing of watermelons is considered a person and as such is
entitled to only one vote, except that such person may cast proxy votes as provided in section 1210.404(e)(1) of this
subpart. 
(e) 

Nomination Conventions. 

If nominations are made by nomination conventions, the Board shall widely publicize such conventions and provide
importers and the Secretary at least 10 days notice prior to each convention. 
(1) Proxy voting by importers shall be permitted at all conventions. Any person wanting to cast proxy votes must demonstrate
authorization to do so. Authority to cast a proxy vote on behalf of another person shall be demonstrated through documentation
containing: 
(i) The proxy voter's name, address, and telephone number; 
(ii) Signature and date signed; 
(iii) A certification identifying the proxy voter as an importer; and 
(iv) A statement identifying the person being given authority by the proxy voter to cast the proxy vote. 
(2) The Board shall provide to the Secretary a typed copy of each convention's minutes and shall arrange for completion
of qualification statements and other specified information by each nominee and forward such to the Secretary within
14 calendar days of completion of a convention. 
(f) 

Mail balloting. 

If nominations are conducted by mail ballot, the Board shall request importers to submit nominations of eligible
importers. It is the importer's responsibility to prove the individual's eligibility. After the names of nominees
are received, the Board shall print ballots and ask eligible importers to vote to nominate their candidates. After
the vote is received, the Board shall tabulate the results and shall send to the Department the nominees in order of
preference. The Board shall provide the Secretary with a report on the results, number of importers participating
in the vote, and the volume of imports, and shall arrange for completion of qualification statements and other specified
information by each nominee and forward such to the Secretary within 14 calendar days of receiving the ballots. 
(g) Any individual who both imports and handles watermelons will be considered an importer if that person imports
50 percent or more of the combined total volume of watermelons handled and imported by that person. 



1210.503

[Redesignated as 1210.405 and Amended]



28. Section 1210.503 is redesignated as 1210.405, the first sentence of paragraph (a) is revised, and a new
undesignated center heading is added to read as follows: 



Public Member 



1210.405

Public member nominations and selection. 


(a) The public member shall be nominated by the other members of the Board. *** 


* * * * * 


Subpart_Rules and Regulations 


