 

The agency may conduct focus group research to evaluate 
consumer understanding of the proposed warning messages and to 
ensure that the messages are not misleading. Focus group 
research involves gathering small, representative groups of 
consumers (no more than nine consumers per group) and leading 
then in a directed discussion of the research topic. For the 
present research, consumers will provide feedback as to their 
level of understanding of the warnings and the degree to which 
the specific wording of the messages is believable, relevant, 
confusing, or irritating. The agency intends to consider the 
results of the focus group research in arriving at any warning 
statement that is included in the final regulations. FDA will 
make a report on the results of its research available for public 
comment before it issues the final regulations.



B. Packaging 


1. Review of Packaging Issues in Citizen Petitions 


Two of the citizen petitions suggested that FDA take action 
with respect to the packaging of iron-containing drugs and 
dietary supplements. Both petitions recommended packaging 
requirements as a means of reducing pediatric poisonings from 
ingestion of multiple doses of drugs and dietary supplements 
containing 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit. 
The AG citizen petition requested that FDA use its authority 
under the act to require that all iron-containing drugs and 
dietary supplements containing 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit 
be packaged in child-resistant blister packs. 
The NDMA petition recommended that FDA incorporate into its 
regulations the NDMA-initiated voluntary program to address 
pediatric poisonings by such iron-containing products. This 
voluntary program includes, in part, a proviso that all iron-containing products currently subject to CPSC's special
packaging 
regulations that contain 30 mg or more of iron per dosage unit be 
packaged in CRP's, and that there be no exemption to CPSC's 
child-resistant special packaging requirements for these types of 
products. As discussed previously, NDMA's voluntary program also 
specifies labeling statements and includes an educational 
program. Implicit in NDMA's recommendation is the view that 
CRC's, labeling warning statements, and consumer education 
programs are sufficient to ensure the safe use of iron-containing 
products. 


2. Agency Response 


FDA considered the following questions in evaluating and 
responding to the packaging issues raised in the citizen 
petitions: (1) Can educational efforts and label warning 
statements alone sufficiently reduce pediatric iron poisonings? 
(2) Are noncomplying child-resistant packages a principal cause 
of iron poisoning deaths? (3) Are additional packaging 
requirements necessary to ensure the safe use of certain iron-containing products? (4) What is FDA's legal authority
to 
regulate packaging for foods and drugs? (5) Should child-resistant blister packaging be required for iron-containing

products? 
a. 

Can educational efforts and label warning statements 
significantly reduce pediatric iron poisonings? 

FDA agrees with 
NDMA that educating consumers on the proper use of CRC's and on 
the hazards posed by iron-containing drugs and supplements is 
very important. However, based on the available evidence, even 
if all CRC's were properly used, these closures could not have 
prevented the majority of the 37 reported fatalities. Improper 
use of CRC's was reported in only 4 of the 21 (19 percent) 
pediatric iron fatalities known to involve child-resistant 
packaging (Table 2). Educational programs and label warning 
statements should help to increase proper use of reclosable 
CRC's, and thereby help to prevent some pediatric iron-poisonings. However, FDA knows of no information showing
that a consumer education program, either that recommended by NDMA or 
any other such program, will be adequate to ensure that children 
will not be able to defeat even properly closed CRC's, or that 
improper use of such closures will cease. In the absence of such 
information, FDA believes that measures beyond consumer education 
programs are necessary to ensure that the use of certain iron-containing products is safe. 
FDA also tentatively finds that label warning statements 
will not be sufficient to ensure the safe use of these products. 
This tentative conclusion is based on the fact that label warning 
statements do not in any way bar access to the product. 
Label statements are an important educational tool for making 
adults aware of the significant consequences for young children 
if they gain access to the product. Young children, 
however, cannot read and have little judgment. Thus, a warning 
statement is likely to have little or no effect on their efforts 
to gain access. 



