 

In reaching its decision regarding the health claims, FDA reviewed the conclusions of many Federal government consensus
documents, Life Sciences Research Office reports, and recent scientific articles. In addition, it considered all
comments received in response to its proposed rules. Among the scientific evidence reviewed were the Department
of Health and Human Services (DHHS) publication ``The Surgeon General's Report on Nutrition and Health,'' U.S. Government
Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1988; the USDA and DHHS publication ``Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary Guidelines
for Americans,'' 3rd ed., Home and Garden Bulletin No. 232, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington DC, 1990;
and the DHHS publication ``The Lipid Research Clinics Population Studies Data Book,'' vol. II, ``The Prevalence
Study-Nutrient Intake,'' NIH Publication No. 822014, 1982. Also considered were reports of recognized non-governmental
scientific bodies that bear on these topics. These included the Committee on Diet and Health, Food and Nutrition Board,
Commission of Life Sciences, National Research Council's ``Diet and Health: Implications for Reducing Chronic
Disease Risk,'' National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1989, and the World Health Organization's ``Diet, Nutrition,
the Prevention of Chronic Diseases,'' Technical Report Series 797, 1990, and the Subcommittee on the Tenth Edition
of the RDAs, Food and Nutrition Board, Commission on Life Sciences, National Research Council's ``Recommended Dietary
Allowances,'' National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1989. 



1. Calcium and Osteoporosis 



Based on significant scientific evidence and overwhelming concurrence among experts in this area, FDA authorizes
a health claim relating to an association between adequate calcium intake and osteoporosis on the labels and labeling
of products that meet the regulatory specifications set forth in 21 CFR 101.72. The health claim will relay the message
that an adequate intake of calcium throughout life may delay the development of osteoporosis, and ultimately reduce
the risk of bone fracture in some individuals later in life. Adequate calcium intake levels for the healthy population
as established by the Subcommittee on the Tenth Edition of the RDAs, Food and Nutrition Board, Commission on Life Sciences,
National Research Council are: 800 milligrams per day for males and females 25 years of age and older, 1,200 milligrams
per day for males and females 11 to 24 years of age, and 800 milligrams per day for children (1 to 10 years). By definition,
RDAs are the levels of intakes of essential nutrients that, on the basis of scientific knowledge, are judged by the
Food and Nutrition Board to be adequate to meet the known nutrient needs of practically all healthy persons. To bear
this claim, a product must be high in calcium (i.e., contain a minimum of 20 percent of the Reference Daily Intake of
1,000 milligrams adopted for nutrition labeling, which is 200 milligrams per reference amount customarily consumed
for the product). 



2. Dietary Lipids and Cancer 



FDA concludes that all publicly available information and authoritative reports support an association between
diets low in fat and risk of some types of cancer. Based on this evidence, FDA authorizes the use of claims relating fat
reduction to reduced risk of some cancers provided that such statements comply with the requirements of 21 CFR 101.73.
The claim would convey the message that diets low in fat may reduce the risk of some types of cancer. The message may not
refer to specific sites of cancer and may not specify types of fat or fatty acids that may be related to the risk of cancer
because of the inconclusiveness of the relevant scientific evidence on these issues. FDA limits this claim to low
fat products, except that fish and game meats may be extra lean. 



3. Sodium and Hypertension 



FDA finds significant scientific agreement that claims relating sodium reduction to reduced risk of high blood pressure
are justified. The scientific evidence shows diets high in sodium are associated with a high prevalence of hypertension
and with increases in blood pressure with age, and that diets low in sodium are associated with a low prevalence of hypertension
and with a low or no increase of blood pressure with age. Therefore, FDA authorizes in 21 CFR 101.74 claims on the relationship
of dietary sodium and high blood pressure on food labels and labeling. Only food products low in sodium are eligible
to carry this claim. 



4. Dietary Saturated Fat and Cholesterol and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease 



Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the most common and serious form of cardiovascular disease. High blood total- and
low density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol levels are major risk factors in the development of CHD. FDA concludes
that the totality of a large body of scientific evidence provides strong and consistent support that diets high in
saturated fat and cholesterol are associated with increased levels of blood total- and LDL-cholesterol and, thus,
with increased risk of CHD. Based on this conclusion, FDA authorizes claims on foods relating the reduction in dietary
saturated fat and cholesterol to reduced risk of CHD when provided in accordance with the requirements of 21 CFR 101.75.
The requirements limit this claim to products that are low in fat, low in saturated fat, and low in cholesterol, except
that fish and game meats may be extra lean. 



5. Fiber-Containing Grain Products, Fruits, and Vegetables and Cancer 



FDA concludes that publicly available scientific evidence indicates that diets low in fat and rich in fiber-containing
grain products, fruits, and vegetables are associated with a decreased risk of some types of cancer. While there is
significant scientific agreement that evidence supports this association, the specific role of total dietary fiber,
fiber components, and other nutrients and substances in these foods in reducing cancer risk is not fully understood.
Based on the evidence, FDA authorizes a health claim in 21 CFR 101.76 relating diets low in fat and high in fiber-containing
grain products, fruits, and vegetables to reduced risk of some cancers. The message may include a reference to dietary
fiber in a statement about the value of grain products, fruits, and vegetables in reducing cancer risk because fiber
is an identifying marker of the types of foods correlated with the risk reduction. Only low fat products may convey
this claim. 



