 

C. Determination of Safety 


Under section 409(c)(3)(A) of the act, a food additive cannot be approved for a particular use unless a fair evaluation
of the data available to FDA establishes that the additive is safe for that use. The concept of safety embodied in the
Food Additives Amendment of 1958 is explained in the legislative history of the provision: ``Safety requires proof
of a reasonable certainty that no harm will result from the proposed use of an additive. It does not_and cannot_require
proof beyond any possible doubt that no harm will result under any conceivable circumstance.'' (H. Rept. 2284, 85th
Cong., 2d sess. (1958)). FDA has incorporated this concept of safety into its food additive regulations. Under 21
CFR 170.3(i), a food additive is ``safe'' if ``there is a reasonable certainty in the minds of competent scientists
that the substance is not harmful under the intended conditions of use.'' 
The agency has reviewed the data and studies submitted in the request for advisory opinion, material that was submitted
subsequent to the conversion of the request for advisory opinion to a food additive petition, the deliberations of
the Food Advisory Committee that took place at the April 1994 meeting, as well as other information in its files. In
addition, the agency has considered the comments that were received in response to the 

Federal Register

 notice announcing receipt of the request for advisory opinion. The comments are addressed in section IV. of this document.
As discussed below, FDA has concluded, based upon its review, that the use of aminoglycoside 3
&rsquo;-phosphotransferase II is safe for use as a processing aid in the development of new varieties of tomato, oilseed
rape, and cotton intended for food use. 


II. Use of the 

kan

r

 Gene As a Selectable Marker in Transgenic Plants


A. Background


Developers have for many years used plant breeding techniques to introduce desirable genetic traits into new varieties
that can be used in agriculture. Traditionally, breeders have relied on selection of mutants and on hybridization
between different varieties of the same species to achieve this goal. More recently, recombinant DNA techniques
(commonly referred to as ``genetic engineering'' techniques) have come into use to generate new plant varieties
with desirable characteristics. Recombinant DNA techniques involve the isolation, and subsequent introduction
into a host plant, of discrete DNA segments containing the gene(s) of interest. This introduction of exogenous DNA
into a cell, resulting in its acquisition of a new phenotype, is commonly referred to as ``transformation,'' and transformed
plants that contain genetic material derived from sources other than the host plant itself are called transgenic.


