 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Fish and Wildlife Service</USBUREAU>


Receipt of Applications for Permit 




The following applicants have applied for a permit to conduct certain activities with endangered species. This notice
is provided pursuant to Section 10(c) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531, 

et seq.

): 



PRT777414 





Applicant: 

Regional Environmental Consultants, San Diego, CA 




The applicant requests a permit to take (collect, identify and sacrifice) Riverside fairy shrimp (

Streptocephalus woottoni

) to determine the presence or absence of the species obtained from vernal pools and soil samples in Riverside and San
Diego Counties, California. Sacrificed species will be maintained as voucher specimens for scientific research.




PRT676811 





Applicant: 

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Regional Director, Region 2 




The applicant requests an amendment to their current permit to include activities for the endangered Holy Ghost ipomopsis
(

Ipomopsis sancti-spiritus

) and the flat-tailed horned lizard (

Phyrynosoma mcallii

) if and when it becomes Federally protected as threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act for the purpose of
scientific research and enhancement of propagation and survival of the species as prescribed by Service recovery
documents. 



PRT704930 





Applicant: 

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Regional Director, Region 6 




The applicant requests an amendment to their current permit to include take activities for the Winkler cactus (

Pediocactus winkleri

) and the water howellia (

Howellia aquatilis

), if and when they become Federally protected as endangered or threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act and
take activities for the threatened Penland alpine fen mustard (

Eutrema penlandii

) and the endangered kodachrome bladderpod (

Lesquerella tumulosa

) for the purpose of scientific research and the enhancement of propagation and survival of the species as prescribed
by Service recovery documents. 



PRT702631 





Applicant: 

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Regional Director, Region 1 




The applicant requests an amendment to their current permit to include take activities for the water howellia (

Howellia aquatilis

), if and when it becomes Federally protected as threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act for the purpose of
scientific research and the enhancement of propagation and survival of the species as prescribed by Service recovery
documents. 



PRT788026 





Applicant: 

Oakhill Center for Rare  Endangered Species, Oklahoma City, OK 




The applicant requests a permit to import one pair of captive-born Amur leopards (

Panthera pardus orientalis

) from the Cricket St. Thomas Wildlife Park, England, for the purpose of enhancement of propagation and survival of
the species. 



PRT787993 





Applicant: 

Texas A  M Univ., College Station, TX 




The applicant requests a permit to import up to 600 blood samples obtained opportunistically from Galapagos tortoises
(

Gechelone elephantopus

) on the Galapagos Islands for DNA analysis to enhance the survival of the species. 



PRT788029 





Applicant: 

New York Zoological Society, Bronx, NY 




The applicant requests a permit to import one captive-born white-naped crane (

Grus vipio

) from the Hong Kong Zoological  Botanical Gardens, to enhance the propagation and survival through breeding.




PRT786709 





Applicant: 

LeRoy Bouck, South Jordan, UT 




The applicant requests a permit to import a pair of Blythe's tragopans (

Tragopan blythi

) from Glenn Howe, Aylmer, Ontario, for breeding to enhance the propagation and survival of the species. 



PRT786831 





Applicant: 

Exotic Animals, Tarzana, CA 




The applicant requests a permit for multiple exports and reimports for a pair of captive-bred tigers (

Panthera tigris

) for the purpose of enhancement of survival through conservation education. 



PRT787926 





Applicant: 

Elizabeth Jacqueline Garcia, Davis, CA 




The applicant requests a permit to take (conduct nest surveys) California clapper rail (

Rallus longisrostris obsoletus

) in Marin County, California, to determine their reproductive success. 



PRT787833 





Applicant: 

Tanganyika Wildlife Co., Wichita, KS 




The applicant requests a permit to export one captive-bred female tiger (

Panthera tigris

) to Parque Zoologico International in Tijuana, Mexico, for the purpose of enhancement of survival through conservation
education. 

