 

The validity of a given neurotoxicity test relies on evidence that it adequately 
measures the domain of interest and is not highly correlated with tests that are believed to 
measure unrelated functions. These convergent and divergent aspects of validity are 
frequently divided into construct, content, and criterion subcategories. Construct validity 
refers to the ability of a given test to measure the intended function or construct (e.g., 
attention), content to how well the test measures the major aspects of the function, and 
criterion to how highly the test correlates with other tests of the same function or predicts 
neurotoxic impairment after similar insult. 
Many neurobehavioral tests purport to measure the same or similar cognitive, 
sensory, or motor functions, but correlations between these tests under chemical exposure or 
control conditions can be disappointingly low. This is not surprising given the procedural 
differences that exist among neurobehavioral tests. Tests intended to measure the same 
function often have different presentation and response modalities (visual, verbal, manual), 
have differing numbers of trials or a different time limit, and have different methods for 
scoring the results. Many tests have such large procedural differences that direct comparison 
is difficult. Assessment of validity for neurobehavioral tests of specific constructs, such as 
attention, is further complicated in that sensory input, other cognitive processes, and motor 
responses are unavoidable contributors to the test result. 


3.6.1.4. Dose response. 


Dose in this discussion refers to the measurement of chemical or 
metabolite concentrations in the body and to estimations of exposure. Both exposure 
assessment and biologic concentrations should be measured whenever possible. 
Dose-response relationships have been observed both in field and laboratory studies. Two 
recent human solvent exposure studies used lower exposure concentration that resulted in 
mucosal membrane effects reported by subjects as odors or irritation (Dick et al., 1992; 
Hjelm et al., 1990). Neurobehavioral impairment was not detected in these studies. A 
review of over 50 organic solvent human exposure experiments found that neurobehavioral 
impairment generally occurred at mean concentrations higher than those associated with 
irritation, although there was often overlap among the irritant and impairment concentration 
ranges (Dick, 1988). Defining neurotoxic dose-response relationships in humans decreases 
the uncertainties of extrapolation from animal data and allows a more accurate risk 
assessment. 
Recent human solvent exposure studies have employed low concentrations under 
which neurobehavioral impairment was not observed. Rather, these studies have primarily 
detected the effects of solvents on mucosal membranes reported by subjects as odors or 
irritation (Dick, unpublished observation). While these data may be relevant to setting 
workplace and environmental exposure limits, they can be expected to provide little 
information about the neurobehavioral impairment that occurs at higher concentrations. The 
relationship between irritant/odor concentration-effect functions and neurobehavioral 
impairment concentration-effect functions is not known, but it is probably not linear. 
Dose-dependent mechanisms of toxic effect can be expected to complicate risk extrapolation 
across the dose-response range in humans. 
A further complication in dose-response extrapolation is that low concentrations of 
chemicals may appear to improve performance as measured by neurobehavioral tests, while 
higher doses are more likely to impair performance. Improved performance does not 
necessarily indicate the absence of neurotoxicity; both increases and decreases in 
neurobehavioral performance may result from deleterious chemical interactions with neurons. 
Dose-response extrapolation is further complicated by the observation that facilitative or 
impairment effects within a given dosage range may occur at some parameters of the test 
stimulus or aspects of the response (response rate-dependent) but not at others (Altmann et 
al., 1991). Therefore, dose extrapolations are more difficult when there is uncertainty about 
the shape of the dose-response function (biphasic, linear, etc.) at the relevant test stimulus 
and response parameters. 
The risk assessment process with animal data involves extrapolation from the effects 
of high doses in animals to predict the effects of chronic low-dose exposure in humans. 
With data from laboratory studies of humans in a risk assessment, however, the extrapolation 
is in the other direction, from very low-dose laboratory exposure to predict the effects of 
chronic exposure at higher (but still low) concentrations in the environment and workplace. 
Low- to high-dose extrapolation within the same species may require different assumptions 
and risk assessment procedures. Although high-dose human exposures have occurred in 
accidents, those data are primarily descriptive in nature and cannot easily be plugged into a 
quantitative risk extrapolation process. Low dose laboratory data may be combined with data 
from epidemiologic studies of persons exposed to higher concentrations. 


3.6.1.5. Structure-activity. 


Structure-activity relationships for well-known chemicals have 
largely been established by clinical methods (and animal studies) and verified by 
neurobehavioral and neurophysiologic testing. Although an area of active research, 
neurobehavioral testing of humans has not yet been able to identify reliable patterns of 
impairment among chemical classes. This endeavor has been hampered by most laboratory 
research having been limited to the evaluation of low concentrations of solvents and a few 
other reversible toxicants and by the exposure uncertainties, biases, and confounding 
variables found in cross-sectional or cohort field studies. 


3.6.2. Other Considerations in Risk Assessment 
3.6.2.1. Mechanisms of action 



Uncovering behavioral and neurophysiologic mechanisms 
of action is a potential contribution of human laboratory exposure studies to neurotoxicity 
risk assessment. For example, Stewart et al. (1972) demonstrated that methylene chloride 
was metabolized to carbon monoxide in humans, and further studies (Putz et al., 1979) found 
that CO production could account for some of the neurobehavioral impairment observed with 
that chemical. Recent human laboratory studies of solvents employed low concentrations that 
produced mucosal irritation and strong odor, but little neurobehavioral impairment (Dick, 
unpublished observation). The mechanisms of action that produce mucosal irritation and the 
neurotoxic mechanisms that are expressed in neurobehavioral impairment may be quite 
different. Data on mucosal irritation and odor may therefore provide limited information for 
a neurotoxicity risk assessment. 


3.6.2.2. Exposure duration 

A criticism of extrapolation from animal studies to human 
exposure conditions is that the effects of short-term exposure (months to 12 years) in 
animals may not accurately predict the effects of chronic exposure (

&gt;

10 years) in humans. 
Laboratory studies rarely expose human subjects to solvents for more than 46 hours per day 
for 25 days while environmental and workplace exposures of concern involve 68 hours of 
exposure per day for years. The uncertainties of extrapolating from relatively acute 
exposures to predict the risks from chronic exposure will not be eliminated by using human 
laboratory exposure data in risk assessment. 


3.6.2.3. Time-dependent effects 

The acute exposures that are possible in human laboratory 
studies may provide little information on chronic time-dependent neurobehavioral effects. 
The effects of initial exposure may remain the same, decrease (tolerance), or increase 
(sensitization) with continued or repeated exposure to the chemical. All effects will not 
change in unison; tolerance and sensitization may be observed simultaneously on different 
measures of neurobehavioral function. The multiple toxicodynamic effects of chemical 
exposure (neurobehavioral and other) seem to follow individual time courses suggestive of 
multiple mechanisms of action. In addition, the processes of tolerance and sensitization can 
be influenced by testing conditions and the nature of the behavioral task. 
One also must be concerned about latent effects that do not appear for some time after 
a brief exposure and ``silent'' cumulative neurotoxic effects that are not observable in acute 
human studies. Latent and silent effects not only bring up the possibility of unknown risks 
for human subjects, but also make more difficult the extrapolation of chronic neurotoxic risks 
on the basis of acute exposures. 





