 

(3) SBDCs must ensure that their clients know that any financial packaging assistance provided does not in any way
guarantee receipt of a loan.
(4) In terms of SBA financial assistance, SBDCs may assist in completing forms for submitting loan applications and
may assist a client in formulating a business plan and preparing financial statements. A representative of an SBDC
may appear before the SBA with an applicant for SBA financial assistance. Unless authorized by the Administrator
with respect to a specific program, an SBDC may not advocate, recommend approval or otherwise attempt in any manner
to influence the SBA to provide financial assistance to any of its clients. In addition, an SBDC cannot collect fees
for assisting a client in preparing an application for SBA financial assistance.
(d) 

Special emphasis groups.

 From time to time, the SBA shall identify special groups to be targeted for assistance by SBA grantees. Support of SBA
special emphasis groups should be negotiated each year as part of the application proposal process and included in
the Cooperative Agreement when appropriate. SBDCs shall endeavor to serve small business owners from all populations
represented in the geographic area served by the SBDC.


130.360 

Specific program responsibilities.


(a) 

Policy development.

 The SBA shall be responsible for the development of policies relating to the management of the national SBDC program
and for the development of practices to ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, OMB Circulars and Executive
Orders. For those policies and practices directly affecting the operation of an SBDC, the SBA should consult, to the
extent practicable, with recognized organizations representing SBDCs to ensure that the policies or practices
promote the effective and efficient delivery of services to the small business community by the SBDC.
(b) 

Responsibilities of the SBDC Directors.

 Subject to SBA's oversight responsibilities, performance of the Cooperative Agreement is the responsibility of
the SBDC Director. The SBDC Director shall direct and monitor the activities of the SBDC network to ensure compliance
with the law, regulations, OMB Circulars, Executive Orders and the terms and conditions of the Cooperative Agreement.
The SBDC Director shall direct the programmatic activities and financial affairs of the SBDC network to deliver effective
services to the small business community in the geographic region included in the Cooperative Agreement. The SBDC
Director shall serve as the recipient organization official responsible for program implementation, evaluation,
and program adjustments necessary to meet the needs of the small business community. The SBDC Director shall have
authority to make expenditures under the Lead Center's budget. SBDC Directors may manage other programs in addition
to the SBDC Program as long as these programs serve small businesses and do not unnecessarily duplicate the services
provided through the Cooperative Agreement with the SBA. However, SBDC Directors may not receive additional compensation
from these other programs for managing them. The SBDC Director shall serve as the principal contact point for all matters
involving the SBDC network.


130.400 

Application procedure. [Reserved]


130.410 

New applications.


(a) When the SBA declines to renew an existing recipient organization or the recipient organization declines to reapply,
the SBA may accept applications from other organizations interested in becoming a recipient organization. An eligible
entity may apply to participate in the Small Business Development Center Program by submitting an original and two
copies of an application to the SBA district office covering the state or portion of a state (when there is more than
one SBDC located or authorized in a state) in which the applicant proposes to provide services. The application shall
meet the requirements set forth in Executive Order 12372. The application shall indicate which officials are authorized
to amend the application with regard to all or particular parts of such application.
(b) An application for the initial funding of a new SBDC network must include a letter by the Governor, or his or her designee,
of the State in which the SBDC will operate, or other evidence, confirming that the applicant's designation as an SBDC
would be consistent with the plan adopted by the State government and approved by the SBA. No such requirement is imposed
on subsequent applications from existing recipient organizations.
(c) The application shall set forth the eligible entity or entities operating or proposing to operate in the SBDC network;
a list of the Lead Center and SBDC service providers by name and address; the geographic areas to be serviced; the resources
to be used; the services that will be provided; the method for delivering the services, including a description of
how and to what extent academic, private and public resources will be used; a budget; a listing of the proposed members
of the State or Regional Advisory Board and other relevant information set forth in the Program Announcement.
(d) The applicant should make every effort to ensure an application is complete when filed. Authorized SBA officials
may request that the applicant amend an application. At any time, an applicant or recipient organization may file
an amendment for the SBA's review and approval. An amendment shall be signed by the official of the applicant or recipient
organization authorized to do so on the original application.
(e) Upon written recommendation for approval by the SBA District Director, the proposal shall be submitted through
appropriate SBA channels to the AA/SBDCs for review.


130.420 

Continuing applications.


(a) The SBA shall announce the due date for submission of all continuing applications in an annual Program Announcement.
This Program Announcement shall include a due date for SBDCs funded on a Federal fiscal year basis and a due date for
SBDCs funded on a calendar year basis. SBDCs shall meet these due dates to receive consideration of their application.
However, an extension may be granted by the SBA Project Officer with the concurrence of the Program Manager.

