 




<USBUREAU>Health Resources and Services Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Final Funding Priorities for Cooperative Agreements for Area Health Education Centers Program for Fiscal Year 1994
</DOCTITLE>



The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) announces the final funding priorities for fiscal year
1994, Cooperative Agreements for the Area Health Education Centers (AHEC) Program authorized under the authority
of section 746 (a)(l), title VII of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act, as amended by the Health Professions Education
Extension Amendments of 1992, dated October 13, 1992. 



Purpose 



Section 746(a)(1) of the PHS Act authorizes Federal assistance to schools of medicine and osteopathic medicine which
have cooperative arrangements with one or more public or nonprofit private area health education centers for the
planning, development and operation of area health education center programs. 



Final Funding Priorities for FY 1994 



Proposed funding priorities were published in the 

Federal Register

 on February 17, 1994, at 59 FR 8000, for public comment. Several comments were received from one respondent. Comments
on aspects of the proposed notice which were not specifically proposed for public comment are not addressed in this
notice. 

The respondent suggested a change in the funding priority proposed for applicants which demonstrate an increase
in the percentage of graduates who have entered a Primary Care Residency for the most recent 3-year period. The respondent
suggested that this priority be expanded to include awarding of the priority to applicants who have, during the most
recent 3-year period, maintained a percentage of graduates entering a Primary Care Residency which substantially
exceeds the average for all U.S. medical schools. This addition to the proposed funding priority would aid medical
schools which may be maintaining a high percentage, i.e., 5060 percent, compared to medical schools which
may show a significant increase but start at a lower percentage, i.e., increase from 15 to 25 percent. It should be noted
that an average percentage for all U.S. medical schools (osteopathic and allopathic) would most likely be lower than
the 5060 percent, example cited, and would not encourage schools to focus their efforts on increasing their
percentage of graduates entering a Primary Care Residency. The second comment was related to the funding priority
proposed for applicants which demonstrate an increase in the percentage of underrepresented minorities for the
most recent 3-year period. The respondent suggested that for this priority the term ``minority'' should be used rather
than underrepresented minority. The intent of this funding priority is to reward those applicants who show progress
in reaching underrepresented minority populations. It is understood that data necessary to establish that specific
populations or subpopulations are underrepresented in a specific discipline may not be readily accessible, or may
differ in terms of data reported to medical school associations. Efforts were made in the application materials to
assist applicants by allowing data to be presented in two ways, in a manner similar to that provided to their medical
school association, or to present student applicant data related to the number and percent of minority population
in the State where the applicant is based. All of the data on minorities presented by the applicants will be reviewed,
recognizing that ``underrepresented minorities'' is defined for all applicants to this program in the 

Federal Register

 notice. 

Therefore, the final funding priorities will be retained as follows: 

A funding priority be given to: 

1. Applicants which demonstrate an increase in the percentage of graduates who have entered a Primary Care (Family
Medicine, General Internal Medicine, General Pediatrics) Residency, for the most recent 3-year period. 

2. Applicants which demonstrate an increase in the percentage of underrepresented minority graduates for the most
recent 3-year period. 



Additional Information 



If additional programmatic information is needed, please contact: Mr. Lou Coccodrilli, Acting Chief, AHEC and Special
Programs Branch, Division of Medicine, Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and Services Administration,
5600 Fishers Lane, Parklawn Building, room 9A05, Rockville, Maryland 20857, Telephone: (301) 4436817,
FAX: (301) 4438890. 



This program is listed at 93.824 in the 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance

. It is not subject to the provisions of Executive Order 12372, Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs (as implemented
through 45 CFR part 100). 

This program is not subject to the Public Health System Reporting Requirements. 




Dated: June 22, 1994. 





<SIGNER>
Ciro V. Sumaya, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
M.D., M.P.H.T.M. Administrator. 




</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9415538 Filed 62494; 8:45 am] 


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416015P 
</BILLING>



