 

365.3 

What regulations apply? 


The following regulations apply to this part: 
(a) The regulations in 34 CFR part 364. 
(b) The regulations in this part 365. 




(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c) and 796e) 


Subpart B_How Does the Secretary Make a Grant to a State? 


365.10 

How does a State apply for a grant? 


To receive a grant under this part, a State shall submit to the Secretary and obtain approval of a State plan that meets
the requirements of part A of title VII of the Act and subparts B and C of 34 CFR part 364. 




(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 796c(a)(1) and (c) and 796e(a)) 


365.11 

How is the allotment of Federal funds for State independent living (IL) services computed? 


(a) The allotment of Federal funds for State IL services for each State is computed in accordance with the requirements
of section 711(a)(1) of the Act. 
(b) The allotment of Federal funds for Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of
the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Republic of Palau is computed in accordance with section 711(a)(2) of the Act.

(c) If the State plan designates, pursuant to 364.22(c), a unit to administer the part of the plan under which
State IL services are provided for individuals who are blind and a separate or different unit to administer the rest
of the plan, the division of the State's allotment between these two units is a matter for State determination. 




(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c) and 796e(a)) 


365.12 

How are payments from allotments for IL services made? 


(a) From the allotment of a State for a fiscal year under 365.11, the Secretary pays to the State the Federal share
of the expenditures incurred by the State during the year in accordance with the State plan approved under section
706 of the Act. After any necessary adjustments resulting from previously made overpayments or underpayments, the
payments may be made in advance or by reimbursement, in installments, and on conditions that the Secretary may determine.

(b)(1) The Federal share with respect to any State for any fiscal year is 90 percent of the expenditures incurred by
the State during that fiscal year under its State plan approved under section 706 of the Act. 
(2) The non-Federal share of the cost of any project that receives assistance through an allotment under this part
may be provided in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services. 




(Authority: U.S.C. 796e1) 


365.13 

What requirements apply if the State's non-Federal share is in cash? 


(a) Except as further limited by paragraph (b) of this section, expenditures that meet the requirements of 34 CFR 80.24(a)
through (b)(6) may be used to meet the non-Federal share matching requirement under section 712(b) of the Act if_
(1) The expenditures are made with funds made available by appropriation directly to the designated State agency
or with funds made available by allotment or transfer from any other unit of State or local government; 
(2) The expenditures are made with cash contributions from a donor that are deposited in the account of the designated
State agency in accordance with State law for expenditure by, and at the sole discretion of, the DSU for activities
identified or described in the State plan and authorized by 365.20; or 
(3) The expenditures are made with cash contributions from a donor that are earmarked for meeting the State's share
for_
(i) Providing particular services (e.g., personal assistance services); (ii) Serving individuals with certain
types of disabilities (e.g., older individuals who are blind); 
(iii) Providing services to special groups that State or Federal law permits to be targeted for services (e.g., children
of migrant laborers); or 
(iv) Carrying out particular types of administrative activities permissible under State law. 
(b) Cash contributions are permissible under paragraph (a)(3) of this section only if the cash contributions are
not used for expenditures that benefit or will benefit in any way the donor, an individual to whom the donor is related
by blood or marriage or with whom the donor has a close personal relationship, or an individual, entity, or organization
with whom the donor shares a financial interest. 
(c) The receipt of a grant, subgrant, or contract under section 713 of the Act or a grant, subgrant, or assistance contract
under section 723 of the Act from the DSU is not considered a benefit to the donor of a cash contribution for purposes
of paragraph (b) of this section if the grant, subgrant, or contract was awarded under the State's regular competitive
procedures. 
(d) For purposes of this section, a donor may be a private agency, a profit-making or nonprofit organization, or an
individual. 



(Authority: 29 U.S.C. 711(c) and 796e1(b)) 

