 

Budget 


The budget must be prepared by the applicant as a plan for the categories of costs under the grant and will be used by FmHA
to monitor the use of funds and accomplishments of the grantee.



Area To Be Served 


The applicant must identify the area to be served which includes governmental units, town, county, etc.



Demographic Information 


The applicant must provide information concerning the project area relating to rural industries and agribusinesses,
underemployment, outmigration of people and businesses and industries from the area, and per capita income of the
area. This information will be used to select projects that will benefit the most needy areas. The applicant must submit
the most current full calendar year for which data is available and the 3 previous calendar years, if available.



Businesses To Be Assisted 


This information is requested to determine the method and rationale that the applicant used to select areas and businesses
to be assisted by their proposed project to determine that the selection was objective and reached the most needy areas/businesses.



Applicant Experience 


The applicant must submit a description of its experience and capability in carrying out similar types of programs
to be used to show its ability to carry out the grant purposes.



Duration of Project


The applicant must provide FmHA with the number of months duration of the project or service and the estimated time
it will take from grant approval to beginning of service.



Source of Work To Be Performed


The applicant must submit a brief description of how the work will be performed and whether organizational staff or
consultants/contractors will be used.



Evaluation Method


The applicant's evaluation method for determining whether the objectives of the project are being met must be provided
so that FmHA can determine that the applicant objectively evaluates its project work.



Plan for Rural Technology Development Grants


Applicants must provide a brief plan which describes how they will meet certain provisions relating to how the center
will effectively serve rural areas; improve the economic condition of rural areas by promoting the development and
commercialization of new products, processes, and services, and new enterprises that can add value to on-farm production
through processing or marketing; description of proposed grant activities and results; provisions for consultation
with business, industry, educational institutions, Federal Government, State, and local governments, and specifically
consultation with colleges/universities administering Extension Service programs; provisions for obtaining
other funding sources; provisions for monitoring/evaluating the center's activities and accounting for grant
funds; and provisions for optimal application of technology and cooperative development in rural areas, especially
areas adversely affected by adverse agricultural economic conditions. This information will be used by RDA to determine
that the application meets the intent of the program and to make a determination concerning grant selection of a project.



Proposed Agreement Between Applicants and Ultimate Recipients


If grant funds will be used for the purpose of making loans/grants to businesses (ultimate recipients), the applicant
must provide a proposed agreement which reflects the grantee and the ultimate recipient's responsibilities in use
of grant funds.



Plan To Provide Financial Assistance to Third Parties


If the project plan is to provide financial assistance to third parties from a revolving fund established, in part,
with RTDG funds, the applicant must provide RDA with information regarding the project to be financed, sources of
all non-RTDG funds, amount of technical assistance, purposes of loans/grants, project priority, length of time
for completion of each project, and other relevant information. This information will be used to ensure that loans
made as a direct result of grant funds are being utilized in accordance with RDA regulations (including EEO laws) and
environmental regulations and will help ensure that objectives and purposes of the grant program are met.



Scope of Work


The scope of work must be prepared by the applicant. It is a summary of previously gathered information concerning
the use of the grant funds, timeframes for actions, key personnel to be utilized, and the use of other than RTDG funds.
This information will be used to monitor what is accomplished by the grantee.



Request for Appeal


If applicable, this is a letter from the grantee requesting a review of any adverse decision made by RDA.



Evidence of Authority To Execute Documents


The evidence of authority to execute documents will be used by FmHA as evidence that the person executing applicable
grant documents on the behalf of the applicant organization has the authority to obligate the applicant organization.



