 

Standard No. 101 Controls and Displays: (a) Substitution of a lens marked ``Brake'' for a lens with an ECE symbol on
the brake failure indicator lamp; (b) installation of a seat belt warning lamp that displays the seat belt symbol;
(c) recalibration of the speedometer/odometer from kilometers to miles per hour.

Standard No. 108 Lamps, Reflective Devices and Associated Equipment: (a) Installation of U.S.-model headlamp assemblies
with sealed beam headlamps and front side markers; (b) installation of U.S.-model tail lamp assemblies with rear
side markers; (c) installation of a high-mounted stop lamp. 

Standard No. 110 Tire Selection and Rims: installation of a tire information placard.

Standard No. 111 Rearview Mirrors: replacement of the passenger side rearview mirror, which is convex but lacks the
required warning statement.

Standard No. 114 Theft Protection: installation of a buzzer microswitch in the steering lock assembly, and a warning
buzzer.

Standard No. 115 Vehicle Identification Number: installation of a VIN plate that can be read from outside the left
windshield pillar, and a VIN reference label on the edge of the door or latch post nearest the driver.

Standard No. 118 Power-Operated Window Systems: rewiring of the power window system so that the window transport
is inoperative when the ignition is switched off.

Standard No. 208 Occupant Crash Protection: (a) Installation of either a U.S.-model seat belt in the driver's position
or a belt webbing-actuated microswitch in the driver's seat belt retractor; (b) installation of an ignition switch-actuated
seat belt warning lamp and buzzer.

Standard No. 214 Side Impact Protection: installation of reinforcing beams in the side doors.

Standard No. 301 Fuel System Integrity: installation of a rollover valve in the fuel tank vent line between the fuel
tank and the evaporative emissions collection canister.

Additionally, the petitioner states that the bumpers on the non-U.S.-certified 1987 Alfa Romeo Spider must be reinforced
to comply with the Bumper Standard found in 49 CFR part 581. 

Interested persons are invited to submit comments on the petition described above. Comments should refer to the docket
number and be submitted to: Docket Section, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, room 5109, 400 Seventh
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. It is requested but not required that 10 copies be submitted. 

All comments received before the close of business on the closing date indicated above will be considered, and will
be available for examination in the docket at the above address both before and after that date. To the extent possible,
comments filed after the closing date will also be considered. Notice of final action on the petition will be published
in the 

Federal Register

 pursuant to the authority indicated below.






Authority:

 15 U.S.C. 1397(c)(3)(A)(i)(I) and (C)(ii); 49 CFR 593.8; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 501.8.




Issued on: April 18, 1994.



<SIGNER>
William A. Boehly, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Administrator for Enforcement.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 949917 Filed 42294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491059M
</BILLING>

