 

b. 

Characterization of Hydrocarbons.

 As shown in Table 1, this rule requires the speciation of hydrocarbons for the vapor phase of combustion emissions
and for evaporative emissions generated using an evaporative emission generator. The speciation is to be performed
using methods that identify and determine the concentration of all hydrocarbon compounds containing twelve or fewer
carbon atoms. The Auto/Oil Program procedures referenced above provide an acceptable speciation method for hydrocarbons.

c. 

Characterization of Aldehydes and Ketones.

 Speciation of aldehydes and ketones containing a maximum of eight carbon atoms is required only for the vapor phase
of combustion emissions. A test procedure for formaldehyde measurement is included in 40 CFR part 86 for formaldehyde.
F/FA manufacturers are also referred to the Auto/Oil Program procedures referenced above for the analysis of aldehydes
and ketones. Additional applicable procedures are available in ASTM D 519791, ``Standard Test Method for
Determination of Formaldehyde and Other Carbonyl Compounds in Air (Active Sampler Methodology).'' 
d. 

Characterization of Alcohols and Ethers.

 Alcohol and ether compounds containing six or fewer carbon atoms are to be characterized for both evaporative and
combustion emissions, whenever the fuel or additive/base fuel mixture under evaluation contains alcohols or ethers.
If a F/FA formulation contains an alcohol or ether with more than six carbon atoms, then this manufacturer is required
to measure their presence in the emissions, as well as alcohols or ethers with fewer number of carbon atoms. For example,
if an ether containing seven carbon atoms (e.g., isopropyl tertiary butyl ether) is part of a fuel formulation being
tested in this program, then its manufacturer must characterize ethers with seven or fewer carbon atoms. 
In addition to the Auto/Oil Program procedures referenced above, a test procedure for the characterization of alcohols
and ethers is described in 40 CFR part 80, Appendix F, entitled ``Test Method for Determination of C1C4 Alcohols
and MTBE in Gasoline by Gas Chromatography''. This procedure can be used for the identification of ethers in addition
to MTBE, but will require appropriate modifications for application to gas phase samples. 
e. 

Characterization of Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds.

 In the NPRM, EPA proposed a broad requirement for the identification and measurement of polycyclic aromatic compounds.
In the final rule, this requirement is narrowed to a limited number of specified compounds which are of significant
concern in terms of their potential non-carcinogenic and/or carcinogenic effects. Included are specified polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) and nitrated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (NPAH) compounds as well as individual
compounds and classes of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins/dibenzofurans (PCDD/PCDFs). 

