 

(1) 

Tentative position: Bone solids content.

 FSIS is considering having the bone solids content of boneless poultry product with 0.6 percent or less bone solids
be measured by calcium analysis with a maximum calcium content of not more than 0.147 percent in product made from turkeys
or mature chickens or 0.111 percent in product made from other poultry. Both of these levels account for the fact that
poultry tissues, other than bone, contain some calcium and that turkeys and mature chickens contain more calcium
naturally than other poultry.
FSIS is considering, as discussed below, that production of boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone
solids under an approved quality control program is necessary to assure consistent compliance with regulatory requirements,
including the calcium content requirement utilized in restricting bone solids content.
The inclusion of these calcium content levels should not be misinterpreted as indicating a concern about the amount
of the essential nutrient calcium that is provided by poultry and meat food products. FSIS considers that, even assuming
all further processed poultry were comprised of boneless poultry with 0.6 percent or less bone solids, the projected
calcium contribution of such product would represent only a negligible increase in per capita daily intakes and cannot
be considered hazardous, particularly since the dietary intake of a large sector of the population may be below the
recommended level of calcium consumption. For the new boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids,
the calcium level would be significantly lower than mechanically deboned poultry.
(2) 

Tentative position: Bone particle size.

 FSIS is considering that the size of the bone particles in boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids
should be restricted to a maximum of less than 1.5 millimeter (mm) in the greatest dimension, but permitting up to 5
bone particles per 50 grams of boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids to be from 1.5 mm to less
than 2.0 mm in the greatest dimension.
FSIS's objective is that the limitation imposed be adequate to prevent any digestibility problems while not restricting
the operation of equipment in accordance with the improved good manufacturing practices more than is necessary for
this purpose or to protect finished product quality. Bone particle size should be controlled to ensure that equipment
type or processing does not result in unacceptably large fragments and, provided this is done, the bone particles
in the product will not present any health hazard because of size or hardness.
FSIS is considering that it is appropriate to permit up to 5 particles per 50 grams of product to be from 1.5 mm to less
than 2.0 mm as an acceptable defect in complying product. FSIS is requesting comments and information on the extent
to which manufacturers should be required to control the production of boneless poultry products produced by mechanical
deboning that have 0.6 percent or less bone solids to limit the size of bone particles. FSIS will consider any information
submitted during the comment period on the size and distribution of bone particles that may occur with various mechanical
deboning procedures conducted in accordance with improved good manufacturing practices (e.g., the extent to which
deviations or nonconforming particles occur, and data substantiating the absence of potential health or finished
product quality problems with such particles).
(3) 

FSIS tentative: Protein quality.

 FSIS is considering proposing to require that boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids meet
a minimum protein quality requirement_a protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score of not less than 40 expressed
as a percent and to accept as evidence of compliance with this requirement an alternative measurement_the content
of 7 essential amino acids being at least 33 percent of the total of 17 amino acids present. Protein quality is a measure
of the content, proportion, and availability of essential amino acids in food protein and a measure of the ability
of the food protein to support human growth and body protein maintenance. 
When the regulations on MS(S) were published in 1982 (47 FR 28214), one of the methods specified for measuring protein
quality was the Protein Efficiency Ratio (PER) procedure. The PER method measures the ability of a protein source
to support growth in young growing rats, and is an expensive and time-consuming assay. FSIS adopted a newer method
for measuring protein quality, in order to assure the value of the protein contributed by meat and poultry to human
dietary needs, in its final regulations on nutrition labeling of meat and poultry products published in the 

Federal Register

 on January 6, 1993 (58 FR 632). The newer procedure, termed the protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score
method, is contained in ``Protein Quality Evaluation, Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Protein
Quality Evaluation,'' Rome, 1990 (PDCAAS method).
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>
 The protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score method is based on human amino acid requirements and, therefore,
is more appropriate for evaluating the protein quality of foods for human consumption than the PER which is based on
amino acid requirements of rats. The protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score method measures the ability
of amino acids in food proteins to meet the dietary protein needs of humans.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>
A copy of the document is available for public inspection in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.

</FOOTNOTE>

