 

Over the years, Congress has considered the policy and has not objected to SBA's approach. In H.R. Rep. No. 840, 94th
Cong., 2d Sess. 28 (1976), the Subcommittee on SBA Oversight and Minority Enterprise acknowledged that SBA's statutory
duty to assist small business ``must be in balance with supervening First Amendment prohibitions. The Subcommittee
does not believe that the SBA should engage in activities which would necessitate its assumption of a censorship role.
By censorship we mean the ability of SBA to direct a business as to what it can do or cannot do, relative to First Amendment
protected activity, coupled with the power to enforce its will through the use of sanctions. The subcommittee believes
such censorship would exist if SBA were to place in its loan agreements a prohibition against the promulgation of certain
ideas and values, a breach of which would allow the Agency to liquidate the loan.''


Many individual members of Congress have expressed concern with the substance of SBA's regulations in this area.
Several bills have been introduced to deal with the rule legislatively, although none has been enacted. For example,
S. 2084, 98th Cong., 2nd Sess. (1984), would have abolished the rule except in cases where the financial assistance
would have been used primarily to (1) advance or inhibit religion; (2) threaten the overthrow of organized Government
by unlawful means; or (3) engage in any illegal activity or the dissemination of obscene materials which may be unlawful
in any jurisdiction in which the small concern may operate. S. 2084 also would have required SBA to look at the content
of the publications or communications in making its decision to assist a particular small concern. 

H.R. 1157, 98th Cong., 1st Sess. (1983), would have required SBA to hold a hearing, if the business was covered by the
media policy rule, in order to ascertain if the SBA financial assistance would have been (1) adverse or detrimental
to a legitimate public interest, or (2) used primarily to promote or criticize political or religious ideas. This
approach would have led to lengthy hearings on applications for assistance every time the Agency interpreted the
law adversely to an applicant.

SBA testified on both of these bills and supported a legislative remedy to the problems associated with administration
of the rule. However, no legislation has been forthcoming.

In hearings on March 7, 1984, before the House Subcommittee on Export Opportunity and Special Small Business Problems,
which was considering H.R. 1157, an expert in Constitutional Law on the faculty of the George Washington University
Law School testified that the media policy rule was constitutional and was a justifiable approach in light of SBA's
business and financial orientation and limited First Amendment expertise. However, there have been concerns raised
over the years regarding the breadth of the present rule.

The regulation presently provides a very broad list of ineligible enterprises which includes publishers, producers,
importers, exporters or distributors of all types of communications (such as newspapers, sheet music, posters,
film, tape, theatrical productions, greeting cards, and books), plus transportation concerns limited to the distribution
of such products. Regulatory exceptions have been granted to commercial printing firms, advertising agencies,
technical production facilities (such as a recording studio), and vocational schools. Eligible for assistance
based on administrative interpretations are general merchandise stores which sell books, magazines and newspapers,
and general book, music, record or videotape stores. Not eligible for assistance are specialty book or videotape
stores which sell or rent items in a single or limited subject area. The rationale underlying the distinction between
general and specialty stores has been that a general store covers a broad range of ideas, values and thoughts, rather
than a particular or narrow set of ideas or values. SBA no longer regards this distinction as a proper basis for determining
eligibility.

SBA is well aware that small media concerns often have difficulty in raising capital or borrowing money. The media
policy rule applicable to the financing of business loans has not been applicable to assistance provided by small
business investment companies (SBICs) which are licensed by SBA. Thus, SBICs are permitted to help businesses engaged
in the media. The policy surrounding SBIC assistance to media concerns is similar to the approach taken by the Congress
in funding broadcasting through the nonprofit Corporation for Public Broadcasting. SBICs operate within SBA regulations,
but their transactions with small companies are private arrangements which carry no SBA guaranty. Their funding
comes from private, SBA and other nonprivate sources.



