 

3. Jurisdiction Requirement 


As discussed in section II.A above, EPA is proposing to interpret the CAA as granting or delegating certain Federal
authority to approved Tribes over all air resources within the exterior boundaries of their reservations. Generally,
therefore, the significant issue that remains in determining the extent of Tribal jurisdiction is the precise boundary
of the reservation in question. Accordingly, a Tribal jurisdictional showing must identify, with clarity and precision,
the exterior boundaries of the reservation. Consistent with the simplified review process, EPA is not proposing
to specify particular supporting materials that the Tribe must provide. However, a Tribal submission will need to
contain information adequate to demonstrate to EPA the location and limits of the reservation, which will usually
include a map and a legal description of the area. EPA will determine the meaning of the term ``reservation'' as indicated
previously. 
Note that there may be less frequent instances when more complex legal and factual demonstrations must be made to establish
jurisdiction. As indicated above, section 301(d)(2)(B) of the Act addresses jurisdiction over ``air resources
within the exterior boundaries of the reservation 

or other areas within the tribe's jurisdiction

'' (emphasis added). While EPA is proposing to construe the Act as delegating to Tribes authority over all air resources
within the exterior boundaries of their reservations, the Agency will require a Tribe to demonstrate its inherent
authority over any areas outside of the exterior boundaries of the reservation before EPA will approve a Tribal program
covering such areas. Where a Tribe seeks to develop and administer an air program on off-reservation lands, the Tribal
submittal must be accompanied by appropriate legal and factual information which supports its inherent authority
to regulate emission sources located on such lands. 
Under the TAS process which EPA has implemented in the past, EPA would not determine that a Tribe had the requisite jurisdiction
without first notifying appropriate ``governmental entities,'' such as States, other Tribes and Federal land management
agencies, of the Tribe's jurisdictional assertions. Those entities were then given an opportunity to comment on
the Tribe's jurisdictional statement, and whenever a comment raised a ``competing or conflicting claim,'' EPA could
not approve the Tribal application without first consulting with DOI. Consistent with the revised eligibility policy,
EPA is proposing to implement a more streamlined approach under the CAA. 
The first time a Tribe submits an application to EPA under the CAA, EPA will, upon receipt of the application, notify
all appropriate ``governmental entities''
<FOOTCITE>12</FOOTCITE>
 regarding the Tribe's assertion of jurisdiction. The precise content of EPA's notification of other governmental
entities will depend on the geographic extent of the Tribe's jurisdictional assertion. Specifically, if a Tribe
seeks only to implement a CAA program within the exterior boundaries of its reservation, EPA's notification of other
governments will only specify the geographic boundaries of the reservation, as set forth in the Tribe's application.
However, where a Tribe seeks to administer a CAA program on lands outside the exterior boundaries of a reservation,
EPA will notify the appropriate governmental entities of the substance of and bases for the Tribe's assertion of inherent
jurisdiction with respect to such off-reservation lands. 




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
12

</FOOTNAME>
For purposes of the CAA rule, EPA is proposing to adopt the same definition of ``governmental entities'' as the Agency
did in its December 1991 Water Quality Standards regulation. See 56 FR 64876 at 64884 (Dec. 12, 1991). 

</FOOTNOTE>


The appropriate governmental entities will have fifteen days following their receipt of EPA's notification to provide
formal comments to EPA regarding any dispute they might have with the Tribe concerning the boundary of the reservation.
Where a Tribe has asserted jurisdiction over off-reservation lands, and has included a more detailed jurisdictional
statement in its application, appropriate governmental entities may request a one-time fifteen day extension to
the general fifteen day comment period. In all cases, comments from appropriate governmental entities must be offered
in a timely manner, and must be limited to the Tribe's jurisdictional assertion. Where no timely comments are presented,
EPA will conclude that there is no objection to the Tribal applicant's identified reservation boundaries (or, if
relevant, its assertion of jurisdiction outside the reservation). Further, to raise a competing or conflicting
claim, a commenter must clearly explain the substance, basis, and extent of its objections. Finally, where EPA receives
timely notification of a dispute, it may obtain such additional information and documentation as it believes appropriate
and may, at its option, consult with DOI. 
Where EPA identifies a dispute and cannot confidently resolve it promptly, it will retain the option of limiting approval
of a Tribal program to those areas that a Tribe has clearly shown are part of the reservation (or are otherwise within
the Tribe's jurisdiction). This will allow EPA to approve the portion of a Tribal application that covers all undisputed
areas, while withholding action on the portion of the application that addresses areas where a jurisdictional issue
has not been satisfactorily resolved. However, this approach will be subject to any applicable statutory restrictions.


See, e.g.

, section 110(k) of the Act (calls upon EPA to complete action on a SIP submittal within certain specified timeframes).




