 



Passing score:

 The minimum passing score as defined by the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates (ECFMG). 



Secondary school:

 A school that provides secondary education as determined under the laws of the country in which the school is located.






(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1082, 1088) 


600.53

Requesting an eligibility determination. 


(a) To be designated as eligible to apply to participate in the FFEL programs or to continue to be eligible beyond the
scheduled expiration of the institution's current period of eligibility, a foreign institution must_ 
(1) Apply on the form prescribed by the Secretary; and 
(2) Provide all the information and documentation requested by the Secretary to make a determination of that eligibility.

(b) If a foreign institution fails to provide, release, or authorize release to the Secretary of information that
is required in this subpart E, the institution is ineligible to apply to participate in the FFEL programs. 





(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 18400673) 





(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1082, 1088) 



600.54

Criteria for determining whether a foreign institution is eligible to apply to participate in the FFEL programs.




The Secretary considers a foreign institution to be comparable to an eligible institution of higher education in
the United States and eligible to apply to participate in the FFEL programs if the foreign institution is a public or
private nonprofit educational institution that_ 
(a) Admits as regular students only persons who_ 
(1) Have a secondary school completion credential; or 
(2) Have the recognized equivalent of a secondary school completion credential; 
(b) Is legally authorized by an appropriate authority to provide an eligible educational program beyond the secondary
school level in the country in which the institution is located; and 
(c) Provides an eligible education program_ 
(1) For which the institution is legally authorized to award a degree that is equivalent to an associate, baccalaureate,
graduate, or professional degree awarded in the United States; 
(2) That is at least a two-academic-year program acceptable for full credit toward the equivalent of a baccalaureate
degree awarded in the United States; or 
(3) That is equivalent to at least a one-academic-year training program in the United States that leads to a certificate,
degree, or other recognized educational credential and prepares students for gainful employment in a recognized
occupation. 




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1082, 1088) 


600.55

Additional criteria for determining whether a foreign graduate medical school is eligible to apply to participate
in the FFEL programs. 


(a) The Secretary considers a foreign graduate medical school to be eligible to apply to participate in the FFEL programs
if, in addition to satisfying the criteria in 600.54, the school satisfies all of the following criteria: 
(1) The school provides, and in the normal course requires its students to complete, a program of clinical and classroom
medical instruction of not less that 32 months in length, that is supervised closely by members of the school's faculty
and that is provided either_ 
(i) Outside the United States, in facilities adequately equipped and staffed to afford students comprehensive clinical
and classroom medical instruction; or 
(ii) In the United States, through a training program for foreign medical students that has been approved by all medical
licensing boards and evaluating bodies whose views are considered relevant by the Secretary. 
(2) The school has graduated classes during each of the two twelve-month periods immediately preceding the date the
Secretary receives the school's request for an eligibility determination. 
(3) The school employs for the program described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section only those faculty members whose
academic credentials are the equivalent of credentials required of faculty members teaching the same or similar
courses at medical schools in the United States. 
(4)(i) The school has been approved by an accrediting 
body_ 
(A) That is legally authorized to evaluate the quality of graduate medical school educational programs and facilities
in the country where the school is located; and 
(B) Whose standards of accreditation of graduate medical schools_ 
(

1

) Have been evaluated by the advisory panel of medical experts established by the Secretary; and 
(

2

) Have been determined to be comparable to standards of accreditation applied to medical schools in the United States;
or 
(ii) The school is a public or private nonprofit educational institution that satisfies the requirements in 600.4(a)(5)(i).

(5)(i)(A) During the academic year preceding the year for which any of the school's students seeks an FFEL program
loan, at least 60 percent of those enrolled as full-time regular students in the school and at least 60 percent of the
school's most recent graduating class were persons who did not meet the citizenship and residency criteria contained
in 34 CFR 668.7(a)(4)(i) through (iii); and 
(B) At least 60 percent of the school's students and graduates who took any step of the examinations administered by
the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates (ECFMG) (including the ECFMG English test) in the year
preceding the year for which any of the school's students seeks an FFEL program loan received passing scores on the
exams; or 
(ii) The school's clinical training program was approved by a State as of January 1, 1992, and is currently approved
by that State. 
(b) In performing the calculation required in paragraph (a)(5)(i)(B) of this section, a foreign graduate medical
school shall count as a graduate each person who graduated from the school during the three years preceding the year
for which the calculation is performed. 




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1082, 1088) 


600.56

Duration of eligibility determination. 


(a) The eligibility of a foreign institution under this subpart expires four years after the date of the Secretary's
determination that the institution is eligible to apply for participation, except that the Secretary may specify
a shorter period of eligibility. In the case of a foreign graduate medical school, continued eligibility is dependent
upon annual submission of the data and information required under 600.55(a)(5)(i), subject to the terms described
in 600.53(b). 
(b) A foreign institution that has been determined eligible loses its eligibility on the date that the institution
no longer meets any of the criteria in this subpart E. 
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of 34 CFR 668.25(c)(2), if a foreign institution loses its eligibility under
this subpart E, an otherwise eligible student, continuously enrolled at the institution before the loss of eligibility,
may receive an FFEL program loan for attendance at that institution for the academic year succeeding the academic
year in which that institution lost its eligibility, if the student actually received an FFEL program loan for attendance
at the institution for a period during which the institution was eligible under this subpart E. 





(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1082, 1088, 1099c) 


PART 601_ELIGIBILITY OF FOREIGN MEDICAL SCHOOLS UNDER THE GUARANTEED STUDENT LOAN PROGRAM (GSLP) 


3. Part 601 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations is removed and reserved.





<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9410036 Filed 42694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 400001P
</BILLING>


