 

EPA is discussing in this preamble only the major comments on the first option. Please see the Response to Comments
Document in the docket for this rule for EPA's responses to all the comments received on the proposed three options.

EPA requested comments on its rationale for setting a common cyanide UTS for all nonwastewater forms of cyanide. Two
primary issues were emphasized in the proposal: (1) the establishment of a cyanide UTS that is less stringent for wastes
that contain little to no cyanide; and, (2) standardized sample size and distillation time for compliance monitoring.

EPA believes that by basing a universal treatment on the cyanide matrix that is most difficult to treat, the universal
treatment standard will indeed be uniformly achievable. EPA has determined that electroplating wastes with high
concentrations of iron represent the most difficult to treat of all the cyanide wastes. The available performance
data for treating electroplating wastes support the establishment of a UTS of 590 mg/kg (total cyanide) and 30 mg/kg
(amenable cyanide). 
EPA noted that although other cyanide wastes were required to meet lower treatment standards, the establishment
of this higher UTS was not likely to discourage effective treatment of these other wastes. Examples of the other wastes
of concern include multi-source leachate, pigments, petroleum, coking, ink solvents and organo-nitrogen wastes.
These wastes generally have very little cyanide in the untreated waste, have cyanide along with organic constituents
which are routinely incinerated, or have cyanide in a free form which is easier to treat by conventional treatment
methods (alkaline chlorination). Because these wastes are routinely treated by incineration or a cyanide destruction
technology, EPA believes further subcategorization of the cyanide UTS standard is not warranted at this time. (Put
another way, the Agency does not believe as a practical matter that more cyanide will be land disposed as a result of
UTS, and therefore that the interest in simplified standards warrants against further subcategorization of cyanide
wastes.) 
The majority of the commenters supported EPA's proposed rationale for developing a cyanide UTS and believe EPA's
proposed approach is appropriate for setting UTS. Two commenters, however, urged EPA to withdraw the proposed UTS
and to promulgate instead a lower cyanide UTS, as described below. 
The first commenter believes that EPA should set two categories of cyanide UTS: (1) organic, which would include all
those cyanide wastes with regulated organics; and, (2) inorganic, which include all cyanide wastes with regulated
metals. For organics, they suggested a UTS of 30 mg/kg (total cyanide) and 1.8 mg/kg (amenable cyanide). For inorganics,
the commenter suggested a UTS of 400 mg/kg (total cyanide) based on rejecting three data points used to calculate the
590 mg/kg limits. 
The other commenter believes that it is inappropriate for EPA to raise the standards for all nonwastewater forms of
cyanide wastes. They said that existing treatment technologies can treat cyanide wastes to levels below the proposed
UTS, and they asked EPA to promulgate lower cyanide levels such as those promulgated for nonwastewater forms of F011
and F012. 
EPA is not persuaded by these comments. First, a separate lower treatment standard for cyanide in organic wastes is
currently unnecessary because combustion of these wastes to comply with organic treatment standards effectively
destroys cyanides. Second, EPA believes that the three data points queried in CyanoKem's comment are in fact representative.
None of these three data points fail a statistical Outlier test. Furthermore, the description of the design and operating
conditions make it appear that treatment was conducted properly. Third, the limit for F011 and F012 (which had a treatment
standard for cyanide below the UTS) has not been previously subject to the 1 hour and 15 minute distillation time and
10 gram sample requirements, which can greatly influence results and are required conditions for the UTS. 
CyanoKem's comment, in fact, amounts to a request that EPA reopen the technology basis for the cyanide standard, an
issue not opened for public comment. The treatment standards for cyanide are based on performance of alkaline chlorination
technology. 54 FR at 26610611 (June 23, 1989). CyanoKem has upgraded that technology with certain proprietary
modifications. 56 FR at 12355 (March 25, 1991). EPA has already indicated that this adapted technology is not, and
need not serve as the basis for the treatment standard. 

Id

. 
In any case, EPA does not believe that this is an appropriate time to undertake major changes to the cyanide standards.
This is because the cyanide analytic method, although improved by the changes in this rule which are the best available
at the present time, continues to have shortcomings. EPA is working to develop a different analytic method. It may
be that after the new method is developed, further investigation of cyanide standards will be warranted.

