 



Response: 

NMFS agrees that critical habitat designation must include areas meaningful to the specie's conservation. Consequently,
NMFS is not designating the northern right whale's entire range, which was suggested by several commenters, but is
focusing attention on particular areas that have essential features and that may be in need of special management
consistent with the ESA and implementing regulations. The section of this preamble entitled ``Essential Habitat
of the Northern Right Whale'' has been expanded from the proposed rule to address those biological and physical features
and to identify those principal constituent elements, such as feeding sites, breeding grounds and calving areas
within the designated areas, that are considered essential to the northern right whale. The section in the proposed
designation entitled ``Need for Special Management Consideration'' summarizes the justification for the designation
of these three special areas.

NMFS has concluded, based on the best available scientific evidence and the biological and ecological needs of the
species, that the areas in coastal and offshore waters that are being designated as critical habitat for northern
right whales contain the appropriate environmental and biological characteristics required by the species to recover,
and may warrant consideration of special management measures.

NMFS has also concluded that the designation of waters within the SEUS is warranted, given the geographic concentration
of northern right whales during the winter/calving period, the extreme endangered status of this species, the importance
of the area to the reproductive potential (recovery) of the species, the possible impacts of commercial activities
on right whales that may require monitoring and the fact that this area may be in need of special management measures.

The potential for special management considerations does not necessarily mandate restriction or elimination of
activities. Close monitoring of activities and additional research also constitute special management considerations.
The existing information, discussed in the preamble to this final designation, supports this designation of critical
habitat.



Comment 16: 

Another Federal agency commenter, citing the EA prepared by NMFS, stated that the direct impact of the designation
affects Federal agencies and only duplicates that protection provided under the section 7 jeopardy provision. According
to the commenter, the primary benefit cited for the proposed designation is increased awareness. The commenter believed
that previous consultations with Federal agencies and meetings with the public have heightened awareness, and therefore,
that more regulations are unnecessary. In summary, the commenter opposed the designation. However, the commenter
wanted to facilitate more progressive conservation of the species and to cooperate in the development of interagency
management plans to reduce impacts to the whales in high density areas. The commenter believed such measures will
allow NMFS and other Federal agencies more flexibility in advancing recovery of the northern right whale.



Response: 

NMFS restates that, while designating critical habitat helps focus the attention of Federal agencies on the importance
of a designated area for an endangered species, state and private agencies may also give special consideration toward
conservation and management actions in these areas. A designation of critical habitat provides some incremental
protection to northern right whales in those cases where the action may not result in a direct impact to individuals
of a listed species (e.g., an action occurring within the critical area when a migratory species is not present, or
when an activity is conducted outside the designated area), but may affect the critical habitat.

Finally, NMFS agrees with the commenter that a more progressive conservation program to protect this species is necessary,
and that the development of interagency management plans to reduce impacts to the whales in high density areas is the
best approach. Therefore, NMFS will continue to work through the Southeast Implementation Team and through ongoing
section 7 consultations to advance recovery efforts for northern right whales in these waters. NMFS appreciates
the efforts that have already been made toward protecting these animals, and believes continued research and management
discussions will result in a cost-effective, flexible program that will enhance the recovery of the northern right
whale.



Comment 17: 

One commenter supported reasonable activities to protect the right whale at an acceptable cost and understood that
the designation will not, in itself, impose additional regulations affecting activities within the habitat area.
The commenter shared the concerns of other port operators that designation of critical habitat may lead to adoption
of rules regulating the speed and routes of commercial vessels which may cause vessels to leave these ports at great
economic cost to the port.



