 

III. Other Matters 


A. Environmental Impact 


In accordance with 40 CFR 1508.4 of the regulations of the Council on Environmental Quality and 24 CFR 50.20(k) of the
HUD regulations, the policies and procedures in this document are determined not to have the potential of having a
significant impact on the quality of the human environment, and, therefore, are categorically excluded from the
requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. Accordingly, a Finding of No Significant Impact is
not required. 


B. Regulatory Flexibility Act 


The Secretary, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 605(b)), has reviewed and approved this
rule, and in so doing certifies that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of
small entities because the rule only affects the way the Department implements the Privacy Act. 


C. Executive Order 12612, Federalism 


The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under section 6(a) of Executive Order 12612, Federalism, has determined
that the policies contained in this rule will not have substantial direct effects on States or their political subdivisions,
or the relationship between the Federal Government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities
among the various levels of government. As a result, the rule is not subject to review under the order. Specifically,
the requirements of this rule are directed to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and do not impinge upon
the relationship between the Federal Government and State and local governments. 


D. Executive Order 12606, The Family 


The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under 
Executive Order 12606, The Family, has determined that this final rule does not have potential for significant impact
on family formation, maintenance, and general well-being, and, thus, is not subject to review under the Order. No
significant change in existing HUD policies or programs will result from promulgation of this rule, as those policies
and programs relate to family concerns. 


E. Regulatory Agenda 


This final rule was listed as item no. 1444 in the Department's Semiannual Agenda of Regulations published on October
25, 1993 (58 FR 56402, 56410) in accordance with Executive Order 12291 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act. 


List of Subjects in 24 CFR Part 16 


Privacy.



Accordingly, 24 CFR part 16 is amended to read as follows: 


PART 16_IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PRIVACY ACT OF 1974 




