 

Morbidity data are generally difficult to evaluate because of methodological problems and because studies focused
on symptoms, lung function tests and x-ray interpretation rather than disease (e.g., Calvert et al., 1991; Pollei
S., Mettler F.A. Jr., Kelsey C.A., Walters M.R., White R.E., 1986. Follow-up chest radiographs in Vietnam veterans:
Are they useful? Radiology 161:101102). One occupational study (Calvert G.M., Sweeney M.H., Morris J.A.,
Fingerhut M.A., Hornung R.W., Halperin W.E., 1991. Evaluation of chronic bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, and ventilatory function among workers exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. American Review
of Respiratory Disease 144:13021306) showed no excess morbidity; another occupational study (Suskind and
Hertzberg, 1984) found increased symptomatology of respiratory disease, but did not adequately control for the
confounding factor of age. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association
between respiratory disorders and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an association,
and he has determined that a positive association does not exist.
NAS noted an association between nasal cancers and occupational exposure to nickel and to chromates. Exposure to
wood dust is also a risk factor for nasal cancers; smoking and exposure to formaldehyde may increase the risk associated
with wood dust. There is also evidence that leather workers have an increased risk for nasal cancers, and that there
is an association between chronic nasal diseases and consumption of salt-preserved foods. Most studies (e.g., Wiklund,
1983; Ronco et al., 1992) showed inconclusive results, and often did not control for confounding variables. Two other
epidemiological studies based on the same three cases (Saracci et al., 1991; Coggon D., Pannett B., Winter P.D., Acheson
E.D., Bonsall J., 1986. Mortality of workers exposed to 2 methyl-4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid. Scandinavian Journal
of Work, Environment, and Health 12:448454) and one case-control study (Hardell L., Johansson B., Axelson
O., 1982. Epidemiological study of nasal and nasopharyngeal cancer and their relation to phenoxy acid or chlorophenol
exposure. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 3:247257) showed increased risk associated with herbicide
exposure; however, that risk was not statistically significant, which diminishes the importance of these studies.
Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against an association between nasal/nasopharyngeal
cancers and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an association, and he has determined that
a positive association does not exist.
NAS also reviewed the literature with respect to possible associations between herbicide exposure and various reproductive
effects, i.e., spontaneous abortion, birth defects, neonatal infant deaths and stillbirths, low birth weight,
and childhood cancers in offspring. These reproductive effects were categorized by NAS as health outcomes with inadequate/insufficient
evidence to determine whether an association exists because the studies were of inadequate statistical power for
specific birth defects, contained a limited sample size, and/or failed to exclude bias and chance. It should be noted
that to compensate a veteran for these conditions is beyond VA's authority (See title 38, U.S.C.) and would require
enabling legislation.
NAS assigns four diseases or categories of diseases to a category labeled limited/suggestive evidence of no association
with herbicide exposure which it defined as meaning that several adequate studies, covering the full range of levels
of exposure that humans are known to encounter, are mutually consistent in not showing a positive association between
herbicide exposure and the particular health outcome at any level of exposure. The conditions include skin cancer,
gastrointestinal tumors (stomach cancer, pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and rectal cancer), bladder cancer,
and brain tumors. There were many credible studies (See NAS Report, Chapter 8) concerning all of these conditions
that showed no association or a negative association with herbicide exposure. Accordingly, the Secretary has found
that there is no credible evidence for an association between skin cancer, gastrointestinal tumors (stomach cancer,
pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and rectal cancer), bladder cancer, and brain tumors and herbicide exposure, and
he has determined that a positive association does not exist.
NAS reviewed approximately 6,420 abstracts of scientific or medical articles as an integral part of the process that
resulted in its report, entitled ``Veterans and Agent Orange: Health Effects of Herbicides Used in Vietnam.'' From
these articles, approximately 230 epidemiologic studies, including studies of people exposed to herbicides in
occupational and environmental settings as well as studies of Vietnam veterans, were chosen for detailed review
and analysis. In our judgment, the comprehensive review and evaluation of the available literature which NAS conducted
in conjunction with its report has permitted us to identify all conditions for which the current body of knowledge
supports a finding of an association with herbicide exposure. Accordingly, the Secretary has determined that there
is no positive association between exposure to herbicides and any other condition for which he has not specifically
determined that a presumption of service connection is warranted.



Dated: December 22, 1993.


<SIGNER>
Jesse Brown,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of Veterans Affairs.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9473 Filed 1394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 832001M
</BILLING>

