 

In conducting these assessments, EPA made full use of previous analyses performed by the Agency, including EPA's
1990 interim hazard assessments and supporting documentation. These analyses were modified in some cases to incorporate
more recent data, such as data received in public comment on the May 12, 1993 NPRM, or to accommodate different analytical
approaches as needed. Finally, these analyses assume that the regulated community complies with applicable requirements
of other statutes and regulations administered by EPA (e.g., recycling requirements promulgated under the CAA)
and other Federal agencies (e.g., any occupational exposure limits set by OSHA). 



Acceptable substitutes within specific use sectors may be listed as hazardous wastes or, because of flammability,
corrosivity, reactivity or toxicity characteristics, must be managed as hazardous wastes. The regulatory status
of three chlorinated hydrocarbons (trichloroethylene, methylene chloride, perchloroethylene) which could serve
as substitutes for ODCs are highlighted in section IX. of this final rule. However, other chemicals listed as acceptable
substitutes are also RCRA-regulated, and the RCRA regulations should be consulted when application of a specific
substitute for an ozone-depleting substance is being considered. 

Should additional data become available that would help characterize the risks of substitutes, the Agency will incorporate
this data into its risk screens. For example, the risk screen does not at present include assessment of the environmental
transformation products of substitutes. Research efforts of the Agency in cooperation with the Alternative Fluorocarbons
Environmental Acceptability Study (AFEAS) are in progress and are intended to define the chemical, biological and
photochemical sinks for these substances in the biosphere. Ultimately, these research activities will contribute
to the development of more complete ecological risk assessments for substitutes. However, the Agency generally
does not believe that a more detailed characterization of risks would lead to a different listing decision for individual
substitutes unless effects are characterized as highly severe, since the critical comparison for policy purposes
remains the adverse effects posed by continued use of a class I compound. 

The listing of acceptable and unacceptable substitutes under SNAP will continue. Thus, if a company is not yet able
to provide the Agency with the information needed to complete a review of a substitute, a review can be completed in
the future, when data become available. Once the data are complete, Agency review will begin, as discussed in sections
IV. through IX. of this final rule. 



B. Format for SNAP Determinations 



Sections IX.D. through IX.K. below present the decisions on acceptability of substitutes that EPA has made based
on available information and the evaluation criteria (see Section V of this final rule). These sections describe
the sector end-uses (e.g., industrial process refrigeration), the substitutes evaluated, the decision (i.e.,
acceptable or unacceptable) and associated rationale, any conditions for or limitations on the use of a substitute,
and any general comments. 

In most cases, the end-use descriptions have been written broadly to encompass numerous industrial applications
or uses. Based on discussions with industry, the Agency felt that this approach was preferable to listing substitutes
by narrowly-defined applications, which would increase needlessly the number of SNAP notices that would be received
by the Agency. The objective of section 612 is to ensure that replacement of class I and II substances with available
substitutes will reduce adverse effects on human health and the environment. In general, the Agency can look at exposures
from very broad classifications of use (e.g., metals cleaning) and perform the screening analysis to ensure that
this statutory objective is being met. It is not necessary or helpful, for example, to list acceptable substitutes
by each specific type of metal being cleaned in the solvents cleaning sector. This is especially true when conservative
assumptions used in the screening analysis demonstrate the acceptability of an alternative in a wide range of end-uses.
Where possible, the substitutes presented in sections D. through K. have been identified by their chemical name.
Generally speaking, EPA has not listed substitutes by product or company name in order to avoid implied endorsement
of one substitute over another. However, there are two circumstances in which specific chemical names have not been
included. First, where proprietary blends have been identified as substitutes, the Agency has worked with the manufacturers
to identify generic ways in which the substitute could be listed. Before a user invests in a substitute in these categories,
they may wish to contact the SNAP program to confirm that the specific substitute they intend to use has been reviewed
and found acceptable by EPA. EPA believes that if a potential user identifies the substitute by a product name that
EPA has on record, but was not included on the list for the reasons stated above, EPA can confirm the listing of the substitute
without violating safeguards important to protect any proprietary business information provided in confidence
to the Agency. 


The second situation in which EPA does not anticipate listing specific chemicals arises in the solvents cleaning
sector, primarily for aqueous and semi-aqueous cleaners. In this area, numerous cleaning formulations exist and
are comprised of a wide variety of chemicals. As discussed in the section below on solvents cleaning alternatives
(see section IX.F.), the Agency performed its screening assessment by identifying representative chemicals. These
were then used to screen a wide variety of chemicals grouped into categories of solvent-cleaning constituents (e.g.,
saponifiers, surfactants, etc.). Information on these chemicals presented in the risk screen was used as a basis
for determining that aqueous and semi-aqueous cleaners present lower risk than the chemicals they are replacing.


EPA has selected this strategy for listing as acceptable aqueous and semi-aqueous cleaners for several reasons.
First, it should minimize the need to submit SNAP notices for blends of compounds that are combinations of the chemicals
which have already been approved. Second, it will allow EPA to avoid listing proprietary formulations. 


Any conditions for use included in listing decisions are part of the decision to identify a substitute as acceptable.
Thus, users would be considered out of compliance if using a substitute listed as acceptable without adhering to the
conditions EPA has stipulated for acceptable use of the alternative. Alternatively, where restrictions are set
which narrow the acceptable applications within an end-use, a user would be considered out of compliance if using
the compound in an end-use application where such use is unacceptable. Conditions, if any, are listed when it is clear
that a substitute can only be used safely if certain precautions are maintained. As noted previously, any conditions
will be imposed in the listing of substitutes as acceptable through rulemaking. 


The comments contained in the table of listing decisions found in summary form in Appendix B provide additional information
on a substitute. Since comments are not part of the regulatory decision, they are not mandatory for use of a substitute.
Nor should the comments be considered comprehensive with respect to other legal obligations pertaining to the use
of the substitute. However, EPA encourages users of acceptable substitutes to apply any comments in their use of these
substitutes. In many instances, the comments simply allude to sound operating practices that have already been identified
in existing industry and/or building-code standards. Thus, many of the comments, if adopted, would not require significant
changes in existing operating practices for the affected industry. 



C. Decisions Universally Applicable 



