 

Send questions or comments regarding these burdens or any other aspect of these collections of information, including
suggestions for reducing the burden, to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and
Budget, room 3201, NEOB, Washington, DC 20503. Attention: Desk Officer for USDA. 



Background 



Section 306E of the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 (RE Act) was amended on December 17, 1993, by Public Law 103201.
As amended, the section directs the Administrator to issue interim final regulations to minimize approval rights,
requirements, restrictions, and prohibitions imposed on the operations of electric borrowers whose net worth exceeds
110 percent of the outstanding loans made or guaranteed to the borrower by REA. The section also directs the Administrator,
when requested by a private lender providing financing for capital investments by such borrowers, to offer, without
delay, to share the government's lien on the borrowers' systems or subordinate the government's lien on the property
financed by the private lender. 

In issuing the regulations, the Administrator is authorized to establish requirements, guided by the practices
of private lenders with respect to similar credit risks, to ensure that the security for loans made or guaranteed by
REA is reasonably adequate. REA understands this to mean that it may consider the practices of private lenders in general,
and not just those that have lent or are currently lending to REA borrowers. If the regulations are not issued within
180 days of enactment of section 306E, the Administrator may not, until the regulations are issued, require prior
approval of, or establish any requirement, restriction, or prohibition, with respect to the operations of any electric
borrower that meets the 110 percent ratio. Nothing in section 306E limits the authority of the Administrator to establish
terms and conditions on the use of funds from loans made or guaranteed by REA, or to take other actions specifically
authorized by law. 

Section 1710.7 added by this rule addresses the application of section 306E of the RE Act to REA operational controls
that apply in general to REA borrowers or specifically to REA loans and loan guarantees. The application of section
306E to lien accommodations and subordinations is set forth in new sections 7 CFR 1717.860 and 1717.904. 



Section 1710.7_Exemptions of REA Operational Controls Under Section 306E of the RE Act



This section sets forth the policy established by section 306E of the RE Act regarding REA operational controls applied
to borrowers that meet the 110 percent net worth ratio; the procedures for determining whether a borrower meets the
110 percent ratio; and the specific operational controls that are or are not exempted for such borrowers. 

Borrowers' net worth to REA debt ratios will be determined each year based on data as of December 31, and borrowers will
be notified in writing of their respective ratios by May 1 of each year. If a borrower's net worth falls below 110 percent
or if the borrower defaults on any requirement of its mortgage, loan contract, or any other agreement with REA that
has not been exempted by REA, REA may reimpose exempted operational controls by informing the borrower in writing.


In calculating net worth, deferred current period expenses properly recordable in accounts 182.2 and 182.3 will
be subtracted from total margins and equities. This is the same procedure followed in 7 CFR part 1717, subpart R to determine
whether a borrower has sufficient net worth to qualify for advance approval of a lien accommodation. It is intended
to prevent net worth from being overstated by the amount of deferred current period expenses. The accounting data
used will be based on REA's system of accounts set forth in 7 CFR part 1767. Since sinking fund depreciation is not approved
under part 1767, net worth for borrowers using sinking fund depreciation will be calculated as if the borrower had
been using straight line depreciation. 

Paragraph (c) of 1710.7 lists 13 operational controls contained in the REA mortgage or loan contract that are
exempted for borrowers that meet the 110 percent ratio. These include, for example: The requirement that extensions
and additions to the borrower's electric system financed by the borrower's own funds be included in an REA-approved
construction work plan; requirements on contract bidding procedures if no REA loan funds are involved; REA approval
of construction, engineering, and architectural contracts, and the use of REA standard forms of contracts if no REA
loan funds are involved; higher maximum limits on plant additions that may be made without REA approval if no REA loan
funds are involved; higher maximum limits on the sale of electric power and energy to ultimate consumers without REA
approval; higher maximum limits on the voluntary sale, lease or transfer of any capital asset, without REA approval,
in exchange for fair market value; and REA approval of the selection of a borrower's manager, provided that the borrower
is not in default. 




