 

The commenter was concerned that all proposed special management measures that could impose increased costs should
be adequately evaluated to assure that resulting benefits justify those costs, and that measures are implemented
in the most cost-effective manner. The commenter suggested that effective alternative protection methods with
significantly less cost may exist, although it did not provide specific recommendations.

This commenter has joined together with others to institute an education and information dissemination plan designed
to protect the right whale. The commenter believed that this cooperative effort is the method most likely to be effective
in protecting the right whale at reasonable cost in northern Florida and southern Georgia coastal waters.



Response: 

NMFS does not expect any additional restrictions on use of the areas as a result of this designation. Therefore, direct
economic impacts associated with this designation are expected to be minimal.

NMFS agrees that there may be alternative protection methods. The possibility of such alternatives, however, does
not eliminate the need to designate critical habitat. These should be brought to the attention of the Southeast Implementation
Team, which can review and evaluate them.



Comment 18: 

One commenter was concerned about the potential effects of this designation on beach nourishment projects done in
conjunction with the ACOE. Currently the commenter and the ACOE are studying the feasibility of beach nourishment
at several eroding areas of the Atlantic shoreline. The commenter continued that the potential window for beach nourishment
projects has already been limited by the presence of essential nesting habitat for endangered and threatened species
of sea turtle. The nesting seasons runs from May 1 through October 1 of each year, limiting the timeframe for nourishment
projects to the winter months.

Another Federal agency stated that any hopper dredge restrictions implemented to avoid the December through March
time period of right whale calving and presence in the area would be burdensome. The commenter encouraged working
out a timeframe that would allow use of a hopper dredge and take into account the winter right whale calving season and
the summer period of high abundance for Kemp's ridley turtle (

Lepidochelys kempii

) and manatee (

Trichechus manatus

) in the Kings Bay area.



Response: 

NMFS realizes that the present dredging period was scheduled to accommodate the presence of several species of sea
turtles in these waters, and also recognizes the seasonal limits for beach nourishment projects. The present seasonal
restriction on dredging is an essential management measure, given the increased densities of sea turtles in coastal
waters during the warmer months.

The designation of critical habitat for right whales will not affect the scheduling of this activity. NMFS does not
intend to alter the present schedule through this designation, but rather will continue to require the present level
of monitoring of dredging activities during winter months to reduce impacts to northern right whales. Over the years,
there have been several very near misses of right whales with dredges that were avoided due, at least in part, to observer
coverage on the dredges.



Comment 19: 

Several organizations and individuals had comments regarding commercial fishing restrictions. One commenter
recommended seasonal restrictions on set-gillnet fisheries and multiple trap American lobster, 

Homarus americanus, 

fisheries within known right whale habitat, and felt that fines and enforcement procedures for individuals violating
this and other restrictions should be mandated.

Another commenter recommended that NMFS expand the rule to include conservation measures to reduce the likelihood
of right whales being struck by boats or becoming entangled in fishing gear. Specifically, the commenter recommended
that NMFS prohibit the use of unattended drift and sink gillnets in all three areas being designated as critical habitat
during the seasons that right whales are likely to occur in the area.

Another commenter suggested that unattended use of gillnets should be prohibited from December 1 through March 31
(the time that northern right whales are in the area), but that commercial fishing need not be restricted on the winter
grounds.

NMFS also received several comments from individuals and organizations recommending against designating critical
habitat because they believed it would lead to further restrictions of fishing activities. One such commenter asserted
that the desigation may eventually result in the halting of recreational fishing outside Sebastian Inlet, FL, and
for that reason was opposed to designating critical habitat. Another commenter felt that the designation of critical
habitat would increase regulation of commercial fishing and for that reason opposed the designation.

Another commenter stated that commercial fishermen throughout the SEUS support efforts to protect the northern
right whale through participating in whale sighting programs, and by radioing positions of whales to other vessels
to avoid collisions. Thus, the commenter felt declaring this area as critical habitat was not necessary to avoid collisions,
and may unnecessarily affect fishermen as well as other commercial activities.



Response: 

As stated in the proposed critical habitat designation, the only direct impact of a critical habitat designation
is through the provisions of section 7 of the ESA, which applies only to those actions authorized, funded or carried
out by Federal agencies. This final critical habitat designation contains no land use or fishing regulations, and
will not directly affect private activities. Even where there is Federal involvement, NMFS anticipates that this
final critical habitat designation, by itself, will not restrict private activities in a manner or to an extent that
these activities are not already affected as a result of the listing of this species as endangered. If, in the future,
NMFS determines that restrictions on human activities are necessary to protect northern right whales or their habitat,
such action would be preceded by an opportunity for public review and comment.



Comment 20: 

One commenter stated that pollutant discharges in CCB may represent a continuous source of degradation to essential
habitats. Sewage discharges, dredging activities, dredge spoil disposal and non-point sources all contribute
contaminants into this relatively shallow and extraordinarily productive environment. The commenter further
stated that the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority (MWRA) is in the process of combining, upgrading and relocating
its outfalls approximately 15km out into Massachusetts Bay, or roughly 40km to the north of the critical habitat boundary.
The commenter felt that research should be continued and broadened to address all aspects of the species' biology,
behavior and habitat requirements, as well as the specific sources of pollution that threaten to diminish the quality
of the habitat for northern right whales.

The commenter stated that in CCB there is a need to establish a water quality monitoring program that focuses on endangered
species and incorporates sampling of critical parameters at the appropriate spatial and temporal scales.



Response: 

As previously stated, NMFS is coordinating the development of a Right Whale Recovery Plan Implementation Team that
will address the possible impacts to right and humpback whales from activities in Massachusetts Bay that may affect
CCB (see Comment 5).



