 

b. 

Response to Comments.

 In this final rule, EPA has maintained the proposed sanction sequence with the offset sanction generally applying
first and the highway sanction second. The EPA continues to believe this sequence is supported by the proposed rationales
that the offset sanction (compared to the highway sanction) will: 

(1) Provide a more certain and direct air quality benefit, 

(2) Potentially affect more criteria pollutants, and 

(3) Be easier to implement and administer. The EPA disagrees with the comments that highway sanctions will always
more effectively address SIP-related deficiencies and should, therefore, be generally applied first. In addition,
EPA does believe that the offset sanction will more likely produce a net air quality benefit. In some cases, the offset
sanction may be more effective at resolving SIP deficiencies. For example, in an area that is undergoing significant
economic growth, the offset sanction could help bring pressure through stationary sources wishing to expand or locate
in the area and which are faced with the need for an additional emission offset increment. Furthermore, offsets achieved
by such a sanction would benefit air quality in the affected area. However, in particular instances, the EPA does not
deny that the offset sanction may not be as effective because, for example, the area may be economically depressed
and not experiencing growth. In such a case, there may be less air quality benefit and perhaps less pressure to correct
the deficiency in applying the offset sanction first. 

Nonetheless, overall EPA continues to believe that conceptually the offset sanction (compared to the highway sanction)
provides a more certain, direct air quality benefit in the near and long term and potentially covers more pollutants.
An increased new source review (NSR) offset ratio necessarily reduces air pollutant emissions as sources modify
or locate in an area under the offset sanction. By contrast, the highway sanction may not directly reduce overall motor
vehicle emissions in the near term and any air quality benefits resulting from the highway sanction would be indirect,
as application of the highway sanction would not necessarily prevent motorists from driving, nor even necessarily
result in overall emissions reductions, at least in the short term. The EPA recognizes that in some instances it may
be more appropriate for the highway sanction to apply to address a political failure and believes there are adequate
mechanisms provided under the rule to address these instances.

9

 




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


9

</FOOTNAME>
 As noted in section I.C.4. of this notice, under the APA citizens can petition the EPA for rulemaking to propose the
highway sanction to apply first. 


</FOOTNOTE>


The EPA did not intend to suggest in the proposal that the offset sanction will apply, in every case, to all criteria
pollutants. The offset sanction will apply only to all criteria pollutants (and their precursors) for which the area
is subject to the section 173 (42 U.S.C. 7503) offset requirement when the SIP deficiency is general in nature. When
the finding is specific to one or more pollutants (and its/their precursor(s)), the sanction applies only to those
pollutants (and/or precursor(s)). The statement in the proposal intended that the offset can potentially affect
all criteria pollutants, either because of pollutant-specific findings or general findings. This means that, regardless
of whether the finding is pollutant-specific or general, the offset sanction will generally apply at least to the
pollutants of direct concern, and sometimes to others as well. On the other hand, the highway sanction will potentially
affect only those pollutants mobile sources emit significantly and not, for instance, lead or SO

2

. However, EPA also realizes that since CO nonattainment area problems are due primarily to mobile sources, arguably
application of the offset sanction may not address the more significant sources contributing to CO nonattainment
problems. Nonetheless, the offset sanction still applies to CO for nonattainment NSR purposes and thus will affect
sources subject to nonattainment NSR that wish to locate or expand in a CO nonattainment area, which would provide
some air quality benefit in the area under the offset sanction. Therefore, EPA continues to believe that overall the
offset sanction is more likely to produce a greater air quality benefit than the highway sanction because, as sources
locate in an area, direct emission reductions will be achieved through the 2-to-1 offset for potentially any of the
criteria pollutants. 

With respect to imposing sanctions on a case-by-case basis, EPA believes there are two main disadvantages to this
approach which have led EPA to reject it. First, the individual notice-and-comment rulemakings that would be needed
for implementing the sanctions on a case-by-case basis would impose significant demands on EPA's resources. These
resources could otherwise be spent on activities that more directly serve the goal of the Act, namely, clean air. Second,
the approach taken in the final rule will provide certainty and sufficient notification to the parties affected about
the details of sanction application and consistency in the implementation of section 179. These details are further
discussed in section III.A. and in the detailed summary of comments document. 

As to establishing a rule that links the first sanction to the deficiency on which the sanction is based, EPA believes
that approach fails to consider other important considerations with respect to sanctions such as which sanction
is more likely to yield the greater air quality benefit. The EPA believes, as a general matter, that the sanction that
results in the greater air quality benefit is a more important consideration than selecting the sanction sequence
based primarily on the nature of the deficiency. 



