 

Low-Level Radioactive Waste



DOE proposes to reduce the volume of solid nonhazardous low-level radioactive waste. DOE would package the low-level
radioactive waste in accordance with the Waste Acceptance Criteria established for the Solid Waste Disposal Facility
(E-Area) Expansion Vaults (operation of the E-Area vaults is based on completed National Environmental Policy Act
reviews and is included in the no-action alternative). As part of the proposed action alternative, volume reduction
technology(ies) would replace existing Savannah River Site compactors, which are reaching the end of their useful
lives. The immediate requirement is to process contact-handled waste; the proposed facility(ies) would have limited
capability to volume-reduce equipment. Subsequently, DOE would develop the capability to volume-reduce remotely
handled waste. DOE would also develop treatment capabilities for liquid low-level radioactive waste (e.g., tritiated
oil).




Liquid High-Level Radioactive Waste



The management of liquid high-level radioactive waste including storage in the F- and H-Area Tank Farm, disposal
of salt solution at the Saltstone Facility, and preparation for vitrification in the Defense Waste Processing Facility
is the same for the proposed action as for the no-action alternative. The examination of the potential environmental
impacts of operating the Defense Waste Processing Facility and associated high-level radioactive waste facilities
at the Savannah River Site as they are presently designed will be done in the Defense Waste Processing Facility Supplemental
EIS. The cumulative impacts of liquid high-level radioactive waste management, including the results from the Defense
Waste Processing Facility Supplemental EIS, will be incorporated into the Savannah River Site Waste Management
EIS.




Hazardous Waste/Mixed Waste



The Draft Site Treatment Plan will consider the Consolidated Incineration Facility a ``planned'' facility for mixed
waste treatment. As part of the proposed action, this EIS will consider other alternatives for waste for which incineration
has not been established as the Best Demonstrated Available Technology or specified technology, including potential
offsite options and commercialization, for incinerable Savannah River Site hazardous and mixed wastes. For example,
DOE could construct and operate a new facility permitted under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act at the Savannah
River Site to receive, handle, treat, and repackage hazardous and mixed waste. This facility could also provide size
reduction and repackaging of hazardous and mixed wastes in preparation for treatment at the Consolidated Incineration
Facility. The proposed treatment building would be able to handle waste that DOE could not treat elsewhere on the Savannah
River Site or send such waste offsite for treatment and disposal. DOE would also evaluate treatment options for non-incinerable
hazardous and mixed wastes.




Transuranic Waste



Under the proposed action, DOE would prepare both currently-stored and newly-generated transuranic waste for certification
and disposal at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant or for reclassification and disposal as low-level radioactive waste.
Facilities would be provided to sort, characterize, and repackage drums of low-activity (less than a total of 0.5
curie per 55-gallon drum) transuranic waste in preparation for direct shipment to the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant
or for storage until treatment to a final waste form. Portions of these activities are included in the no-action alternative
because they are covered in the completed Environmental Assessment for Management Activities for Retrieved and
Newly Generated Transuranic Waste (DOE/EA0315).

DOE would provide treatment, such as vitrification or stabilization, for retrievably stored transuranic wastes
with activity greater than 0.5 curie per container if required to meet future criteria of the Waste Isolation Pilot
Plant or another Federal repository. The proposed action would provide the capability to treat high-activity waste
drums, boxes, etc., for shipment to the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant or another repository. DOE would design treatment
facilities when it has a better understanding of Waste Isolation Pilot Plant acceptance requirements for the transuranic
waste stream.



(3) The ``Minimum Treatment, Storage, and Disposal'' Alternative



The alternative represents a lower-bound of waste management activities at the Savannah River Site. The quantities
and characteristics of the waste would be based on reasonable lower-bound estimates of ongoing operations, onsite
environmental restoration and decontamination and decommissioning waste, and wastes that DOE might receive from
offsite as a result of Federal Facility Compliance Act, Environmental Restoration and Waste Management Programmatic
EIS, and Reconfiguration Programmatic EIS decisions. Also consistent with alternatives being considered in the
Environmental Restoration and Waste Management Programmatic EIS, certain quantities of waste in storage and newly
generated waste would be shipped offsite.



(4) The ``Maximum Treatment, Storage, and Disposal'' Alternative 

This alternative represents a condition where the Savannah River Site would manage more waste than that anticipated
under the proposed action. The quantities and characteristics of the waste would be based on reasonable upper-bound
estimates of ongoing operations, on site environmental restoration and decontamination and decommissioning waste,
and wastes that DOE might receive from offsite as a result of Federal Facility Compliance Act, Environmental Restoration
and Waste Management Programmatic EIS, and Reconfiguration Programmatic EIS decisions. Under this alternative,
DOE would augment its waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities at the Savannah River Site. This increase
will be described and analyzed in terms of an increment above the current and projected quantities used in the analysis
of the proposed action.



Identification of Environmental and Other Issues




DOE has identified the following issues to be addressed in the analysis of proposed and alternative actions in the
EIS. Additional issues may be identified as a result of the scoping process.

1. Public and worker safety and health risk assessment: radiological and nonradiological impacts of the proposed
action and alternatives, including projected effects on workers and the public from construction, normal operation,
and potential accidents.

2. Impacts from releases to air, water, and soil.

3. Impacts to plants, animals, and habitat, including impacts to wetlands, and threatened or endangered species
and their habitat.

4. The consumption of natural resources and energy including water, natural gas, and electricity.

5. Impacts of the transportation of construction and operation supplies, materials, equipment, products, and wastes
to, from, and within the site. 

6. Socioeconomic impacts to affected communities from construction and operation labor forces and support services.

7. Environmental Justice: disproportionately high or adverse human health and environmental effects on minority
and low-income populations.

8. Impacts to cultural resources such as historic, archaeological, scientific, or culturally important sites.

9. Accuracy of projected waste volumes.

10. Status of compliance with applicable Federal, state, and local statutes and regulations.

11. Cumulative impacts from the proposed action and other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions at the
Savannah River Site.

12. Potential irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources.

13. Pollution prevention, waste minimization, and potential mitigative measures.

