 

The Service has carefully assessed the best scientific and 
commercial information available regarding the past, present and future 
threats faced by the arroyo toad in determining to make this final 
rule. The arroyo toad has been extirpated from a substantial portion of 
its historic range. Virtually all remaining populations are small and 
face a variety of immediate threats to their continued viability. This 
toad lives in highly specialized habitats that have been and will 
continue to be targeted for development and degradation by human 
activities and is extremely vulnerable to habitat modification and water 
quality changes. Based on this evaluation, the preferred action is to 
list the arroyo toad as endangered. Other alternatives to this action 
were considered but not preferred because not listing this species at 
all or listing it as threatened would not be in keeping with the 
purposes of the Act. For the reasons discussed below, critical habitat 
is not being proposed at this time. 


Critical Habitat 


Section 4(a)(3) of the Act requires to the maximum extent prudent 
and determinable that the Secretary designate critical habitat at the 
time a species is determined to be endangered or threatened. The 
Service finds that designation of critical habitat is not presently 
prudent for the arroyo toad. 
As discussed under Factor B in the ``Summary of Factors Affecting 
the Species,'' the arroyo toad is threatened by taking, an activity 
difficult to control. Remaining populations of the arroyo toad are 
small and geographically restricted, so that they are now vulnerable to 
unrestricted collection. Publication of specific localities, which 
would be required in proposing critical habitat, would reveal precise 
locality data and, thereby, make the species more vulnerable to 
additional collection and acts of vandalism and increase the 
difficulties of enforcement. 
The Forest Service has been notified of the locations and importance 
of protecting this species' habitat. Protection of this species' 
habitat will be addressed in the recovery process and through the 
section 7 consultation process. Therefore, it would not now be prudent 
to determine the critical habitat of the arroyo toad. 


Available Conservation Measures 


Conservation measures provided to species listed as endangered or 
threatened under the Endangered Species Act include recognition, 
recovery actions, requirements for Federal protection, and prohibitions 
against certain activities. Recognition through listing encourages and 
results in conservation actions by Federal, State, and private agencies; 
groups; and individuals. The Endangered Species Act provides for 
possible land acquisition and cooperation with the States and requires 
that recovery actions be carried out for all listed species. The 
protection required of Federal agencies and the prohibitions against 
taking and harm are discussed, in part, below. 
Section 7(a) of the Act, as amended, requires Federal agencies to 
evaluate their actions with respect to any species that is proposed or 
listed as endangered or threatened and with respect to its critical 
habitat, if any is being designated. Regulations implementing this 
interagency cooperation provision of the Act are codified at 50 CFR part 
402. Section 7(a)(2) requires Federal agencies to insure that 
activities they authorize, fund, or carry out are not likely to 
jeopardize the continued existence of a listed species or to destroy or 
adversely modify its critical habitat. If a Federal action may affect a 
listed species or its critical habitat, the responsible Federal agency 
must enter into formal consultation with the Service. 
The Forest Service (Department of Agriculture) and the Corps 
(Department of Defense) are the main Federal agencies that will be 
required to protect this species if it is listed. Federal agencies must 
consult with the Service, as described in section 7 of the Act, on any 
project that may affect this species. The Forest Service harbors a 
substantial portion of known arroyo toad populations; hence, some of 
Forest Service actions within the species' habitat may be affected. 
Forest Service activities, such as the construction and maintenance of 
roads, and the issuance of special use permits for dam and bridge 
construction, mining, and water diversion projects would be subject to 
the Act's section 7 requirements. Corps activities or issuances of 
permits subject to section 404 of the Clean Water Act would be subject 
to the Endangered Species Act section 7 requirements. Any Federal 
actions that are subject to environmental review under the National 
Environmental Policy Act may be subject to the requirements of section 7 
of the Act. 
Listing of the arroyo toad as endangered will provide for the 
development of a recovery plan. Such a plan will bring together both 
State and Federal efforts for its conservation. The plan will establish 
a framework for cooperation and coordination among agencies in 
conservation efforts. The plan will set recovery priorities and 
estimate costs of various tasks necessary to accomplish them. It will 
also describe site-specific management actions necessary to achieve 
conservation and survival of the arroyo toad. 
The Act and implementing regulations found at 50 CFR 17.21 set forth 
a series of prohibitions and exceptions that apply to endangered 
wildlife. These prohibitions, in part, make it illegal for any person 
subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to take (includes 
harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or 
collect; or attempt any such conduct), import or export, transport in 
interstate or foreign commerce in the course of commercial activity, or 
sell or offer for sale in interstate or foreign commerce any listed 
wildlife species. It is also illegal to possess, sell, deliver, carry, 
transport, or ship any such wildlife that has been taken illegally. 
Certain exceptions apply to agents of the Service and State conservation 
agencies. 




