 

(b) Procedures for special educational programs (including related services) for preschool children and children
with disabilities (321 years inclusive) are in appendix B to this part.
(c) Procedures for adjudicative requirements required by Pub. L. 101476, as amended, and Pub. L. 102119
are in appendix C to this part. These procedures establish adjudicative requirements whereby the parents of an infant,
toddler, preschool child or child with a disability and the military department concerned or Section 6 School System
are afforded an impartial due process hearing on early intervention services or on the identification, evaluation,
and educational placement of, and the free appropriate public education provided to, such infant, toddler, preschool
child or child, as the case may be.


Appendix A to Part 80_Procedures For The Provision of Early Intervention Services for Infants And Toddlers With Disabilities,
Ages 02 years (Inclusive), And Their Families


A. Requirements For A System of Early Intervention Services


1. A system of coordinated, comprehensive, multidisciplinary, and intercomponent programs providing appropriate
early intervention services to all infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families shall include the following
minimum components:
a. A timely, comprehensive, multidisciplinary evaluation of the functioning of each infant and toddler with a disability
and the priorities and concerns of the infant's or toddler's family to assist in the development of the infant or toddler
with a disability.
b. A mechanism to develop, for each infant and toddler with a disability, an IFSP and early intervention services coordination,
in accordance with such service plan.
c. A comprehensive child-find system, coordinated with the appropriate Section 6 School Arrangement, including
a system for making referrals to service providers that includes timelines and provides for participation by primary
referral sources, such as the CDC and the pediatric clinic.
d. A public awareness program including information on early identification of infants and toddlers with disabilities
and the availability of resources in the community to address and remediate these disabilities.
e. A central directory that includes a description of the early intervention services and other relevant resources
available in the community.


B. Each Military Medical Department Shall Develop and Implement a System to Provide for:


1. The administration and supervision of early intervention programs and services, including the identification
and coordination of all available resources.
2. The development of procedures to ensure that services are provided to infants and toddlers with disabilities and
their families in a timely manner.
3. The execution of agreements with other DoD components necessary for the implementation of this appendix. Such
agreements must be coordinated with the ASD(HA) and the GC, DoD, in consultation with the USD(PR).
4. The collection and reporting of data required by ASD(HA).
5. A multidisciplinary assessment of the unique strengths and needs of the infant or toddler and the identification
of services appropriate to meet such needs.
6. A family-directed assessment of the resources, priorities, and concerns of the family and the identification
of the supports and services necessary to enhance the family's capacity to meet the developmental needs of its infant
or toddler with a disability.


C. Each Military Medical Department Shall Develop and Implement a Program to Ensure That an IFSP is Developed for Each
Infant or Toddler With a Disability and the Infant's or Toddler's Family According to the Following Procedures:


1. The IFSP shall be evaluated once a year and the family shall be provided a review of the plan at 6-month intervals (or
more often where appropriate), based on the needs of the infant or toddler and family.
2. Each initial meeting and each annual meeting to evaluate the IFSP must include the following participants:
a. The parent or parents of the infant or toddler.
b. Other family members, as requested by a parent, if feasible to do so.
c. An advocate, if his or her participation is requested by a parent.


