 

A vine in the passionflower family, banana poka was introduced to the islands in the 1920s, probably as an ornamental.
This vine is extremely detrimental to certain wet forest habitats of Kauai, Maui, and Hawaii. Heavy growth of this
vine can cause damage or death to the native trees by overloading branches, causing breakage, or by forming a dense
canopy cover, intercepting sunlight and shading out native plants below. An infestation of this vine is located at
Olaa Tract on the island of Hawaii, the site of one population of 

Adenophorus periens

 (J. Lau, pers. comm., 1992).
A recent introduction to the Hawaiian Islands, yellow Himalayan raspberry is rapidly becoming a major weed pest in
wet forests, pastures, and other open areas on the island of Hawaii. It forms large thorny thickets and displaces native
plants. Its ability to invade the understory of wet forests enables it to fill a niche presently unoccupied by any other
major wet forest weed in Hawaii. This has resulted in an extremely rapid population expansion of this alien plant in
recent years. One population of 

Adenophorus periens

 grows in Olaa Tract within Hawaii Volcanoes National Park in a region where yellow Himalayan raspberry is found in
increasing numbers (J. Lau, pers. comm., 1992).
There are a number of other alien plant species that pose a significant threat to populations of the plants in this ruling.


Cynodon dactylon

 (Bermuda grass) is a major threat to at least one population of 

Sesbania tomentosa

 at Moomomi on Molokai. 

Senecio mikanioides

 (German ivy), a noxious, wind-dispersed vine that forms localized mats of vegetation, is a threat to the only currently
known population of 

Solanum incompletum

 on the island of Hawaii (J. Lau, pers. comm., 1992). This 

Solanum incompletum

 population is fenced and protected from ungulates; however, it is not protected from German ivy. 

Syzygium cumini

 (Java plum), a large evergreen tree, is an aggressive invader of undisturbed forests (Smith 1985). It threatens to
shade out the only known populations of 

Hibiscus brackenridgei

 ssp. 

mokuleianus

 on Oahu (J. Lau, pers. comm., 1992). 

Melia azedarach

 (pride of India), a fast-growing deciduous tree that forms deep shade, grows in open dry habitats. A major infestation
of this large tree in Waimea Canyon on Kauai poses an immediate threat to individuals of 

Flueggea neowawraea

 (HHP 1992d18, 1992d31).
Fire threatens six plant species growing in dry to mesic grassland, shrubland, and forests on five islands. On Oahu,
fire is a potential threat to three populations of 

Bonamia menziesii

 and two populations of 

Flueggea neowawraea

 located adjacent to Makua Military Reservation, where current ordnance training exercises could unintentionally
ignite fires (HHP 1992b12, 1992b19, 1992b20, 1992d12; J. Lau, pers. comm., 1992). The area has had a history of fires
that may have burned through at least one of the populations of 

Bonamia menziesii,

 and burned to within a few tens of meters of another (HHP 1992b19, 1992b20). Fire is also a threat to the following populations:
one population each of 

Bonamia menziesii

 and 

Flueggea neowawraea

 on Oahu, one population of 

Bonamia menziesii

 on Lanai, two populations of 

Sesbania tomentosa

 and one population of 

Vigna o-wahuensis

 on Molokai, all known populations of 

Vigna o-wahuensis

 on Kahoolawe, and at least one population each of 

Bonamia menziesii

 and 

Sesbania tomentosa

 on the island of Hawaii (HHP 1992d12; J. Lau, pers. comm., 1992). Of note is a population of 

Adenophorus periens

 in Kahaualea NAR on the island of Hawaii (HHP 1992a8). Tephra fallout and lava flows from Kilauea Volcano have affected
the NAR over the past several years. Wildfires ignited by volcanic activity have destroyed some of the NAR's mesic
and wet forests. In addition, tephra fallout and noxious volcanic gasses have caused extensive damage to surrounding
native forests. Such catastrophic natural events threaten to destroy the region's largest population of 

Adenophorus periens.




