 

a. Liquidation value will depend on the decreasing value of wasting assets, the costs experienced by the business
being liquidated, the expenses borne by the Licensee in order to be able to realize any liquidating value, the elapsed
time until such net proceeds can be realized, the ranking of the Licensee's claims relative to other security interests
and subordination agreements, and the probability of any ultimate realization of value.

b. Incorporating this approach as a normal step in valuation can provide improved understanding of the downside of
an investment.

c. Licensees should recognize unrealized appreciation or depreciation, as appropriate, on Assets Acquired in Liquidation
of Loans and Investments. In order to recognize Unrealized Appreciation, asset values must be verified by an appraisal
which meets all the conditions specified in the preceding paragraph; 

Provided, however,

 that if the assets acquired constitute a going concern, such assets may be appraised as a going concern rather than
at liquidation value. Unrealized Appreciation may not be recognized if the Licensee does not benefit from such appreciation.
For example, an asset acquired through foreclosure should not be carried at a value greater than the defaulted loan
balance plus any expenses and penalties to which the Licensee is entitled.

8. Warrants should be valued at the excess of the value of the underlying security over the exercise price. 

a. Valuation of debt with detachable warrants can be done similarly to convertible debt by treating the debt and warrants
as a unit, or, alternatively, the debt can be valued on its own basis as a debt instrument, and the warrants separately.
If the warrants are valued separately, the following factors must be taken into account:

(1) Current value of issued shares.

(2) The differential between the exercise private and the underlying share values if the current share values are
higher than the exercise price.

(3) Time until expiration dates are reached or dates of changes in terms of exercise prices.

(4) Number of shares into which the warrants are exercisable on various dates.

(5) Restrictions on sale of the underlying stock.

(6) Restrictions on the transferability of the warrants.

(7) Registration rights for the warrants or the underlying shares.

(8) Financial ability of the Licensee to perform the exercise of its rights or to sell its warrants.

(9) The ultimate desirability, if any, of exercising the rights given by the warrants.



D. Equity Securities_Public Companies



1. Public securities should be valued as follows: (a) For over-the-counter stocks, take the average of the bid price
at the close for the valuation date and the preceding two days, and (b) for listed stocks, take the average of the close
for the valuation date and the preceding two days.

a. However, securities are not deemed to be freely marketable in those situations where such securities are very thinly
or infrequently traded, or may be lacking in truly representative market quotations, or where the market for such
securities cannot absorb the quantity of shares which the Licensee and similar investors may want to sell.

b. In such cases, Asset Value must be determined by the Board of Directors or General Partners.

2. The valuation of public securities that are restricted should be discounted appropriately until the securities
may be freely traded. Such discounts typically range from 10% to 40%, but the discounts can be more or less, depending
upon the resale restrictions under securities laws or contractual agreements.

3. When the number of shares held is substantial in relation to the average daily trading volume, the valuation should
be discounted by at least 10%, and generally by more.




Dated: May 19, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Erskine B. Bowles,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrator.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413322 Filed 6194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 802501M
</BILLING>



