 

Effects of the Rule 


The Service has determined that this proposed rule is categorically excluded under Departmental procedures in complying
with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). See 516 DM [Departmental Manual] 2, appendix 1 Paragraph 1.10.
The proposed regulations are procedural in nature, and the environmental effects while crafted to carry out the benign
purposes of the WBCA, are judged to be minimal, speculative, and do not lend themselves to meaningful analysis. Future
regulations implementing the WBCA may be subject to NEPA documentation requirements, on a case-by-case basis. 


Executive Orders 12866, 12612, and 12630 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act 


This rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12866. This action is not expected to have significant taking implications
for U.S. citizens, as per Executive Order No. 12630. It has also been certified that these revisions will not have a
significant economic effect on a substantial number of small entities as described by the Regulatory Flexibility
Act. Since the rule applies to importation of live wild birds into the United States, it does not contain any Federalism
impacts as described in Executive Order 12612. 


Paperwork Reduction 


This proposed rule does not contain information collection requirements for persons subject to the jurisdiction
of the United States that require approval by the Office of Management and Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.




Author 


The primary authors of this proposed rule are Dr. Susan S. Lieberman, Office of Management Authority, and Dr. Rosemarie
Gnam, Division of Law Enforcement, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, D.C. 20240 (703/3582093).




List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 15 


Imports, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Transportation and Wildlife. 



Proposed Regulation Promulgation 


PART 15_[AMENDED] EXOTIC WILD BIRD CONSERVATION

Accordingly, 50 CFR part 15 is proposed to be amended as follows: 
1. The authority citation for part 15 continues to read as follows:

 


Authority:

 Pub. L. 102440, 16 U.S.C. 49014916.

 

2. Amend part 15 subpart A 15.3 by adding the following definitions, in alphabetical order: 


15.3

Definitions.


* * * * * 




Documentation 

means a description of how information was collected, including the methodologies used; names and institutions
of individuals conducting the work; dates and locations of any study; and any published results or reports from the
work. 


* * * * *




Life cycle 

means the annual processes involved with breeding, migration, and all other non-breeding activities. 


* * * * *




Status 

means a qualitative measure of the vulnerability to extinction or extirpation of a population at a given time (e.g.,
endangered, threatened, vulnerable, not threatened, non-threatened or insufficiently known). 


Sustainable use 

means the use of a species in a manner and at a level such that populations of the species are maintained at optimal levels
for the long term and involves a determination of the productive capacity of the species and its ecosystem, in order
to ensure that utilization does not exceed those capacities or the ability of the population to reproduce and maintain
itself. 


Trend 

means a long-term projection of any change in the size of a species' population or habitat over time (e.g., increasing,
decreasing, equilibrium, insufficiently known). 


* * * * * 


3. Subpart D is revised to read as follows: 


Subpart D_Approved List of Species Listed in the Appendices to the Convention 


15.31Criteria for including species in the approved list for captive-bred species 
15.32Criteria for including species in the approved list for non-captive-bred species. 
15.33Species included in the approved list. 


15.31

Criteria for including species in the approved list for captive-bred species. 


The Director will periodically review the list of captive-bred exotic bird species in 15.33(a), for which
importation into the United States is approved. Any exotic bird species listed in paragraph 15.33(a) pursuant to
this section must meet all of the following criteria: 
(a) All specimens of the species known to be in trade (legal or illegal) are captive-bred; 
(b) No specimens of the species are known to be removed from the wild for the pet bird market; 
(c) Any importation of specimens of the species would not be detrimental to the survival of the species in the wild;
and 
(d) Adequate enforcement controls are in place in countries of export to ensure compliance with paragraphs (a) through
(c) of this section. 




