 

FSIS anticipates permitting the use of boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids made, in whole
or part, from fowl (mature female chickens, as defined in 9 CFR 381.170(a)(1)(vi)) in baby, junior, or toddler foods.
The Agency is interested in receiving comments and supporting scientific documentation if there are valid, scientific
findings contradicting this view.
(3) 

Tentative position: Poultry product limitations. 

Because boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids is comminuted, i.e., finely ground, in form,
FSIS is considering its use to be inconsistent with the basic characteristics associated with poultry products that
have been processed only to the extent of cutting or grinding or that are made from poultry products so processed, such
as chicken breasts, turkey fillets, and chicken burgers or shredded chicken. FSIS also considers its use to be inconsistent
with the basic characteristics associated with poultry products that are processed, convenience versions of ready-to-cook
poultry or cuts or solid pieces of poultry or poultry meat, such as roasted chicken, boned turkey with natural juices,
chicken a la Kiev, and turkey ham. FSIS is interested in receiving comments on its views as to the products in which use
of boneless poultry product produced by mechanical deboning with 0.6 percent or less bone solids or its use in anything
but sauces and dressings should be prohibited as inconsistent with their basic characteristics.
FSIS's tentative position on limitations of use is intended to provide a mechanism for assuring that boneless poultry
products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids is not an ingredient in products marketed as classes or cuts of raw poultry
which have undergone additional preparation such as boning and/or cooking where regulatory standards currently
do not address their poultry or poultry meat content (e.g., boneless turkey breasts), as well as where they do.
FSIS does not anticipate adopting any restrictions on the amount of boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or
less bone solids that can be used in poultry products, or meat food products, in which it is a permitted ingredient.
However, standards for particular products may contain quantitative limits (e.g., the limit on the amount of poultry
product ingredients permitted in cooked sausages such as frankfurters and bologna (9 CFR 319.180)) or other restrictions
on the way in which various poultry product ingredients may be used.
(4) 

Tentative position: Finished poultry products and meat food products. 

As indicated previously, FSIS is considering proposing that boneless poultry product with 0.6 percent or less bone
solids should be classified as ``poultry'' or ``poultry meat'' and that it should be described accordingly. Although
boneless poultry product with 0.6 percent or less bone solids is finely ground in form, it is expected that this product
would be used as an ingredient in products which are, themselves, categorized as finely ground in texture, e.g., frankfurters
and bologna. Therefore, FSIS is considering that when boneless poultry product with 0.6 percent or less bone solids
is used as ingredient in a poultry or meat product, it should be declared by terms that accurately describe it as a poultry
or poultry meat product, e.g., ``chicken'' and ``turkey meat.''
FSIS's tentative position is not to require special declaration of calcium and/or cholesterol content on labeling
of a poultry or meat food product containing boneless poultry products with 0.6 percent or less bone solids because
calcium and cholesterol declaration becomes necessary on the labeling of most multi-ingredient poultry and meat
products upon the effective date of FSIS's nutrition labeling regulations (58 FR 632).
FSIS's tentative labeling provisions reflect FSIS's belief that nutrition labeling is the most appropriate place
for calcium and cholesterol content information by requiring that the declaration of calcium and/or cholesterol
content appear as part of any nutrition labeling that a poultry product or meat food product bears.





Authority: 

7 U.S.C. 450; 21 U.S.C. 451470; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.55.



Done at Washington, DC on: February 25, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Patricia Jensen,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Inspection Services.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 944892 Filed 3294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3410DMM
</BILLING>


