 

(2) Collaborate with the recipient in evaluating the effectiveness of educational materials and activities.


2. 

General Environmental Health Education


Collaborate with the recipient in developing appropriate general environmental health education materials and
programs for health professionals.


Evaluation Criteria


1. Review of New Applications


Applications will be reviewed and evaluated according to the following criteria.


A. Proposed Program_30%


The extent to which the applicant has:
1. Described project purpose and rationale;
2. Justified the need or problem to be addressed;
3. Described the objectives of the project in specific, measurable terms;
4. Outlined an appropriate and feasible plan of action which describes the scope and detail the proposed work to be
accomplished;
5. Described a specific timeline for project activities;
6. Identified results/impact expected and benefits to be derived;
7. Identified specific target group(s) for health education activities;
8. Addressed each of the ``recipient activities'' listed above (Recipient Activity A.2., General Environmental
Health Education, is optional); and
9. Described appropriate content of educational programs (in accordance with the 

PURPOSE 

and 

PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS 

sections); programs should include both site-specific health professional and site-specific community health
education.


B. Program Personnel_20%


Adequacy of the proposal relative to the:
1. Appropriateness of qualifications and experience of proposed program staff;
2. Appropriateness of how staff will be used in relation to the activities to be performed to accomplish the work, and
their percentage of time to be spent on the project (at least 1.00 FTE); and
3. Appropriate CVs provided.


C. Capability_10%


Description of the applicant's capability to carry out the proposed project and suitability of facilities and equipment
available or to be purchased/leased for the project.


D. Program Evaluation_15%


The adequacy of the proposal relative to:
1. Appropriateness and thoroughness of the methods used to evaluate the project; and
2. Extent to which evaluation plan includes measures of program outcome (i.e., effect of participant's knowledge,
attitudes, skills, behaviors, exposure to hazardous substances).


E. Site-Specific Activity Level_25%


The extent to which the proposal has addressed site-specific health education needs at NPL sites in the State. In States
with sites recommended for HARP follow-up, such sites should take priority. Sites for health education should be
selected based on public health need.


F. Program Budget_(not scored)


The extent to which the budget relates directly to project activities, is clearly justified, and is consistent with
intended use of funds. 


2. Review of Continuation Applications


Continuation applications within the project period will be reviewed according to the following criteria:
A. Satisfactory progress has been made in meeting project objectives (each objective must be listed, and status toward
meeting the objective must be described); if not met, explain;
B. Objectives for the new budget period are realistic, specific, and measurable;
C. Proposed changes in objectives, methods of operation, need for financial support, and/or applicant's evaluation
procedures will lead to achievement of project objectives; and
D. The budget request is clearly justified and consistent with the intended use of Federal funds.


Executive Order 12372 Review


Applications are subject to the Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs as governed by Executive Order (E.O.)
12372. E.O. 12372 sets up a system for State and local government review of proposed Federal assistance applications.
Applicants (other than federally recognized Indian tribal governments) should contact their State Single Point
of Contacts (SPOCs) as early as possible to alert them to the prospective applications and to receive any necessary
instructions on the State process. For proposed projects serving more than one State, the applicant is advised to
contact the SPOC for each affected State. A current list of SPOCs is included in the application kit. If SPOCs have any
State process recommendations on applications submitted to CDC, they should forward them to Henry S. Cassell, III,
Grants Management Officer, Grants Management Branch, Procurement and Grants Office, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC), 255 East Paces Ferry Road, NE., Atlanta, GA 30305, no later than 30 days after the application
deadline date. (A waiver for the 60-day requirement has been requested.) The granting agency does not guarantee to
``accommodate or explain'' State process recommendations it receives after that date.


