 

The Title XI program enables owners of eligible vessels to obtain long-term financing on terms and conditions 
and at interest rates comparable to those available to large and financially strong corporations. Funds secured
by the obligation guarantees that are used for financing a vessel 
are borrowed in the private sector. 

Public Law 103160, the ``National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994'' (``Authorization Act''),
was enacted on November 30, 1993. Subtitle D of Title XIII of the Authorization Act, the ``National Shipbuilding and
Shipyard Conversion Act of 1993'' (``Shipbuilding Act''), establishes a National Shipbuilding Initiative (NSI)
program to support the industrial base and national security objectives by assisting in the reestablishment of the
United States shipbuilding industry as a self-sufficient internationally competitive industry. It adds new sections
1111 and 1112 to the Act. 

New section 1111 applies to vessels and provides that the Secretary may guarantee obligations for eligible export
vessels in accordance with the same terms and conditions of Title XI as have been applicable to vessels documented
under United States law. Alternatively, the Secretary may guarantee obligations in accordance with such other terms
as the Secretary determines to be more favorable than the terms otherwise provided in Title XI and to be compatible
with export credit terms offered by foreign governments for the sale of vessels built in foreign shipyards. 

Section 1111 also establishes an Interagency Council to ``obtain information on shipbuilding loan guarantees,
on direct and indirect subsidies, and on other favorable treatment of shipyards provided by foreign governments
to shipyards in competition with United States shipyards.'' New section 1112 applies to shipyards and provides that
the Secretary may guarantee the payment of the principal of, and the interest on, obligations for advanced shipbuilding
technology and modern shipbuilding technology of general shipyard facilities located in the United States. 

Hereinafter in the discussion of this rule, the use of initial capital letters in a term will indicate that it is a defined
term in this Part 298. 
The Act presently provides a limitation of 75 percent or 
871/2 percent of the amount of Actual Cost which can be guaranteed, depending on the category of Vessel financed. However,
in 1985 MARAD formalized the policy, begun in 1982, of issuing Guarantees of no more than 75 percent of the Actual Cost
of a project in reaction to the growing number of defaults in several industry segments. As amended, the regulations
now require a 25 percent equity contribution in every case. The Shipbuilding Act prohibits the Secretary from establishing
any lesser percentage than set by statute that is intended to be applied uniformly to all Guarantees that are subject
to the limitation. 

Subtitle D of Title XIII also makes conforming amendments to Title XI of the Act to reflect the new authority of the Secretary
to issue Guarantees of debt Obligations used to finance Eligible Export Vessels and shipyard modernization and improvement,
in the form of Advanced Shipbuilding Technology or Modern Shipbuilding Technology, abbreviated in this discussion
as ``AST/MST'', and referred to at some places in the text as ``Advanced or Modern Shipbuilding Technology.'' It restricts
the total value of all Guarantees for shipyard modernization and improvement to not more than 121/2 percent of the
funds available per year for loan Guarantees from funds transferred from the Secretary of Defense pursuant to section
108 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994. 

As specifically authorized by the Shipbuilding Act that became effective on November 30, 1993, MARAD published conforming
amendments to its Title XI regulations, as an interim final rule (59 FR 512333; March 31, 1994), effective on
publication, to avoid delay in implementation of the new law that could adversely impact the NSI program. This interim
final rule was intended to minimize transitional uncertainty, while allowing subsequent fine-tuning of these regulations
based on the opportunity for considered evaluation of comments from interested parties before adopting a final rule.


It was stated that whenever reference is made in the interim final regulations to forms prescribed by MARAD for applications
or other filing requirements, the format of such forms in effect prior to the effective date of these regulations may
be used pending revision and issuance of new forms to be approved by the Office of Management and Budget. To the extent
necessary to reflect statutory requirements, any form submitted may be modified or supplemented to facilitate processing,
but, until new forms have been approved, these regulations do not require more extensive paperwork or reporting requirements
than exist under the present Title XI regulations. Exemptions provided herein should substantially lessen the aggregate
reporting burden. 




