 



Service Response: 

Designation of critical habitat for the delta 
smelt is justified even though the 1992 and 1993 summer tow-net and fall 
midwater trawl abundance indices show increased abundance levels. Based 
on the best available information, the delta smelt has not recovered, 
and remains vulnerable to a variety of threats. Delta smelt were listed 
as threatened because the species was likely to become an endangered 
species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant 
portion of its range. A species has recovered if the status of the 
species, based on the best scientific and commercial data available, 
indicates listing is no longer appropriate under the criteria of the Act 
(50 CFR 402.02, 424.11(d)(2)). Listing remains appropriate under the 
Act until long-term population abundance indices remain at high levels 
and the population is widespread throughout the Estuary for a number of 
years. One or two years of high abundance levels is not sufficient to 
ensure recovery of an annual species such as the delta smelt. Specific 
recovery criteria are being developed in the recovery planning process. 


Comment 19: 

Several commenters were concerned with the Service's 
``single species approach'', whereas other individuals were worried that 
EPA's water quality standards, having been based on eight estuarine 
indicator species, were too broad because species other than the delta 
smelt would benefit from the standards. There was concern how delta 
smelt recovery would be coordinated with the recovery of other 
threatened and endangered estuarine fish species (e.g., winter-run 
chinook and Sacramento splittail), the salt marsh harvest mouse 
(

Reithrodontomys raviventris

), California clapper rail (

Rallus 
longirostris obsoletus

), Suisun Marsh management in general, and with 
other species outside the Estuary area. 


Service Response: 

Designation of critical habitat and identifying 
water quality (salinity) as a primary constituent element for protection 
of the delta smelt may incidentally benefit other native estuarine 
species. Providing variable salinity regimes will facilitate the 
recovery of the Estuary to its natural state. The Service does not 
foresee a significant decline in other native estuarine species due to 
this critical habitat designation, or due to the implementation of EPA's 
water quality standards. 
Delta smelt recovery will be coordinated with the habitat and water 
quality needs of other fish and other marsh and wetland species in the 
Estuary. The Delta Native Fishes Recovery Team was formed in 1993 to 
address the Estuary native fishes in general. The recovery team will 
consider the population decline of delta smelt and other native Estuary 
fishes that ultimately may require active management to restore 
sustainable populations. The recovery team has developed a draft 
Recovery Plan that has analyzed the needs and recommended management 
actions for the delta smelt, longfin smelt, Sacramento splittail, green 
sturgeon, spring-run chinook salmon, late fall-run chinook salmon and 
San Joaquin fall-run chinook salmon. Winter-run chinook salmon also was 
included in recovery planning for the delta smelt, using recommendations 
developed by the Winter-run Recovery Team. 
Federal agencies that propose projects that may affect the salt 
marsh harvest mouse and the California clapper rail, both listed as 
endangered under the State and Federal Endangered Species Acts, must 
consult with the Service under section 7 of the Federal Act. All listed 
species have equal protection under the State and Federal Acts and the 
Service cannot develop solutions for one species that may jeopardize 
other listed species. 


Comment 20: 

One commenter claimed that the Service misrepresented 
Moyle 

et al. 

(1992) by stating that delta smelt grow faster in the 
mixing zone. 


Service Response: 

The Service is puzzled by the assertion that 
Moyle 

et al. 

(1992) was misrepresented in the revised proposed rule for 
delta smelt critical habitat. The Service stated: ``[w]hen the 
entrapment zone is located in a broad geographic area with extensive 
shallow-water habitat within the euphotic zone (depths less than 4 
meters), high densities of phytoplankton and zooplankton are produced 
(Arthur and Ball 1978, 1979, 1980), and larval and juvenile fish, 
including delta smelt, grow rapidly.'' (Moyle 

et al. 

1992, Sweetnam and 
Stevens 1993). 
Moyle 

et al. 

(1992) stated ``[T]he mixing currents keep the larvae 
circulating with the abundant zooplankton also found here [in the mixing 
zone] (Orsi and Knutson 1979; Siegfried 

et al

. 1979; Stevens 

et al

. 
1985). Growth is rapid, and the juvenile fish are 4050 mm fork length 
(FL) by early August [citations omitted].''

Sweetnam and Stevens (1993) stated ``[D]elta smelt are fast growing 
and short lived (Moyle 1976) *** The majority of growth is within the 
first 7 to 9 months of life ***.'' 
The purpose of the paragraph written by the Service and pointed out 
by the commenter was to illustrate estuarine productivity, while 
explaining the dynamics of the Estuary's mixing zone and the delta 
smelt's association with the mixing zone. The Service has not knowingly 
misrepresented information, and does not believe any misrepresentation 
occurred in this instance. 


Comment 21: 

One respondent commented that delta smelt spawn north 
of Suisun Bay in Montezuma Slough, Suisun Slough and their tributaries, 
and believed this fact contradicted the Service's assertion that delta 
smelt spawn upstream of the mixing zone. 


Service Response: 

Montezuma Slough, Suisun Slough, and their 
tributaries are upstream of the area where mixing between freshwater and 
salt water occurs in wetter water years. In dryer water years, the 
entrapment zone may move upstream as far upstream as the City of 
Sacramento in late summer, and these sloughs may become saline. If 
delta smelt were to spawn late (i.e., July or August), they would 
probably seek areas other than the sloughs to spawn in freshwater. 


Comment 22: 

Several commenters at the public hearings suggested 
that the Service use hatcheries to produce enough delta smelt to make 
the population stable. 


Service Response: 

The Service believes using hatcheries to 
propagate fish, including delta smelt, should not be a substitute for 
habitat protection and restoration. Dr. Moyle presented testimony in 
1992 (Natural Heritage Institute 1992) summarizing the work of Hilborn 
(1992), which explained several reasons why hatcheries are not 
beneficial to the long-term maintenance of fisheries. His points 
included (1) though initially successful, hatchery effectiveness 
decreases after a few years; (2) hatchery fish often do poorly in the 
wild; (3) artificial production poses a threat to the maintenance of 
wild fish; (4) hatchery fish dilute the naturally adapted genes of wild 
fish; and (5) hatcheries provide an excuse for habitat loss. Assuming 
hatcheries could be used to stabilize delta smelt populations, 
propagated fish would require an environment that provides ample food, 
low levels of toxic compounds, and low entrainment losses (Moyle and 
Herbold 1989). Reliance on hatcheries would not adhere to one of the 
primary purposes of the Act, which is to conserve the ecosystem(s) upon 
which listed species depend (16 USC 1531(b)). 


Comment 23: 

One commenter asked why the Service stated that delta 
smelt are more likely to be entrained in river channels than when 
downstream of the Sacramento-San Joaquin River confluence, when there is 
no relationship between salvage and subsequent delta smelt abundance. 
The commenter noted that entrainment also occurs in Pacific Gas and 
Electric (PG  E) cooling water diversions downstream from the 
confluence of the two rivers. 




