 







<USDEPT>UNITED STATES ENRICHMENT CORPORATION</USDEPT>



<CFRNO>10 CFR Part 1102</CFRNO>



Freedom of Information Act Regulations



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

United States Enrichment Corporation.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The United States Enrichment Corporation (Corporation) is adopting this final rule pursuant to the Freedom of Information
Act (FOIA). The implementing regulations establish procedures for the disclosure of information by the Corporation
under FOIA. The objective of these implementing regulations is to facilitate the exercise of rights conferred on
the public by FOIA and to ensure that the Corporation's determinations regarding disclosure of information are in
compliance with FOIA. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE: 

May 27, 1994.



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Robert J. Moore, General Counsel, United States Enrichment Corporation, Two Democracy Center, 6903 Rockledge Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20817 or telephone (301) 5643200.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

On March 30, 1994 (59 FR 14789), the Corporation published a proposed rule pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act,
5 U.S.C. 552 (FOIA). The period for public comment extended through April 29, 1994. The Corporation received no comments
with regard to the proposed rule. These final regulations are adopted by the Corporation, without change, as published
below. 



Background



The United States Enrichment Corporation (Corporation), an agency and instrumentality of the United States, was
established by the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (Pub. L. 102486; 42 U.S.C. 2297 

et seq.

) as a wholly owned Government corporation. On July 1, 1993, the Corporation assumed responsibility for the majority
of the uranium enrichment enterprise activities formerly conducted by the U.S. Department of Energy. Since that
date, the Corporation has been the exclusive marketing agent for the U.S. Government for entering into contracts
for providing enriched uranium and uranium enrichment and related services. In connection with its legitimate activities,
the Corporation possesses records that may fall within the scope of the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C.
552. Consequently, the Corporation is promulgating these implementing regulations pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(4)(A)
to ensure compliance with the provisions of FOIA. 

In general, FOIA provides for public access to records in the possession of the Corporation, while preserving the
Corporation's ability to protect certain specifically exempted material from disclosure. Specifically, FOIA
requires the Corporation to publish certain information in the 

Federal Register

, including a description of the organization of the Corporation and substantive rules of general applicability,
and make other information available for public inspection and copying, including statements of policy and interpretations
adopted by the Corporation which are not published in the 

Federal Register

. FOIA also requires the Corporation to make records available in response to a request which (i) reasonably describes
such records; and (ii) is made in accordance with these implementing regulations, which state the time, place, fees
and procedures to be followed. The Corporation, however, will not treat records that have been prepared by a contractor,
and are available to the Corporation pursuant to the terms of a contract between the Corporation and the contractor,
but which have not been delivered to the Corporation, as ``records'' available in response to a request made in accordance
with these implementing regulations. Finally, FOIA exempts specific categories of matters from disclosure pursuant
to a request for information made under these implementing regulations. For example, 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(3) exempts
those matters which are ``specifically exempted from disclosure by statute *** provided that such
statute'' meets certain criteria. Recognizing the unique status of the Corporation as a government agency with the
statutory mission to ``operate as a business enterprise on a profitable and efficient basis,'' Congress specifically
provided the Corporation with authority to ``protect trade secrets and commercial or financial information to the
same extent as a privately owned corporation,'' 42 U.S.C. 2297b13(a). The Corporation interprets 42 U.S.C.
2297b13(a) as being a statute covered by section (b)(3) of FOIA and anticipates that a significant amount of
the Corporation's records will fall under this exemption. 



Final Rule



As a whole, these implementing regulations provide the means necessary for the public to exercise fully the rights
provided under FOIA. Section 1102.3 establishes the Corporation's policy regarding the disclosure of Corporation
records pursuant to FOIA. Section 1102.4 establishes the availability of materials to the public as required by 5
U.S.C. 552(a) (2) and (5). Section 1102.5 establishes procedures by which the public can request access to Corporation
records which are not covered by 5 U.S.C. 552(a) (1) or (2) and time requirements regarding the Corporation's response
to such requests. Section 1102.6 establishes nine categories of matters which are exempt from all publication and
disclosure requirements of FOIA, provides for the disclosure of any reasonably segregable portion of an exempted
record subsequent to deletion of exempted portions of the record, and establishes guidance for the Corporation in
relation to providing a requesting party with information regarding exempt material. Section 1102.7 establishes
procedures for responding to a request for disclosure of records made pursuant to these implementing regulations.
Section 1102.8 establishes procedures for denying a request for disclosure of records made pursuant to these implementing
regulations. Section 1102.9 establishes procedures for the appeal of a denial of a request for disclosure of records
made pursuant to these implementing regulations. Section 1102.10 establishes the schedule of fees applicable to
the processing of requests under these implementing regulations and also establishes procedures and guidance for
determining when such fees should be waived or reduced. Section 1102.11 establishes procedures to provide submitters
of information containing confidential commercial information, as defined by Executive Order 12600, with notice
of a request for such information submitted pursuant to these implementing regulations. 



Paperwork Reduction Act



The Corporation certifies that these implementing regulations do not require additional reporting under the criteria
of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.





Executive Order 12291



These implementing regulations are not a ``major rule'' within the meaning of E.O. 12291 because they: (1) do not have
an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more; (2) do not result in a major increase in the cost of financial
institution operations or governmental supervision; and (3) do not have a significant adverse effect on competition
(foreign or domestic), employment, investment productivity or innovation within the meaning of E.O. 12291. Accordingly,
a regulatory impact analysis is not required. 



Regulatory Flexibility Act



Pursuant to Section 605(b), the Corporation certifies that these implementing regulations are not expected to have
a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities within the meaning of the Regulatory Flexibility
Act, 5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

 These regulations implement FOIA, which is concerned with disclosure of records in the possession of an agency of
the Federal Government. Accordingly, a regulatory flexibility analysis is not required.



</SUPPLEM>
