 

(C) For SDAs, SSGs and subrecipients, the awarding agency authorizes noncompetitive proposals; for States, the
noncompetitive proposal is approved through the State's normal sole source approval process; 
(D) After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate; 
(2) 

Pass Throughs

_The procurement rules do not apply to pass throughs of monies from any unit of State or local government (or SDA or SSG
administrative entities) to other such units, such as a local educational agency or public housing authority. To
qualify as a pass through, the receiving entity must either further pass through the monies to another such entity
or procure services in accordance with the procurement rules. 
(e) 

Cost or price analysis

. (1) Each recipient, in accordance with the minimum requirements established in this section, shall establish standards
on the performance of cost or price analysis. 
(2) Each recipient and subrecipient shall perform a cost or price analysis in connection with every procurement action,
including modifications (except for modifications where a determination has been made that they do not have a monetary
impact). The method and degree of analysis depends on the facts surrounding the particular procurement and pricing
situation. At a minimum, the awarding agency shall make independent estimates before receiving bids or proposals.
A cost analysis is necessary when the offeror is required to submit the elements of the estimated cost (

e.g.,

 as in the case of subrecipient relationships), when adequate price competition is lacking, and for sole source procurements,
including modifications or change orders. A price analysis shall be used when price reasonableness can be established
on the basis of a catalog or market price of a commercial product sold in substantial quantities to the general public
or based on prices set by law or regulation (including situations involving inadequate price competition and sole
source procurements where a price analysis may be used in lieu of a cost analysis). When a cost analysis is necessary
and there is inadequate price competition, the offeror shall certify that to the best of its knowledge and belief,
the cost data are accurate, complete, and current at the time of agreement on price. Awards or modifications negotiated
in reliance on such data should provide the awarding agency a right to a price adjustment to exclude any significant
sum by which the price was increased because the awardee had knowingly submitted data that were not accurate, complete,
or current as certified. 
(3) JTPA procurements shall not permit excess program income (for nonprofit and governmental entities) or excess
profit (for private for-profit entities). If profit or program income is included in the price, the awarding agency
shall negotiate profit or program income as a separate element of the price for each procurement in which there is no
price competition and in all cases where cost analysis is performed. To establish a fair and reasonable profit or program
income, consideration shall be given to: 
(i) The complexity of the work to be performed; 
(ii) The risk borne by the awardee; 
(iii) The offeror's investment; 
(iv) The amount of subcontracting/subgranting; 
(v) The quality of the offeror's record of past performance; 
(vi) Industry profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for similar work; and 
(vii) Market conditions in the surrounding geographical area. 
(4) Each recipient and subrecipient may charge to the agreement only those costs which are consistent with the allowable
cost provisions of 627.435 of this part, including the guidelines issued by the Governor, as required at 627.435(i)
of this part. 
(5) The cost plus a percentage of cost method shall not be used. 
(f) 

Oversight

. (1) Each recipient and subrecipient shall conduct and document oversight to ensure compliance with the procurement
standards, in accordance with the requirements of 627.475 of this part, Oversight and monitoring. 
(2) Each recipient and subrecipient shall maintain an administration system which ensures that vendors and subrecipients
perform in accordance with the terms, conditions, and specifications of their awards. 
(g) 

Transactions between units of government

. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (g)(2) of this section, procurement transactions between units of State or local
governments, or any other entities organized principally as the administrative entity for service delivery areas
or substate areas, shall be conducted on a cost reimbursable basis. Cost plus type awards are not allowable. 
(2) In the case of procurement transactions with schools that are a part of these entities, such as State universities
and secondary schools, when tuition charges or entrance fees are not more than the educational institution's catalogue
price, necessary to receive specific training, charged to the general public to receive the same training, and for
training of participants, the tuition and/ or entrance fee does not have to be broken out by items of cost. 
(h) 

Award provisions

. Each recipient and subrecipient agreement shall: 
(1) Clearly specify deliverables and the basis for payment; and 
(2) In the case of awards to subrecipients, contain clauses that provide for: 





