 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 

Background 



The Arkansas River shiner was first discovered by A. I. Ortenburger in 1926 in the Cimarron River northwest of Kenton,
Cimarron County, Oklahoma (Hubbs and Ortenburger 1929). The Arkansas River shiner is a small, robust shiner with
a small, dorsally flattened head, rounded snout, and small subterminal mouth (Miller and Robison 1973, Robison and
Buchanan 1985). Adults attain a maximum length of 51 millimeters (mm) (2 inches (in)). Dorsal, anal, and pelvic fins
all have eight rays and there is usually a small, black chevron present at the base of the caudal fin. Dorsal coloration
tends to be light tan, with silvery sides gradually grading to white on the belly. The Arkansas River shiner historically
inhabited the main channels of wide, shallow, sandy-bottomed rivers and streams of the Arkansas River Basin. Adults
are uncommon in quiet pools or backwaters, and almost never occur in tributaries having deep water and bottoms of mud
or stone (Cross 1967). 

Adults prefer to orient into the current on the ``lee'' sides of transverse sand ridges and feed upon organisms washed
downstream (Cross 1967). Their food habits have not been recorded but their principal food items are presumed to be
small aquatic invertebrates (Gilbert 1978) or plankton (Sublette 

et al

. 1990). The Arkansas River shiner spawns in July, usually coinciding with flood flows following heavy rains (Moore
1944). The pelagic eggs drift with the swift current and hatching occurs within 2448 hours. The larvae are capable
of swimming within 34 days; they then seek out backwater pools and quiet water at the mouths of tributaries where
food is more abundant (Moore 1944). Both Moore (1944) and Cross (1967) inferred that this species will not spawn unless
conditions are favorable to the survival of the larvae.

Maximum longevity is unknown, but Moore (1944) speculated that the species' life span is likely less than 3 years (age
class II) in the wild. The age structure of Arkansas River shiners collected from the Pecos River in New Mexico included
three, and possibly four, age classes (Bestgen 

et al

. 1989). The majority of the fish captured were juveniles (age class 0) and first-time spawners (age class I). Most
of the fish in spawning condition were age class I. Bestgen 

et al. 

(1989) thought mortality of post-spawning fish was extremely high based on the absence of age class I and older fish
from collections made after the spawning period (late July and August). 




</SUPPLEM>
