 

(v) 

Test connector reliability. 

(A) A single pair connector 
shall be capable of making a minimum of 100 successive 
connections to binding post terminals without the occurrence of 
an open circuit. The test shall include terminals along the 
matrix edge, center, top, and bottom. 

(B) A multi-pair test connector shall be attached to the 
binding post terminal field and tests for opens between the 
binding post terminals and the test connector shall be conducted. 
All circuits must prove good. The test shall be repeated along 
the terminal matrix edges, center, top, and bottom. 

(vi) 

Service cycle reliability. 

A torque indicating device 
or wrench with an accuracy of 

#

0.17 N-m (

#

1.5 lb-in.) or better shall be used to tighten the terminal screw or nut as appropriate 
to 1.7 N-m (15.0 lb-in.). The terminal nut or screw is then 
loosened and retightened to 1.7 N-m (15 lb-in.). After 50 
repeated connections and disconnections, the terminal shall be 
placed in an environmental chamber at 95% RH where the 
temperature shall be cycled as indicated in Figure 3 in paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section for a 
duration of 72 hours. The terminal shall then be momentarily 
removed from the chamber and the test procedure repeated. After 
a total of 250 loosening and retightening cycles have 
accumulated, the terminal must be capable of withstanding a 
torque of 1.7 N-m (15 lb-in.). 

(4) 

Dielectric strength. 

All housing components in the 
vicinity of unsheathed field cable conductors, unsheathed housing 
stub cable or harness conductors, terminals, or cross-connect 
wire paths shall have a minimum dielectric strength of 500 volts 
ac to the cabinet grounding and bonding bracket. Dielectric 
strength is tested by connecting one lead from a 500-volt ac at 
0.5 ampere source to the cabinet ground connector and the other 
lead is passed along the surfaces of all cabinet components in 
the vicinity of unsheathed cable or harness conductors, cross-connect wire paths, and in the splice area where unsheathed
field 
cable conductors may be located. Sparkover constitutes failure. 

(5) 

Operational requirements

_(i) 

Durability. 

In order to 
verify the durability requirements while minimizing the number of 
test housings required to complete the test program, the binding 
posts selected for tests shall be separately identified and then 
checked to establish compliance after the various tests have been 
conducted. 

(ii) Twenty-five jumper connections shall be made on each of 
two binding post connectors chosen at random from a 
representative sample in an assembled interface unit. After 
exposure to this test, these and adjacent connectors shall be 
inspected for damage such as cracks or chips in metal or plastic 
parts. Failure consists of structural damage, open circuits 
through the connector, or inability to pass the torsional, 
lateral loading, or axial pullout tests described in paragraphs 
(g)(3)(ii) through (g)(3)(iv) of this section. 

(iii) Select six binding posts at random in a representative 
interface. On each connector, attach any test cord included with 
the unit and then remove the test cord as follows. On binding 
post sample 1, remove the cord normally ten times. On binding 
post sample 2, remove the cord ten times by jerking the test 
leads straight out. In these and the remaining tests, do this 
without releasing any manual attachment mechanisms. On sample 3, 
remove ten times by jerking downward at 45
&cir; from horizontal; 
sample 4, upward at 45
&cir; ten times; sample 5, left 45
&cir; ten times; 
sample 6, right 45
&cir; ten times. Check for opens and damage in the 
test cord, clips, and connectors. Failure consists of structural 
damage, open circuits through the connector, or inability of the 
terminal blocks to pass the torsional, lateral loading, axial 
pullout, test connector reliability, or dielectric strength tests 
described in paragraphs (g)(3)(ii) through (g)(3)(v)(B), and 
paragraph (g)(4) of this section. 

(iv) Use craft tools such as scissors, diagonal cutters, and 
long nose pliers to loosen and tighten screws where the binding 
post design does not prohibit the possibility. Failure consists 
of severe structural damage. 

(h) 

Functional design criteria for insulation displacement 
type cross-connect modules used in SAI cabinets

_(1) 

General 
description. 

Cross-connect modules normally consist of multiple 
metallic contact elements that are retained by nonmetallic 
fixtures. The contact elements are spliced with permanent wire 
leads compatible for splicing to 22, 24, or 26 gauge cable on one 
side and configured for the acceptance of recurring connections 
and disconnections of plastic insulated cross-connect wire on the 
other side. Cross-connect modules are usually housed in a SAI 
cabinet. However, modules may receive limited usage in smaller 
pedestal-type housings and cabinets in the outside plant 
environment. 




