 




<DOCTITLE>Privacy Act of 1974: Computer Matching Program for the Disqualified Recipient Subsystem_U.S. Department of Agriculture
and State Welfare Agencies Administering the Food Stamp Program</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Office of the Secretary, USDA.




</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Third Notice of Computer Matching Programs for the Disqualified Recipient Subsystem_U.S. Department of Agriculture
and State welfare agencies administering the Food Stamp Program.





</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 On June 16, 1993, (58 FR 33246) and again on November 29, 1993, (58 FR 62634), the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS), U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) provided notice of its intent to conduct a computer matching program with all 50
States as well as the District of Columbia, Guam, and the Virgin Islands. Not all of the States were fully prepared to
participate in the computer matching program at its inception and only those 28 States that had executed computer
matching agreements were included under the first notice. The second notice announced the participation of an additional
12 States. This third notice announces the participation of the remaining 13 States in the computer matching program.
Included are the States of Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Ohio, Rhode
Island, South Dakota, Texas, and Utah.




The matching program will enable State agencies to determine appropriate periods of disqualification from participation
in the Food Stamp Program for intentional program violations. To assign appropriate periods of disqualification,
State agencies will match data on individuals recently determined to have committed intentional program violations
with an FNS-maintained, centralized data bank list of individuals previously disqualified. Then, based on the number
of times an individual has been disqualified, an appropriate period of disqualification will be assigned for the
latest violation.


The matching program will also enable State agencies to prevent the certification or detect the participation of
individuals who are in a disqualified status. At their option, State agencies may match the FNS-supplied data against
their records of applicants and/or recently-certified individuals to insure that those currently in a disqualified
status do not participate. Matches will be conducted in accordance with written agreements between USDA and each
of the State agencies.


This notice is required by Public Law No. 100503, the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988.
The information provided is in accordance with paragraph 6.c. of the Final Guidance Interpreting Pub. L. 100503
issued by the Office of Management and Budget, 54 FR 25818 (June 19, 1989). A copy of this notice has been provided to
the Committee on Government Operations, U.S. House of Representatives, the Committee on Governmental Affairs,
U.S. Senate, and the Office of Management and Budget.




</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 In accordance with section 2 of Pub. L. 100503, the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988, 5 U.S.C.
552a(o)(2)(B), the matching programs will begin no sooner than 30 days after the signed agreements are transmitted
to the Committee on Government Operations, U.S. House of Representatives, the Committee on Governmental Affairs,
U.S. Senate, and the Office of Management and Budget. This matching program will continue for 18 months, the maximum
time period allowed under section 2 of Pub. L. 100503, 5 U.S.C. 552a(o)(2)(C). At the end of that period, with
the approval of the USDA Data Integrity Board, this matching program may be extended for an additional year without
further notice.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Comments and inquiries should be addressed to: Cecilia Fitzgerald, Supervisor, State Management Section, State
Administration Branch, Program Accountability Division, Food and Nutrition Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Room 907, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, VA 22302, telephone (703) 3052386.




</ADDRESS>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 Pub. L. 9735, the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, requires that individuals who intentionally
violate Food Stamp Program regulations more than once be assigned increasingly longer periods of disqualification
for each subsequent offense. To assign appropriate disqualification periods, State agencies must have access to
information on individuals who have previously been disqualified in other jurisdictions as well as their own. Although
Congress, in Pub. L. 9735, did not specify a system for assuring State agencies access to information on disqualified
individuals, it did require State agencies to report disqualification actions to FNS. Thus, to enable States to act
on this information as Congress intended, FNS will make this information available to State agencies through the
Disqualified Recipient Subsystem.




FNS will act as the central collection point for data on disqualified individuals, which States will then access through
the Disqualified Recipient Subsystem. The data will include the name, social security number, date of birth, and
sex of disqualified individuals. If data in the Disqualified Recipient Subsystem indicates that an individual had
been disqualified previously, the information obtained from the Disqualified Recipient Subsystem will be verified
before a new period of disqualification is assigned. If the information in the Disqualified Recipient Subsystem
originated in another State, that State will be asked to verify the subject data. This procedure will also be followed
before any action is taken to deny an individual's application or terminate an individual's participation based
on a match with the Disqualified Recipient Subsystem.

Food Stamp Program regulations provide for notification and due-process rights for individuals adversely affected
by computer match programs.


</SUPPLEM>
