 




<DOCTITLE>FF Bancorp, Inc., et al.; Acquisitions of Companies Engaged in Permissible Nonbanking Activities</DOCTITLE>


The organizations listed in this notice have applied under  225.23(a)(2) or (f) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 CFR
225.23(a)(2) or (f)) for the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8))
and  225.21(a) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.21(a)) to acquire or control voting securities or assets of a company engaged
in a nonbanking activity that is listed in  225.25 of Regulation Y as closely related to banking and permissible for
bank holding companies. Unless otherwise noted, such activities will be conducted throughout the United States.
Each application is available for immediate inspection at the Federal Reserve Bank indicated. Once the application
has been accepted for processing, it will also be available for inspection at the offices of the Board of Governors.
Interested persons may express their views in writing on the question whether consummation of the proposal can ``reasonably
be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency,
that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition,
conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices.'' Any request for a hearing on this question must be accompanied
by a statement of the reasons a written presentation would not suffice in lieu of a hearing, identifying specifically
any questions of fact that are in dispute, summarizing the evidence that would be presented at a hearing, and indicating
how the party commenting would be aggrieved by approval of the proposal.
Unless otherwise noted, comments regarding each of these applications must be received at the Reserve Bank indicated
for the application or the offices of the Board of Governors not later than January 20, 1994.


A. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta

 (Zane R. Kelley, Vice President) 104 Marietta Street, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30303:


1. FF Bancorp, Inc.

, New Smyrna Beach, Florida; to become a bank holding company by acquiring Key Bancshares, Inc., Tampa, Florida, and
thereby indirectly acquire The Key Bank of Florida, Tampa, Florida.
Applicants proposes to retain its thrift subsidiaries, First Federal Savings Bank of New Smyrna, New Smyrna Beach,
Florida, and First Federal Savings Bank of Citrus County, Inverness, Florida, and thereby engage in operating a thrift
subsidiary pursuant to  225.25(b)(9) of the Board's Regulation Y. Applicant also proposes to retain Smyrna Thrift's
subsidiary, Florida Agency, and Inverness Thrift's subsidiary, Home Assets, and thereby engage in discount brokerage
activities pursuant to  225.25(b)(15) of the Board's Regulation Y.



Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 30, 1993.


<SIGNER>
Jennifer J. Johnson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Secretary of the Board.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94214 Filed 1594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 621001F 
</BILLING>


