 

Consistent with the need for centralized management of the database, OSM has such a role with respect to the AVS and
the information contained therein. As will be discussed below in the discussion of specific sections of the final
rules, one of the changes made from the September, 1991, proposal was to place language in the final rule clarifying
OSM's plenary role with respect to the content of ownership or control information in the AVS. See 30 CFR 773.25(b)(3)(i).
OSM will also have sole responsibility over the ownership and control relationships incident to Federal violations.
See 30 CFR 773.25(b)(2). Further, OSM will exercise oversight over State regulatory authorities' activities. See
30 CFR 773.25(b)(3)(ii). This role provided for OSM under the final rule, consistent with that proposed under the
proposed rule, recognizes that, under the Act, while the States are subject to Federal oversight, OSM is not subject
to the oversight of State regulatory authorities.

The industry commenters asserted that the proposed rules will create confusion and conflict among the States with
the potential for conflicting decisions on ownership and control by multiple State regulatory authorities and OSM.
Again, OSM disagrees with the commenters' characterization of the effect of the rules. As indicated above, the proposed
rules and the final rules clearly allocate responsibility among the various regulatory agencies. The regulatory
authority before which an application is pending decides whether or not to issue a permit.

OSM retains the authority to oversee the decision of the State. Indeed, OSM's role as controller of information already
on AVS and as overseer of State ownership or control decisions will reduce, not create, confusion and conflict by establishing
one final authority to make decisions in cases where disagreements among States might occur about information already
on AVS.

Accordingly, the rules do not inappropriately disperse decisionmaking among State and Federal regulatory authorities
with respect to ownership and control. Further, prior to the publication of these final rules, OSM's AVS Office and
the States have worked well together to implement AVS and the ownership and control regulations promulgated in 1988.
To the extent that there have been disagreements between OSM's AVS Office and the State regulatory counterparts,
such disagreements have been addressed expeditiously and resolved in a collegial and cooperative manner.

Some commenters expressed concern that the proposed rules did not sufficiently address the issues of conflicts between
the States and OSM and between the States themselves on matters of ownership and control. OSM believes that these issues
will be addressed adequately by the provisions of 30 CFR 773.25. That section is based upon proposed 773.26
and establishes the relative responsibilities of agencies responsible for making ownership and control decisions.
As noted previously, this regulation is discussed in detail below. Within the framework of State primacy, OSM will
exercise its oversight role to review State ownership or control decisions, in response to citizen complaints or
as otherwise appropriate, to assure the integrity of the AVS. See 30 CFR 773.12; 842.11; and 843.21.

One commenter asserted, in substance, that the proposed rules did not go far enough in imposing Federal responsibility.
This commenter proposed that all matters relating to ownership and control under section 510(c) of the Act should
be OSM's responsibility. While OSM appreciates the commenter's suggestion, OSM must reject this proposal. As OSM
indicated above, the Act establishes a system of State primacy with Federal oversight and assistance to the States.
While it is understandable that some persons would prefer that the entire responsibility for permit decisionmaking
be shouldered by the Federal government, such a system would require a significant restructuring of the statutory
framework established by the Act. In contrast to this, today's final rules address the responsibilities established
by section 510(c) of the Act in a manner more consistent with the statutory framework.

One commenter questioned whether OSM had given adequate consideration to the implications of the rules upon Federal
and State relations. As the above discussion indicates, OSM has considered, in detail, the effect of AVS and these
rules upon the relationship between OSM and the State regulatory authorities and believes that the rules are consistent
with the framework for Federal and State relations established by the Act. Further, as indicated above, the working
relationship between OSM's AVS Office and its State colleagues has been heretofore very productive and cooperative.
OSM believes that State and Federal cooperation on AVS matters has been, overall, a significant success. Accordingly,
OSM intends to continue to work closely and cooperatively with State regulatory authorities to resolve issues related
to the implementation of AVS and section 510(c) of the Act.



Citizen Participation



Commenters representing environmental groups criticized the proposed rules as not containing sufficient provision
for citizen participation. They asserted that citizens should be afforded the opportunity to add ownership and control
links to AVS. They further argued that citizens should have appeal rights when the regulatory authority denies their
requests to add ownership or control links and that citizens should have rights of intervention when decisions are
made to sever links. They also urged that citizens should have explicit rights to request enforcement action with
respect to improvidently issued permits, with respect to other provisions of the rules relating to ownership and
control, and with respect to the imposition of sanctions.



