 

&bull;Eliminate the current 28 day pre-acceptance period for notices 
involving nonbanking proposals; 
&bull;Reduce from 30 days to 15 days the public comment period for 
proposals involving listed activities; and 
&bull;Specify in the regulation the core information that bank holding 
companies must provide for a nonbanking proposal.



These revisions to the current application procedures should result in an 
overall reduction in the total period of time involved in reviewing nonbanking 
proposals, and in a reduction in the paperwork burden associated with proposals 
to engage in nonbanking activities. Comment is invited on all aspects of this 
proposal. 


Notice Procedure Under Interim Rule 


To implement these statutory changes, the Board proposes to amend 
Regulation Y to replace the application procedures for obtaining approval to 
engage in nonbanking activities with a notice procedure. The interim rule 
contemplates action by the Reserve Bank on nonbanking proposals involving 
listed activities within 30 days after a notice containing all of the information 
required in the rule has been received by the Reserve Bank, in cases that 
qualify for Reserve Bank action, and within 60 days of that date in cases 
involving any previously approved activity that are subject to Board action. 
While the rule also indicates that the Board will seek to act on notices involving 
new activities within 60 days of receipt of the notice by the Reserve Bank, 
proposals that involve activities that have not been previously approved by the 
Board often require substantial information and may continue to require a 
greater processing period. 
The interim rule specifies the different types of information required for 
proposals to engage 

de novo 

in listed activities, proposals to acquire a company 
engaged in listed activities, and proposals to engage in activities not previously 
approved by regulation (``unlisted activities''). 


Listed Activities 


The proposed rule contemplates that proposals to engage 

de novo 

or to 
acquire a company engaged in a listed activity will be approved within 30 days 
of the original date of filing of the notice, even if additional information is 
subsequently requested by the Reserve Bank or the Board. Upon receipt of a 
notice to engage in or to acquire a company engaged in a listed activity (or an 
activity previously approved by order), the Reserve Bank shall immediately 
notify the Board, and the Board will publish notice of the proposal in the 


Federal Register

 inviting public comment for a period of 15 days. Within 30 
calendar days after receipt by the Reserve Bank of a notice filed under the 
interim rule, the Reserve Bank must approve the notice, extend the notice 
period for 15 calendar days, or refer the notice to the Board for decision 
because a substantive comment on the proposal has been received or action on 
the notice by the Reserve Bank is not appropriate. The Reserve Bank also 
may, within 15 calendar days of receipt of the notice, return the notice if it is 
informationally incomplete. Under the interim rule, the return of a notice by a 
Reserve Bank under such circumstances is deemed action on the notice. 




Unlisted Activities 


As is the practice under the current rules, proposals to engage in 
activities not previously approved by the Board by regulation or order will be 
published by the Board in the 

Federal Register

 within 10 business days of 
acceptance by the Reserve Bank, unless the Board determines to extend this 10-
day period for an additional 30 days. Public notice of proposals to engage in 
such new activities shall invite comment for a period of generally 30 days, or if 
the Board determines that the notificant has not adequately demonstrated that 
the proposed activity is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident 
thereto, the Board may return the notice and explain the reasons for its 
determination. 
The interim rule provides that the Board will attempt to act on all cases 
referred for Board action within 60 days of the date the notice is received by 
the Reserve Bank. As noted above, proposals that involve new activities that 
have not been previously approved by the Board are likely to require a greater 
processing period. In the event the Board does not act on the notice within 60 
days of receipt by the Reserve Bank, the Board will notify the bank holding 
company, and explain the reasons for needing additional time as well as provide 
an anticipated date by which the Board expects to act on the notice. 


Elimination of Pre-Acceptance Review Period 


As noted above, the interim rule eliminates the pre-acceptance review 
procedure currently contained in Regulation Y for proposals to engage in 
nonbanking activities. This procedure established a defined period of up to 28 
days during which an applicant and the Reserve Bank could identify and 
address significant issues prior to the filing of a final application. This 
procedure has been particularly beneficial to the processing of complex 
proposals and applications to engage in activities not previously approved by the 
Board by regulation or order, where information requests often must be tailored 
to the specific proposal. 
While the elimination of pre-acceptance procedures should shorten the 
review process, the Board recognizes the utility of a pre-acceptance procedure 
and anticipates that there will be certain proposals that could benefit from some 
form of pre-acceptance review. The Board invites comments as to whether 
some form of pre-notice review procedure should be reinstated in the final 
regulations. 


Public Notice 


Regulation Y currently provides that (with the exception of proposals 
processed under the abbreviated procedure for small acquisitions) all proposals 
to engage in previously approved nonbanking activities must be published in the 


Federal Register

 and provide for a public comment period of not more than 
30 days. Under the interim rule, the public comment period has been shortened 
from 30 days to 15 days for proposals to engage in activities previously 
approved by the Board by regulation or order. The interim rule also provides 
that the Reserve Bank may not act on a notice before the fifth business day 
following the close of the public comment period unless an emergency exists 
requiring expedited or immediate action. 
Section 346 authorizes the Board to prescribe shorter notice periods by 
regulation for particular activities or transactions. The Board invites comment 
on whether further shortening of the comment period is appropriate, particularly 
for notices to engage in activities previously approved by the Board. In 
particular, the Board requests comment on a proposal to reduce the public 
comment period to 5 calendar days for proposals that involve listed activities 
and/or activities that have been previously approved by Board order. This 
would enable the Reserve Banks to act on proposals that raise no substantive 
issues well within the 30-day target. 



