 

The proposal would require that the record be made in a state-approved book or in a bound book with sequential machine-numbered
pages. Comments are solicited on this approach and on an alternative approach wherein the Agency would develop, in
coordination with the states, books specific for the required records. 

As with other records required by this proposal, proposed paragraph (i) would require that these records be retained
for at least 1 year at a surface location at the mine and be made available for inspection by authorized representatives
of the Secretary and the representative of miners. Records of examinations, provide the operator and other interested
parties with a history of the types of problems discovered and the types of corrective actions required. In the opinion
of the Agency, a 1-year retention period is sufficient to satisfy this need. 



Section 75.383Escapeway Maps and Drills 



Existing paragraphs (a) and (b)(1) deal with the escapeway map and drill requirements in areas where mechanized mining
equipment is being installed or removed. Although the Agency believes that the promulgation of paragraphs (a) and
(b)(1) of this standard was done appropriately, as with other provisions dealing with the installation and removal
of mechanized mining equipment, they are being reproposed for the purposes of receiving and giving consideration
to all pertinent comments. The Agency believes that for areas where mechanized mining equipment is being installed
or removed, providing escapeways and posting maps identifying these escapeways and conducting drills specified
in the standard are essential to maintain safety. These requirements help to assure that miners are familiar with
escape routes so that, should escape become necessary, they can reach the surface as quickly as possible. 



Section 75.384Longwall and Shortwall Travelways 



Existing 75.384 addresses the requirements for a travelway on the tailgate side of a longwall or shortwall,
the location and marking of the travelway, and procedures during a blockage of the travelway. While the Agency has
received comments suggesting that additional involvement by the miners would be of benefit when a roof fall or other
blockage occurs that prevents travel in the tailgate travelway, no changes are proposed to 75.384 at the present
time. The Agency believes that the existing procedures and regulations appropriately address the hazards and provide
a sufficient opportunity for input and involvement for all interested parties. The following discussion reviews
the appropriate procedures and regulations. 

The general procedures to be followed when such a blockage occurs are specified in 75.384(c). The standard
requires that work on the face must cease, miners must be withdrawn, and MSHA must be notified. The standard also prohibits
work on the face until the procedures set out in 75.215 and 75.222 are implemented. 

Section 75.215 requires that the approved roof control plan specify the procedures that will be followed if a ground
failure prevents travel out of the section through the tailgate side of the longwall. In this regard, 75.222(g)(2),
the roof control plan, would address notification of the miners, re-instruction of the miners regarding escapeways
and escape procedures, re-instruction of the miners on the availability and use of self-contained self-rescue devices,
monitoring and evaluation of air; location and effectiveness of communication, and a means of transportation from
the section. All approved roof control and ventilation plans and revisions must be available to the miners according
to current regulations. 

District managers historically have met with and will continue to meet with interested parties to discuss plans under
review or previously approved. As plans are developed, reviewed, and approved, MSHA considers written comments
from all interested parties. Additionally, the Act entitles a representative of the miners to accompany an MSHA representative
conducting an inspection or investigation as a result of the 75.384(c)(3) notification to MSHA of a blocked
travelway. Finally, under 103(g) of the Act, miners are entitled to request an inspection by MSHA. 



Section 75.388Boreholes in Advance of Mining 



The Agency is proposing to revise 75.388(c) to require rib holes to be drilled in one or both ribs of advancing
working places described in 75.388(a) ``as may be necessary for adequate protection of miners in such working
places.'' The present standard requires that boreholes be drilled in at least one rib of advancing working places
described in 75.388(a). Although no change was intended by the Agency in promulgating the current language,
comments indicate that the previous language was more specific and clearer to the mining community. The Agency is
therefore proposing to adopt language similar to the previous regulation. 



Section 75.389Mining Into Inaccessible Areas 



Section 75.389(c) addresses the special case where mining operations mine through into areas where hazards and potential
hazards may be unknown. During the informational meetings and later discussions, it became apparent that differing
interpretations of the application of this provision existed. To clarify the intent of the Agency, the proposal would
revise existing 75.389(c) by adding an exception for routine mining-through operations that are a part of
a retreat mining system approved in the mine ventilation plan. 

In some circumstances, the mining through occurs during routine mining into an area which is covered by an approved
ventilation plan. In this case, the potential hazards have already been addressed in the ventilation plan. The Agency
believes that the requirements set out in 75.389(c) should not apply in this situation and proposes an exception
to these requirements where the mining-through operations are part of a retreat mining system approved in the mine
ventilation plan and are routine operations. Requiring the operator to submit duplicate plans does not result in
any safety benefit; therefore, the level of safety provided by the existing standard is maintained. 





