 

In the event deviations from proper QAP procedures are 
detected by the PPB during the reliability verification 
process, the handler will be informed of the problem and 
corrective action required. If corrective action is taken, 
the QAP continues in operation. Continued deviations may 
result in suspension of QAP approval. The suspension may be 
permanent or temporary and may only be restored upon 
concurrence by the PPB. During any suspension, the handler 
would be required to use continuous in-line inspection. 
Establishing a QAP inspection procedure meets marketing 
order inspection requirements, and provides handlers with an 
alternative to continuous in-line inspection (which requires 
the presence of a PPB inspector during final processing 
prior to the packaging of olives). To effectuate this 
change, paragraphs (a) and (b)(1) of 932.152, Outgoing 
regulations, are revised to add authority for handlers to 
use either the QAP process or continuous in-line inspection. 
Section 932.52 authorizes sizing of whole pitted olives 
based upon count-per-pound designations (the actual weight 
of individual fruit) or modifications recommended by the 
committee and approved by the Secretary. Section 932.152 
currently specifies that all processed olives must be sized 
in accordance with the count-per-pound designations 
established for canned whole ripe olives, and further 
requires that such sizing be done prior to pitting. This 
interim final rule provides an alternative method for sizing 
whole pitted olives to provide handlers with more 
flexibility in their operations while ensuring that 
appropriate size standards are continued for whole pitted 
olives. 
The Standards provide a method for sizing whole pitted 
fruit on the basis of illustrations and approximate diameter 
ranges (section 52.3754, Table I). For example, olives that 
are ``Jumbo'' in size are those that are approximately 22 to 
24 millimeters in diameter and conform closely with the 
applicable illustration in Table I. The committee believes 
that this sizing method may be more appropriate for whole 
pitted olives, which now account for a substantial majority 
of the California olives packaged in the whole form. Thus, 
this rule authorizes the sizing of whole pitted olives after 
pitting in accordance with the illustrations and approximate 
diameter ranges provided in the Standards. 
The Standards also provide allowances for size 
variances for whole pitted olives in 52.3756. The 
requirements of U.S. Grade C (the minimum allowed under the 
order), provide that of the 60 percent, by count, of the 
olives that are most uniform in size, the diameter of the 
largest olive cannot exceed the diameter of the smallest 
olive by more than 4 millimeters. These variances will be 
applied to whole pitted olives when handlers choose to have 
their pitted olives sized by diameter, after pitting. The 
committee believes that these guidelines for sizing whole 
pitted olives are sufficient and that no additional 
specifications relating to size are needed at this time. 
To provide for this change in whole pitted olive sizing 
requirements, paragraph (f) of 932.152 is revised to add 
authority for sizing by diameter as provided in the 
Standards. In addition, paragraph (b)(1) of 932.152 is 
revised by deleting the sentence which requires sizing prior 
to pitting. Also, paragraph (b)(2) is revised to reflect 
the elimination of the in-line inspection and sizing prior 
to pitting requirements. 
The outgoing regulations contain a table pertaining to 
size certification of limited size olives for limited use 
styles at 932.152(g)(1). In 1991, the committee 
recommended and the Secretary approved modifications in the 
sizes of limited use olives. While such modifications were 
reflected elsewhere in the regulations, a conforming change 
was not made in Table II of 932.152(g)(1). This rule 
corrects the table, bringing it into conformance with the 
rules as they were modified in 1991. 
In accordance with section 8e of the Act, olives 
imported into the United States are subject to comparable 
size requirements as established for domestically grown 
olives under the order. Those requirements are found in 
Olive Regulation 1 [7 CFR 944.401]. 
Under the import regulation, canned pitted ripe olives 
are subject to minimum size requirements in terms of a 
minimum diameter and a specific tolerance for undersized 
fruit. The undersize tolerances set forth in the import 
regulation are based upon those established for canned whole 
olives under the California olive marketing order. 
As previously explained, this interim final rule 
establishes size requirements for canned pitted olives under 
the order in terms of illustrations, approximate diameter 
ranges, and size variances which are set forth in the 
Standards. Thus, in accordance with section 8e of the Act, 
conforming changes are made in the minimum size requirements 
for imported canned pitted olives so that such requirements 
are applied in a manner similar to that under the order. 
Based on the above, the Administrator of the AMS has 
determined that this rule will not have a significant 
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. 
In accordance with section 8e of the Act, the U.S. 
Trade Representative has concurred with the issuance of this 
interim final rule. 
After consideration of all relevant matter presented, 
including information and recommendations submitted by the 
committee and other available information, it is hereby 
found that this rule, as hereinafter set forth, will tend to 
effectuate the declared policy of the Act. 




