 

Over the past 7 years, Institute staff have reviewed approximately 2,700 concept papers and 1,300 applications.
On the basis of those reviews, inquiries from applicants, and the views of the Board, the Institute offers the following
recommendations to help potential applicants present workable, understandable proposals that can meet the funding
criteria set forth in this Guideline. 
The Institute suggests that applicants make certain that they address the questions and issues set forth below when
preparing a concept paper or application. Concept papers and applications should, however, be presented in the formats
specified in sections vi. and vii. of the guideline, respectively. 
1. 

What is the subject or problem you wish to address? 

Describe the subject or problem and how it affects the courts and the public. Discuss how your approach will improve
the situation or advance the state of the art or knowledge, and explain why it is the most appropriate approach to take.
When statistics or research findings are cited to support a statement or position, the source of the citation should
be referenced in a footnote or a reference list. 
2. 

What do you want to do? 

Explain the goal(s) of the project in simple, straightforward terms. The goals should describe the intended consequences
or expected overall effect of the proposed project (e.g., to enable judges to sentence drug-abusing offenders more
effectively, or to dispose of civil cases within 24 months), rather than the tasks or activities to be conducted (e.g.,
hold three training sessions, or install a new computer system). 
To the greatest extent possible, an applicant should avoid a specialized vocabulary that is not readily understood
by the general public. Technical jargon does not enhance a paper. 
3. 

How will you do it? 

Describe the methodology carefully so that what you propose to do and how you would do it are clear. All proposed tasks
should be set forth so that a reviewer can see a logical progression of tasks and relate those tasks directly to the accomplishment
of the project's goal(s). When in doubt about whether to provide a more detailed explanation or to assume a particular
level of knowledge or expertise on the part of the reviewers, provide the additional information. A description of
project tasks also will help identify necessary budget items. All staff positions and project costs should relate
directly to the tasks described. The Institute encourages applicants to attach letters of cooperation and support
from the courts and related agencies that will be involved in or directly affected by the proposed project. 
4. 

How will you know it works? 

Include an evaluation component that will determine whether the proposed training, procedure, service, or technology
accomplished the objectives it was designed to meet. Concept papers and applications should describe the criteria
that will be used to evaluate the project's effectiveness and identify program elements which will require further
modification. The description in the application should include how the evaluation will be conducted, when it will
occur during the project period, who will conduct it, and what specific measures will be used. In most instances, the
evaluation should be conducted by persons not connected with the implementation of the procedure, training, service,
or technique, or the administration of the project. 
The Institute has also prepared a more thorough list of recommendations to grant writers regarding the development
of project evaluation plans. Those recommendations are available from the Institute upon request. 
5. 

How will others find out about it? 

Include a plan to disseminate the results of the training, research, or demonstration beyond the jurisdictions and
individuals directly affected by the project. The plan should identify the specific methods which will be used to
inform the field about the project, such as the publication of law review or journal articles, or the distribution
of key materials. A statement that a report or research findings ``will be made available to'' the field is not sufficient.
The specific means of distribution or dissemination as well as the types of recipients should be identified. Reproduction
and dissemination costs are allowable budget items. 
6. 

What are the specific costs involved? 

The budget in both concept papers and applications should be presented clearly. Major budget categories such as personnel,
benefits, travel, supplies, equipment, and indirect costs should be identified separately. The components of ``Other''
or ``Miscellaneous'' items should be specified in the application budget narrative, and should not include set-asides
for undefined contingencies. 
7. 

What, if any, match is being offered? 

Courts and other units of State and local government (not including publicly-supported institutions of higher education)
are required by the State Justice Institute Act to contribute a match (cash, non-cash, or both) of not less than 50 percent
of the grant funds requested from the Institute. All other applicants also are encouraged to provide a matching contribution
to assist in meeting the costs of a project. 
The match requirement works as follows: If, for example, the total cost of a project is anticipated to be $150,000,
a State or local court or executive branch agency may request up to $100,000 from the Institute to implement the project.
The remaining $50,000 (50% of the $100,000 requested from SJI) must be provided as match. 








