 



a. Wage-Related Costs (Core).

 For most hospitals, the wage-related costs used to 
develop the wage index would be limited to ``core'' wage-
related costs. The list of ``core'' wage-related costs 
includes all commonly recognized costs (which are similar to 
fringe benefits used for cost reimbursement purposes) that 
contribute significantly to the wage costs of a hospital and 
that are readily identifiable on the hospital records. 
These costs will also be listed on the revised HCFA339 
form, and hospitals will be required to provide the 
intermediary with a detailed description of the wage-related 
costs in Exhibit 7. This description will allow the 
intermediary to review the appropriateness of each wage-
related cost. We believe that this core list includes 
virtually all significant wage-related costs, including 
those costs that are required by statute. 
To develop the list of core wage-related costs, the 
MTAG task force established a number of specific criteria. 
To be considered a core wage-related cost, one or more of 
the following criteria must be met: 
&bull;The wage-related cost is provided at a significant 
financial cost to the employer. 
&bull;The wage-related cost is of a type and nature that 
would generally be offered as a fringe benefit by most 
employers. 
&bull;The perceived value of this wage-related cost is of 
such importance that it would influence an individual's 
employment decisions. 
&bull;The wage-related cost is a mandatory requirement under 
Federal or State law (for example FICA, Federal and State 
unemployment, etc.). 
&bull;Fees paid to external organizations that are directly 
associated with the core wage-related costs may be included 
as part of the wage-related cost (for example, actuarial 
fees, claim administration fees, IRS form preparation fees, 
etc.). 
The following is the proposed list of core wage-related 
costs:

 



(1) Retirement Costs: 
401(k) employer contributions 
Tax sheltered annuity (TSA) employer contributions 
Qualified and non-qualified pension plan cost 
Prior year pension service cost 
(2) Plan Administration Costs (Paid to external 
organization): 
401(k)/TSA plan administration fees 
Legal/accounting/management fees_pension plan 
Employee managed care program administration fees 
(3) Health and Insurance Costs: 
Health insurance (purchased or self-funded) 
Prescription drug plan 
Dental, hearing, vision plans 



