 



Department's Position: 

We disagree with TIMET. Consistent with the Kazakh Government's questionnaire response, our analysis of Census
data reveals that no shipments of titanium sponge have entered the United States from Kazakhstan during the period
of review. While TIMET provided public information on imports of titanium sponge from Russia and Ukraine in those
ongoing administrative reviews, it provided no information on shipments in this case. Absent evidence to the contrary,
we conclude that there were no imports, including imports under TIB procedures, of titanium sponge from Kazakhstan
during the review period. 


Final Results of Review 


Based on our analysis of the comments received we have not changed the final results from those presented in the preliminary
results of review. 
The following deposit requirements will be effective for all shipments of the subject merchandise, entered or withdrawn
from warehouse, for consumption on or after the publication date of these final results of review, as provided by section
751(a)(1) of the Act: the cash deposit rate for entries of titanium sponge from Kazakhstan will be 83.96 percent. 
These deposit requirements, when imposed, shall remain in effect until publication of the final results of the next
administrative review. 
This notice also serves as a reminder to importers of their responsibility under 19 CFR 353.26 to file a certificate
regarding the reimbursement of antidumping duties prior to liquidation of the relevant entries during this review
period. Failure to comply with this requirement could result in the Secretary's presumption that reimbursement
of antidumping duties occurred and the subsequent assessment of double antidumping duties. 
This notice also serves as a reminder to parties subject to administrative protective orders (APOs) of their responsibility
concerning the disposition of proprietary information disclosed under APO in accordance with 19 CFR 353.34(d).
Timely written notification of return/destruction of APO materials or conversion to judicial protective order
is hereby requested. Failure to comply with the regulations and the terms of an APO is a sanctionable violation. 
This administrative review and notice are in accordance with section 751(a)(1) of the Act (19 U.S.C. 1675(a)(1))
and 19 CFR 353.22.




Dated: March 31, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Susan G. Esserman,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Import Administration.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948381 Filed 4694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3510DSP
</BILLING>


