 

There are no administrative procedures which must be exhausted prior to any judicial challenge to the provisions
of import regulations issued under section 8e of the Act. 
Pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA), the Administrator of the Agricultural
Marketing Service (AMS) has considered the economic impact of this action on small entities. 
The purpose of the RFA is to fit regulatory actions to the scale of business subject to such actions in order that small
businesses will not be unduly or disproportionately burdened. Marketing orders issued pursuant to the Act, and rules
issued thereunder, are unique in that they are brought about through group action of essentially small entities acting
on their own behalf. Thus, both statutes have small entity orientation and compatibility. 
There are about 100 Florida citrus handlers subject to regulation under the marketing order covering oranges, grapefruit,
tangerines, and tangelos grown in Florida, and about 11,000 producers of these citrus fruits in Florida. There are
approximately 25 importers of grapefruit subject to the grapefruit import regulation. Small agricultural producers
have been defined by the Small Business Administration [13 CFR 121.601] as those having annual receipts of less than
$500,000, and small agricultural service firms are defined as those whose annual receipts are less than $3,500,000.
A minority of these handlers and a majority of the producers and importers may be classified as small entities. 
This rule finalizes an interim final rule that relaxed the minimum size requirement for domestic shipments of Florida
red seedless grapefruit to 35/16 inches in diameter (size 56) through November 6, 1994. This rule will enable handlers
to continue to ship size 56 red seedless grapefruit for the entire 199394 season. The interim final rule was
published in the November 12, 1993, 

Federal Register

 [58 FR 59931], and provided 30 days for interested persons to file comments. No comments were received. 
Section 905.306 [7 CFR 905.306] specifies minimum grade and size requirements for different varieties of fresh Florida
grapefruit. Such requirements for domestic shipments are specified in 905.306 in Table I of paragraph (a),
and for export shipments in Table II of paragraph (b). Export requirements were not changed by the interim final rule
for Florida grapefruit. 
The Citrus Administrative Committee (committee) met September 28, 1993, and unanimously recommended that the minimum
size requirement for domestic shipments of fresh red seedless grapefruit be relaxed. The committee meets prior to
and during each season to review the handling regulations effective on a continuous basis for each citrus fruit regulated
under the order. Committee meetings are open to the public, and interested persons may express their views at these
meetings. The Department reviews committee recommendations and information, as well as information from other
sources, and determines whether modification, suspension, or termination of the handling regulations would tend
to effectuate the declared policy of the Act. 
The committee reports that it expects that the fresh market demand will be sufficient to permit the shipment of size
56 red seedless grapefruit grown in Florida during the entire 199394 season. The committee also expects that
the overall external quality of the fruit will be good. The committee also expects that more Florida red seedless grapefruit
will be shipped fresh this season than last season. 
This rule is designed to enable Florida grapefruit shippers to continue shipping size 56 red seedless grapefruit
to the domestic market consistent with current and anticipated strong demand in those markets during the entire 199394
season, and to maximize shipments to fresh market channels. This rule is based on the committee's assessment of the
maturity, flavor level, and size composition of this season's Florida red seedless grapefruit crop. The Florida
seedless grapefruit shipping season normally begins in September and continues until the following July. 
Minimum size requirements are designed to provide fresh markets with fruit of acceptable size and maturity, thereby
maintaining consumer confidence in fresh Florida grapefruit. This helps create buyer confidence and contributes
to stable marketing conditions. This is in the interest of producers, packers, and consumers, and is expected to increase
returns to Florida grapefruit growers. 
Under the order for Florida citrus, handlers may ship up to 15 standard packed cartons (12 bushels) of fruit per day,
and gift packages which are individually addressed and not for resale, under exemption provisions. Fruit shipped
for animal feed is also exempt under specific conditions. In addition, fruit shipped to commercial processors for
conversion into canned or frozen products or into a beverage base are not subject to the handling requirements. 
This rule also finalizes an interim final rule that relaxed the minimum size requirement for imported shipments of
red seedless grapefruit. The interim final rule was published in the November 12, 1993, 

Federal Register

 [58 FR 59933], and provided 30 days for interested persons to file comments. No comments were received. 
Section 8(e) of the Act requires that whenever grade, size, quality, or maturity requirements are in effect for grapefruit
under a domestic marketing order, imported grapefruit must meet the same or comparable requirements. The interim
final rule for Florida grapefruit relaxed the minimum size requirements for Florida red seedless grapefruit. Therefore
a corresponding change was needed in the grapefruit import regulation. 
Minimum grade and size requirements for grapefruit imported into the United States are currently in effect under
944.106 [7 CFR 944.106], as reinstated on July 26, 1993 [58 FR 39428, July 23, 1993]. The interim final rule for
imported grapefruit relaxed the minimum size requirements for imported red seedless grapefruit to 35/16 inches
in diameter (size 56) for the period November 8, 1993, through November 6, 1994. 
In accordance with section 8e of the Act, the USTR has concurred with the issuance of this final rule as it pertains to
imported grapefruit. 
This rule reflects the committee's and the Department's appraisal of the need to relax the minimum size requirement
for red seedless grapefruit, as specified. The Department's view is that this rule will have a beneficial impact on
producers, handlers, and importers since it will permit Florida grapefruit handlers to continue to make available
those sizes of fruit needed to meet consumer needs consistent with this season's crop and market conditions. 
Based on the above, the Administrator of the AMS has determined that this rule will not have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities. 


