 

Analysis of State Submittal 


The State of Louisiana has ten parishes designated as nonclassifiable ozone nonattainment areas. Nonclassifiable
ozone nonattainment areas had air quality data which demonstrated attainment of the ozone standard, but had not petitioned
the EPA for redesignation to attainment before the Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) were passed. These parishes were
nonattainment prior to the 1990 CAAA, and retained their ozone nonattainment designations with the passage of the
CAAA. Transitional areas possessed the required three years of air quality data, while incomplete data areas had
less than the required three years of data. 
Beauregard, Grant, Lafourche, St. James and St. Mary Parishes were classified as incomplete data areas for ozone
on November 6, 1991 (56 FR 56694). The New Orleans Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area contained four parishes
which were designated as transitional ozone nonattainment areas on November 6, 1991: Jefferson, Orleans, St. Bernard
and 
St. Charles. Lafayette Parish was also classified as a transitional ozone nonattainment area on November 6, 1991.

On August 5, 1994, the State of Louisiana submitted a petition to the EPA requesting that the ten parishes listed above
be exempted from the requirement to perform the NO

X

 portion of the build/no-build test required by the new transportation conformity rule. This exemption request is
pursuant to the recently published General Preamble for transportation conformity NO

X

 exemptions. 
The exemption request was based on air monitoring data which demonstrated that the NAAQS for ozone was attained in
each of these nonclassifiable ozone nonattainment areas for the three years prior to the petition. The Air quality
data was verified as quality assured in accordance with monitoring requirements specified in 40 CFR part 58, and demonstrates
that the ozone standard has been maintained in these areas. 


Proposed Rulemaking Action 


The EPA has evaluated the State's exemption request for consistency with the CAA, EPA regulations, and EPA policy.
The EPA believes that the exemption request and monitoring data qualifies the parishes of Beauregard, Grant, Lafayette,
Lafourche, Jefferson, Orleans, St. Bernard, St. Charles, 
St. James, and St. Mary as ``clean data areas''. In addition, the EPA has determined that the exemption request meets
the requirements and policy set forth in the General Preamble for NO

X

 exemptions from the build/no-build test for transportation conformity, and today is proposing approval of Louisiana's
request for exemption from the NO

X

 build/no-build test of transportation conformity for these parishes. The section 182(f) exemption will be conditioned
upon the area's monitoring data continuing to demonstrate attainment after the exemption has been granted. If the
EPA later determines that any of these parishes has violated the ozone standard, the section 182(f) exemption will
be rescinded for that parish. Past conformity determinations and transportation plans would not be affected, but
new conformity determinations would then be subject to the NO

X

 provisions of the conformity rule. 
The EPA has reviewed this request for exemption from the NO

X

 provisions of the Federal transportation conformity rule for conformance with the provisions of the 1990 CAAA enacted
on November 15, 1990. The EPA has determined that this action conforms with those requirements. 


Regulatory Process 


Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 600 


et seq

., the EPA must prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis assessing the impact of any proposed or final rule on small
entities (5 U.S.C. 603 and 604). Alternatively, under 
5 U.S.C. 605(b), the EPA may certify that the rule will not have a significant impact on a substantial number of small
entities (see 46 FR 8709). Small entities include small businesses, small not-for-profit enterprises, and governmental
entities with jurisdiction over populations of less than 50,000. 
Because an exemption from the Federal transportation conformity rule does not impose any new requirements, I certify
that it does not have a significant impact on any small entities affected. Moreover, due to the nature of the Federal-State
relationship under the CAA, preparation of a regulatory flexibility analysis would constitute Federal inquiry
into the economic reasonableness of State action. The CAA forbids the EPA to base its actions concerning SIPs on such
grounds (Union Electric Co. v. U.S.E.P.A., 427 U.S. 246, 25666 (S. Ct. 1976); 42 U.S.C. 7410 (a)(2)). 

 



