 

The studies related to hepatic enzyme abnormality did not demonstrate an association with liver disease, and confounding
factors (alcohol abuse, cirrhosis, hepatitis, and other toxic chemicals) were not ruled out. Studies showing lipid
abnormalities do not control for the confounding variables of obesity and genetic factors, and no medical significance
of the modest and variable increases has been demonstrated. The risk of gastric ulcers in exposed populations has
not been sufficiently studied to establish an association with herbicide exposure. Only one study (Suskind and Hertzberg,
1984) indicates any increase, and in that study it is difficult to rule out the many factors (e.g., alcoholism, non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, and H. pylori infection) known to be associated with ulcers. Accordingly, the Secretary
has found that there is no credible evidence for an association between metabolic and digestive disorders (other
than diabetes) and herbicide exposure, and he has determined that a positive association does not exist.
The available data deal with two categories of immune system disorders: immune modulation and autoimmunity. Many
immune parameters have been studied; however, few show a relationship to herbicide exposure. Most studies address
such a wide range of immune parameters that it is likely that at least some of the positive results are due to chance alone,
which undermines the credibility of those studies. Furthermore, the clinical meaning, i.e., the relationship of
immune disorders to disease, is unclear. Other studies (e.g., Pocchiari F., Silano V., Zampieri A., 1979. Human health
effects from accidental release of tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) at Seveso, Italy. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 320:311320; Ghezzi I., Cannatelli P., Assennato G., Merlo F., Mocarelli P., Brambilla
P., Sicurello F., 1982. Potential 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin exposure of Seveso decontamination workers.
A controlled prospective study. Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment, and Health 8:176179) found no
relationship between immune system disorders and herbicide exposure. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that
the credible evidence against an association between immune system disorders and herbicide exposure outweighs
the credible evidence for such an association, and he has determined that a positive association does not exist.
Most occupational studies concerning circulatory disorders (e.g., Moses et al., 1984; Suskind and Hertzberg, 1984)
showed no increased mortality or morbidity from circulatory disorders after herbicide exposure. The studies of
the residents of Seveso, Italy (Bertazzi, P.A., Zocchetti C., Pesatori A.C., Guercilena S., Sanarico M., Radice
L., 1989a. Mortality in an area contaminated by TCDD following an industrial incident. Medicina Del Lavoro 80:316329;
Bertazzi et al., 1989b) showed some increased risk of mortality in the first five year follow-up; however, these studies
had a number of technical problems: they were not specific to circulatory disease and did not control for the confounding
variables of smoking, diabetes, and hypertension. Veteran studies (e.g., CDC, 1988) have suggested that any increase
in heart disease may be associated with the Vietnam experience rather than herbicide exposure, and most of these studies
did not adjust for confounding variables. Accordingly, the Secretary has found that the credible evidence against
an association between circulatory diseases and herbicide exposure outweighs the credible evidence for such an
association, and he has determined that a positive association does not exist.
NAS examined studies that covered a wide variety of respiratory disorders (e.g., chronic bronchitis, asthma, pleurisy,
pneumonia, and tuberculosis), other than respiratory cancer. Studies of individuals exposed in occupational settings
revealed no increase in mortality from respiratory disease (Coggon D., Pannett B., Winter P., 1991. Mortality and
incidence of cancer at four factories making phenoxy herbicides. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 48:173178;
Blair A., 1983. Lung cancer and other causes of death among licensed pesticide applicators. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute 71:3137; Alavanja et al., 1989; Coggon D., Pannett B., Winter P.D., Acheson E.D., Bonsall
J., 1986. Mortality of workers exposed to 2-methyl_chlorophenoxyacetic acid. Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment,
and Health 12:448454). Environmental exposure studies similarly showed no significant differences in mortality
due to respiratory disease (Bertazzi et al., 1989a,b). Also, mortality studies of Vietnam veterans generally found
no increased risk.

