 

An interim final rule was issued on May 18, 1994, and published in the 

Federal Register

 [59 FR 26927, May 25, 1994], with an effective date of May 25, 1994. That rule amended 905.146, 905.147,
and 905.148 of the rules and regulations in effect under the order. That rule provided a 30-day comment period which
ended June 24, 1994. One comment was received. 
Mr. Joseph B. Procacci, Assistant Chairman, National Association of Perishable Agricultural Receivers, filed
a comment in support of the revisions. He supports the revision in the regulation's definition of Special Purpose
Shippers to include Florida's new certification process of organic producers. He stated it is crucial in preserving
the integrity of the organic citrus industry. He also expressed support for the regulation's requirement that such
shippers also certify that they will limit organic shipments to organic outlets. 
The order for Florida citrus provides for the establishment of minimum grade and size requirements. The minimum grade
and size requirements are designed to provide fresh markets with fruit of acceptable quality, thereby maintaining
consumer confidence for fresh Florida citrus. This helps create buyer confidence and contributes to stable marketing
conditions. This is in the interest of producers, packers, and consumers, and is designed to increase returns to Florida
citrus growers. 
The cultural practices of producers of organically grown citrus differ from normal industry practices. Because
of these differences, organically grown fruit is usually required to meet a different grade standard under the marketing
order. This grade standard pertains only to the external characteristics of the fruit, not the internal quality.

The different grade standard is needed to facilitate the marketing of organic citrus. There are indications that
organically grown citrus, from a marketing standpoint, are a different commodity than conventionally grown citrus.
Organic citrus generally has higher external damage. Organic fruit for the most part is marketed differently, is
not mixed with non-organic fruit, appeals only to certain consumers, and is in many respects, a specialized commodity.
The interim final rule also more precisely defined organic fruit, and the type of market outlets which organically
grown fruit could be sold in, free from certain requirements imposed under the order. These changes were unanimously
recommended by the committee at its November 16, 1993, meeting. 
Sections 905.146, 905.147, and 905.148 of the regulations provide terms and conditions under which shippers may
ship organically grown Florida citrus fruit, as Special Purpose Shippers, with a conditional release from certain
grade requirements issued under 905.52 of the order. 
When the provisions concerning special purpose shipments were made effective in 1978, there were no laws governing
organic fruit and vegetable growers in Florida. A ``Special Purpose Shipper'' was defined under the marketing order
as one who had certified that they would handle only citrus fruit which they knew from their own personal knowledge
was produced on trees on which only compost, non-acidulated fertilizer such as rock phosphate, dolomite, or ground
limestone is used, and to which no chemical insecticide or fungicide had been applied. However, the State of Florida
now requires all organically grown fruits and vegetables to be certified. Accordingly, the committee has recommended
redefining the term ``Special Purpose Shipper'' in 905.146 to mean a person who handles Florida citrus fruit
that is certified by a Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services licensed certifying agent as organically
grown under Florida law. This definition reflects that organic fruit has been certified under Florida law, and also
provides additional assurance that shippers claiming organic status and utilizing the grade standards for organic
fruit qualify to do so. 
Under Florida law, the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services licenses independent third parties
to act as certifying agents. Growers who intend to sell organic fruit make an application to a certifying agent. The
certifying agent inspects and certifies a grower's acreage as being in accordance with Florida law and issues the
grower a certificate. The certificate number is transferred to a trip ticket which accompanies any shipments of fruit
grown on the certified acreage. When the handler receives the shipment, a copy of the trip ticket is provided to the
state inspector indicating that the fruit is certified organic and can be packed using the applicable organic grade
standards. 
The committee also recommended that 905.146 be revised to require Special Purpose Shippers to certify that
they will limit their shipments of organically grown citrus fruit to outlets handling organically grown fruits.
The interim final rule replaced the requirement that only outlets registered and approved by the committee could
receive such fruit and ended the requirement that receivers of special purpose shipments complete the applicable
sections of the Report of Special Purpose Shipments form. 





