 

As noted above, Mn affects multiple organ systems, including 
the respiratory and reproductive systems as well as the CNS. 
However, because the only available evidence suggests that the 
CNS is the most sensitive target for Mn toxicity, neurobehavioral 
endpoints were the focus of the RfC derivation. Although other 
types of effects remain a concern, it is presumed, based on the 
limited data now available, that protecting against neurotoxicity 
provides protection against these other, apparently less 
sensitive endpoints. 
In revising the RfC for Mn, a draft version was subjected to 
peer review by external experts (from academic and non-EPA 
governmental institutions) as well as internal experts. 
Following this peer review, a further-revised version was 
submitted to and verified by an EPA-wide RfD/RfC work group in 
September 1993. The current RfC for Mn was made available 
through IRIS in early November 1993 through two mechanisms. A 
special notice beginning November 1 in the news section of EPA's 
internal IRIS2 database announced the availability of a hard copy 
of the text to EPA requesters who contacted the Risk Information 
Hotline; also, the text was obtainable through the National 
Library of Medicine's publicly accessible on-line computer 
database, TOXNET, beginning November 10, 1993. It also became 
available on line via the EPA IRIS database beginning December 1, 
1993.
<FOOTCITE>57</FOOTCITE>



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
57

</FOOTNAME>
The complete text of the revised RfC as it exists on IRIS2 may be found in Appendix C in the docket. 
</FOOTNOTE>


4. Alternative Approaches to Deriving RfCs 


After the revised RfC for Mn became available to the public, 
Ethyl Corporation and other interested parties submitted comments 
on the RfC and issues related to it. One of the primary comments 
concerned the availability of various statistical techniques for 
deriving a NOAEL from the study by Roels et al. (1992) and/or 
from supplementary data for that study provided to ORD by Roels 
(1993). In response to Ethyl Corporation's request that EPA 
consider alternative approaches to analyzing these data and 
deriving an RfC for Mn, further analyses of the subject data were 
undertaken using a variety of statistical methods. These 
approaches may be identified as (1) conventional NOAEL- or LOAEL- 
based analyses, (2) ``no statistical significance of trend'' 
(NOSTASOT) analyses of the type described by Tukey et al. (1985), 
(3) benchmark dose analyses of the type described by Crump 
(1984), and (4) Bayesian analyses of the type described by 
Jarabek and Hasselblad (1991). These analyses and their 
results
<FOOTCITE>58</FOOTCITE>
 yield several possible RfC estimates, so designated 
because the current and only verified RfC for Mn is that which 
has been verified by the EPA-wide RfD/RfC work group and entered 
on IRIS. It must be emphasized that the RfC estimates developed 
for the purpose of this risk assessment do not represent a 
revision of the current verified RfC for Mn. Reexamination of 
the current Mn RfC, and any decision to revise or reaffirm the 
current RfC, will be under the purview of the EPA-wide RfD/RfC 
work group at some future date. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
58

</FOOTNAME>
See ``Reevaluation of Inhalation Health Risks Associated with Methycycloentadienyl Manganese Tricarbonyl (NMT)
in Gasoline'', Appendix A, Docket A9146.
</FOOTNOTE>


A fundamental issue pertaining to all of the approaches 
presented here is the selection of a measure of exposure. Roels 
et al. (1992) described two measures of respirable dust, the 
occupational lifetime respirable dust concentration (LIRD), 
expressed as &mu;g/m

3

 x years, and the current concentration of 
respirable dust (CRD), expressed as &mu;g/m

3

. The CRD concentration 
was measured at the time the study was conducted by Roels et al. 
and refers to a representative concentration measured for the 
type of job performed by a worker (e.g., electrician, maintenance 
worker). The LIRD value for each worker was a cumulative 
exposure measure derived by adding the CRD values over the 
worker's entire period of employment. If a worker changed jobs 
within the plant during his period of employment, the CRD for 
each job held was multiplied by the number of years the worker 
performed that job. Thus, if more than one job classification 
was worked, the worker's LIRD was the sum of the products of CRD 
multiplied by years of performance of the respective jobs. 
However, if a worker held only one job classification, his LIRD 
was simply equal to his CRD multiplied by the number of years 
employed. Another measure of exposure may be derived from LIRD 
by dividing an individual worker's LIRD value by his total number 
of years of employment. The latter measure, designated as the 
average concentration of respirable dust (ACRD), reflects a 
worker's time-weighted cumulative exposure level but removes 
years from the unit of measurement of LIRD and is expressed as 
&mu;g/m

3

. Although Roels et al. (1992) did not refer to ACRD, this value could be calculated for each individual and for the entire

cohort by using the unpublished data provided to ORD by Roels 
(1993). For reasons to be discussed later, ACRD offers 
advantages for certain analyses and, unless otherwise noted, is 
the exposure measure used in the alternative RfC estimates 
discussed here. 
a. 

Conventional NOAEL- or LOAEL-Based Approach

. The conventional method, and only method used thus far by EPA, to derive an RfC has been to identify a NOAEL or LOAEL
from a study and divide that concentration by uncertainty factors, as described above for the Mn RfC. In the case of
the study by Roels et al. (1992), the geometric mean LIRD concentration of the 
Mn-exposed workers was used as a LOAEL. Roels et al. (1992) also 
performed an exposure-response analysis of their data by grouping 
the exposed workers into three exposure categories and comparing 
the prevalence of abnormal neurobehavioral scores for each of the 
three groups to those of controls. As indicated in the summary 
sheet for the Mn RfC (see Appendix C), the results of this 
exposure-response analysis were not used in deriving the revised 
Mn RfC because the reported analysis did not correct for multiple 
comparisons. However, ORD's analyses of additional data provided 
by Roels (1993) suggest a possible RfC estimate of 0.03 &mu;g/m

3

 
(versus the current RfC of 0.05 &mu;g/m

3

), if a one-tailed test of statistical significance is accepted (see Appendix A, 
``Reevaluation of Inhalation Health Risks Associated with Methyl- 
cyclopentadienyl Manganese Tricarbonyl (MMT) in Gasoline'' as 
referenced in the reference section below, hereafter referred to 
as Appendix A.). Because it was based on an exposure-response 
analysis, this RfC estimate is labeled as such in Figure 1, which could not be reproduced in the 

Federal Register. 

It is available by calling the person listed in the 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT 

section of this notice. It is also available in docket A9326, item number IIA17, page 12
(see 

ADDRESS 

section of this notice for docket location). 


b. NOSTASOT Approach

. Another approach to analyzing dose-response data makes use of a procedure known as NOSTASOT, described by Tukey
et al. 
(1985). In essence, the procedure applies a trend test sequentially to determine the highest noneffective dose of
a series of doses by eliminating one dose at a time. In this manner, the dose level at which the response is not significantly
different from controls is determined to be the NOSTASOT dose, which could therefore be considered a NOAEL. Applied
to Roels' 
(1993) epidemiologic data by beginning with the highest individual ACRD exposure and moving downward (i.e., a ``top-down''
approach), the procedure yielded a NOSTASOT of 285 &mu;g/m

3

 for eye-hand coordination (see Table A4, Appendix A). This approach implies that once nonsignificance is
reached, further application of trend tests to lower dose groups would also yield 
nonsignificance. However, this was not the case with Roels' (1993) epidemiologic data, and thus it was important
to determine not simply the highest NOAEL but the highest NOAEL below the lowest LOAEL. By this ``bottom-up'' approach,
the highest nonsignificant exposure below the lowest statistically significant exposure was 21 &mu;g/m

3

, for visual reaction time. Using the latter value as a NOAEL and a total uncertainty factor of 100 (the same as that used
for the current Mn RfC, except omitting a factor of 10 for extrapolating from a LOAEL to a NOAEL), one would obtain a value
of 0.07 &mu;g/m

3

 for an RfC estimate (Figure 1). Disparities in the NOSTASOTs obtained for various endpoints by the top-down and bottom-up
approaches raise 
questions about the suitability of this technique for deriving a NOAEL from the data of Roels (1993).




