 




<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 97</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 27828; Amdt. No. 1612]</RINDOCK>



Standard Instrument Approach Procedures; Miscellaneous Amendments



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This amendment establishes, amends, suspends, or revokes Standard Instrument Approach Procedures (SIAPs) for
operations at certain airports. These regulatory actions are needed because of the adoption of new or revised criteria,
or because of changes occurring in the National Airspace System, such as the commissioning of new navigational facilities,
addition of new obstacles, or changes in air traffic requirements. These changes are designed to provide safe and
efficient use of the navigable airspace and to promote safe flight operations under instrument flight rules at the
affected airports.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

An effective date for each SIAP is specified in the amendatory provisions.




Incorporation by reference-approved by the Director of the Federal Register on December 31, 1980, and reapproved
as of January 1, 1982.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Availability of matters incorporated by reference in the amendment is as follows:



For Examination


1. FAA Rules Docket, FAA Headquarters Building, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591;
2. The FAA Regional Office of the region in which the affected airport is located; or
3. The Flight Inspection Area Office which originated the SIAP.


For Purchase


Individual SIAP copies may be obtained from:
1. FAA Public Inquiry Center (APA200), FAA Headquarters Building, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington,
DC 20591; or

2. The FAA Regional Office of the region in which the affected airport is located.



By Subscription


Copies of all SIAPs, mailed once every 2 weeks, are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington, DC 20402.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Paul J. Best, Flight Procedures Standards Branch (AFS420), Technical Programs Division, Flight Standards
Service, Federal Aviation Administration, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington DC 20591; telephone (202)
2678277.




</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

This amendment to part 97 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 97) establishes, amends, suspends, or revokes
Standard Instrument Approach Procedures (SIAPs). The complete regulatory description of each SIAP is contained
in official FAA form documents which are incorporated by reference in this amendment under 5 U.S.C. 552(a), 1 CFR part
51, and 97.20 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR). The applicable FAA Forms are identified as FAA Forms
82603, 82604, and 82605. Materials incorporated by reference are available for examination
or purchase as stated above.




The large number of SIAPs, their complex nature, and the need for a special format make their verbatim publication
in the 

Federal Register

 expensive and impractical. Further, airmen do not use the regulatory text of the SIAPs, but refer to their graphic
depiction on charts printed by publishers of aeronautical materials. Thus, the advantages of incorporation by reference
are realized and publication of the complete description of each SIAP contained in FAA form documents is unnecessary.
The provisions of this amendment state the affected CFR (and FAR) sections, with the types and effective dates of the
SIAPs. This amendment also identifies the airport, its location, the procedure identification and the amendment
number.


This amendment to part 97 is effective upon publication of each separate SIAP as contained in the transmittal. Some
SIAP amendments may have been previously issued by the FAA in a National Flight Data Center (FDC) Notice to Airmen (NOTAM)
as an emergency action of immediate flight safety relating directly to published aeronautical charts. The circumstances
which created the need for some SIAP amendments may require making them effective in less than 30 days. For the remaining
SIAPs, an effective date at least 30 days after publication is provided.
Further, the SIAPs contained in this amendment are based on the criteria contained in the U.S. Standard for Terminal
Instrument Approach Procedures (TERPS). In developing these SIAPs, the TERPS criteria were applied to the conditions
existing or anticipated at the affected airports. Because of the close and immediate relationship between these
SIAPs and safety in air commerce, I find that notice and public procedure before adopting these SIAPs are unnecessary,
impracticable, and contrary to the public interest and, where applicable, that good cause exists for making some
SIAPs effective in less than 30 days.
The FAA has determined that this regulation only involves an established body of technical regulations for which
frequent and routine amendments are necessary to keep them operationally current. It, therefore: (1) Is not a ``significant
regulatory action'' under Executive Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies
and Procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979); and (3) does not warrant preparation of a regulatory evaluation as
the anticipated impact is so minimal. For the same reason, the FAA certifies that this amendment will not have a significant
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.

</SUPPLEM>
