 




<USBUREAU>International Trade Administration</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[A351820] </RINDOCK>


Notice of Amended Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Ferrosilicon From Brazil 


Agency: 

Import Administration, International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce.



<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 February 23, 1994.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Kimberly Hardin, Office of Antidumping Investigations, Import Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, 14th
Street and Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20230; telephone (202) 4820371. 


Amendment of Final Determination 


In accordance with 19 CFR 353.28(c)(1993), we are amending the final determination of the antidumping duty investigation
of ferrosilicon from Brazil (59 FR 732, January 6, 1994) to announce the Department's correction of ministerial errors
in the calculations. 


Case History 


Since publication of the notice of final determination on January 6, 1994 (59 FR 732), the following events have occurred.

On January 21, 1994, petitioners and one of the respondents, Companhia Ferroligas Minas Gerais (Minasligas), alleged
that the Department made several ministerial errors in its final determination. On January 24, 1994, respondent
Companhia Brasileira Carbureto de Calcio (CBCC) also alleged that the Department made ministerial errors in its
final determination. On January 31, 1994, petitioners submitted comments on the ministerial error allegations
submitted by CBCC. Also on January 31, 1994, Minasligas submitted comments on the ministerial error allegations
submitted by petitioners. All allegations and comments were timely. 


Scope of Investigation 


The merchandise subject to this investigation is ferrosilicon (FeSi), a ferroalloy generally containing, by weight,
not less than four percent iron, more than eight percent but not more than 96 percent silicon, not more than 10 percent
chromium, not more than 30 percent manganese, not more than three percent phosphorous, less than 2.75 percent magnesium,
and not more than 10 percent calcium of any other element. For a complete description of the merchandise covered by
this investigation, see Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Ferrosilicon from Brazil (59 FR 732,
January 6, 1994). 


Ministerial Error Allegations 


On January 21, 1994, petitioners alleged that the Department made several ministerial errors in its final determination.
First, petitioners state that the Department improperly included home market ``credit expenses'' reported by two
respondents, Minasligas and CBCC, in the price that was compared to the monthly cost of production (COP) for purposes
of the COP test. 
We agree with petitioners that this constitutes a ministerial error and have recalculated accordingly. In this investigation,
we intended to make contemporaneous comparisons by comparing the price at the time of shipment to the replacement
cost in the month of shipment. However, our comparisons were not contemporaneous because the COP in one month was compared
to a price charged in the same month which included an adjustment for anticipated inflation. We thus determine that
this constitutes an unintentional ministerial error as defined at 19 CFR 353.28(d). As a result of our recalculation,
U.S. sales for both companies are now being compared to constructed value (CV). For the one U.S. sale made by Minasligas
for which Minasligas did not report CV information, we indexed period of investigation (POI) average costs to February
1993 using International Monetary Fund's Brazilian wholesale price index. For two U.S. sales made by CBCC shipped
outside the POI, CBCC incorrectly reported direct selling expenses. We calculated the direct selling expenses for
these sales as a percentage of cost of manufacture based on CBCC's actual experience for each month of the POI. 
Second, petitioners claim the Department erroneously imputed negative U.S. credit expenses for Minasligas by treating
the first date on which Minasligas borrowed from U.S. advance exchange contracts as the date of payment by the purchaser
(Minasligas received the first draw from the advance exchange contract prior to the date of shipment). In addition,
petitioners claim we incorrectly used a cruzeiro-denominated interest rate to calculate Minasligas' negative
U.S. credit figures. 
We disagree with petitioners. We note that we accounted for actual expenses associated with the advance exchange
contracts by making a circumstance of sale adjustment to foreign market value (FMV). Regarding the use of the first
versus the second advance exchange contract payment date as well as the use of the monthly cruzeiro-denominated interest
rate for calculating U.S. credit, these decisions are discussed in the final determination concurrence memorandum.
Accordingly, we do not consider these issues to constitute ministerial errors, as defined in 19 CFR 353.28. 
Third, petitioners claim the Department inaccurately imputed home market credit expenses by assuming Minasligas
had reported 30 day interest rates for each transaction. We agree with petitioners that this is a ministerial error.
We recalculated home market imputed credit expenses to accurately reflect the actual interest rate for each transaction.

Finally, petitioners claim we wrongly allowed a monetary correction offset of loans in our calculation of interest
expenses for COP. We disagree with petitioners. We followed our normal practice of adjusting financial expenses
to compensate for the effects of hyperinflation so that only the actual interest expenses are reflected. Therefore,
petitioners' claim does not constitute a ministerial error as defined by 19 CFR 353.28. 
On January 21, 1994, respondent Minasligas alleged that the Department made a ministerial error in its final determination.
Minasligas claims that, because we used incorrect figures in two instances, we erroneously calculated Minasligas'
general and administrative (GA) expenses. We agree with Minasligas that this is a ministerial error and have
recalculated Minasligas' GA expenses accordingly. 
On January 24, 1994, respondent CBCC alleged that the Department made several ministerial errors in its final determination.
First, CBCC claims that we failed to use the correct interest expense ratio for CV purposes. We agree with CBCC that
the incorrect interest expense ratio was used for CV purposes, and have changed our calculation accordingly. 
Second, CBCC claims that we double-counted inventory holding gain/loss in our calculation of the CV related to a December
U.S. sale. We disagree with CBCC. Inventory holding gain/loss was appropriately accounted for in the calculation
of CV. However, we have removed inventory carrying costs from our analysis as it is not our policy to include this element
in purchase price calculations. 
Third, CBCC argues that we used an incorrect monthly ``Unidade Fiscal de Referencia'' figure in our depreciation
calculation. CBCC claims we did not consider the ``special depreciation'' which was mandated by the Brazilian Government
to compensate for the period in which Brazilian companies were prohibited from recognizing depreciation. CBCC claims
the result is that we used an incorrect multiplier, thus overstating depreciation expense. We disagree with CBCC
that we used an incorrect multiplier and that our depreciation expense calculation was overstated. Thus, we find
that the calculation does not contain a ministerial error. 

</FURTHER>
