 




<USBUREAU>Federal Energy Regulatory Commission</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[Docket No. EC9410000, et al.]</RINDOCK>


Commonwealth Edison Co., et al.; Electric Rate and Corporate Regulation Filings


February 15, 1994.


Take notice that the following filings have been made with the Commission:


1. Commonwealth Edison Company


[Docket No. EC9410000]


Take notice that on February 4, 1994, Commonwealth Edison Company (Edison), 10 South Dearborn Street, Post Office
Box 767, Chicago, Illinois 60690, submitted an application pursuant to Section 203 of the Federal Power Act for authority
to carry out a ``disposition of facilities'' that would assertedly be deemed to occur as a result of a proposed corporate
restructuring, all as more fully set forth in the Application, which is on file with the Commission and open to public
inspection.
The Application states that the proposed restructuring would be accomplished through transactions in which Edison
would become a subsidiary of CECo Holding Company (Holding Company) through the conversion of Edison's common stock
into common stock of Holding Company. It is stated that the proposed restructuring will permit Edison affiliates
to engage in non-utility businesses and will not affect Edison's jurisdictional facilities, rates, or services.


Comment date: 

March 3, 1994, in accordance with Standard Paragraph E at the end of this notice.
 


2. West Texas Utilities Company


[Docket No. ER94959000]
 


Take notice that on February 8, 1994, West Texas Utilities Company (WTU) submitted for filing seven (7) executed Delivery
Point and Service Specifications sheets providing for various minor changes to the Service Agreement between WTU
and three of its wholesale customers: Midwest Electric Cooperative, Inc., Brazos Electric Power Cooperative, Inc.,
and Rio Grande Electric Cooperative, Inc., executed under WTU's FERC Electric Tariff, Original Volume No. 1.
WTU states that copies of the filing have been sent to the Public Utility Commission of Texas and the affected full-requirements
wholesale customers. 


Comment date: 

March 3, 1994, in accordance with Standard Paragraph E at the end of this notice.


3. Elkem Metals Company


[Docket No. ER94966000]


Take notice that on February 9, 1994, Elkem Metals Company (Elkem), tendered for filing with the Commission as initial
rate schedules pursuant to Part 35.12 of the Commission's regulations a Special Contract which provides, 

inter alia 

for the sale from time to time of electricity by Elkem to Appalachian Power Company (Appalachian).
The Special Contract sets forth terms pursuant to which Elkem will sell to Appalachian excess electric energy generated
by its hydroelectric facility. The Special Contract will be effective as of December 1, 1993, and has a term of two years,
subject to extension by the parties.
Copies of the filing were served by Elkem upon what will be its sole jurisdictional customer, Appalachian.
The parties have requested a waiver of the Commission's Rules and Regulations to permit the proposed sale to become
effective on less than 60 days notice.


Comment date: 

March 3, 1994, in accordance with Standard Paragraph E at the end of this notice.


4. GWF Power Systems, L.P.


[Docket No. QF86138005]


On February 7, 1994, GWF Power Systems, L.P. of 225 Lennon Lane, Suite 120, Walnut Creek, California 94598, submitted
for filing an application for certification of a facility as a small power production facility pursuant to Section
292.207 of the Commission's Regulations. No determination has been made that the submittal constitutes a complete
filing.
According to the applicant, the small power production facility is located in Hanford, Kings County, California
and consists of a fluidized bed boiler and a steam turbine generator. The maximum net power production capacity of
the facility is approximately 25.44 MW. The primary energy source is petroleum coke. The installation of the facility
began in November of 1988.


Comment date: 

Thirty days from publication in the 

Federal Register

, in accordance with Standard Paragraph E at the end of this notice.


5. Pacific Gas and Electric Company


[Docket No. ER94962000]


Take notice that on February 9, 1994, Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PGE) tendered for filing an Amended Appendix
A to the Settlement Agreement (Agreement) between PGE and Northern California Power Agency (NCPA) which was
previously accepted for filing and designated as PGE Rate Schedule FERC No. 28.
The Agreement provides for the sale of non-peak firm energy by PGE to NCPA and includes provisions for adjusting
rates. Due to the discontinuation of an index, the Amended Appendix A proposes to change the indices used for adjusting
rates.
PGE has also requested a waiver of the Commission's notice requirements of the Commission's regulations so
that the rate change may become effective January 1, 1993 pursuant to the Agreement and Amended Appendix A.
Copies of this filing were served on NCPA and the California Public Utilities Commission.


Comment date: 

March 2, 1994, in accordance with Standard Paragraph E at the end of this notice.


