 

An environmental group (which stated that it had recently concluded a successful citizen's suit against a mining
company in South Dakota) commented that it had filed written complaints with the DENR based on anonymous tips that
it, rather than the DENR, had received. Citizens had been reluctant to file a complaint even if it was considered ``confidential.''
This group also stated that it had never found any citizen complaint to be frivolous or harassing. 

2. Several commenters criticized the process for investigating and responding to unsigned complaints, described
in Item E.4. on page 7 of the MOA. Their comments included: 

``The MOA should contain unequivocal language setting forth a specific procedure for SDDENR to follow for maintaining
(1) an investigation of violations and (2) procedures for ensuring proper consideration of information from the
public about violations.'' 

``We do find fault, at times, with the depth and timeliness of the `investigation' conducted by DENR upon our filed
complaints. Investigations conducted several days to weeks after a complaint is filed may miss a violation.'' 

``In South Dakota, with its small population and overlapping networks of personal and business relationships, unsigned
complaints_if they are seriously considered by SDDENR are likely to be the most fruitful sources of violation reporting.''


``It is not clear *** whether department authorities exist within SDDENR to appropriately handle
unsigned citizen complaints if referred by another State agency.... We do not consider it
appropriate to burden other State agencies whose administrative and field staff are already clearly overworked.''


``Any unsigned complaint will simply fall into the cracks between agencies and nothing will be done.'' 

``The Departments of Agriculture and Game, Fish and Parks do not have authority or expertise for dealing with complaints
that are properly the concern of SDDENR.'' 

3. Some commenters indicated that SDCL prevented South Dakota's application from meeting pertinent authorization
requirements: 

``We believe neither SDCL 34A2111 nor EPA's proposed solution meets the requirements of Section 402(b)(2)(B)
and Section 402(b)(7) of the Clean Water Act, and 40 CFR Sections 123.26(b)(3) and (4) ***. EPA should
withhold NPDES delegation until SDCL 34A2111 is repealed.'' 

``The requirements of forty (sic) CFR Sections 123.26(b)(3) and (4) will not be met under the MOA because of the convoluted
nature of provisions for receiving and dealing with unsigned complaints.'' 

4. Some commenters stated that the state's procedure for handling unsigned complaints created the impression that
the state favored special interests over the general public: 

``If there's a problem, [most citizens] want action, no matter whom they call. For a citizen to be told they have to call
another agency to get a water problem addressed just confirms [the] citizen's view of government as controlled by
special interests who get laws like 34A2111 approved ***. State government should
not be empowered by EPA to cripple or make more difficult and confusing citizens' ability to work directly with the
proper state regulators because of paranoia on the part of the special interests who are regulated under water quality
laws.'' 
Two individuals commented in a letter that they were ``appalled of (sic) the manner in which the State intends on handling
or rather not handling citizen complaints and the legalese double talk the State Attorney General's office is trying
to portray as meaningful procedures.'' 



C. EPA's Response to Comments on Sec. 34A2111 



The State has a program and procedures for public reporting of violations that ensures their proper consideration,
even though the existence of 34A2111 appears to require a more cumbersome process than is desirable.
EPA might propose a simpler program or procedures for a hypothetical ``model'' state program. However, under the
Clean Water Act, a State is provided flexibility in achieving the minimum requirements of the Act, including those
for public participation. If approached by another state on suggestions for public reporting, EPA would recommend
against inclusion of a Section 111-type provision. EPA encourages South Dakota to repeal Section 111 as inefficient
and having the potential to limit the discretion of the very state agency entrusted to exercise enforcement discretion.


EPA doubts that facilities subject to DENR investigations could use Section 111 as a means to avoid the consequences
for failing to comply with 34A240, 44, and 45. DENR investigators are not required
by any provision of state law to identify the basis for the information leading to investigation. Moreover, DENR has
authority to initiate prosecution based on verified information. Notwithstanding questions about enforceability,
DENR has indicated its intention to faithfully implement applicable provisions of state law, as well as to implement
public participation procedures to meet the requirements of 40 CFR 123.27(d). EPA encourages DENR to periodically
evaluate the effectiveness of its public reporting procedures in providing public participation in the NPDES enforcement
program in South Dakota, particularly in light of the existence of Section 111. 





