 




<DOCTITLE>Finding of No Significant Impact; Short-Term Storage of Naval Spent Fuel; Availability for Public Review</DOCTITLE>



<SUMMARY>
summary: 

The Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program has prepared an Environmental Assessment of short-term storage of Naval spent
nuclear fuel. The preferred alternative is the ``No Action'' alternative. Naval spent fuel removed from nuclear
powered ships would be retained in shipping containers at five shipyards: Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery,
Maine; Norfolk Naval Shipyard in Portsmouth, Virginia; Newport News Shipbuilding in Newport News, Virginia; Puget
Sound Naval Shipyard in Bremerton, Washington; and Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Naval spent
fuel also would remain in the Surface Ship Support Barge at Newport News Shipbuilding. The Department of Energy (DOE),
with the Navy as a cooperating agency, is preparing an Environmental Impact Statement on longer-term storage of all
DOE spent fuel, including Naval spent fuel. The time period evaluated in the short-term storage Environmental Assessment
is the period through implementation of the Record of Decision for the DOE Environmental Impact Statement. 



The Environmental Assessment discusses alternatives to the preferred alternative and evaluates the environmental
impacts of both the preferred and other alternatives. The Environmental Assessment concludes that the environmental
impact of any of the alternatives would be very small. Therefore, there is no basis for determining that any of these
alternatives would be environmentally preferable to the others. The No Action alternative, which is the preferred
alternative, would allow all shipyard work, including refueling and defueling of nuclear powered ships, to continue
unimpeded by the short-term accumulation of Naval spent fuel. 

The Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program provided a draft of this Environmental Assessment to officials of Virginia,
Maine, New Hampshire, Washington, and Hawaii for review and comment. Letters were received from Congressman Norm
Dicks of Washington and Mr. T.R. Strong of the State of Washington Department of Health, both of whom agreed that the
No Action alternative is appropriate, and Mr. Brian Choy of the State of Hawaii Office of Environmental Quality Control,
who had no comment. 

Mr. Strong suggested that the Navy and the State of Washington collaborate in monitoring of radiation levels in the
vicinity of Puget Sound Naval Shipyard and share results of past radiation monitoring. The Program agreed with these
suggestions. Mr. Strong also suggested that the Navy pro-actively inform the public of its plans, emphasizing that
this is a short-term measure, and not in consideration as a long-term solution. In the letters seeking State comments
on the Environmental Assessment, the Navy stated that if the Environmental Assessment justified a Finding of No Significant
Impact, the Navy would make the Finding available for public review prior to a final determination. Accordingly,
the Program is making this Finding and the Environmental Assessment available to State and local officials, the news
media, and the public for a 30 day comment period. The Environmental Assessment on short-term storage of Naval spent
fuel evaluates short-term storage only, and the Finding of No Significant Impact would only cover short-term storage.
However, it should be noted that long-term storage at shipyards is one of the alternatives being considered for Naval
spent fuel in a separate Environmental Impact Statement which DOE is preparing with Navy assistance on spent fuel
management. 

Based on the analysis in the Environmental Assessment, the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program considers that the preferred
alternative is not a major Federal action significantly affecting the quality of the human environment, within the
meaning of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.). In accordance with the Council
on Environmental Quality regulations which allow agencies to determine circumstances under which public review
of Findings of No Significant Impact are appropriate, the Program is making this Finding available for public comment
for a period of 30 days following the date of 

Federal Register

 publication of this notice. Comments postmarked within the 30 day public comment period will be considered by the
Program prior to a final determination. To facilitate review of this matter, copies of the Environmental Assessment
have been placed in public libraries in the vicinity of the five shipyards. Additionally, persons desiring a copy
of the Environmental Assessment may request one from the address indicated below. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
dates: 

Comments on the Finding of No Significant Impact may be sent to Mr. Richard A. Guida, Associate Director for Regulatory
Affairs, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program at the address indicated below. Comments must be postmarked within the
30 day public comment period to ensure consideration.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
addresses and further information: 

Persons requesting additional information on the Finding of No Significant Impact for short-term storage of Naval
spent fuel, the National Environmental Policy Act process associated with this preferred alternative, or wishing
a copy of the Environmental Assessment should contact Ms. Lisa Megargle, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, Code
NAVSEA 08U, Naval Sea Systems Command, 2521 Jefferson Davis Highway, Arlington, VA 222425160, (7036036126).
Persons desiring to review the Environmental Assessment at a public library should contact the Public Information
Office at Portsmouth (2074381260), Norfolk (8043969550), Puget Sound (2064767111),
or Pearl Harbor (8084740272) Naval Shipyards.


</ADDRESS>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:


</SUPPLEM>
