 

228.25 

Community development test for wholesale or limited purpose 
banks. 


(a) 

Scope of test. 

(1) The Board shall assess the degree to which a 
wholesale or limited purpose bank (as defined in 228.12 of this part) is helping to meet the credit needs of its
service area(s) under the community development test only if the bank's written request to be designated as a wholesale
or limited purpose bank has been approved by the Board before the commencement of its CRA examination, and the designation
has not been revoked either at the request of the bank or at the Board's own initiative. 

(2) The community development test evaluates the record of a 
wholesale or limited purpose bank in helping to meet the credit needs of its 
service area(s) through qualified investments, community development lending, 
or community development services. 

 (3) For purposes of the community development test only, community development loans include small business and
small farm loans and loans to low- and moderate-income individuals and geographies, whether or not reported or collected
by the bank or one of its affiliates as home mortgage loans, 
small business loans, small farm loans, or consumer loans, pursuant to 228.42 of this part. 

 (b) 

Assessment criteria. 

The Board shall evaluate the community 
development performance of a wholesale or limited purpose bank pursuant to the 
following criteria: 

 (1) The number and amount of community development loans 
outstanding, qualified investments (as defined in 228.23 of this part), or 
community development services (as defined in 228.24 of this part); 

 (2) The use of innovative or complex qualified investments, 
community development loans outstanding, or community development services 
and their connection to credit needs; and 

 (3) The degree of responsiveness to credit and community economic 
development needs. 

 (c) 

Indirect activities. 

The Board shall, if the wholesale or limited purpose bank elects, consider in its community development performance

assessment: 

 (1) Qualified investments or community development services 
provided by an affiliate of the bank, provided the investment or services are not claimed by any other institution;
and 

 (2) Community development lending by affiliates, consortia and third 
parties, subject to the requirements and limitations in 228.22(c)(3) and (d) of this part. 

 (d) 

Benefit to service area(s)_. 

(1) 

Benefit inside service area(s).

 For purposes of assessing a wholesale or limited purpose bank's community development performance under this section,
the Board shall consider all qualified investments, community development loans outstanding, and community development
services that benefit areas within the bank's service area(s). 

 (2) 

Benefit outside service area(s). 

The Board shall consider the 
qualified investments, community development loans outstanding, and community 
development services provided by a wholesale or limited purpose bank that 
benefit areas outside the bank's service area(s) only up to an amount equivalent to the amount of investments, loans,
and services considered under paragraph (d)(1) of this section. If a bank demonstrates a limited need or opportunity
for these investments, lending, and services, in its service area(s), the Board may exempt the bank from all or part
of this limitation. 
 





