 

Federal Information Processing Standard Publication XXX



Draft 1993 September 30 Draft



Announcing a Standard Security Label for the Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile



Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS) are issued by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to section 111(d) of the Federal Property
and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100235.



Name of Standard:

 Standard Security Label for the Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile.



Category of Standard:

 Computer Security, Security Labels



Explanation:

 This standard specifies the security label for the U.S. Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile (GOSIP).
GOSIP security labels carry information used by protocol entities to determine how to handle data communicated between
open systems. Information on a security label can be used to control access, specify protective measures, and determine
additional handling restrictions required by a communications security policy.

This standard specifies the syntax for the labels and relies on a Computer Security Objects Register (CSOR) to provide
the semantics. The separation of the label syntax from its semantics enables a common label format to support multiple
security policies and facilitate cross-domain communications.

Given the inherent differences in layer functionality the security label defined in this document is expressed both
as an abstract label syntax specification for the OSI Application Layer and an encoding optimized for use at the Network
Layer. The Application and Network Layers are the initial targets of GOSIP security.

The label presented here defines security tags that may be combined into tag sets to carry security-related information.
Five basic security tag types allow security information to be represented as bit maps, attribute enumerations,
attribute range selections, hierarchical security levels, or as user-defined data.



Approving Authority:

 Secretary of Commerce.



Maintenance Agency:

 Computer Systems Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology.



Cross Index:



Federal Information Resources Management Regulations, subpart 20120.303, Standards, and subpart 20139.1002,
Federal Standards.

``Procedures for Registering Computer Security Objects'', NISTIR XXXX, September 1993.

``U.S. Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile'' (GOSIP), FIPS PUB 1461, April 1991.






Scope:

 This standard specifies a security label for GOSIP-complaint implementations. It includes two label specifications,
one suitable for the OSI Application Layer, and the other for the Network Layer. GOSIP will call for the use of this standard
when optional security protocols at these layers require the use of security labels.



Applicability:

 The specified Standard Security Label (SSL) applies to OSI communications systems handling U.S. Government unclassified
but sensitive data. The SSL shall be used on OSI systems required to label data as indicated in the security chapter
of GOSIP. Although this standard is intended for use on systems handling unclassified information, it could be adopted
by the appropriate authorities for use on systems handling classified information.

The SSL may be used by OSI protocols to control access, specify protective measures, and indicate handling restrictions
required by a network security policy as registered in a Computer Security Objects Register.

Complying implementations shall be capable of transmitting, receiving, and obtaining information from security
labels based on the specifications in this document.



Specifications:

 Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS xxx) Standard Security Label for the Government Open Systems Interconnection
Profile (affixed).



Implementation Schedule:

 This standard becomes effective six months after publication of a notice in the 

Federal Register

 of its approval by the Secretary of Commerce.



Waiver Procedure:

 Under certain exceptional circumstances, the heads of Federal departments and agencies may approve waivers to Federal
Information Processing Standards (FIPS). The head of such agency may redelegate such authority only to a senior official
designated pursuant to section 3506(b) of title 44, United States Code. Waiver shall be granted only when:

a. Compliance with a standard would adversely affect the accomplishment of the mission of an operator of a Federal
computer system; or

b. Compliance with a standard would cause a major adverse financial impact on the operator which is not offset by Government-wide
savings.

Agency heads may act upon a written waiver request containing the information detailed above. Agency heads may also
act without a written waiver request when they determine that conditions for meeting the standard cannot be met. Agency
heads may approve waivers only by a written decision which explains the basis on which the agency head made the required
finding(s). A copy of each decision, with procurement sensitive or classified portions clearly identified, shall
be sent to: National Institute of Standards and Technology; ATTN: FIPS Waiver Decisions, Technology Building, room
B154, Gaithersubrg, MD 20899.

In addition, notice of each waiver granted and each delegation of authority to approve waivers shall be sent promptly
to the Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Government Affairs
of the Senate and shall be published promptly in the 

Federal Register

.

When the determination on a waiver applies to the procurement of equipment and/or services, a notice of the waiver
determination must be published in the Commerce Business Daily as a part of the notice of solicitation for offers of
an acquisition or, if the waiver determination is made after that notice is published, by amendment of such notice.

A copy of the waiver, any supporting documents, the document approving the waiver and any accompanying documents,
with such deletions as the agency is authorized and decides to make under United States Code section 552(b), shall
be part of the procurement documentation and retained by the agency.



Where to Obtain Copies:

 Copies of this publication are for sale by the National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce,
Springfield, VA 22161. When ordering, refer to Federal Information Processing Standards Publication XX (FIPS PUB
XX), and identify the title. When microfiche is desired, this should be specified. Prices are published by NTIS in
current catalogs and other issuances. Payment may be made by check, money order, deposit account or charged to a credit
card accepted by NTIS.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 941819 Filed 12794; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3510CNM
</BILLING>



