 

(4) 

Tentative position: Protein quality. 

FSIS is considering requiring that MDP meet a minimum protein quality requirement_a protein digestibility-corrected
amino acid score of not less than 40 expressed as a percent and to accept as evidence of compliance with this requirement
an alternative measurement_the content of 7 essential amino acids being at least 33 percent of the total of 17 amino
acids present. Protein quality is a measure of the content, proportion, and availability of essential amino acids
in food protein and a measure of the ability of the food protein to support human growth and body protein maintenance.
When the regulation on MS(S) (a finely comminuted product resulting from the mechanical separation and removal of
most of the bone from attached skeletal muscle of livestock carcasses and parts of carcasses that meets the provisions
of 9 CFR 319.5) was published in 1982 (47 FR 28214), one of the methods specified for measuring protein quality was the
Protein Efficiency Ratio (PER) procedure. The PER method measures the ability of a protein source to support growth
in young growing rats, and is an expensive and time-consuming assay. FSIS adopted a newer method for measuring protein
quality, in order to assure the value of the protein contributed by meat and poultry to human dietary needs, in its final
regulations on nutrition labeling of meat and poultry products published in the 

Federal Register 

on January 6, 1993 (58 FR 632). The newer procedure, termed the protein digestibility_corrected amino acid score
method, is contained in ``Protein Quality Evaluation, Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Protein
Quality Evaluation,'' Rome, 1990 (PDCAAS method).
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>
 The protein digestibility_corrected amino acid score method is based on human amino acid requirements and, therefore,
is more appropriate for evaluating the protein quality of foods for human consumption that the PER which is based on
amino acid requirements of rats. The protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score method measures the ability
of amino acids in food proteins to meet the dietary protein needs of humans.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>
A copy of the document is available for public inspection in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.
</FOOTNOTE>


FSIS is considering proposing a requirement that the protein in MDP have a protein quality value that is a protein digestibility-corrected
amino acid score of not less than 40 expressed as a percent. This value is consistent with nutrition labeling requirements
for protein in foods for children older than one but less than four years of age, as provided in 21 CFR 101.9(c)(7), which
is cross-referenced in its final nutrition regulations (58 CFR 632) in 9 CFR 317.309(b). FSIS believes this value
protects the young consumer from inadequate nutrition and from the use of poor quality protein (i.e., protein that
does not meet the dietary needs for growth), and in turn, protects people other than young consumers. FSIS also believes
that it may be appropriate to assure comparability of MDP with boneless poultry and poultry that is derived by hand-deboning
in terms of the protein contributed to human dietary needs to maintain the quality and integrity of the poultry products
supply.
FSIS is proposing to permit an alternative measurement to the protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score
method, which requires a digestibility measurement in addition to an amino acid analysis, to control the cost of monitoring
compliance with the protein quality requirement. FSIS is considering proposing that, for the purpose of measuring
the protein quality of MDP, an alternative measurement of protein quality would be allowed that is comparable to the
protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score. This measure would be based on a comparison between the ``essential
amino acid content of MDP'' and ``total amino acids present in MDP.'' Essential amino acid content includes isoleucine,
leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, and valine content, and the total amino acids present including
isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, valine, tyrosine, arginine, histidine,
alanine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, glycine, proline, serine, and hydroxyproline content. It is being considered
that the essential amino acid content would be determined by methods given in the ``Protein Quality Evaluation, Report
of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Protein Quality Evaluation.''
FSIS believes that MDP found to be in compliance by the proposed amino acid content measurement would have protein
of high quality. This belief is supported by the 198283 evaluation of an Expert Work Group that was organized
by the Department's Agricultural Research Service, in cooperation with the University of Maryland, to develop recommendations
based on available scientific knowledge for consideration in policy decisions regarding the protein quality of
meat, poultry, and their products.
<FOOTCITE>6</FOOTCITE>



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
6

</FOOTNAME>
``The Protein Nutritional Quality of Meat and Poultry Products: Scientific Basis for Regulation'' is the final report
of the Expert Working group, with accompanying background papers. C.E. Bodwell, ed., American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 40(3): 671742, supplement, September 1984. A copy of the report is available for public inspection
in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.

</FOOTNOTE>

