 

(i) Spouse.

(ii) Child or children.

(iii) Father or mother, or both.

(iv) Brothers or sisters, or both.

(b) A member of another U.S. Armed Force may present a claim to an Army claims office for loss of or damage to personal
property incident to his or her service. Any such claim will be investigated and processed short of adjudication under
the provisions of this subpart. The completed file will contain all required supporting documents, including evidence
in support of the amount claimed and documents facilitating recovery from a carrier, insurer, or other third party.
Such claims will be forwarded direct to the nearest legal office of the service concerned for settlement. However,
Marine personnel claims should be forwarded directly to the Commandant of the Marine Corps (MHP40), Headquarters,
United States Marine Corps, WASH DC 203800001.

(c) Claims of civilian employees of nonappropriated fund activities for damage to or loss of personal property incident
to their service will be processed in accordance with this subpart and subpart L, with payment made only from nonappropriated
funds.

(d) Subrogees, assignees, conditional vendors, and similar third parties are not proper claimants under this subpart,
and their claims are barred from payment. Further, claims for losses of subrogees and similar third parties are barred
from consideration or payment under other subparts when the property owner could have presented a cognizable claim
for loss under the provisions of this subpart.

(e) Personnel who do not fall within one of the categories listed in (a) above (such as Red Cross employees, foreign
military personnel, United States Organization personnel, or employees of Government contractors, including
technical representatives) are not proper claimants under this subpart and their claims are barred.

(f) Claimants who are absent without leave (AWOL) will have any pending claim denied once they are dropped from the
rolls (DFR). The denial letter will be mailed to the claimant's last known civilian address.



536.165

 Claims cognizable.



The following are nonexclusive examples of categories of damage to or loss of property that may be considered by claims
approval and settlement authorities as having been sustained incident to service. Note that a loss unconnected with
the performance of duty, particularly a loss occurring outside of normal duty hours, would often not be deemed incident
to a civilian employee's service, even though the same loss might be deemed incident to a soldier's service. This is
particularly true if the civilian employee is a local foreign national employee. A claims approval or settlement
authority will ask the Chief, Personnel Claims and Recovery Division, USARCS for an advance opinion prior to adjudicating
a claim that is deemed incident to service but does not fall within one of the following categories:

(a) Losses in quarters or other authorized places. Damage to or loss of property by fire, flood, hurricane, or other
unusual occurrence, or by theft or vandalism may be considered, while located at_

(1) Quarters, wherever situated, which are assigned to the claimant or otherwise provided in kind by the Government.

(2) Quarters outside the United States, which are occupied ority but are neither assigned to the claimant nor otherwise
provided in kind by the Government. However, a claim is not cognizable when the claimant is_

(i) A civilian employee who is a local inhabitant.

(ii) A U.S. citizen hired as a civilian employee while residing abroad or after moving to a foreign country as part of
the household of a person who is not a proper party claimant.

(iii) A family member residing outside the United States while the soldier is stationed in a different country.

(iv) A local inhabitant of a U.S. territory who is in that territory at the time of a loss when he or she is in the ARNG either
Full Time-National Guard Duty (AGR) or on active duty under Title 10, or in the USAR on active duty for any reason.

(3) Any place of lodging wherever situated, such as a hotel, motel, guest house, transit billet or other place, when
occupied by claimant while in the performance of temporary duty or similar authorized military assignment of a temporary
nature.

(4) Any warehouse, office, hospital, baggage holding area, or other place authorized or apparently authorized by
the government for the reception or storage of personal property.

(b) Transportation losses. Damage to or loss of property incident to transportation or storage pursuant to orders
or in connection with travel under orders or in performance of military duty may be considered, if not the result of
a mechanical or structural defect. This includes property in the custody of_

(1) A common or contract carrier or any other commercial concern, either pursuant to a Government Bill of Lading (GBL),
Government contract, or the commuted rate method (Joint Travel Regulation (JTR) Vol II, paragraph C8001(4)). With
respect to mobile homes, it is the owner's responsibility to place the mobile home and its tires, tubes, frame, and
other parts in fit condition and to load the mobile home to withstand the stress of normal transportation, at his or
her own expense, prior to shipment.

(2) An agent or agency of the Government, to include property mailed at Government expense in the custody of the U.S.
Postal Service.

(3) The claimant or appropriate personnel while the claimant is traveling in a private or public vessel, vehicle,
aircraft, or other conveyance in performance of military duty.

(4) The claimant or appropriate personnel while the claimant is traveling aboard a military vessel, aircraft, or
vehicle in performance of military duty or pursuant to orders authorizing travel, including travel pursuant to leave
orders on a space available basis.

(c) Losses due to enemy action, evacuation, hostile acts, or public service. Damage to or loss of property may be considered
which is a direct result of_

(1) Enemy action, or threat thereof; combat, guerrilla, or other belligerent activities, whether or not the United
States was involved; or unjust confiscation by a foreign power or its nationals of property belonging to soldiers
or U.S. national civilian employees.

(2) Acts of mob violence, terrorist attacks, or other hostile acts directed against the United States or its officers
and employees.

(3) Action by the claimant in an attempt to quiet a civil disturbance or alleviate a public disaster.

(4) Efforts by the claimant to save a human life or Government property.

(5) Evacuation from a foreign country on the recommendation or order of competent authority. This subsection provides
payment for property belonging to soldiers and civilian employees and their command-sponsored dependents, with
entitlement to shipment at Government expense, which is abandoned during an evacuation and not recovered, or damaged
by an incident of political unrest or hostile act prompting or following such evacuation.

(d) Loss of money delivered to a Government agent. Loss of funds neither applied as directed by the owner nor returned
may be considered when the funds were delivered to and accepted by Government personnel authorized or apparently
authorized to receive them for such purposes as safekeeping; deposit in savings deposit program; transmission by
personal transfer account; purchase of U.S. bonds or postal money orders; or conversion into military payment orders,
Government checks, or into another kind of currency.

(e) Vehicle losses. Vehicles are defined to include automobiles, motorcycles, mopeds, utility trailers, camping
trailers, trucks with mounted camper bodies, motor homes, boats, boat trailers, bicycles, and aircraft. Mobile
homes and other property used as dwelling places are not considered vehicles. Damage to or loss of vehicles and property
properly stored or contained therein may be considered when_

(1) Used in the performance of military duty, if such use was authorized or directed for the convenience of the Government
and provided_

(i) The travel did not include commuting to or from the permanent place of duty and,

(ii) The loss or damage did not arise as a result of a mechanical or structural failure of the vehicle during such usage.

(2) Shipped to, from, or between an overseas area or areas at Government expense in accordance with paragraph (b) of
this section, provided the loss or damage did not arise as a result of mechanical or structural failure of the vehicle
during such shipment.

(3) Located at quarters or place of lodging as defined in paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of this section, which for
the purposes of this paragraph includes garages, carports, driveways, assigned parking spaces, and lots specifically
provided and used for the purpose of parking at one's quarters, provided that the loss or damage is caused by fire, flood,
hurricane, or other unusual occurrence, or by theft or vandalism. There is a presumption that vehicle theft or vandalism
occurs off the military installation and is generally not compensable. Claims for theft or vandalism to vehicles
(including property stored inside a vehicle) are only payable when a claimant proves that the theft or vandalism occurred
while the vehicle was located at his or her authorized or assigned quarters (for example, a military police report
indicates broken glass from the window is on the driveway).

(4) Located other than at quarters on a military installation, provided that the loss or damage is caused by fire, flood,
hurricane, or other unusual occurrence. The term ``military installation'' is used broadly to describe any fixed
land area, wherever situated, controlled, and used by military activities or the DOD. A vehicle that is properly on
the installation should be presumed to be incident to the claimant's service unless the application of such a presumption
would be unreasonable under the particular circumstances, such as visiting a fellow soldier on another military
installation while on leave.

(f) Clothing and articles being worn. Damage to or loss of clothing and articles being worn while on a military installation
or in the performance of military duty may be considered, provided such loss was caused by fire, flood, hurricane,
or other unusual occurrence, or by theft. Spilling battery acid, paint or similar substances on clothing, or breaking
eyeglasses during physical training is not an unusual occurrence.

(g) Personal property held as evidence. Deprivation of property held as evidence may be considered when after taking
all circumstances into consideration, the temporary loss of the property will work a grave hardship on the claimant
who is a victim of a crime.

(h) On-post robberies. Claims for losses due to theft from the person on a military installation by the use of force,
violence, or threat to do bodily harm may be considered. If cognizable under Article 139, the claims should be considered
under subpart I.



536.166

 Claims not cognizable.




