 

(e) 

Processing late and incorrect paper form reports

. If SSA receives paper form wage reports after the due date, SSA will notify IRS of the late filing so that IRS can decide
whether to assess penalties for late filing, pursuant to section 6721 of the Internal Revenue Code. SSA will ask an
employer to provide replacement forms for illegible, incomplete, or clearly erroneous paper reporting forms, or
will ask the employer to provide information necessary to process the reports without having to resubmit corrected
forms. If an employer fails to provide legible, complete, and correct W2 reports within 45 days, SSA may identify
the employers to IRS for assessment of employer reporting penalties.

(f) 

Reconciliation of wage reporting errors

. After SSA processes wage reports, it matches them with the information provided by employers to the IRS on Forms 941,
``Employer's Quarterly Federal Tax Return,'' for that tax year. Based upon this match, if the total social security
or medicare wages reported to SSA for employees is less than the totals reported to IRS, SSA will write to the employer
and request corrected reports or an explanation for the discrepancy. If the total social security or medicare wages
reported to SSA for employees is more than the totals reported to IRS, IRS will resolve the difference with the employer.
If the employer fails to provide SSA with corrected reports or information that shows the wage reports filed with SSA
are correct, SSA will ask IRS to investigate the employer's wage and tax reports to resolve the discrepancy and to assess
any appropriate reporting penalties.






422.115

[Removed]






4. Section 422.115 is removed.

5. Section 422.120 is revised to read as follows:






422.120

Earnings reported without a social security number or with an incorrect employee name or social security number.






(a) 

Correcting an earnings report

. If an employer reports an employee's wages without the employee's social security number or with a different employee
name or social security number than shown in SSA's records for him or her, SSA will write to the employee at the address
shown on the wage report and request the missing or corrected information. If the wage report does not show the employee's
address or shows an incomplete address, SSA will write to the employer and request the missing or corrected employee
information. SSA notifies IRS of all wage reports filed without employee social security numbers so that IRS can decide
whether to assess penalties for erroneous filing, pursuant to section 6721 of the Internal Revenue Code. If an individual
reports self-employment income without a social security number or with a different name or social security number
than shown in SSA's records, SSA will write to the individual and request the missing or corrected information. If
the employer, employee, or self-employed individual does not provide the missing or corrected report information
in response to SSA's request, the wages or self-employment income cannot be identified and credited to the proper
individual's earnings records. In such cases, the information is maintained in a ``Suspense File'' of uncredited
earnings. Subsequently, if identifying information is provided to SSA for an individual whose report is recorded
in the Suspense File, the wages or self-employment income then may be credited to his or her earnings record.

(b) 

Returning incorrect reports

. SSA may return to the filer, unprocessed, an employer's annual wage report submittal if 90 percent or more of the wage
reports in that submittal are unidentified or incorrectly identified. In such instances, SSA will advise the filer
to return corrected wage reports within 45 days to avoid any possible IRS penalty assessment for failing to file correct
reports timely with SSA (see also 422.114(c)). Upon request, SSA may grant the employer a 15-day extension
of the 45-day period.




5. A new 422.122 is added to read as follows:



422.122

Information on deferred vested pension benefits.



(a) 

Claimants for benefits

. Each month, SSA checks the name and social security number of each new claimant for social security benefits or for
hospital insurance coverage to see whether the claimant is listed in SSA's electronic pension benefit record. This
record contains information received from IRS on individuals for whom private pension plan administrators have
reported to IRS, as required by section 6057 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 6057), as possibly having a right
to future retirement benefits under the plan. SSA sends a notice to each new claimant for whom it has pension benefit
information, as required by section 1131 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b1). If the claimant filed for the lump-sum
death payment on the social security account of a relative, SSA sends the claimant the pension information on the deceased
individual. In either case, SSA sends the notice after it has made a decision on the claim for benefits. The notice shows
the type, payment frequency, and amount of pension benefit, as well as the name and address of the plan administrator
as reported to the IRS. This information can then be used by the claimant to claim any pension benefits still due from
the pension plan.



