 

II. Eligible Applicants 
 

The eligible applicants for each of the four TA programs are listed below. Many organizations are eligible to apply
for more than one TA program and are encouraged to do so to the extent they have the requisite experience, expertise
and capability. 
 All applicant organizations must have demonstrated experience in providing TA in a geographic area larger than a

single city or county and must propose to serve an area larger than a single city or county. Additionally, an organization
may not provide assistance to itself, and any organization funded to assist CHDOs under this NOFA may not act as a CHDO
itself within its service area while under award with HUD. 
 A consortium of organizations may apply for one or more TA programs, but HUD will require that one organization be designated
as the legal applicant, where legally feasible. Where one organization cannot be so designated for all proposed activities,
HUD may execute more than one cooperative agreement with the members of a consortium. 
 All applicants must meet minimum statutory eligibility requirements for each TA program for which they are chosen
in order to be awarded a cooperative agreement. (See Appendices C, D, E, and F to this NOFA for copies of applicable regulations.)

 All eligible TA providers may propose assistance using in-house staff, consultants, sub-contractors and sub-recipients,
and networks of private consultants and/or local organizations with requisite experience and capabilities. Whenever
possible, applicants should make use of technical assistance providers located in the Field Office jurisdiction
receiving services. This draws upon local expertise and persons familiar with the opportunities and resources available
in the area to be served while reducing travel and other costs associated with delivering the proposed technical assistance
services. 


(A) CDBG and Supportive Housing Eligible Applicants 
 

(1) States and units of general local government. 
 (2) Public and private non-profit or for-profit groups, including educational institutions and area-wide planning
organizations, qualified to provide technical assistance on CDBG programs or Supportive Housing projects. 


(B) CHDO Eligible Applicants 
 

Public and private non-profit intermediary organizations that customarily provide services (in more than one community)
related to affordable housing or neighborhood revitalization to CHDOs or similar organizations that engage in community
revitalization, including all eligible organizations under 24 CFR 92.302(b)(1)(v) and (b)(2). An intermediary
will be considered as a primarily single state technical assistance provider if it can document that more than 50 percent
of its past activities in working with CHDOs or similar nonprofit and other organizations (on the production of affordable
housing or revitalization of deteriorating neighborhoods and/or the delivery of technical assistance to these
groups) was confined to the geographic limits of a single state. 


(C) HOME Eligible Applicants 
 

(1) A for-profit or non-profit professional and technical services company or firm that has demonstrated capacity
to provide technical assistance services; 
 (2) A HOME participating jurisdiction (PJ) or agency thereof; 
 (3) A public purpose organization responsible to the chief elected official of a PJ and established pursuant to state
or local legislation; 
 (4) An agency or authority established by two or more PJs to carry out activities consistent with the purposes of the
HOME program; 
 (5) A national or regional non-profit organization that has membership comprised predominantly of entities or officials
of entities of PJs or PJs' agencies or established organizations. 


III. Eligible Activities 


(A) General. 


Eligible activities for each of the four TA programs are listed in the program regulations. (See Appendices C, D, E,
and F to this NOFA for copies of applicable regulations.) Any and all eligible activities for each TA program may be
proposed as part of an applicant's TA program. For the Supportive Housing TA program, this means that TA must be provided
to help supportive housing applicants, prospective applicants, and/or recipients involved in supportive housing
plan, develop, administer, implement, and evaluate their supportive housing projects or proposed projects; implement
linkages between assisted supportive housing projects and other activities (including linkages involved in continuum
of care comprehensive planning); and/or evaluate their supportive housing project's effectiveness at establishing
a continuum of care. 
Applicants should pay special attention to eligible activities related to the Factors for Award contained in Section
IV(A) of this NOFA. 





