 

(3) 

Comment. 

The preamble to the proposed rule gives the impression that the NRC would allow nuclear physicians and nuclear pharmacists
to use unregulated, dangerous radioactive drugs. In addition, a commenter stated that, under State Pharmacy law,
a licensed pharmacist may delegate certain duties to non-pharmacist individuals if the pharmacist provides ``direct
supervision.'' Is it the NRC's intent to permit the authorized nuclear pharmacist to delegate the full range of professional
duties to non-pharmacist individuals?



Response. 

The preamble to the proposed rule stated that a licensee must meet the Commission's regulations regarding radiation
safety of the workers and the public, including patients, and that the licensee is not relieved from complying with
applicable FDA, other Federal, and State requirements governing radioactive drugs. Because the FDA and States regulate
the safety and efficacy of radioactive drugs, the licensee must also follow their regulations when using radioactive
drugs. The Commission will allow an authorized nuclear pharmacist to delegate a full range of duties to a non-pharmacist
individual provided that the individual is properly supervised (i.e., according to 35.25). 

(4) 

Comment. 

The final rule should be effective immediately upon publication in the 

Federal Register

 instead of being effective 6 months after publication. 



Response. 

The Commission agrees that licensees may not need 6 months to implement this final rule. However, with limited exceptions,
section 553(d) of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) provides that ``[t]he required publication or service
of a substantive rule shall be made not less than 30 days before its effective date.'' The commenter has not persuaded
the NRC that good cause exists for making immediately effective this final rule, which in part, imposes new substantive
requirements. Therefore, the effective date will be 30 days after publication of this rule in the 

Federal Register

. 

(5) 

Comment. 

The NRC should provide a mechanism for ``grandfathering'' qualified nuclear pharmacists who are currently working
in hospital-based nuclear pharmacies, similar to the mechanism proposed for ``grandfathering'' qualified individuals
working in commercial nuclear pharmacies. 



Response. 

The Commission agrees with this comment because a qualified nuclear pharmacist should be ``grandfathered'' regardless
of whether the individual is currently working in a commercial nuclear pharmacy or a hospital-based nuclear pharmacy.
Therefore, 35.981 entitled ``Training for experienced nuclear pharmacists,'' has been added to this final
rule. This section is similar to 32.72 in the proposed rule for ``grandfathering'' qualified individuals
working in commercial nuclear pharmacies. The Commission believes that this limited ``grandfathering'' is justified
provided: (1) This individual is currently working in a nuclear pharmacy; (2) this individual has completed a structured
educational program as specified in 35.980(b)(1); and (3) the qualifications of this individual would be
reviewed and approved by NRC before a licensee may allow this individual to work as an authorized nuclear pharmacist.


(6) 

Comment. 

Several commenters requested that the following items be addressed in this rulemaking: (a) Handling of brachytherapy
radioactive sources for temporary implants related to I125 eye plaques, wherein the patient goes home and
returns several days later for removal of the sources; (b) Changing the person who signs the records of sealed source
leak tests, sealed source inventories, and surveys of sealed source storage areas from the Radiation Safety Officer
to the individual who performs these tasks; and (c) Permitting licensees to allow Radiation Safety Officers who meet
certain requirements to work without first obtaining a license amendment (similar to the provisions proposed for
authorized users and authorized nuclear pharmacists). 



Response. 

These items will not be addressed because they are beyond the scope of this rulemaking. 



Specific Comments 



Section 32.72Manufacture, Preparation, or Transfer for Commercial Distribution of Radioactive Drugs
Containing Byproduct Material for Medical Use Under 10 CFR Part 35



Several commenters addressed the use of the term ``radioactive drug.'' These comments and the NRC's responses are
summarized below. 

(1) 

Comment. 

One commenter stated that ``the FDA has a specific definition which it uses for radiopharmaceuticals, and I am not
aware that it will similarly replace this word with that of radioactive drug.'' Also, the commenter questioned whether
the term ``radioactive drug'' included radiolabeled biologics. 



Response. 

FDA regulations define the term ``radioactive drug'' (21 CFR 310.3) but do not define the term ``radiopharmaceutical.''
As stated in the preamble to the proposed rule, the term ``radioactive drug'' includes a radiolabeled biologic, which
is an accurate usage for both NRC and FDA regulations. 


(2) 

Comment. 

The medical use of byproduct material may be approved by the FDA as a radioactive drug or a device. If it is approved as
a device, not a radioactive drug, would the proposed changes create regulatory barriers in such situations? 



Response. 

This rule does not impose any new regulatory requirements for the use of devices containing byproduct material. Therefore,
this rule would not create regulatory barriers for the use of such devices. 



Section 32.72(a)(2)



Several commenters requested clarification concerning the proposed requirement that a nuclear pharmacy or a drug
manufacturer must obtain a Part 32 license. These comments and the NRC's responses are summarized below. 

(1) 

Comment. 

The NRC should continue to permit Part 33 or 35 medical use licensees to share a nuclear pharmacy without requiring
a Part 32 license. 



Response. 

The Commission currently permits the nuclear pharmacy of a Part 33 or 35 medical use licensee to distribute radioactive
drugs to a limited set of medical use licensees through a license amendment approval on a case-by-case basis. This
is the context in which such licensees may ``share'' a nuclear pharmacy. The Commission believes that Part 33 or 35
licensees who have been granted this authority could continue to operate a nuclear pharmacy provided that the nuclear
pharmacy: 


