 

ATA understands that for Kansas, a single trip permit would normally be issued for ``occasional use'' purposes. It
is clear that the intent of the (SVC) permit was for multiple trip purposes and not occasional ``one or two trips.''
The permit had been applied for long before the freeze language was proposed. It was only a matter of timing that so few
trips were made.




There is nothing in the ISTEA legislative history that clarifies the meaning of ``regular or periodic basis,'' but
the ATA's interpretation is plausible, especially in view of the Caltrans' response to the SNPRM. The Caltrans stated
that it




[I]ssued two permits, at the request of the California Legislature, allowing two vehicle combinations with three
26.5-foot trailers to operate from October 27 to November 5, 1971. These vehicle combinations had an overall length
of 94.25 feet with gross vehicle weights of 76,800 pounds and 90,000 pounds. The 1971 permits were issued to gather
information on truck tractor and triple trailer combination operations. The information was used to consider whether
triple combination operations should be allowed in California.




In 1983, the Caltrans issued permits for operational tests of (1) a 111,000-pound ``Triple'' (28-foot trailers)
between October 2428; (2) a 106,850-pound ``Rocky Mountain Double'' (48-foot semitrailer, 28-foot pup)
between November 710; and (3) a 122,650-pound ``Turnpike Double'' (two 48-foot trailers) between November
1418. The Caltrans argued that




California retains the right to issue an extralegal permit for good cause to operate a divisible combination of vehicles
exceeding the maximum size or weight limits with specific guidance provided by the California Legislature.




The brief tests performed by California one and two decades ago, which never resulted in the authorization of LCV's,
are certainly among the minimal operations that the requirement for ``regular or periodic'' use was intended to exclude.
The FHWA has therefore declined to list these vehicles in appendix C.

Kansas and Yellow Freight, on the other hand, clearly expected LCV's to use I70 routinely and for years to come,
and made elaborate preparations on that basis. In addition, the KDOT's efforts to cooperate with the FHWA delayed
the issuance of the first permits, which would otherwise have been available in March 1991. On balance, the FHWA believes
that the SVC operations on I70 satisfy the statutory standard. The Goodland route has therefore been restored
to appendix C.

The CRASH commented on the accuracy of the lists of routes available to the different vehicle combinations. Appendix
C now reflects the proper route listings. Due to the SVC and Turnpike operations, the truck tractor and three trailing
unit combination does have more route mileage available to it than do two trailing unit combinations. The new route
lists show that I70 between the Colorado State Line and Goodland is available only to SVC's with three trailing
units and not to LCV combinations with two trailing units.



LEGAL CITATIONS:



One change has been made at the request of the State. KSA81915 has been moved from the list of applicable
statutes for two trailing unit combinations to the list for three trailing unit combinations.



MASSACHUSETTS



LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS:



The CRASH commented that the cargo-carrying length listed in the SNPRM for the ``Turnpike Double_LCV'' was incorrectly
listed as 114 feet. This figure is the overall length previously allowed for this configuration. Applying the convention
for determining cargo-carrying length used throughout this rulemaking, 10 feet will be deducted for the tractor.
The cargo-carrying length now shown in appendix C for the truck tractor and two trailing unit combination is 104 feet.






