 



Changes: 

None. 


Selection Criteria_Program Factors (472.22(a)(5)) 




Comment:

 Section 472.22(a)(5) proposed adding language to a selection criterion encouraging applicants to focus ``on improving
performance in jobs or job functions that have a broad representation within the Nation's workforce so that the products
can be adapted for use by similar workplaces across the Nation.'' Several commenters interpreted this language as
a statement of the scope of services that are allowable under the National Workplace Literacy Program, believed that
this scope had been defined too narrowly, and urged that it be expanded to include a variety of activities. It was also
suggested that a project be permitted to provide any services identified in a needs assessment. One commenter asked
whether use of the term ``jobs or job functions'' was intended to shift focus away from job-specific competencies
of current job titles to broader competencies that are identified in the report issued by the Department of Labor Secretary's
Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS). The commenter asked that the Department clarify or define which
jobs or job functions have ``broad representation within the Nation's workforce.'' Other commenters stated that
a broader scope of services is needed to meet the National Education Goals. 


Discussion:

 Section 472.22(a)(5) is a selection criterion used to evaluate applications and is not a statement of the scope of
allowable program services. That scope is stated in 472.3, which reflects sections 371(a)(1) and (3) of the
Adult Education Act, and lists allowable activities. Many activities mentioned by the commenters, such as speaking,
listening, reasoning, problem-solving, team building, GED preparation, and meeting the literacy needs of adults
with limited English proficiency, are allowable under 472.3. Further guidance on the scope of allowable activities
is included in the notice inviting applications published elsewhere in this issue of the 

Federal Register

. Generally, workplace literacy projects teach literacy skills needed in the workplace that improve the productivity
of the workforce. The program is not a program of general adult education and cannot serve needs that are not directly
related to the workplace. At the same time, projects serving needs that are directly related to the workplace are encouraged
to use creative approaches to stimulate workers' interests and to develop individualized education plans that reflect
workers' goals. See 472.22(c)(2). 
The purpose of the language encouraging a focus on nationally representative jobs or job functions is to enhance the
capability of a project to demonstrate results that can be adapted by similar employers and industries. Section 472.22(a)(5)
was not proposed specifically to respond to the recommendations of the SCANS report, nor was the report intended to
modify the scope of services under the workplace literacy program. The Secretary believes that it is unnecessary
to define by regulation what jobs or job functions are broadly representative. Applicants are encouraged to make
their own evaluation of current and future labor market conditions, and design a project that can help similar workplaces
in the future. This should assist in meeting National Education Goal 5, that every adult American will be literate
and will possess the knowledge and skills necessary to compete in a global economy and exercise the rights and responsibilities
of citizenship. 


Changes: 

None. 


Selection Criteria_Demonstration (472.22(h)) (Proposed 472.22(h)(1)) 




Comments: 

Several commenters agreed that the Department should emphasize dissemination activities, and recommended the
inclusion of various other dissemination strategies. Two commenters were concerned that dissemination activities
could be hampered because the instructional materials produced by a project might contain protected information.

One commenter suggested that, because carrying out both the demonstration and commitment activities described
in proposed 472.22(h)(1) and (2) would be overwhelming, applicants should be asked to address only one of these
criteria. 


Discussion: 

The dissemination strategies listed in proposed 472.22(h)(1) are among the regulatory changes designed
to transform the National Workplace Literacy Program into a true demonstration program. See the previous discussion
of the background of these regulations and note also 472.31(c), which requires that a project be independently
evaluated for ``spread'' and ``transportability'' to other sites. Proposed 472.22(h)(1) encouraged applicants
to use certain dissemination strategies but was not intended to preclude the use of additional strategies when they
are appropriate for a particular project. 
The Secretary does not expect or anticipate that partnerships will disseminate trade secrets or other protected
information. However, a project's dissemination activities should clearly benefit businesses and workplaces
outside of the partnership. 
While, ideally, all partners will be involved in demonstration and commitment activities, these activities may
be accomplished through the efforts of particular partners. The Secretary desires that the factors listed in the
criteria on ``Demonstration'' and ``Commitment'' be reflected in an applicant's program design, management plan,
and budget. However, the Secretary does not anticipate that addressing both criteria will be burdensome if partners
adequately plan and budget for them. 


Changes: 

The selection criterion ``Demonstration and commitment'' in proposed 472.22(h) has been separated into
a criterion on ``Demonstration'' in 472.22(h) and a criterion on ``Commitment'' in 472.22(i). Also
see the discussion on 472.22(i). 


Selection Criteria_Commitment (472.22(i)) (Proposed 472.22(h)(2)) 




