 

Alternatively, EPA believes that the approach in this notice is consistent with section 211 because EPA interprets
section 211(e)(3) (A) and (B) in conjunction with section 211(e)(3)(C), which gives EPA authority to exempt any F/FA
from duplicative testing. Thus, even if one interprets the phrase ``fuel or fuel additive which [is/is not] registered''
to mean either that an identical F/FA must already have a registration, or to refer to a product-specific registration,
EPA believes it is reasonable to interpret section 211(e)(3)(C) to allow F/FAs that are similar in composition and
usage to those already on the market to group with those similar F/FAs and complete the testing with the other F/FAs
in their group. At the same time, EPA believes that for F/FAs that differ significantly in composition or usage from
currently registered F/FAs, such testing would not be duplicative of testing of groups of registered F/FAs; and therefore,
EPA is authorized under section 211(e) to require this information prior to registration. 

Under either theory, EPA's authority to obtain information is not limited to Tier 1 and Tier 2 data, because section
211(b)(2)(B) gives EPA authority to require any information necessary to assess the effects of emissions on public
health or welfare. Therefore, EPA interprets section 211 (e) and (b) to give it the authority to require any necessary
health or welfare effects information for F/FAs that are significantly different in composition or usage from currently
registered products. 

EPA solicits comments on its interpretation of CAA section 211 as it applies to the approach outlined in this notice
and on the proposed compliance requirements for F/FA products which manufacturers may seek to register after promulgation
of this rule. EPA is proposing: (1) To allow those products fitting the definition of ``registrable'' to become registered
and thus subject to the same compliance and timing requirements as currently registered products, and (2) to require
manufacturers of ``new'' F/FAs (i.e., those not in conformance with the definition of ``registrable'') to submit
any information EPA requires, potentially including Tier 3, prior to registration. Based on its analysis of the public
comments on these proposed provisions, EPA may adopt both proposals, adopt one proposal, or reject both proposals.




B. Alternative Testing Requirements in Lieu of Tier 2 



As explained in the NPRM, the main purpose of the proposed rule is to obtain information for the identification and
evaluation of potential health effects of F/FA emissions in order to guide EPA in future regulatory actions. CAA section
211(b)(2)(A) gives EPA the authority to require the manufacturer of any fuel or fuel additive ``to conduct tests to
determine potential public health effects of such fuel or additive (including, but not limited to, carcinogenic,
teratogenic, or mutagenic effects).'' Thus, the statute gives EPA discretion to require the examination of other
endpoints of concern in addition to the mandatory areas of testing described above. 

The Tier 2 program in the NPRM proposed to establish a testing framework that incorporated the screening of several
health effects endpoints relevant to the assessment of the public health impacts of F/FA emissions, including those
endpoints mandated by the statute. In general, EPA still intends to maintain a standard Tier 2 biological testing
program as a requirement for registration. Thus, the prescribed Tier 2 tests to be included in the final rule would
apply to nearly all F/FAs seeking compliance with registration requirements, to the extent that the results of the
data search activities in Tier 1 do not include comparable existing information from adequately performed and properly
documented previous studies. 

However, EPA is now proposing a special provision which would give EPA discretion to require different testing requirements
in lieu of the standard Tier 2 program, in order to address specific health concerns for a particular fuel or fuel additive
product. EPA recognizes that, in some special cases, more exhaustive or specifically focused tests might be warranted
in lieu of the screening Tier 2 tests, based on already available health effects information. For example, for a particular
fuel or fuel additive product, information could already be available to EPA (independent of this proposed program)
which indicates that testing should be targeted to an identified health concern that is not specifically addressed
in Tier 2 or that calls for more definitive testing than would ordinarily occur under Tier 2. The currently proposed
testing program structure certainly allows EPA to require such tests under Tier 3 after the evaluation of the previous
tiers. However, in this special case, requiring more definitive tests or other appropriate endpoint tests earlier
in the testing program would result in overall savings to the manufacturer while providing EPA with the needed data
earlier to assess the potential health risks for the particular fuel or fuel additive in question. Under this special
provision EPA would also be able to prescribe additional tests to be performed along with the standard Tier 2 program
as well as substituting different tests. EPA asks for comments on this proposed provision that would allow EPA to prescribe
alternative tests in lieu of (or in addition to) the standard Tier 2 tests in special cases. 






