 

(ii) The vehicle's seat is positioned according to S8.1.2 and S8.1.3 of 571.208 of this title. 

(iii) Tires used during the test are of the same size and construction recommended by the manufacturer for the vehicle.
The tires have accumulated not less than 80 and not more than 1620 kilometers. Not less than 80 of those kilometers are
accumulated at a speed of not less than 80 kilometers per hour. All tires are clean and dry. All tires are inflated to
the vehicle manufacturer's recommended inflation pressure for maximum vehicle loading and measured when the tire
is cold. 

(iv) All vehicle openings (doors, windows, hood, trunk, convertible top, etc) are in the closed position. 

(3) 

Load. 

A Hybrid III Test Dummy, as defined in Subpart E of 572 of this title, is placed in the left front seating position,
positioned according to S11 of 571.208 of this title, and secured with the vehicle's safety belt system, whether
manual or automatic. The dummy may be placed in the test vehicle before or after moving the vehicle onto the test device.
The test vehicle carries no load other than the test dummy. 

(4) 

Ambient conditions. 

The measurements of the center of gravity height and roll mass moment of inertia are made with both the vehicle and the
test device at a temperature not less than 4 and not more than 39 degrees Celsius. Air motion around the vehicle and device
is less than 6 kilometers per hour. 

(g) 

Test Procedures. 

The test procedure for use with the IPMD is described in the report, ``Vehicle Inertial Parameters_Measured Values
and Approximations,'' by Garrott 

et al.

 of NHTSA's VRTC. A copy of the report is available in Docket No. 9168, Notice 03. 






Alternative Two 



(c) 

Definitions_Nearest degree 

means the next lower whole degree, in the case of a measurement that falls above a whole number by 0.00 to 0.49 degrees,
and the next higher whole degree, in the case of a measurement that falls above a whole number by 0.50 to 0.99. 



Production year 

means the period from September 1 of a calendar year to August 31 of the next calendar year, inclusive. 



Tilt table angle (TTA) 

means, with respect to a motor vehicle placed on a tilt table, the angle between the horizontal and the platform of the
tilt table when the last uphill tire of the vehicle ceases contact with the platform surface. 



Vehicle 

means a group of vehicles within a make, model, or car division which have a degree of commonality in construction (e.g.,
body, chassis). It does not consider any level of decor, opulence, or other characteristics that do not affect TTA.


(d) 

Reporting Requirements_

(1) 

Reporting. 

On or before January 1 of each calendar year, beginning with the 1996 calendar year, each manufacturer shall report
to the Administrator a TTA for each vehicle to be manufactured in the production year beginning on September 1 of that
calendar year. The TTA shall be accurate to the nearest degree. In reporting a TTA, the manufacturer shall list the
vehicle(s) to which it applies. 

(2) 

Information. 

On or before April 1 of each calendar year, beginning with the 1996 calendar year, the Administrator, based on the information
provided by all manufacturers under paragraph (d)(1) of this section, provides manufacturers with the passenger
car and multipurpose passenger vehicle/truck TTA ranges to appear on the vehicle label and in the owner's manual under
paragraphs (e)(1)(i) through (e)(1)(iii) of this section. 

(e) 

Label_

(1) 

Attachment and Maintenance of Label. 

(i) Each vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 shall have affixed to it a vehicle rollover stability label
as described in paragraph (e)(3) of this section. Each manufacturer shall affix or cause to be affixed the labels required
by this paragraph at the final assembly point. 





