 

(b) 

The transactional penalty

_(1) 

Substantial valuation 
misstatement. 

In the case of any transaction between related 
persons, there is a substantial valuation misstatement if the 
price for any property or services (or for the use of property) 
claimed on any return is 200 percent or more (or 50 percent or 
less) of the amount determined under section 482 to be the 
correct price. 
(2) 

Gross valuation misstatement. 

In the case of any 
transaction between related persons, there is a gross valuation 
misstatement if the price for any property or services (or for 
the use of property) claimed on any return is 400 percent or more 
(or 25 percent or less) of the amount determined under section 
482 to be the correct price. 
(3) 

Reasonable cause and good faith. 

Pursuant to section 
6664(c), the transactional penalty will not be imposed on any 
portion of an underpayment with respect to which the requirements 
of 1.66644 are met. A taxpayer that meets the requirements of 
paragraph (d) of this section with respect to an allocation under 
section 482 will be treated as having established that there was 
reasonable cause and good faith with respect to that item for 
purposes of 1.66644. If a substantial or gross valuation 
misstatement under the transactional penalty also constitutes (or 
is part of) a substantial or gross valuation misstatement under 
the net adjustment penalty, then the rules of section (d) (and 
not the rules of 1.66644) will be applied to determine whether 
the adjustment is excluded from calculation of the net section 
482 adjustment. 
(c) 

Net adjustment penalty

_(1) 

Net section 482 
adjustment. 

For purposes of this section, the term net section 
482 adjustment means the sum of all increases in the taxable 
income of a taxpayer for a taxable year resulting from 
allocations under section 482 (determined without regard to any 
amount carried to such taxable year from another taxable year) 
less any decreases in taxable income attributable to collateral 
adjustments as described in 1.4821T(e). For purposes of this 
section, amounts that meet the requirements of paragraph (d) of 
this section will be excluded from the calculation of the net 
section 482 adjustment. Substantial and gross valuation 
misstatements that are subject to the transactional penalty under 
paragraphs (b) (1) or (2) are included in determining the amount 
of the net section 482 adjustment. See paragraph (f) of this 
section for coordination rules between penalties. 
(2) 

Substantial valuation misstatement. 

There is a 
substantial valuation misstatement if a net section 482 
adjustment is greater than the lesser of 5 million dollars or ten 
percent of gross receipts. 
(3) 

Gross valuation misstatement. 

There is a gross 
valuation misstatement if a net section 482 adjustment is greater 
than the lesser of 20 million dollars or twenty percent of gross 
receipts. 





