 


In addition to the programs supported under this grant competition, the Corporation is sponsoring other Summer of
Safety initiatives. These are briefly described in Appendix 2.



Eligibility




Public agencies (including law enforcement agencies, local units of government, health/social service agencies,
etc.), nonprofit organizations (including youth-servin groups, community based organizations, service organizations,
etc.), institutions of higher education, and Indian tribes are eligible to apply. State agencies that intend to operate
the program directly are also eligible.


While a single entity may be the actual recipient of the grant thereby responsible for financial administration and
program management we expect that the Summer of safety programs will be conducted by working partnerships among any
or all of the above types of organizations.



Special Funding Requirements




Summer of Safety grants may be made from one of three sources of funds: Subtitle H of the Act (Investment for Quality
and Innovation), Subtitle B2 of the Act (Learn and Serve America: Higher Education) and Subtitle C of the Act
(AmeriCorps Grants). Applicants should specify which type of funding they are seeking. While Subtitle H carries
no restrictions, Subtitles B2 and C contain the following:


Subtitle B2 requires, among other things, that an applicant be an institution of higher education (or a consortium
of such institutions), or a partnership of public or private nonprofit organizations and one or more institutions
of higher education. Programs must involve, but are not limited to, current students. Pursuant to the Act, priority
will be given to applications that meet certain characteristics, as detailed in Appendix 3.


The Corporation will ensure that at least 50% of the funds awarded under Subtitle C will support projects that will
be conducted in areas of need, as detailed in Appendix 4.


Beyond the requirements specific to the Subtitles from which the funding originates, applicants must meet all other
requirements in this notice, regardless of the type of funds being requested. Proposals that do not indicate a preferred
type of funding will be reviewed as the Corporation deems appropriate. Each of the two types of funds require a non-Corporation
match of at least 25% of program costs. The Corporation has the flexibility to ensure that the highest quality proposals
are funded, regardless of whether they are submitted under Subtitle B2 or Subtitle C.



Content of Proposal




Summer of Safety applicants should submit program proposals that contain the sections noted below and meet the requirements
in this notice. Should you desire further guidance on the format of your proposal, you should contact the Corporation
at 202/6064949.



1. Title Page




List: (1) Name and address of legal applicant (and include the signature of the authorized executive); (2) names of
organizations participating in partnership; (3) amount of Federal funds requested, amount of non-federal match
(both cash and in-kind); (4) number of stipended participants and number of additional volunteers who will not receive
a stipend; and (5) one paragraph describing program activities and target community.



2. Program Narrative




A narrative describing the proposed program should contain sections that respond to the following requirements:



(a) Community Need/Anticipated Impact




The paramount goal of Summer of Safety is to address problems of crime, violence and fear in the communities where programs
are conducted. To have such an impact, problems must be identified and defined and strategies developed which have
specific objectives. Accordingly, successful proposals will:


(i) Discuss the specific needs or problems that exist in the target community/neighborhood(s) which the project
will address. Sources of official data (demographic data, crime offense data, etc.), public opinion surveys, expert
analysis, and other sources of local information are all useful.


(ii) Describe specifically how the program will address the identified problem(s). Outcomes must be direct and demonstrable.


While the goal of every project should be the reduction of crime, violence and fear, it may be very difficult to document
such accomplishments, given the limited time during which a summer program can operate. Accordingly, as well as quantifiable
measures of outcome, there may also be intermediate measures of effort and accomplishment which are appropriate
as specific objectives.


Examples of such objectives each of which should address only one activity and include one result may include reduction
in reported crime of XX% (generally, or in more limited focus, i.e., robberies of convenience stores, gang-related
assaults, attacks against senior citizens, etc.), XX% of neighborhood residents feel safer compared to before program,
XX victims of violent crime assisted at court or at home, XX Safe Houses established, XX playgrounds refurbished and
supervised, XX ``crack houses'' rehabilitated, XX youth provided crime prevention/violence reduction training,
etc.


