 

The Forest Service and BLM are seeking information and comments from Federal, State and local agencies as well as individuals
and organizations who may be interested in, or affected by, the proposed action as part of the scoping process. The
scoping process is designed to guide project analysis and documentation and obtain input to identify significant
issues and alternatives to the proposal. The EIS will consider a range of alternatives based on the issues, concerns
and opportunities identified for the project. Comments should be submitted to the Forest Service within 30 days from
the date of publication of this Notice in the 

Federal Register

.

The estimated date for completion of the draft EIS is June, 1995. A public meeting(s) will be held in conjunction with
the issuance of the draft EIS. The comment period on the draft EIS will be 45 days from the date the Environmental Protection
Agency publishes the notice of availability in the 

Federal Register

.

The Forest Service and BLM believe it is important to give reviewers notice at this early stage in the process of court
rulings related to public participation in the environmental review process. Reviewers of draft EISs must structure
their participation in the environmental review of the proposal so that it is meaningful and alerts the agencies to
the reviewers' position and contentions. 

Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp.

 v. 

NRDC,

 435 U.S. 519, 553 (1978). Environmental objections that could have been raised at the draft stage may be waived if not
raised until after completion of the final EIS. 

City of Angoon

 v. 

Hodel,

 (9th Circuit, 1986) and 

Wisconsin Heritages, Inc.

 v. 

Harris,

 490 F. Supp. 1334, 1338 (E.D. Wis. 1980). We mention these court cases to ensure that substantive comments and objections
are made available to the BLM and FS at a time when they can meaningfully consider them and respond in the Final EIS.

To assist the Forest Service and BLM in identifying and considering issues and concerns related to the proposed action,
comments for scoping, and later for the draft EIS, should be as specific as possible. It would be helpful if comments
on the draft EIS refer to specific pages or chapters of the draft or the merits of the alternatives formulated and discussed
in the statement. Reviewers may wish to refer to the Council on Environmental Quality Regulations for implementing
the procedural provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act, 40 CFR 1503.3, in addressing these points.

The final EIS is expected to be available in December, 1995.

The BLM Idaho State Director, who is the responsible official for the EIS, will then make a decision regarding this
proposal, considering: FS recommendations; comments; responses; anticipated environmental consequences discussed
in the Final EIS; and applicable laws regulations, and policies. The reasons for the decision will be documented in
the Record of Decision.




Dated: November 3, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Harold W. Klein,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Forest Supervisor, Caribou National Forest.


</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
Jeff S. Steele,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Area Manager, Pocatello Resource Area.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9427882 Filed 11994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341011M
</BILLING>


