 

However, OSHA does not believe that the data are available to permit OSHA to do a separate risk assessment for these
effects which would in a major way add to the present assessment. The risk assessment on which OSHA has based its significant
risk determinations for the 1986 and newly revised standards, calculated the incidence of mesothelioma, lung and
other cancers and asbestosis, diseases based on a substantial amount of both mortality and exposure data. The data
concerning lung function decrement and pleural plaques lack exposure information and would make quantitative risk
estimates for these health effects less precise than the data for other forms of asbestos-related disease upon which
OSHA is relying. 
A separate risk assessment is also unnecessary. OSHA believes that the revised regulations are already regulating
at the margin of what is feasible, in terms of levels to be achieved, and controls which are required. OSHA has imposed
necessary, feasible and well supported work practices for custodial work, which should reduce custodial exposures
well below the historic levels (indeterminate) which may have been experienced by the workers studied in the above
reports. 
More generally, there would be remaining significant risk at this new 0.1 f/cc exposure limit if there were not other
provisions to these standards. However, the exposure limit is accompanied by mandated work practice controls and
requirements for hazard communication, training and other provisions. Together these will very substantially
reduce that remaining significant risk, although the exact amount of that reduction cannot be quantified. In addition,
it would be difficult to measure accurately in the industrial setting levels lower than those in these standards.
OSHA believes its approach of setting a PEL which is reliably measurable, yet, imposing work practices and ancillary
provisions for operations regardless of measured fiber levels will result in risk reduction well below that expected
from just enforcing the 0.1 f/cc PEL. Thus, a lower PEL would not produce significant worker benefit. 


(4) Multi-Employer Worksites 


Paragraph (d) Construction and Shipyard Employment Standards. OSHA is retitling paragraph (d) ``multi-employer
worksites.'' The first provision, the same regulatory text as in the 1986 construction standard, requires that an
employer whose work requires the establishment of a regulated area must inform other on-site employers of the asbestos
work, and how other employees will be protected from hazards stemming from that work. In addition, new provisions
follow which set out the compliance responsibilities of employers on multi-employer worksites. 
In 1990, OSHA had proposed more comprehensive provisions governing communication of asbestos hazards among all
employers, building and facility owners and employees, in a revised paragraph (d). These final standards expand
communication provisions but repositions them in paragraph (k), ``communication of hazards.'' A discussion of
those provisions is found below in this preamble under that heading. 
Paragraphs (d)(2) and (3) set out the compliance responsibilities of employers on multi-employer worksites. They
acknowledge that on asbestos work sites, like other construction sites, employees exposed to a hazard are not always
the employees of the employer who created the hazard. 
Paragraph (d)(2) incorporates the rules now applied in enforcement actions governing multi-employer construction
sites generally, to assure that all employees on such a site receive the protection intended by the standards.(See
Gelco Builders, Inc. 6 BNA 1104). The standard explicitly requires asbestos hazards to be abated ``by the contractor
who created or controls the source of asbestos contamination.'' 
In addition, paragraph (d)(3) sets forth the duties of the employer of employees who are exposed to asbestos hazards,
but who did not create the source of contamination. One, such employer may request the contractor with control of the
hazard to take corrective action. For example, if there is a breach of an enclosure within which asbestos work is being
performed, the employer of employees working outside that enclosure should request the asbestos contractor who
erected the enclosure to repair the breach immediately, as required by paragraph (d)(2). If the repair is not made,
and if employees working outside the enclosure are exposed to asbestos in more than de minimis amounts, the employer
of those employees should either remove them from the worksite pending repairs, or consider his employees to be working
within a regulated area and comply with the provisions of paragraph (e) governing exposure assessments and monitoring
of employees who work within such areas. If the employer of employees exposed to asbestos because of the failure of
controls installed by another contractor, is the general contractor of the construction project, as such he has supervisory
control over the entire worksite including the regulated area, and is responsible for violations which could be abated
or prevented by the exercise of such supervisory capacity. 



