 

(2) A notice referred to in subrule (1) is effective the day after it is issued. 



(3) The responsible Secretary shall cause a notice issued under subrule (1) to be published in the official publications
of the involved Parties. 


37. The members of a special committee are discharged from their duties on the day on which a notice of completion of
the special committee proceeding is effective. 



Confidentiality 




38. All written submissions to, and communications with, a special committee and all documents filed with the involved
Secretariats shall be kept confidential. 


39. (1) All hearings of a special committee, and all transcripts thereof, shall be kept confidential. 



(2) It is the responsibility of each involved Party to ensure that the persons attending oral proceedings of a special
committee on its behalf maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings. 


Ex Parte Contacts 




40. (1) No special committee or member of a special committee shall meet or contact one involved Party in the absence
of the other involved Party. 



(2) No special committee member shall discuss a matter before the special committee with the involved Parties in the
absence of other special committee members. 



Extension and Computation of Time 




41. A time period fixed by these rules may be extended with the consent of both involved Parties or by a decision of a special
committee. 


42. (1) In computing any time period fixed in or under these rules, the day or date from which the time period begins to
run shall be excluded and, subject to subrule (2), the last day of the time period shall be included. 



(2) Where the last day of a time period computed in accordance with subrule (1) falls on a legal holiday of the responsible
Secretariat, that day and any other legal holidays of the responsible Secretariat immediately following that day
shall be excluded from the computation. 



(3) In computing any time period of five days or less fixed in these rules or by a decision of a special committee, any
legal holiday that falls within the time period shall be excluded from the computation. 


Responsibilities of the Responsible Secretary 





43. The responsible Secretary shall provide administrative support for each special committee proceeding and shall
make the arrangements necessary for the hearings and meetings of the special committee, including the provision
of court reporters and, if required, interpreters to provide simultaneous translation. 



44. The responsible Secretary shall maintain a file for each special committee proceeding, comprised of the original
or a copy of all documents filed, whether or not filed in accordance with these rules, in the special committee proceeding.




Death or Incapacity 




45. Where a special committee member is disqualified, dies or otherwise becomes unable to fulfil special committee
duties, 



(a) special committee proceedings and computations of time shall be suspended, pending the appointment of a substitute
member; and 



(b) where the disability, disqualification or death occurs after oral argument has begun, the chairperson may order
that the matter be reheard, on such terms as are appropriate, after selection of a substitute member. 




Dated: February 10, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Timothy J. Hauser,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Under Secretary 
for International Trade.



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 943931 Filed 22294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3510GTP
</BILLING>





