 



Id

. A hazardous substance regulated under the HMR as a Class 9 material is subject to requirements governing packaging,
shipping papers, package marking and labelling, vehicle operation, employee training and registration. 

See generally

 49 CFR subpart 107.600; subparts 172.100172.700; 173.203173.204; 173.240173.241; part 177.

The rule is effective August 29, 1994. 


II. The Petition for Reconsideration 


Petitioners ASARCO, Inc., Cominco Ltd., Cyprus Climax Metals Company, Magma Copper Company, Montana Resources,
and Phelps Dodge Mining Company, collectively, engage in the exploration, mining, milling, smelting and refining
of metals including copper, molybdenum and zinc. In the course of their activity, petitioners offer for transportation
and transport significant quantities of copper, molybdenum and zinc concentrates. Petitioners' concentrates
contain lead sulfide in a concentration between 0.001 and 2.0 percent. 
Petitioners request reconsideration of the June 20, 1994 rule because it incorporates the EPA's reduction of the
lead sulfide RQ from 5,000 to 10 pounds (58 FR 35314, June 30, 1993), and thereby, through operation of the 171.8
mixture rule, subjects to regulation under the HMR certain of petitioners' copper, molybdenum and zinc concentrates
that until now have not been regulated. 
Petitioners represent that the lead sulfide in the copper, molybdenum and zinc concentrates is of low bioavailability
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 and that these concentrates currently are being shipped safely, and contend on that basis that there is no need to regulate
the concentrates as hazardous materials. Petitioners cite several types of costs that they will incur from designation
of the concentrates as hazardous materials and suggest that, contrary to RSPA's finding in the rule's preamble, 59
FR 31823, the economic impact of the rule is not minimal. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
According to EPA, ``bioavailability'' is ``the rate and extent to which a substance is absorbed or otherwise assimilated
into body tissue following exposure by various routes, such as ingestion.'' 58 FR 35318. 
</FOOTNOTE>


Petitioners assert that few U.S. ports accept bulk shipments of concentrates, and that of those that do, many would
not if the concentrates were designated hazardous materials. Petitioners say they have been informed by officials
of the Port of Corpus Christi, Texas, that the port no longer would accept bulk shipments of copper and zinc concentrates,
if designated as hazardous materials. Petitioners state that if the rule is not modified to except their concentrates
from the hazardous material designation, they might need to ship the concentrates through Canadian or Mexican ports,
adding millions of dollars annually to their shipping costs. Petitioners suggest that this rerouting, by increasing
the distances over which the concentrates are shipped, would increase the risk of accident and release of these materials.
Petitioners also suggest that a decision by U.S. ports not to handle these materials could result in job losses among
port workers. 
Second, petitioners predict that concentrates designated as hazardous materials would be subject to shipping surcharges
and shipping rate increases. 
Third, petitioners cite the general costs of compliance with HMR packaging, shipping paper, marking, labelling,
placarding and employee training requirements. (Note: As Class 9 materials, petitioners' concentrates would not
be required to be placarded in domestic transportation. 49 CFR 172.504(f)(9).) 
Finally, petitioners suggest that the rule is inconsistent with international regulations that, according to petitioners,
do not subject the concentrates in question to similar regulation. This, say petitioners, runs counter to RSPA's
and DOT's policy to seek a uniform global regulatory framework for hazardous material transportation. 
Petitioners assert that the 42 U.S.C. 9656(a) mandate to list and regulate hazardous substances as hazardous materials
does not supersede RSPA's delegated authority under 49 U.S.C. 5103 to designate as hazardous materials those materials
that ``in a particular amount and form may pose an unreasonable risk to health and safety or property.'' Petitioners
concede that 9656(a) requires RSPA both to designate lead sulfide as a hazardous material and to recognize
the 10-pound RQ for lead sulfide established by the EPA, but assert that this directive does not constrain RSPA's discretion
to determine the threshold concentration at which a particular mixture containing lead sulfide is to be regulated
as a hazardous material. Petitioners suggest that the mixture table at 49 CFR 171.8 is a comparable exercise of discretion,
and that RSPA simply can modify the table in a way that excludes their concentrates from a hazardous material designation.

Procedurally, petitioners take issue with RSPA's failure to provide for public notice and comment before issuing
the rule. They argue that notice and comment was not ``impracticable'' since the rule was not issued until a year after
the EPA rule revising the RQ for lead sulfide. They contend that comment was not ``unnecessary'' because: (1) The opportunity
to comment during the EPA rulemaking did not encompass the transportation-related ramifications of the EPA action;
and (2) RSPA 

does 

have the statutory authority to decide what quantity and form of materials in transportation may pose an unacceptable
risk to health, safety or property. 





