 

(2) 

Examples. 

The rules of this paragraph (d) are illustrated by the following examples.






Example 1. Omitted item attributable to prerecognition period. 

X is a C corporation that elects to become an S corporation effective January 1, 1996. X improperly capitalizes repair
costs and recovers the costs through depreciation of the related assets. In 1999, X properly changes to deducting
repair costs as they are incurred. Under section 481(a), the basis of the related assets are reduced by an amount equal
to the excess of the repair costs incurred before the year of change over the repair costs recovered through depreciation
before the year of change. In addition, X has a negative section 481(a) adjustment equal to the basis reduction. Under
paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the portion of X's negative section 481(a) adjustment relating to the repair costs
incurred before the recognition period is recognized built-in loss because those repair costs are items attributable
to periods before the beginning of the recognition period under the principles for determining recognized built-in
gain or loss in this section.
 


Example 2. Duplicated item attributable to prerecognition period. 

Y is a C corporation that elects to become an S corporation effective January 1, 1996. Y improperly uses an accrual method
without regard to the economic performance rules of section 461(h) to account for worker's compensation claims.
As a result, Y takes deductions when claims are filed. In 1999, Y properly changes to an accrual method with regard to
the economic performance rules under section 461(h)(2)(C) for worker's compensation claims. As a result, Y takes
deductions when claims are paid. The positive section 481(a) adjustment resulting from the change is equal to the
amount of claims filed, but unpaid, before the year of change. Under paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the deduction
allowed in the recognition period for claims filed, but unpaid, before the recognition period is recognized built-in
loss because a deduction was allowed for those claims before the recognition period under an accrual method without
regard to section 461(h)(2)(C). Under paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the portion of Y's positive section 481(a)
adjustment relating to claims filed, but unpaid, before the recognition period is recognized built-in gain because
those claims are items attributable to periods before the beginning of the recognition period under the principles
for determining recognized built-in gain or loss in this section.




(e) 

Section 995(b)(2) deemed distributions. 

Any item of income properly taken into account during the recognition period under section 995(b)(2) is recognized
built-in gain if the item results from a DISC termination or disqualification occurring before the beginning of the
recognition period.
(f) 

Discharge of indebtedness and bad debts. 

Any item of income or deduction properly taken into account during the first year of the recognition period as discharge
of indebtedness income under section 61(a)(12) or as a bad debt deduction under section 166 is recognized built-in
gain or loss if the item arises from a debt owed by or to an S corporation at the beginning of the recognition period. 
(g) 

Completion of contract. 

Any item of income properly taken into account during the recognition period under the completed contract method
(as described in 1.4513(d)) where the corporation began performance of the contract before the beginning
of the recognition period is recognized built-in gain if the item would have been included in gross income before the
beginning of the recognition period under the percentage of completion method (as described in 1.4513(c)).
Any similar item of deduction is recognized built-in loss if the item would have been allowed as a deduction against
gross income before the beginning of the recognition period under the percentage of completion method.
(h) 

Installment method_

(1) 

In general. 

If a corporation sells an asset before or during the recognition period and reports the income from the sale using the
installment method under section 453 during or after the recognition period, that income is subject to tax under section
1374. 
(2) 

Limitation on amount subject to tax. 

For purposes of paragraph (h)(1) of this section, the taxable income limitation under 1.13742(a)(2)
is equal to the amount by which the S corporation's net recognized built-in gain would have been increased from the
year of the sale to the earlier of the year the income is reported under the installment method or the last year of the
recognition period, assuming all income from the sale had been reported in the year of the sale and all provisions of
section 1374 applied. For purposes of the preceding sentence, if the corporation sells the asset before the recognition
period, the income from the sale that is not reported before the recognition period is treated as having been reported
in the first year of the recognition period. 
(3) 

Rollover rule. 

If the limitation in paragraph (h)(2) of this section applies, the excess of the amount reported under the installment
method over the amount subject to tax under the limitation is treated as if it were reported in the succeeding taxable
year(s), but only for succeeding taxable year(s) in the recognition period. The amount reported in the succeeding
taxable year(s) under the preceding sentence is reduced to the extent that the amount not subject to tax under the limitation
in paragraph (h)(2) of this section was not subject to tax because the S corporation had an excess of recognized built-in
loss over recognized built-in gain in the taxable year of the sale and succeeding taxable year(s) in the recognition
period. 



