 

(j) A witness subpoenaed by the OHA may be paid the same fees and mileage as paid to a witness in the district courts of
the United States. 

(k) If in the course of a proceeding a subpoena is issued at the request of a person other than an officer or agency of the
United States, the witness fees and mileage shall be paid by the person who requested the subpoena. However, at the
request of the person, the witness fees and mileage may be paid by the OHA if the person shows: 

(1) The presence of the subpoenaed witness will materially advance the proceeding; and 

(2) the person who requested that the subpoena be issued would suffer a serious hardship if required to pay the witness
fees and mileage. 

(l) If any person upon whom a subpoena or SRO is served pursuant to this section, refuses or fails to comply with any provision
of the subpoena or SRO, an action may be commenced in the appropriate United States District Court to enforce the subpoena
or SRO. 

(m) Documents produced in response to a subpoena shall be accompanied by the sworn certification, under penalty of
perjury, of the person to whom the subpoena was directed or his authorized agent that: 

(1) A diligent search has been made for each document responsive to the subpoena; and 

(2) To the best of his knowledge, information, and belief each document responsive to the subpoena is being produced.


(n) Any information furnished in response to an SRO shall be accompanied by the sworn certification under penalty
of perjury of the person to whom it was directed or his authorized agent who actually provides the information that:


(1) A diligent effort has been made to provide all information required by the SRO; and 

(2) All information furnished is true, complete, and correct. 

(3) If any document responsive to a subpoena is not produced or any information required by an SRO is not furnished,
the certification shall include a statement setting forth every reason for failing to comply with the subpoena or
SRO. 

(o) If a person to whom a subpoena or SRO is directed withholds any document or information because of a claim of attorney-client
or other privilege, the person submitting the certification required by paragraph (m) or (n) of this section also
shall submit a written list of the documents or the information withheld indicating a description of each document
or information, the date of the document, each person shown on the document as having received a copy of the document,
each person shown on the document as having prepared or been sent the document, the privilege relied upon as the basis
for withholding the document or information, and an identification of the person whose privilege is being asserted.


(p) If testimony is taken pursuant to a subpoena, the Director shall determine whether the testimony shall be recorded
and the means by which the testimony is recorded. 

(q) A witness whose testimony is recorded may procure a copy of his testimony by making a written request for a copy and
paying the appropriate fees. However, the Director may deny the request for good cause. Upon proper identification,
any witness or his attorney has the right to inspect the official transcript of the witness' own testimony. 

(r) The Director may sequester any person subpoenaed to furnish documents or give testimony. Unless permitted by
the OHA official, neither a witness nor his attorney shall be present during the examination of any other witnesses.


(s) A witness whose testimony is taken may be accompanied, represented and advised by his attorney as follows: 

(1) Upon the initiative of the attorney or witness, the attorney may advise his client, in confidence, with respect
to the question asked his client, and if the witness refuses to answer any question, the witness or his attorney is required
to briefly state the legal grounds for such refusal; and 

(2) If the witness claims a privilege to refuse to answer a question on the grounds of self-incrimination, the witness
must assert the privilege personally. 

(t) The Director shall take all necessary action to regulate the course of testimony and to avoid delay and prevent
or restrain contemptuous or obstructionist conduct or contemptuous language. OHA may take actions as the circumstances
may warrant in regard to any instances where any attorney refuses to comply with directions or provisions of this section.




1003.9

 General filing requirements. 



(a) 

Purpose and scope.

 The provisions of this section shall apply to all documents required or permitted to be filed with the OHA. One copy
of each document must be filed with the original, except as provided in 1003.9(f). A telefax filing of a document
will be accepted only if immediately followed by the filing by mail or hand-delivery of the original document. 

(b) 

Signing.

 Any document that is required to be signed, shall be signed by the person filing the document. Any document filed by
a duly authorized representative shall contain a statement by such person certifying that he is a duly authorized
representative. (A false certification is unlawful under the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 1001). The signature by the
person or duly authorized representative constitutes a certificate by the signer that the signer has read the document
and that to the best of the signer's knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry, the document
is well grounded in fact, warranted under existing law, and submitted in good faith and not for any improper purpose
such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay. If a document is signed in violation of this section, OHA may impose
the sanctions specified in 1003.3 and other sanctions determined to be appropriate. 

(c) 

Labeling.

 An application, petition, or other request for action by the OHA should be clearly labeled according to the nature
of the action involved both on the document and on the outside of the envelope in which the document is transmitted.


(d) 

Obligation to supply information.

 A person who files an application, petition, appeal or other request for action is under a continuing obligation during
the proceeding to provide the OHA with any new or newly discovered information that is relevant to that proceeding.
Such information includes, but is not limited to, information regarding any other application, petition, appeal
or request for action that is subsequently filed by that person with any DOE office. 

(e) 

The same or related matters.

 A person who files an application, petition, appeal or other request for action by the OHA shall state whether, to the
best knowledge of that person, the same or related issue, act or transaction has been or presently is being considered
or investigated by any other DOE office, other Federal agency, department or instrumentality; or by a state or municipal
agency or court; or by any law enforcement agency, including, but not limited to, a consideration or investigation
in connection with any proceeding described in this part. In addition, the person shall state whether contact has
been made by the person or one acting on his behalf with any person who is employed by the DOE with regard to the same issue,
act or transaction or a related issue, act or transaction arising out of the same factual situation; the name of the
person contacted; whether the contact was verbal or in writing, the nature and substance of the contact; and the date
or dates of the contact.





