 

Second, the record does not support the view that the operator's risk of being injured by a jillpoke entering the cab
is greater than the risk of injury from not wearing seat belts. Of the 105 logging fatalities reported to OSHA between
1985 and 1990, only one was caused by a jillpoke (Ex. 465). On the other hand, 7 fatalities occurred during machine
rollover accidents when either the machine operator or a rider was thrown from the machine and crushed because he was
not wearing a seat belt. NIOSH said that 80 deaths occurred due to logging machine rollovers from 198085 (Ex.
542). The State of Washington study indicated that 12 loggers were killed in machine rollover accidents and
no machine operators were killed during that period because of jillpokes (Ex. 4129). California OSHA also
testified that their experience has been that the jillpoke hazard is far outweighed by the hazard of rollovers (Ex.
912). They provided examples of logging accidents in which the employee would not have died or been injured
if he had been wearing a seat belt. 


Third, OSHA has dealt directly with the hazard of jillpokes in the final rule. The final rule requires that all operator
cabs be equipped with screening or other material that will prevent objects from penetrating the cab. This requirement
is expected to prevent jillpoke injuries, therefore the seat belt exception is not necessary. 


Fourth, OSHA agrees with commenters that there should be no exception to the seat belt requirement for mobile machine
operators, especially those who operate on steep terrain. Mobile logging machines are operated on unlevel ground
and steep terrain where it is well-recognized that machine rollover and tipover is a primary danger. Seat belts will
restrain the operator in the cab and its protective structure rather than allowing the operator to try to jump free.
In most instances, when the operator tries to jump free he is pinned, crushed or hit by the machine, ROPS/FOPS or overhead
guard. Finally, OSHA notes that seat belts have been designed that keep operators restrained within the cab in the
event of a rollover or tipover, while at the same time providing them with maximum movement within the cab. One commenter
said these seat belts, which resemble carnival harnesses, have been designed by the Forest Engineering Research
Institute of Canada (Ex. 32). These seat belts would meet the requirements of this section while addressing the concerns
raised by the commenters. 


Paragraph (d)(3)(iii) of the final rule requires that each employee fasten the seat belt securely and tightly so that
the employee is restrained in the vehicle or machine cab in the event of an accident. Evidence in this record (Ex. 535;
Tr. W2 190) indicates that employees frequently keep their seat belts loose in order to move in the cab more easily.
However, if the machine rolls over, the loose seat belt may not be effective in keeping the operator in the cab. In such
cases, the operator may be thrown from the cab and pinned or crushed by the machine because the seat belt was too loose
to keep the operator fully contained in the cab. 


Paragraph (d)(3)(iv) of the final rule requires that machine seat belts meet the requirements of the Society of Automotive
Engineers standard (SAE J386 June 1985) for seat belts for construction machines. This incorporation by reference
of SAE J386 June 1985, has been approved by the Office of the Federal Register, in accordance with the requirements
of 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51. The final rule has been revised to reflect this approval and provides the requisite
information regarding access to the text of SAE J386, June 1985. This provision updates the proposed standard to incorporate
the latest SAE seat belt standard. There were no comments opposing this provision. 


Paragraph (d)(3)(v) of the final rule requires employers to assure that seat belts are not removed from any vehicle
or machine. This paragraph also requires the employer to replace the missing seat belts if seat belts were installed
in the vehicle or machine at the time of manufacture and have subsequently been removed. OSHA is aware that seat belts
are removed from machines because operators do not like to wear them. OSHA is requiring the replacement of seat belts
because the Agency believes they are essential in protecting machine and vehicle operators from being killed or seriously
injured in accidents. 


Paragraph (d)(3)(vi) of the final standard requires 
employers to assure that seat belts are maintained in a 
serviceable condition. Employers have the duty to ensure that seat belts are functioning properly and are not damaged.
The standard also requires inspection of seat belts as part of the general machine and vehicle inspection required
at the start of each workshift. (See discussion of maintenance in paragraphs (f) and (g)). 




Fire Extinguishers





