 

(1) Meet or exceed current industry standards for brake system maintenance; 
(2) Meet or exceed all requirements of this part; and 
(3) Clearly identify those items or procedures that are safety critical. 
(b) A railroad shall conduct maintenance in accordance with the procedures developed in paragraph (a) of this section.
FRA shall enforce those items identified as safety critical. 
(c) Train brake system maintenance shall be performed only by an individual qualified as a mechanical or electronic
train brake system inspector who meets the qualification requirements of 232.207 and 232.209 or a person
apprenticed to such an inspector acting under the inspector's direct supervision. 
(d) A qualified train brake system supervisor who meets the qualification requirements of 232.205 shall perform
frequent spot checks of all train brake system maintenance operations. 
(e) Prior to commencing revenue service of new train brake system technology, a railroad shall develop the maintenance
plans and complete the tests and the demonstrations required by subpart J of this part. 
(f) A railroad proposing high speed service shall develop a train brake system inspection, maintenance, and test
plan. This plan shall provide adequate technical detail on the train brake system inspection, maintenance and test
procedures to be used to ensure safe train operation and to ensure the performance of the brake system does not deteriorate
over time. The plan shall be submitted to FRA one year prior to planned commencement of revenue service. The plan is
intended to be used as the basis for a set of safety standards tailored to the specific train brake system to be used.
Such planned revenue service may not begin until FRA has approved the plan in writing. The plan shall be changed only
when specifically agreed to by FRA. The plan shall become part of the safety standards that apply to the operation of
the specific intermediate speed or high speed train to which the plan applies. FRA shall enforce compliance with the
safety critical items identified in the plan. 



Subpart I_Operating Requirements for Train Brake Systems. 


232.801 

General. 


(a) A railroad shall develop, implement, and make available to FRA upon request written detailed operating requirements
governing the safe operation of train brake systems over its railroad under all operating conditions. 
(b) Railroads shall determine speed restrictions and issue train handling instructions based on air brake performance,
tonnage and grade. Dynamic brake retarding force shall not be considered in determining speed restrictions. 
(c) The operating requirements contained in 232.803 to 232.811 and in 232.815 to 232.819
are applicable to all trains subject to this part. 


232.803 

Train information handling. 


(a) A railroad shall develop, implement, and make available to FRA upon request written procedures to ensure that
a train crew employed by the railroad is given accurate information on the condition of the train brake system and train
factors affecting brake system performance and testing when such crew takes over responsibility for the train. At
a minimum, the procedures shall provide that each train crew coming on duty be informed of: 
(1) On trains operating over 20 mph, the operational status of all dynamic brakes, including: 
(i) The number of locomotive axles with operational dynamic brakes and their location in the train. 
(ii) An estimate of the total retarding force available from the dynamic brakes (as a function of speed in five mph increments
covering the operational speed range of the train). Railroads shall develop and implement an accurate means to make
this estimate by January 1, 1995. 
(2) The total weight and length of the train. 






