 




<USBUREAU>Centers for Disease Control and Prevention</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[Announcement Number 437] </RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN 0905ZA27</RINDOCK>


Cooperative Agreements for Studies to Evaluate the 
Effectiveness of Interventions to Prevent or Reduce 
Childhood Lead Poisoning, 
Notice of Availability of Funds for Fiscal Year 1994 


Introduction


The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announces the availability of fiscal year (FY) 1994 funds for
a cooperative agreement program to conduct studies to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions to prevent or
reduce childhood lead poisoning. 
The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention objectives
of ``Healthy People 2000,'' a PHS-led national activity to reduce morbidity and mortality and improve the quality
of life. This announcement is related to the priority area of Environmental Health. (For ordering a copy of ``Healthy
People 2000,'' see the section 

WHERE TO OBTAIN ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

.)


Authority 


This program is authorized under sections 301(a) (42 U.S.C. 241(a)) and 317A (42 U.S.C. 247b-1) of the Public Health
Service Act, as amended. Program regulations are set forth in 42 CFR part 51b. 



Smoke-Free Workplace 


The Public Health Service strongly encourages all cooperative agreement recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace
and promote the non-use of all tobacco products. This is consistent with the PHS mission to protect and advance the
physical and mental health of the American people. 


Eligible Applicants 


Applications may be submitted by public and private, nonprofit and for-profit organizations and governments and
their agencies. Thus, universities, colleges, research institutions, hospitals, other public and private organizations,
State and local health departments or their bona fide agents, and small, minority and/or women-owned businesses
are eligible for these cooperative agreements. 
Applications will be considered for funding to conduct studies in one or more programmatic interest areas. Applicants
interested in conducting more than one study must submit a separate application for each. If a single study addresses
more than one programmatic interest area, only one should be identified as the primary interest area. The programmatic
interest area should be clearly indicated for each study. 



Availability of Funds 


Approximately $600,000 is available in FY 1994 to fund approximately three cooperative agreements. It is expected
that the average award will be $200,000 (direct and indirect cost), ranging from $100,000 to $350,000. It is expected
that the awards will begin on or about September 30, 1994. The awards will be made for 12-month budget periods within
a project period up to 3 years. Funding estimates may vary and are subject to change based on the availability of funds.

Continuation awards within the project period will be made on the basis of satisfactory progress and the availability
of funds. 


Purpose 


The purpose of these awards is to study important epidemiologic questions critical to the implementation, operation,
and expansion of childhood lead poisoning prevention programs, and to support the development of guidelines and
policies. These awards are to study: 
1. The effectiveness of environmental interventions for primary prevention of childhood lead poisoning; 




