

(4) If the DA General Counsel approves the request for counsel, the Chief, DAJA-LE, will appoint a DA attorney to represent
the individual. This appointment may be made telephonically but will be confirmed in writing. The Chief, DAJA-LE,
will make appropriate coordination with MACOM SJAs and command counsel to confirm availability of the attorney.

(5) An attorney appointed by DA may represent a civilian employee in any proceeding initiated by OSC before the MSPB.
However, counsel provided by DA may not represent the employee in any proceeding initiated by DA, in any appeal from
a final decision by the MSPB, or in any collateral proceeding before any forum other than the MSPB. 
(6) OSC may not bring a disciplinary action before the MSPB against a military member. Accordingly, DA counsel will
not be required to represent the military member in any MSPB disciplinary proceeding. However, counsel may represent
the member during the OSC investigation with the understanding that the evidence obtained by OSC may be referred to
the member's command for possible disciplinary action under the UCMJ or appropriate regulations. If DA initiates
action against the military member for misconduct disclosed in the OSC investigation, the member will obtain counsel
as provided under the UCMJ or relevant regulations. 
(c) Records. 
(1) OSC requests for records must be in writing. The Labor Counselor will assist OSC representatives in identifying
the custodian of specific records sought during the inquiry. 
(2) Generally, requested records should be furnished to OSC representatives if such records would be released under
AR 2555 or AR 34021 to other government agencies in the normal course of official business. Records constituting
attorney work product should not be released without approval of the Chief, DAJA-LE. IG records will not be released
without the approval of the Inspector General. (AR 201). The Labor Counselor should seek guidance from the
Chief, DAJA-LE, if there is any doubt concerning the release of records. 
(3) If, after completion of the OSC investigation, the OSC files a complaint against DA or a DA employee, release of
records and other information will be accomplished pursuant to MSPB rules of discovery (5 CFR part 1201, subpart B).

(d) Funding. The command, activity, or installation within which the allegations of misconduct arose will provide
funding for travel, per diem and other necessary expenses related to the OSC investigation. These expenses may include
appropriate funding for witnesses, counsel for consultation and DA General Counsel approved counsel for representation.



516.73 

Assistance from HQDA. 


Labor Counselors may seek guidance on questions arising from implementation of this chapter by calling the Chief,
DAJA-LE, DSN 2259476/9481 or Commercial (703) 6959476/9481. 


Subpart J_Soldiers Summoned to Serve on State and Local Juries 


516.74 

General. 


(a) This subpart implements 10 U.S.C. 982 and DOD Directive 5525.8. It establishes Army policy concerning
soldiers on active duty who are summoned to serve on state and local juries. 
(b) This subpart does not apply to Army National Guard soldiers in an annual training or full-time AGR (Active Guard
Reserve) status under Title 32, U.S. Code. Soldiers in a Title 32 status must refer to their respective state law for
relief from state or local jury duty. 


516.75 

Policy. 


(a) Active duty soldiers should fulfill their civic responsibility by serving on state and local juries, so long as
it does not interfere with military duties. 
(b) The following active duty soldiers are exempt from complying with summons to serve on state and local juries: 
(1) General officers. 
(2) Commanders. 
(3) Active duty soldiers stationed outside the United States, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, American
Samoa, and the Virgin Islands. 
(4) Active duty soldiers in a training status. 
(5) Active duty soldiers assigned to forces engaged in operations. 
(c) Other active duty soldiers may be exempted from serving on local juries if compliance with such summons would have
either of the following effects: 
(1) It would unreasonably interfere with performance of the soldier's military duties; or, 



