 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>21 CFR Part 74</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 92C0294]</RINDOCK>



Listing of Color Additives Subject to Certification; DC Green No. 5



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending the color additive regulations to provide for the safe use of DC
Green No. 5 for coloring drugs and cosmetics intended for use in the area of the eye. This action is in response to a petition
filed by the Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (CTFA).



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Effective September 12, 1994, except as to any provisions that may be stayed by the filing of proper objections; written
objections and requests for a hearing by September 9, 1994.

 

</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit written objections to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Robert L. Martin, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS217), Food and Drug Administration, 200
C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022549519.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:





I. Introduction



In a notice published in the 

Federal Register

 of August 11, 1992 (57 FR 35833), FDA announced that a color additive petition (CAP 6C0204) had been filed by CTFA, 1101
17th St. NW., suite 300, Washington, DC 20036. The petition proposed that the color additive regulations for DC
Green No. 5 be amended to provide for the safe use of DC Green No. 5 for coloring drugs and cosmetics intended for
use in the area of the eye. The petition was filed under section 706 (currently section 721) of the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C. 376) (currently 21 U.S.C. 379e).



II. Regulatory History



The regulatory history of DC Green No. 5 is summarized in a final rule that was published in the 

Federal Register

 of June 4, 1982 (47 FR 24278). In that final rule, FDA permanently listed DC Green No. 5 for use in drugs and cosmetics
excluding use in the area of the eye. These actions were taken in response to a color additive petition (CAP 8C0084).



III. Definitions



Section 70.3(s) (21 CFR 70.3(s)) defines the term ``area of the eye'' as ``the area enclosed within the circumference
of the supra-orbital ridge and the infra-orbital ridge, including the eyebrow, the skin below the eyebrow, the eyelids
and the eyelashes, and conjunctival sac of the eye, the eyeball, and the soft areolar tissue that lies within the perimeter
of the infra-orbital ridge.'' 21 CFR 70.5(a) states that ``No listing or certification of a color additive shall be
considered to authorize the use of any such color additive in any article intended for use in the area of the eye unless
such listing or certification of such color additive specifically provides for such use.'' The petitioner has requested
that the uses for DC Green No. 5 be expanded to include drug and cosmetic uses in the area of the eye.



IV. The Color Additive



DC Green No. 5 is principally the disodium salt of 2,2'-[(9,10-dihydro-9,10-dioxo-1,4-anthracenediyl)diimino]bis-[5-methylbenzenesulfonic
acid] (CAS Reg. No. 4403901). The manufacture of DC Green No. 5 is accomplished by the sulfonation
of DC Green No. 6 with fuming sulfuric acid. Because DC Green No. 6 is the starting material in this manufacturing
process, the possibility exists that the chemicals used in the synthesis of DC Green No. 6 may be present in minor
amounts in DC Green No. 5. DC Green No. 6 is formed by chemically reacting one molecule of quinizarin with
two molecules of 

p

-toluidine. The significance of these components is that Weisburger et al. have demonstrated that 

p

-toluidine is a carcinogen in mice (Ref. 1). Residual amounts of reactants, such as 

p

-toluidine and related manufacturing aids, are commonly found among the constituents of many color additives. The
presence of such constituents, however, is not unique to color additives. Numerous contaminants are unavoidably
present in all chemical products, even in highly purified reagent grade chemicals. 

Although DC Green No. 5 has itself not been shown to cause cancer, it does contain minor amounts of a carcinogenic
impurity, 

p

-toluidine. The carcinogenicity of 

p

-toluidine was discussed in the final rule, published in the of

 Federal Register

 June 4, 1982 (47 FR 24278), permanently listing DC Green No. 5 for use in drugs and cosmetics, excluding use in
the area of the eye. 



V. Determination of Safety



Under section 721(b)(4) of the act (21 U.S.C. 379e(b)(4)), the so-called ``general safety clause'' for color additives,
a color additive cannot be listed for a particular use unless a fair evaluation of the data available to FDA establishes
that the color additive is safe for that use. FDA's color additive regulations (70.3(i)) define safe as ``convincing
evidence that establishes with a reasonable certainty that no harm will result from the intended use of the color additive.''

The anticancer or Delaney clause of the Color Additive Amendments (section 
721(b)(5)(B) of the act) provides that a noningested color additive shall be deemed unsafe and shall not be listed
if, after tests that are appropriate for evaluating the safety of the additive for such use, it is found to induce cancer
in man or animal. Importantly, however, the Delaney clause applies to the additive itself and not to constituents
of the additive. That is, where an additive itself has not been shown to cause cancer, but contains a carcinogenic impurity,
the additive is properly evaluated under the general safety clause using risk assessment procedures to determine
whether there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result from the proposed use of the additive (

Scott

 v. 

FDA

, 728 F.2d 322 (6th Cir. 1984)).



VI. Safety of the Petitioned Use of the Additive



FDA estimates from the data submitted and other relevant information that the exposure to DC Green No. 5 from
its use in drugs and cosmetics intended for use in the area of the eye, is 0.56 milligrams per person per day (mg/p/d),
based upon a maximum frequency of application and maximum quantity applied.

FDA does not ordinarily consider chronic toxicological testing to be necessary to determine the safety of an additive
whose use will result in such low exposure levels (Ref. 2), and the agency has not required such testing here. Although
the agency does not normally require such testing, chronic studies supporting current listings for the use of DC
Green No. 5 are available in the agency's files, and FDA's safety evaluation for the proposed use of the color additive
in drugs and cosmetics intended for use in the area of the eye included a consideration of these studies. Two-year carcinogenicity
studies of DC Green No. 5 showed no indication of carcinogenicity. 

FDA has evaluated the safety of this additive under the general safety clause, considering all available data. The
agency has used risk assessment procedures to estimate the upper-bound limit of risk presented by 

p

-toluidine, the carcinogenic chemical that may be present as an impurity in the additive. The risk evaluation of this
chemical has two aspects: (1) Assessment of the exposure to the impurity from the proposed use of the additive, and
(2) extrapolation of the risk observed in the animal bioassays to the conditions of probable exposure to humans.

FDA estimates that the maximum total lifetime exposure to 

p

-toluidine that will result from the use of DC Green No. 5 in drugs and cosmetics intended for use in the area of
the eye that complies with the applicable specifications is 8.4 nanograms (ng)/p/d. This exposure estimate was based
on the use of this color additive in eyebrow pencil, eyeliner, eye shadow, eye lotion, eye makeup remover, mascara,
eye cream, eye shadow base, and eye stick.

The agency used data reported by the National Cancer Institute which demonstrated that 

p

-toluidine was carcinogenic for male and female Charles River CD1 (HaM/ICR derived) mice, causing an increased
incidence of hepatomas (liver tumors) (Ref. 1) to estimate the upper-bound limit of lifetime human risk from exposure
to this chemical stemming from the proposed use of DC Green No. 5 as a color additive in drugs and cosmetics intended
for use in the area of the eye (Ref. 3).

Based on a potential exposure of 8.4 ng/p/d, FDA estimates that the upper-bound limits of individual lifetime risk
from the potential exposure to 

p

-toluidine from the proposed use of DC Green No. 5 as a color additive in eye area drugs and cosmetics is 2 x 10

-9

 or 2 in 1 billion (Ref. 4). Moreover, FDA points out that in an earlier determination of the risk from exposure to 

p

-toluidine from all other uses of DC Green No. 5, the agency calculated the upper-bound limits of individual
lifetime risk to be in the 1 in 30 million to 1 in 300 million range (47 FR 24278). Thus, the use of DC Green No. 5 in
eye area drugs and cosmetics does not increase this risk in any way. The agency also points out that because of the numerous
conservative assumptions used in calculating the exposure estimate, actual lifetime-averaged individual exposure
to 

p

-toluidine is expected to be substantially less than the worst-case exposure. Therefore, the actual upper-bound
limits of risk would be less than that cited above. Thus, the agency concludes that there is a reasonable certainty
of no harm from exposure to 

p

-toluidine that might result from the proposed use of DC Green No. 5 for coloring drugs and cosmetics intended
for use in the area of the eye. 

In its evaluation of the safety of the proposed use of the subject additive, FDA has also considered other safety data
submitted previously to support current listings for the use of DC Green No. 5. These toxicity studies of DC
Green No. 5, involving dogs, rats, and mice, included acute oral toxicity studies, subchronic studies, and chronic
toxicity studies in which animals were exposed to the color additive through diet and skin applications, and reproductive
toxicity studies. These studies did not produce any evidence that DC Green No. 5 would be unsafe for the petitioned
uses. 

In addition, FDA evaluated the ocular toxicity studies that the petitioner provided to support the proposed use of
DC Green No. 5 in drugs and cosmetics intended for use in the area of the eye. Almost all of the animals were free
of signs of ocular irritation. The effects noted in most animals that exhibited irritation were slight conjunctival
redness or discharge. These irritations were seen sporadically in both control and test animals. Based on its review
of these studies, FDA finds that there were no significant adverse clinical findings in the ocular irritation studies.



VII. Conclusions



A. Safety



Based upon the available toxicity data and other relevant considerations discussed above, FDA concludes that there
is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result from the use of DC Green No. 5 as a color additive in drugs and
cosmetics intended for use in the area of the eye. The agency also concludes on the basis of available data that the color
additive will perform its intended technical effect and thus is suitable for the petitioned uses. The agency, therefore,
is amending 74.1205(c)(2) and 74.2205(b) of the color additive regulations to provide for the use of
DC Green No. 5 in drugs and cosmetics intended for use in the area of the eye. 



B. Specifications



DC Green No. 5 is currently produced as a certifiable color additive for use in drugs and cosmetics excluding
use in the area of the eye in amounts consistent with current good manufacturing practices in accordance with 21 CFR
part 80. Based upon the low level of exposure to 

p

-toluidine that results under the current specifications for DC Green No. 5 in 74.1205 and 74.2205
(21 CFR 74.1205 and 74.2205), the agency concludes that the specifications listed in 74.1205 are adequate
to ensure the safe use of this color additive and to control the amount of 

p

-toluidine that may exist as an impurity in the color additive when used in drugs and cosmetics intended for use in the
area of the eye.



VIII. Inspection of Documents



In accordance with 71.15 (21 CFR 71.15), the petition and the documents that FDA considered and relied upon
in reaching its decision to approve the petition are available for inspection at the Center for Food Safety and Applied
Nutrition (address above) by appointment with the information contact person listed above. As provided in 71.15,
the agency will delete from the documents any materials that are not available for public disclosure before making
the documents available for inspection.



IX. Environmental Impact



The agency has carefully considered the potential environmental effects of this action. FDA has concluded that the
action will not have a significant impact on the human environment, and that an environmental impact statement is
not required. The agency's finding of no significant impact and the evidence supporting that finding, contained
in an environmental assessment, may be seen in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. 



X. Objections



Any person who will be adversely affected by this regulation may at any time on or before September 9, 1994, file with
the Dockets Management Branch (address above) written objections thereto. Each objection shall be separately numbered,
and each numbered objection shall specify with particularity the provisions of the regulation to which objection
is made and the grounds for the objection. Each numbered objection on which a hearing is requested shall specifically
so state. Failure to request a hearing for any particular objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing
on that objection. Each numbered objection for which a hearing is requested shall include a detailed description
and analysis of the specific factual information intended to be presented in support of the objection in the event
that a hearing is held. Failure to include such a description and analysis for any particular objection shall constitute
a waiver of the right to a hearing on the objection. Three copies of all documents shall be submitted and shall be identified
with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document. Any objections received in response to the
regulation may be seen in the Dockets Management Branch between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. FDA will publish
notice of the objections that the agency has received or lack thereof in the 

Federal Register

.



XI. References



The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.



1. Weisburger, E. K. et al., ``Testing of Twenty-one Environmental Aromatic Amines or Derivatives for Long-Term
Toxicity or Carcinogenicity,'' 

Journal of Environmental Pathology and Toxicology

, 2:325356, 1978.

2. Kokoski, C. J., ``Regulatory Food Additive Toxicology,'' in ``Chemical Safety Regulation and Compliance,''
edited by F. Homburger and J. K. Marquis, S. Karger, NY, pp. 2433, 1985.

3. Memorandum of Conference of the Cancer Assessment Committee, ``Para-Toluidine,'' February 24, 1981.

4. Report of the Quantitative Risk Assessment Committee, ``Estimation of the Upper-Bound Lifetime Risk from Para-Toluidine
in DC Green No. 5 for Uses Requested in CAP 6C0204, Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association,'' September
28, 1993.



 List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 74



Color additives, Cosmetics, Drugs.

Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, 21 CFR part 74 is amended as follows:



PART 74_LISTING OF COLOR ADDITIVES SUBJECT TO CERTIFICATION



1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 74 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 Secs. 201, 401, 402, 403, 409, 501, 502, 505, 601, 602, 701, 721 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.
321, 341, 342, 343, 348, 351, 352, 355, 361, 362, 371, 379e).




2. Section 74.1205 is amended by revising paragraph (c)(2) to read as follows:



74.1205 

DC Green No. 5.



* * * * *



(c) * * * 

(2) DC Green No. 5 may be safely used for coloring drugs generally, including drugs intended for use in the area
of the eye, in amounts consistent with current good manufacturing practice.



* * * * *



3. Section 74.2205 is amended by revising paragraph (b) to read as follows:



74.2205 

DC Green No. 5. 



* * * * *



(b) 

Uses and restrictions

. DC Green No. 5 may be safely used for coloring cosmetics generally, including cosmetics intended for use in
the area of the eye, in amounts consistent with current good manufacturing practice.


* * * * *




Dated: August 4, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
 Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
 Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9419483 Filed 8994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

