 

In the case of Fengbin, three additional proprietary factors of production were identified after the preliminary
determination. These factors were verified and considered for the final determination. In addition, factors of
production, labor and energy used in electroplating subject merchandise were adjusted to reflect allocation based
on actual electroplating process time.

In the case of Jiaxing, verification findings made it possible to calculate type-specific FMVs for No. 1 and Giant
paper clips for the final determination. Reported direct labor was adjusted based on verification findings.

In the case of Wuyi, total reported clip production was found to be overstated at verification and adjustments to factors
of production were made accordingly. For certain factors, adjustments were made to reflect actual amounts consumed
during the POI instead of simple averages. Adjustments were also made to material, labor and electricity factors
used in electroplating subject merchandise, to reflect actual quantities consumed for paper clip plating during
the POI. We also made a downward adjustment to reported electricity usage in the clip production process based on verification
findings.



Surrogate Country



Section 773(c)(4) of the Act requires the Department to value the factors of production, to the extent possible, in
one or more market economy countries that are (1) at a level of economic development comparable to that of the non-market
economy country, and (2) significant producers of comparable merchandise. The Department has determined that India
and Pakistan are the countries most comparable to the PRC in terms of overall economic development. (See memorandum
from the Office of Policy to the file, dated November 29, 1993.) Although India is the preferred surrogate country
for purposes of calculating the factors of production, we have resorted to Pakistan for certain surrogate values
where Indian values were either unavailable or significantly outdated. We have obtained and relied upon published,
publicly available information, wherever possible.



Verification



As provided in section 776(b) of the Act, we verified the information submitted by respondents for use in our final
determination. We used standard verification procedures, including examination of relevant accounting and production
records and original source documents provided by respondents.



Interested Party Comments



Comment 1: PRC Exporters and Separate Rates


ZMEC and ZLIP



Petitioners argue that ZLIP and ZMEC are both subject to control by one or more government agencies in the Zhejiang
Province. Since the ZCOFTEC has the authority under the company charter to appoint ZLIP's general manager and deputy
general manager, petitioners contend that ZLIP's operations are overseen by ZCOFTEC. Petitioners argue that ZMEC
also is under the supervision of the ZCOFTEC since ZCOFTEC communicates with ZMEC, an export trading company located
in the Zhejiang province. Petitioners also note that ZMEC's appointment of its general manager is subject to approval
by another Zhejiang province government agency, the ZMB.

Respondents counter that little evidence is provided to support Petitioners' claim that ZMEC and ZLIP are both subject
to the control of the ZCOFTEC and the ZMB. The fact that the ZCOFTEC communicates to all export trading companies in
the Zhejiang province does not evince governmental control over the companies' operations. with respect to ZMB,
respondents argue that the ZMB's role is also limited to the communication of market information, and statistical
services to companies in the machinery industry. Even though the ZMB has the right under law to object to any general
manager nomination, respondents state that this responsibility does not allow the ZMB total control over ZMEC's
operations. In fact, no evidence was found to indicate that the ZMB has ever actually exercised that right in the case
of ZMEC. Furthermore, respondents note that evidence on the record regarding other aspects of 

de facto

 control demonstrates that both ZLIP and ZMEC clearly are independent from central or provincial government control.
Both companies act independently without governmental interference in setting their own export prices, negotiating
contracts and agreements, and disposing of profits and financing of losses. Respondents argue that the ``totality
of information'' contradicts petitioners' assertions that ZLIP and ZMEC are controlled by the governmental body
and therefore, should not be assigned company-specific, separate rates.




