 

Several commenters addressed the need for front wheel control. ATA strongly opposed mandating ABS for the steering
axle of single-unit trucks and suggested the agency reconsider mandating them on all tractors. In contrast, Rockwell,
WABCO, Freightliner, AAMA, Advocates, and the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) favored requiring
that ABS be equipped on front axles. AAMA favored equipping each vehicle with ABS that has at least one independent
channel of control for the wheels on a front axle and at least one independent channel of control for the wheels on a rear
axle, but objected to mandating more than two independent channels of control. Because Rockwell, Freightliner,
Advocates, and the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) were concerned that the current proposal would
allow ``select low''

4

 antilock systems on any axle, they recommended that the equipment requirement include language that would require
``independent control of each wheel'' of the axles that are required to be ABS-controlled. They believed such a requirement
would prevent significant degradation in the stopping performance, particularly on a split mu surface.

5

 Rockwell WABCO recommended a minimum standard of at least one rear axle having independent wheel brake control. It
opposed allowing select low ABS which it believed would experience significantly longer stopping distances on split
mu surfaces. Allied Signal recommended requiring independent control of the brakes on the steering axle. Bosch recommended
a minimum requirement of a 4S/3M ABS. Freightliner favored requiring at least four independent channels of control,
two for each axle, allowing independent control of each wheel on the forward and rear axle. Similarly, IIHS favored
requiring that the brakes/wheels of the front axle be independently controlled by an antilock system and that the
brakes/wheels of at least one rear axle have similar independent antilock control. Advocates recommended that ABS
be functional on all axles, not just one axle in each multiple axle set on a heavy vehicle. Because commenters differed
on which axle the antilock system should provide independent wheel control, NHTSA has decided to propose requiring
that the wheels on at least one axle be independently controlled, without specifying the axle on which it should be
installed. This would allow manufacturers the flexibility to determine on which axle the wheels would be independently
controlled by the antilock system.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
While some ABS are equipped with modulators that independently control each wheel, a select low ABS controls both
wheels on each axle with one modulator while having a wheel speed sensor at each wheel location. As such, both brakes
on the controlled axle are applied and released simultaneously by the ABS. Such a system affords vehicle and directional
stability, and shorter stopping distances on surfaces with uniform friction, but increases stopping distances
if road-surface friction on one side of the vehicle differs from that on the other.



</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
With such a surface, the road is split along its length so that the wheels on one side of the vehicle are on a high friction
surface and the wheels on the other side are on a low friction surface; the term ``mu'' concerns the surface's coefficient
of friction.

</FOOTNOTE>


After reviewing the comments, NHTSA has decided to propose modifications to the proposal to require heavy vehicles
to be equipped with systems that independently control each wheel on at least one axle of a truck, a truck tractor, or
a bus. Based on the comments and other available information, the agency believes that a minimum requirement that
includes an antilock braking system that controls the wheels on at least one front and one rear axle where the wheels
on at least one of these axles are independently controlled would provide an acceptable level of stopping distance
performance on low mu and split mu surfaces. In addition to the data provided by Freightliner and Rockwell WABCO, the
agency's ABS heavy vehicle testing showed that independent wheel control by an ABS enables a vehicle to stop in a shorter
distance compared with either a vehicle equipped with an axle-by-axle control antilock system, or with a non-ABS
equipped vehicle using a driver best-effort brake application. (``Improved Brake Systems for Commercial Vehicles,''
DOT HS 807 706, Final Report, April 1991)





