 

(2) The surface of the coal is trimmed to a reasonable level to the boundary bulkheads; 
(3) Each casing leading into the cargo hold and all other openings to the cargo hold are sealed prior to loading the coal,
and that, unless the coal is as described in paragraph (f) of this section, the hatches are sealed after the coal is trimmed;

(4) As far as reasonably practicable, no gases which may be emitted by the coal accumulate in enclosed working spaces
such as storerooms, shops, or passageways, and that such spaces are adequately ventilated. 
(5) The vessel has adequate ventilation as required by paragraph (f) of this section; and 
(6) If paragraph (e) of this section requires the temperature of the coal to be monitored_
(i) The temperature of the coal to be loaded does not, at the time of loading exceed 15
&cir;C (27
&cir;F) above the ambient temperature or 41
&cir;C (105
&cir;F) whichever is greater; and 
(ii) The vessel has on board appropriate instruments for measuring the temperature of the cargo in the range 0
&cir;100
&cir;C (32
&cir;212
&cir;F) without requiring entry into the cargo hold. 
(d) A cargo hold containing coal must not be ventilated unless the conditions of paragraph (f) of this section are met,
or unless methane is detected under paragraph (h) of this section. 
(e) If the shipper, terminal operator, or the master of the vessel has any information pertaining to the coal that indicates
that the coal to be loaded has been handled in such a manner as to increase its susceptibility to self-heating, has a
history of self-heating, or has been observed to be heating, the temperature of the coal must be monitored prior to
loading. The monitoring must be at intervals sufficient to determine whether the temperature of the coal is increasing.

(f) If the shipper, terminal operator, or the master of the vessel has any information pertaining to the coal that indicates
that the coal to be loaded, is freshly mined, or has a history of emitting dangerous amounts of methane, then surface
ventilation, either natural or from fixed or portable nonsparking fans, must be provided. 
(g) Electrical equipment and cables in a hold containing a coal described in paragraph (f) of this section must be suitable
for use in an explosive gas atmosphere, or must be deenergized at a point remote from the hold. Electrical equipment
and cables necessary for continuous safe operations, such as lighting fixtures, may not be deenergized. The master
of the vessel shall ensure that the affected equipment and cables remain deenergized as long as this coal remains in
the hold. 
(h) For all coal loaded on a vessel, other than an unmanned barge, for a voyage with a duration of more than 72 hours, the
atmosphere above the coal must be routinely tested for the presence of methane, carbon monoxide and oxygen. This testing
must be performed in such a way that the cargo hatches are not opened and entry into the hold is not necessary. 
(i) When carrying a coal described in paragraph (e) of this section, the atmosphere above the coal must be monitored
for the presence of carbon monoxide as prescribed in paragraph (h) of this section. The results of this monitoring
must be recorded at least twice in every 24 hour period, unless the conditions of paragraph (n) of this section are met.
If the level of carbon monoxide is increasing rapidly or reaches 30% of the LFL, the frequency of monitoring must be
increased. 




