 

Since an unsafe condition has been identified that is likely to exist or develop on other GE CT7 series turboprop engines
of the same type design, this airworthiness directive (AD) is being issued to prevent separation of the propeller
from the propeller shaft, which could result in damage to the aircraft. This AD requires a one-time ultrasonic inspection
of the propeller shaft flange OD fillet radius and ID bore on a suspect population of propeller shafts for subsurface
metallurgical defects, and if necessary, replacement with a serviceable part. This inspection must be performed
at the next shop visit after the effective date of this AD, or prior to October 31, 1994, whichever occurs first. The
FAA has determined that the compliance end-date of October 31, 1994, will be necessary to ensure timely inspection
of all propeller shafts and thus minimize the potential for additional propeller shaft failures. The actions are
required to be accomplished in accordance with the service bulletin described previously. 
Since a situation exists that requires the immediate adoption of this regulation, it is found that notice and opportunity
for prior public comment hereon are impracticable, and that good cause exists for making this amendment effective
in less than 30 days. 


Comments Invited 


Although this action is in the form of a final rule that involves requirements affecting flight safety and, thus, was
not preceded by notice and an opportunity for public comment, comments are invited on this rule. Interested persons
are invited to comment on this rule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Communications
should identify the Rules Docket number and be submitted in triplicate to the address specified under the caption
``

ADDRESSES

.'' All communications received on or before the closing date for comments will be considered, and this rule may be
amended in light of the comments received. Factual information that supports the commenter's ideas and suggestions
is extremely helpful in evaluating the effectiveness of the AD action and determining whether additional rulemaking
action would be needed. 
Comments are specifically invited on the overall regulatory, economic, environmental, and energy aspects of the
rule that might suggest a need to modify the rule. All comments submitted will be available, both before and after the
closing date for comments, in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report that summarizes each
FAA-public contact concerned with the substance of this AD will be filed in the Rules Docket. 
Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments submitted in response to this notice must submit
a self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: ``Comments to Docket Number 94ANE07.''
The postcard will be date stamped and returned to the commenter. 
The regulations adopted herein will not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this final rule does not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.


