 




<CFRNO>7 CFR Part 1126 </CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[DA9410] </RINDOCK>



Milk in the Texas Marketing Area; Suspension of Certain Provisions of the Order 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA. 




</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Suspension of rule. 







</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This document suspends the ``dairy farmer for other markets'' provisions of the Texas Federal milk marketing order.
The action was requested by Associated Milk Producers, Inc. (AMPI), a cooperative association that represents dairy
farmers whose milk is pooled under the order. The suspension will give supply organizations, like AMPI, the flexibility
they need to market their milk supplies efficiently under today's marketing conditions. 




</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 May 24, 1994.




</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Clifford M. Carman, Marketing Specialist, USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2971, South
Building, P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 200906456, (202) 7209368. 




</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 Prior document in this proceeding: 




Notice of Proposed Suspension: Issued April 6, 1994; published April 13, 1994 (59 FR 17498). 




The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601612) requires the Agency to examine the impact of a proposed rule
on small entities. Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Service has certified
that this rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. This rule lessens
the regulatory impact of the order on certain milk handlers and tends to ensure that dairy farmers will have their milk
priced under the order and thereby receive the benefits that accrue from such pricing. 




The Department is issuing this final rule in conformance with Executive Order 12866. 




This final rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. This rule is not intended to have
a retroactive effect. This rule will not preempt any state or local laws, regulations, or policies, unless they present
an irreconcilable conflict with this rule. 




The Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601674), provides that administrative
proceedings must be exhausted before parties may file suit in court. Under section 608c(15)(A) of the Act, any handler
subject to an order may file with the Secretary a petition stating that the order, any provisions of the order, or any
obligation imposed in connection with the order is not in accordance with the law and requesting a modification of
an order or to be exempted from the order. A handler is afforded the opportunity for a hearing on the petition. After
a hearing, the Secretary would rule on the petition. The Act provides that the district court of the United States in
any district in which the handler is an inhabitant, or has its principal place of business, has jurisdiction in equity
to review the Secretary's ruling on the petition, provided a bill in equity is filed not later than 20 days after the
date of the entry of the ruling. 




This order of suspension is issued pursuant to the provisions of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act and of the
order regulating the handling of milk in the Texas marketing area. 




Notice of proposed rulemaking was published in the 

Federal Register

 on April 13, 1994 (59 FR 17498) concerning a proposed suspension of certain provisions (or sections) of the order.
Interested persons were afforded opportunity to file written data, views and arguments thereon. No opposing views
were received. 




After consideration of all relevant material, including the proposal in the notice and other available information,
it is hereby found and determined that from the date this order is published in the 

Federal Register

 the following provisions (or sections) of the order do not tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act: 




In 1126.12, paragraph (b)(5) in its entirety. 




Statement of Consideration 




The suspension order makes inoperative the ``dairy farmer for other markets'' provisions of the Texas milk order
(Order 126). By suspending these provisions, the milk of dairy farmers who were not associated with the Texas market
in September-November could be used to supply Order 126 distributing plants during the following months of FebruaryJuly.


In its letter requesting the suspension, Associated Milk Producers, Inc. (AMPI), stated that in some instances these
provisions prevent the cooperative from marketing its milk supplies efficiently. Because of the limitation on which
dairy farmers can be producers under the Texas order during the months of FebruaryJuly, AMPI was unable to pool
more than two million pounds of milk it supplied to an Order 126 distributing plant in Little Rock, Arkansas, during
February 1994. The milk of these dairy farmers, who are more favorably located with respect to the Little Rock plant
than are the cooperative's Texas producers, was not eligible for pool status because the dairy farmers had not been
associated with the Texas market to the extent necessary during the preceding months of September-November. Also,
if AMPI supplies the Arkansas plant with milk of eligible Texas producers, the cooperative suffers an economic pooling
loss because the Little Rock plant is subject to a minus 39-cent location adjustment. 

The market's supply/demand relationship has changed dramatically since these provisions were adopted. Because
of these circumstances, as proponent requested, the ``dairy farmer for other markets'' provisions should be suspended
indefinitely. 




</SUPPLEM>
