 




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 04009024] </RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Energy Fuels Nuclear, Inc.; Receipt of Application from Energy Fuels Nuclear, Inc, for a Source Material License
</DOCTITLE>



Notice is hereby given that the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) has received, by letter dated
November 18, 1993 from Energy Fuels Nuclear, Inc., an application for a source material license to commercially produce
uranium oxide by in-situ leaching (ISL) of uranium ores, at its Reno Creek, Wyoming ISL facility. 

The facility will be located approximately 12 miles southwest of the town of Wright, in Campbell County, Wyoming.
The operation is anticipated to extract about 181,440 kilograms (400,000 pounds) of uranium oxide

(U

3 

O

8

) per year, with a maximum quantity of 7000 kilograms (15,400 pounds) of source material on site at any one time. 

The applicant plans to use a series of injection wells, which will introduce hydrogen peroxide and sodium carbonate/bicarbonate
(lixiviant) into the ore zone; and extract the mobilized uranium through a series of pumping wells. The uranium-rich
water will be routed to an on-site processing building (satellite plant) where the uranium will be concentrated in
ion-exchange resin tanks. The uranium-depleted fluids will be recharged with lixiviant and recirculated into the
ore zone through the injection wells to mobilize more uranium. The loaded ion-exchange resin will be hydraulically
transferred to tank trucks and periodically shipped to another NRC-licensed facility for elution and further processing.
The designed production rate for total circulation of leaching solutions will be about 7570 liters per minute (2000
gallons per minute). 

Following the extraction of the uranium from the ore zone, the ground water affected by the mining operation will be
restored to a quality of use equal to or better than the water uses prior to extraction operations. The ground-water
restoration techniques will include pumping the well field without lixiviant injection (ground-water sweep),
followed by circulating and injecting water treated by reverse osmosis to achieve final restoration. Ground-water
quality will be monitored in perimeter monitoring wells during extraction operations and ground-water restoration
activities. 

 




<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Michael C. Layton, Uranium Recovery Branch, Division of Low-Level Waste Management and Decommissioning, U.S. Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555, (301) 5042584. Availability of License Application by Energy
Fuels Nuclear, Inc.




Energy Fuels Nuclear, Inc.'s source material license application and supporting documents, which describe the
proposed in-situ leach facility, location, facility operations, and design, is being made available for public
inspection at the Commission's Public Document Room at 2120 L Street, NW. (Lower Level), Washington, DC 20555. Opportunity
for Hearing on License Application Request by Energy Fuels Nuclear, Inc.

The licensee and any person whose interest may be affected by the issuance of this license may file a request for hearing.
A request for hearing must be filed with the Office of the Secretary, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington,
DC 20555, within 30 days of the publication of this notice in the 

Federal Register

; be served on the NRC staff (Executive Director for Operations, One White Flint North, 11555 Rockville Pike, Rockville,
MD 20852); be served on the applicant (Energy Fuels Nuclear, Inc., 1200 17th Street, suite 2500, Denver, Colorado
80202); and must comply with the requirements set forth in the Commission's regulations, 10 CFR 2.105 and 2.714. The
request for hearing must set forth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding and how that
interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding, including the reasons why the request should be granted,
with particular reference to the following factors: 




1. The nature of the petitioner's right, under the Atomic Energy Act, to be made a party to the proceeding; 

2. The nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial or other interest in the proceeding; and 

3. The possible effect, on the petitioner's interest, of any order which may be entered in the proceeding. 




The request must also set forth the specific aspect or aspects of the subject matter of the proceeding as to which petitioner
wishes a hearing. 




Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 30th day of March 1994. 

For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 



</FURTHER>
<SIGNER>
Joseph J. Holonich,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Chief, Uranium Recovery Branch, Division of Low-Level Waste Management and Decommissioning, Office of Nuclear
Materials Safety and Safeguards. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948181 Filed 4594; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M
</BILLING>





