 

Preliminary Finding


The Canadian Standards Association addressed all of the criteria which had to be met for recognition as an NRTL in its
initial application and in its further correspondence. For example, the applicant submitted a list of its test equipment
and instrumentation; a roster of its personnel including resumes of those in key positions and copies of position
descriptions; copies of a typical test report, a factory inspection form and an inspection summary; a summary of its
listing, labeling, and follow-up services; a statement of its independence as a testing laboratory; and a copy of
its Quality Assurance Manual including a description of its documentation, calibration system, appeals procedure,
recordkeeping and operational procedures.
Nine major areas were examined in depth in carrying out the laboratory surveys: facility; test equipment; calibration
program; test and evaluation procedures; test reports; records; quality assurance program; follow-up listing
program; and personnel. The discrepancies noted by the survey teams in the on-site evaluations [Ex. 10.A.(1)] and
in the extensive evaluations [Ex. 10.A.(2)] were adequately responded to by the applicant prior to the preparation
of the survey report and are included as an integral part of the report.
With the preparation of the final survey reports of the Canadian Standards Association, the survey team was satisfied
that the testing facilities appeared to meet the necessary criteria required by the standard, and so noted in the On-Site
Review Report (Survey). (See Ex. 10.A.).
Following a review of the application file and the on-site survey reports of the CSA Montreal and Vancouver facilities,
and the evaluation of the Edmonton, Moncton, and Winnipeg facilities (based upon questionnaire responses, supportive
documentation, and video tapes of each site depicting the facility, test equipment, typical procedures, files,
and staff), the NRTL Recognition Program staff concluded that the applicant appeared to have met the requirements
for recognition as a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory for the five above noted facilities and, therefore,
recommended to the Assistant Secretary that the application be preliminarily approved.
Based upon a review of the completed application file and the recommendation of the staff, the Assistant Secretary
has made a preliminary finding that the Canadian Standards Association facilities for which accreditation was requested
(Montreal, Vancouver, Edmonton, Moncton, and Winnipeg) can meet the requirements for recognition as required by
29 CFR 1910.7.
All interested members of the public are invited to supply detailed reasons and evidence supporting or challenging
the sufficiency of the applicant's having met the requirements for a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory,
as well as Appendix A, of 29 CFR 1910.7. Submission of pertinent written documents and exhibits shall be made no later
than May 2, 1994, and must be addressed to the NRTL Recognition Program, Office of Variance Determination, room N3653,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,
DC 20210. Copies of the CSA application, the laboratory survey report, and all submitted comments, as received, (Docket
No. NRTL292), are available for inspection and duplication at the Docket Office, room N2634, Occupational
Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, at the above address.
The Assistant Secretary's final decision on whether the applicant satisfies the requirements for recognition as
an NRTL will be made on the basis of the entire record including the public submissions and any further proceedings
that the Assistant Secretary may consider appropriate in accordance with Appendix A of section 1910.7.



Signed at Washington, DC this 25th day of February, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Joseph A. Dear,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 944897 Filed 3294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 451026M
</BILLING>


