 

Proposed paragraph (h) would require that at the completion of any shift during which a portion of a weekly examination
is conducted a record be made of the results of each weekly examination, including a record of hazardous conditions,
their locations found by the examiner during each examination, the corrective action taken, and the results and location
of air and methane measurements. The record would be made by the person making the examination or a person designated
by the operator. If made by a person other than the examiner, the examiner would be required to verify the record by initials
and date. The record would be countersigned by the mine foreman and by the mine superintendent, mine manager, or other
mine official to whom the mine foreman is directly accountable. The record would be made in a state-approved book or
in a bound book with sequential machine-numbered pages. 

MSHA estimates that it would take about 2 minutes for the mine superintendent to countersign the record and an additional
3 minutes to record noncompliance with mandatory safety or health standards that could result in a hazardous condition.
The total estimated recordkeeping burden for all affected mines would be 5,457 hours, of which large mines would incur
3,048 hours and small mines would incur 2,409 hours. 

Existing 75.382(c) requires mechanical escape facilities, including automatic elevators, to be examined
weekly. 

Proposed paragraph (h) would require that a record of the results of the examination of mechanical escape facilities,
including any deficiency found and the corrective action taken, be made at the completion of any shift during which
the weekly examination is made. The record would be made by the person making the examination. The record would be countersigned
by the mine foreman and by the mine superintendent, mine manager, or other mine official to whom the mine foreman is
directly accountable. The record would be made in a state-approved book or in a bound book with sequential machine-numbered
pages. 

Proposed paragraph (i) would require that the records be retained for at least one year at a surface location at the
mine and made available for inspection by authorized representatives of the Secretary and representative of miners.


A record of examinations would be required to be made weekly at all mines that would be governed by 75.382. MSHA
estimates that it would take about 5 minutes to complete a record and an additional 4 minutes for the mine foreman and
mine superintendent to countersign the record. The total estimated recordkeeping burden for all affected mines
would be 3,360 hours, of which large mines would incur 3,300 hours and small mines would incur 60 hours. 

Send comments regarding these burden estimates or any other aspect of this collection of information, including
suggestions for reducing these burdens, to Patricia W. Silvey, Director, Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances,
MSHA, room 631, Ballston Tower 

#

3, 4015 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, Virginia 22203, and directly to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget, Attention: Steve Semenuk, Desk Officer for MSHA, room 3001, New Executive Office
Building, Washington DC 20503. 



New Technology for Recordkeeping



As the complexity of mining increases with the introduction of technological improvements and innovations, MSHA
foresees that electronic storage of records in computer systems could enhance health and safety by facilitating
rapid access to critical information by individuals with the authority and responsibility to direct or redirect
resources to correct potentially unsafe or unhealthy conditions. Records electronically stored also could facilitate
trend analysis, allowing for earlier detection and correction of potential hazards. In addition, the efficiency
of accessing various records at a desktop computer workstation could promote a more integrated and effective approach
to mine safety and health. 

MSHA is considering allowing electronic storage of the records and certifications required by this proposed rule.
Although the Agency envisions that such storage would most likely be on a personal computer at the mine site, central
storage of the records would not be precluded as long as immediate access to those records at the mine site were available.
The use of electronic media for storage of such records would have to be accessible, secure, verifiable, and provide
for necessary backups. MSHA would require both the availability of immediate screen viewing of the information and
the availability of a hard copy printout within 1 hour of a request by MSHA or an authorized representative of miners.
The records would have to be kept in a secure manner that would preclude alteration once the required information is
correctly entered. MSHA would have to be able to verify that the electronic signature of the persons required to sign
or countersign such records is authentic and entered in a timely manner. Finally, the records would have to be periodically
backed-up on media separate from the computer so that computer failure would not result in the loss of data. Although
MSHA has not specifically included any such provisions in this proposal, the Agency requests comments on the storage
of records on electronic media, in particular on the safeguards necessary to ensure the integrity of such storage.





