 




<CFRNO>49 CFR Part 580 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 9220; Notice 3] </RINDOCK>


Petition for Rulemaking; American Car Rental Association 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), DOT.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Denial of petition for rulemaking.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This notice denies a petition filed by the American Car Rental Association, requesting that the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration amend its regulation concerning odometer disclosure requirements to accommodate
the needs of car rental companies purchasing fleets of new vehicles. The petition is denied, because the agency concludes
that its authority to grant relief extends only to vehicles for which the odometer reading is not relied upon as an indicator
of mileage or condition.


</SUMMARY>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 John Donaldson, Attorney Adviser, Office of the Chief Counsel, NHTSA, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, D.C.
20590; (202) 3661834. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


Title IV of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 19811991) (``the Act'') sets forth
certain requirements concerning odometers in motor vehicles. Among other things, the Act prohibits disconnecting,
resetting, or altering motor vehicle odometers and requires the execution of an odometer disclosure statement incident
to the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle. The Act also subjects violators to civil and criminal penalties, and
provides for Federal injunction, State enforcement, and a private right of civil action. The provisions requiring
odometer disclosure statements on titles were added by the Truth in Mileage Act of 1986 (Pub. L. 99579), and
reflect Congress' intent to address the growing national problem of odometer tampering in motor vehicles. 
Section 408 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1988) directs the Secretary of Transportation to promulgate rules governing the
making of odometer disclosure statements. In accordance with that mandate, NHTSA published a regulation (49 CFR
part 580) which requires, in connection with the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, that each transferor must
disclose the mileage to the transferee in writing on the title (or in some cases on the document being used to reassign
the title). The regulation details the minimum contents of the disclosure, requires the disclosure to be signed by
both the transferor and the transferee, and provides that no person shall sign an odometer disclosure statement as
both the transferor and transferee in the same transaction, except in limited situations (described below). 
The regulation allows a number of exemptions of relevance to the instant petition. Section 580.6(b) provides that
``[a] transferor of a new vehicle prior to its first transfer for purposes other than resale need not disclose the vehicle's
odometer mileage.'' In practice, this provision exempts a motor vehicle manufacturer from the odometer disclosure
requirement with respect to a vehicle transferred to a dealer for purposes of resale as a new vehicle. Section 580.5(h),
which prohibits a person from signing an odometer disclosure statement as both transferor and transferee, allows
an exemption in situations where the exercise of a power of attorney is authorized under 580.13 or 580.14.
The power of attorney allows a transferee to make an odometer disclosure on behalf of his transferor only in cases where
the transferor's title is held by a lienholder or where the transferor to whom the title was issued by the State has lost
his title and the transferee obtains a duplicate title on behalf of the transferor. 



The Petition 


The American Car Rental Association (ACRA) filed a petition dated November 29, 1993, seeking an amendment to NHTSA's
regulation, under which its member car rental companies would be relieved of certain odometer disclosure requirements
when purchasing new vehicles. ACRA describes a process, referred to as ``drop-shipment,'' by which many nationwide
car rental companies purchase fleets. According to ACRA, the companies receive vehicle deliveries directly from
the manufacturers but, due to franchising agreements between manufacturers and dealers, the purchase must be handled
through a dealer. In some cases, the manufacturer ships both the vehicles and the title documents directly to the car
rental company, while in other cases, it ships the vehicles to the car rental company and the ownership documents to
the dealer. In either of these cases, ACRA asserts, car rental companies experience significant logistical problems
in complying with the odometer disclosure regulations, because they must secure odometer disclosure statements
from dealers that never take possession of the vehicles or, in some cases, the title documents. 
ACRA explains that the required odometer disclosure is currently accomplished through the grant of a power-of-attorney
from the dealer to a third party (not related to the limited power of attorney between transferor and transferee authorized
under 580.13 and 580.14). The third party certifies the vehicle's odometer reading on behalf of the
dealer, conveys the manufacturer's certificate of origin (MCO), and performs other services incidental to titling
and registering the vehicle. ACRA acknowledges that this system works, but claims that it imposes a significant cost
on the car rental industry, because the dealers pass on the costs associated with third party services to the car rental
companies. ACRA estimates the cost to the average nationwide car rental company to be in the tens of thousands of dollars
per year, and asserts that the process delays the introduction of vehicles into a car rental fleet without a legitimate
law enforcement purpose, given the extremely low mileage on these new vehicles. 




</SUPPLEM>
