 

c. 

Spot Purchasers. 

Finally, we will adopt a rebuttable presumption that a reseller or retailer that made only spot purchases from Beacon
Bay did not suffer injury as a result of those purchases. As we have previously stated, spot purchasers generally had
considerable discretion as to the timing and location of their purchases, and therefore would not have made spot market
purchases from a firm at increased prices unless they were able to pass through the full amount of the firm's selling
price to their own customers. See, 

e.g., Vickers,

 8 DOE at 85,39697. Accordingly, a spot purchaser claimant must submit specific and detailed evidence to rebut
the spot purchaser presumption and to establish the extent to which it was injured as a result of its spot purchases
from Beacon Bay.

8

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


8

</FOOTNAME>
In prior proceedings, we have stated that refunds will be approved for spot purchasers who demonstrated that: (1)
they made the spot purchases for the purpose of ensuring a supply for their base period customers rather than in anticipation
of financial advantage as a result of those purchases, and (2) they were forced by market conditions to resell the product
at a loss that was not subsequently recouped through the draw down of banks. See, e.g., Texaco Inc., 20 DOE  85,147
at 88,321 (1990); Quaker State Oil Refining Corp./Certified Gasoline Co., 14 DOE  85,465 (1986). 

</FOOTNOTE>


B. Refund Application Requirements 



To apply for a refund from the Beacon Bay Remedial Order fund, a claimant should submit an Application for Refund containing
all of the following information: 

(1) Identifying information including the claimant's name, current business address, business address during
the refund period, taxpayer identification number, a statement indicating whether the claimant is an individual,
corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other business entity, the name, title, and telephone number
of a person to contact for any additional information, and the name and address of the person who should receive any
refund check.

9

 If the applicant operated under more than one name or under a different name during the price control period, the applicant
should specify those names; 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


9

</FOOTNAME>
Under the Privacy Act of 1974, the submission of a social security number by an individual applicant is voluntary.
An applicant that does not wish to submit a social security number must submit an employer identification number if
one exists. This information will be used in processing refund applications, and is requested pursuant to our authority
under the Petroleum Overcharge Distribution and Restitution Act of 1986 and the regulations codified at 10 C.F.R.
Part 205, Subpart V. The information may be shared with other Federal agencies for statistical, auditing or archiving
purposes, and with law enforcement agencies when they are investigating a potential violation of civil or criminal
law. Unless an applicant claims confidentiality, this information will be available to the public in the Public Reference
Room of the Office of Hearings and Appeals. 

</FOOTNOTE>


(2) The applicant's use of gasoline purchased from Beacon Bay: e.g., consumer (end-user), reseller, cooperative,
or public utility; 

(3) A monthly purchase schedule covering the period August 1, 1979 through March 31, 1980. The applicant should specify
the source of its gallonage information. In calculating its purchase volumes, an applicant should use actual records
from the refund period, if available. If these records are not available, the applicant may submit estimates of its
gasoline purchases, but the estimation methodology must be reasonable and must be explained in detail; 

(4) If the applicant was a direct purchaser from Beacon Bay, it should provide its customer number. If the applicant
was an indirect purchaser from Beacon Bay (i.e., it purchased Beacon Bay gasoline through another supplier), it should
submit the name, address, and telephone number of its immediate supplier and should specify why it believes that the
gasoline was originally sold by Beacon Bay; 

(5) If the applicant is a regulated utility or cooperative, certifications that it will pass on the entirety of any
refund received to its customers, will notify its state utility commission, or other regulatory agency, or membership
body of the receipt of any refund, and a brief description of how the refund will be passed along; 

(6) If the applicant is a retailer, reseller, or refiner whose allocable share exceeds $5,000 (i.e., whose purchases
equal or exceed 72,471 gallons), it must indicate whether it elects to rely on the appropriate reseller injury presumption
and receive the larger of $5,000 or 40% of its allocable share. If it does not elect to rely on the injury presumption,
it must submit a detailed showing that it absorbed Beacon Bay's overcharges. See Section III.A.4 

supra; 

(7) A statement as to whether the applicant or a related firm has filed, or has authorized any individual to file on its
behalf, any other application in the Beacon Bay refund proceeding. If so, an explanation of the circumstances of the
other filing or authorization should be submitted; 

(8) A statement as to whether the applicant is or was in any way affiliated with Beacon Bay. If the applicant was so affiliated,
it should explain this affiliation, including the time period in which it was affiliated;

10

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


10

</FOOTNAME>
Affiliates of firms that have remitted overcharge funds to the DOE are generally not entitled to share in those funds.
If an affiliate of Beacon Bay were granted a refund, Beacon Bay would be indirectly compensated from a Remedial Order
fund remitted to settle its own violations. 
See 

Propane Industrial, Inc.

 v. 

Department of Energy,

 No. 823, slip op. at 3 (Temp. Emer. Ct. App. January 8, 1993). In addition, Beacon Bay presumably would not have
sold petroleum products to an affiliate if such a sale would have placed the purchaser at a competitive disadvantage.
See 

Marathon Petroleum Co./Pilot Oil Corp.,

 16 DOE  85,611 (1987), amended claim denied, 17 DOE  85,291 (1988), reconsideration denied, 20 DOE 
85,236 (1990). 




</FOOTNOTE>

