 

EPA is currently developing a timeline for the development 
of emission standards and test procedures for ethanol-fueled 
vehicles. In the event that manufacturers introduce ethanol- 
fueled vehicles into commerce before federal fuel economy test 
procedures are established, EPA will consider proposing 
California test procedures and a fuel economy equation to ensure 
that a mechanism is in place for ethanol-fueled vehicle CAFE 
credit as soon as possible. 

Today's rule also integrates the energy efficiency 
requirements of the AMFA into EPA's existing fuel economy 
regulations. These requirements must be met for a dual-fueled 
vehicle to be eligible for fuel economy credit. In the NPRM, EPA 
proposed that the manufacturer must test each dual-fueled vehicle 
used for fuel economy purposes on both the city and highway 
driving cycles using three fuels: gasoline or diesel fuel, the 
alternative fuel, and, in the case of alcohol dual-fueled 
automobiles, a 50 percent gasoline/50 percent alcohol mixture to 
satisfy the energy efficiency requirements of the AMFA. 15 U.S.C. 
2013(h)(1)(C) (ii) and (iii). Although testing on both the 
alternative fuel and gasoline fuel is required to determine fuel 
economy, the 50/50 mixture requirement is only needed to 
determine energy efficiency. After considering comments received 
from manufacturers, the EPA realizes that the requirement to test 
every fuel economy vehicle on three fuels could be excessively 
burdensome compared to the requirements for testing gasoline- 
fueled vehicles, which are tested on one fuel. Therefore, for 
dual-fueled vehicles, this final rule requires manufacturers to: 
(1) Perform city and highway fuel economy tests on all vehicles 
used for fuel economy purposes using both gasoline and the 
alcohol fuel and, (2) during initial certification, either 
perform city and highway fuel economy tests on one emission data 
vehicle per engine family using the 50/50 alcohol/gasoline 
mixture or provide a statement attesting that equal or superior 
energy efficiency is attained while using a 50/50 mixture 
compared to using gasoline, where applicable. EPA retains the 
right to audit test any vehicle used for fuel economy purposes to 
confirm the manufacturer's statement. This will reduce the test 
burden on the manufacturer while preserving the intent of the 
energy efficiency requirements of the AMFA by ensuring that 
vehicles are designed to be equally or more energy efficient 
while operating on the alternative fuel and a 50/50 
alcohol/gasoline mixture than when operated on gasoline. 

Today's rule also integrates the fuel economy labeling 
requirements of the AMFA for alternative-fueled vehicles into the 
existing fuel economy regulations. Some minor modifications were 
made to the proposed label formats as a result of comments 
received on the NPRM. These changes are discussed in detail in 
the ``Public Participation'' section. In response to 
manufacturers' comments, the EPA is offering an optional label 
format for dual-fueled vehicles that contains fuel economy values 
for vehicle operation using the alternative fuel. The AMFA 
requires that the fuel economy values while operating on gasoline 
or diesel appear on the label with a statement that further 
information is contained in the Gas Mileage Guide available at 
the dealer. This optional label format contains a limited amount 
of additional information pertaining to the fuel economy while 
operating on the alternative fuel and should reduce consumer 
confusion and frustration in obtaining such fuel economy 
information. Also, this optional label will contain a statement 
that refers to the availability of additional information in the 
Gas Mileage Guide. The label formats established under this 
rulemaking are found in the revised regulations following the 
preamble. 

EPA is working with the Department of Energy (DOE), the 
Department of Transportation (DOT), and the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) to revise the Gas Mileage Guide to include 
information on alternative-fueled vehicles. These changes will 
be coordinated with the FTC's implementation of section 406 of 
the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (Public Law 102486) which mandates 
that the FTC promulgate rules to establish uniform labeling 
requirements for alternative fuels and alternative-fueled 
vehicles, including requirements for appropriate information with 
respect to costs and benefits so as to reasonably enable the 
consumer to make choices and comparisons. The revisions to the 
Gas Mileage Guide (including changing the name of the guide to 
``Fuel Economy Guide'') will not be completed in time for inclusion 
in the 1994 model year guide. Therefore, the fuel economy 
labeling requirements for alternative-fueled vehicles, which 
contain label statements that refer the consumer to the Gas 
Mileage Guide for further information on the fuel economy of 
alternative-fueled vehicles, are applicable beginning with the 
1995 model year. However, those manufacturers who produce 1993 
or 1994 model year alternative-fueled automobiles may optionally 
comply with the labeling regulations in today's rule using the 
appropriate label wording modifications, approved by the 
Administrator, regarding availability of additional information 
in the Gas Mileage Guide. 

The AMFA does not address the applicability of the gas 
guzzler tax to dedicated alternative-fueled vehicles or dual-fueled vehicles. The Secretary of the Treasury (after

consultation with the Secretary of Transportation) is authorized 
by Section 201 of the Energy Tax Act of 1978, 26, U.S.C. 4064 

et 
seq.

, to include in the gas guzzler tax program automobiles 
fueled with any product of petroleum or natural gas, if such 
inclusion is consistent with the need of the nation to conserve 
energy. Consequently, the alternative fuels covered by the AMFA 
could conceivably be included in the gas guzzler tax program. 
Currently the program is limited to passenger automobiles powered 
by gasoline or diesel fuel. The Secretary of Treasury has not 
made a determination to include alcohols or natural gas in the 
gas guzzler program; therefore, dedicated alternative-fueled 
vehicles are currently not included in the guzzler program. In 
the NPRM, the EPA solicited comments regarding whether 
alternative fueled automobiles or dual-fueled automobiles should 
be included in the gas guzzler tax program. The comments were 
forwarded to the Treasury Department for consideration in the 
determination of applicability of gas guzzler tax to dual-fueled 
vehicles. The IRS agreed that EPA's decision to label dual- 
fueled automobiles for gas guzzler tax purposes based on the fuel 
economy while operating on gasoline is in accordance with the 
law. 

To save time and printing costs, some technical amendments of 
40 CFR parts 86 and 600 have also been included in this final 
rule. 


