 

If the claim is denied following the review of the public comments, FSIS would notify the applicant by letter of the
basis for the denial, including the reason why the claim on the labeling was determined by the Administrator to be false
or misleading. The applicant would have the opportunity to appeal this decision by instituting a proceeding that
would be conducted under the same procedures specified above if a labeling application were summarily denied by the
Administrator during the initial review. If the claim is approved by the Administrator, FSIS would notify the applicant
by letter and would also publish in the 

Federal Register

 a final regulation regarding the approval of the claim. The final regulation would amend the regulations to authorize
the use of the health claim in the labeling of meat and poultry products. 

FSIS's proposed labeling application process concerning health claims differs from that of FDA as detailed in 21
CFR 101.70. Although FSIS has attempted to harmonize to the maximum extent possible with FDA in most aspects of nutrition
labeling, FDA's rulemaking process regarding health claims differs from FSIS's statutory authority mandated by
Congress under section 7(e) of the FMIA (21 U.S.C. 607(e) and section 8(d) of the PPIA (21 U.S.C. 457(d)). These statutes
afford applicants whose labeling claims are denied by the Administrator the right to appeal that decision to a Federal
court of appeals. Because of these statutory requirements, the Department has promulgated regulations (9 CFR 335.12,
9 CFR 381.233, and 7 CFR 1.130 

et seq

.) that specify the hearing procedures and rules of practice which are used in proceedings before the Secretary under
section 7(e) of the FMIA and section 8(d) of the PPIA. Accordingly, the labeling application process proposed by FSIS
concerning health claims provides applicants with those same rights to a due process administrative hearing if their
claims are denied by the Administrator, and is thereby consistent with FSIS's statutory requirements. 

When the Administrator has determined that a health claim may be used, firms may make claims based on the regulation
provided that: 

1. All label or labeling statements about the substance-disease or health-related relationship are based on, and
consistent with, the conclusions prescribed in the summary of scientific information and proposed health claims;


2. The claim is limited to describing the value that ingestion of the substance may have on a particular disease or health-related
condition; 

3. The claim is complete, truthful, and not misleading; 

4. All information required to be included in the claim appears in one place without other intervening material, except
that the label may bear the statement, ``See 

XX

 for information about the relationship between 

XX

 and 

XX

,'' with the blanks filled in with references to the location of the labeling containing the health claim, the name
of the substance, and the disease or health-related condition, with the entire claim appearing on the other labeling;


5. The claim enables the public to comprehend the information provided and to understand the relative significance
of such information in the context of the total daily diet; and, 

6. If the claim is about the effects of consuming the substance at decreased dietary levels, the level of the substance
in the food is sufficiently low to justify the claim, or, if the claim is about the effects of consuming the substance
at other than decreased dietary levels, the level of the substance in the food is sufficiently high to justify the claim.




Proposed Effective Date 



Because of the nature and complexity of health claims and the consumer's reliance on them in making decisions on food
purchases, FSIS believes it is essential that health claims be conveyed to consumers in an accurate and informative
manner. Therefore, if this proposal is adopted as a final regulation, FSIS would make the final regulation effective
6 months from the date of publication of the final regulation. FSIS believes that this would provide sufficient time
for meat and poultry producers to conform to the new health claim requirements. It is noted, therefore, that the health
claim requirements would not become effective on July 6, 1994, along with the mandatory nutrition labeling regulations.




List of Subjects 



9 CFR Part 317 



Food labeling, Food packaging, Meat inspection, Recordkeeping and reporting requirements. 



9 CFR Part 381 



Food labeling, Poultry and poultry products, Poultry inspection, Recordkeeping and reporting requirements. 



Proposed Rule 



For the reasons discussed in the preamble, FSIS is proposing to amend 9 CFR parts 317 and 381 of the Federal meat and poultry
products inspection regulations as follows: 



PART 317_LABELING, MARKING DEVICES, AND CONTAINERS 



1. The authority citation for Part 317 would continue to read as follows:






Authority: 

21 U.S.C. 601695; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.55.




2. A new section 317.314 would be added to read as follows: 



317.314

Health claims; general requirements. 



(a) 

Definitions. 

For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 

(1) 

Health claim 

means any claim made on the label or in labeling of a meat or meat food product that expressly or by implication, including
third party references, written statements (e.g., a brand name including a term such as ``heart''), symbols (e.g.,
a heart symbol), or vignettes, characterizes the relationship of any substance to a disease or health-related condition.
Implied health claims include those statements, symbols, vignettes, or other forms of communication that suggest,
within the context in which they are presented, that a relationship exists between the presence or level of a substance
in the meat or meat food product and a disease or health-related condition. 





