 

``Legal representative'' is defined as a parent or other individual 
who is qualified under state law to consent to the immunization 
of a minor. 


Recordkeeping 


Health care providers are not required to obtain the signature of 
the patient, or legal representative, acknowledging receipt of 
the vaccine information materials. To ensure that a record of 
provision of the materials exists, health care providers shall 
make a notation in each patient's permanent medical record 
indicating that the vaccine information materials were provided 
at the time of the vaccination. 


Applicability of State Law 


Health care providers should consult their legal counsel to 
determine additional State requirements pertaining to 
immunization. For example, state law determines who is qualified 
to consent to immunization of minors. The Federal requirement to 
provide the vaccine information materials supplements any 
applicable state law. 


Interim Use of Materials Prior to October 1, 1994 


Prior to October 1, 1994, health care providers may use either 
the vaccine information materials contained in this notice or the 
materials in Appendix A of 42 CFR Part 110. 


Availability of Copies 


Single camera-ready copies of the vaccine information materials 
are available from State health departments.

 


Dated: June 14, 1994.

 



<SIGNER>
David Satcher,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 

 


Polio Vaccine 


What you need to know before you or your child gets the vaccine. 



About the Disease 


Polio is a serious disease. It spreads when germs pass from an 
infected person to the mouths of others. Polio can: 
&bull;Paralyze a person (make arms and legs unable to move). 
&bull;Cause death. 


About the Vaccines 


Benefits of the Vaccine 


Vaccination is the best way to protect against polio. Because 
most children get the polio vaccine, there are now very few cases 
of this disease. Before most children were vaccinated, there were 
thousands of cases of polio. 


There are 2 Kinds of Polio Vaccine 


OPV or 

O

ral 

P

olio 

V

accine is the one most often given to 
children. It is given by mouth as drops. It is easy to give and 
works well to stop the spread of polio. 
IPV or 

I

nactivated 

P

olio 

V

accine is given as a shot in the leg or arm. 


OPV Schedule 


Most children should have a total of 4 OPV vaccines. They should 
have OPV at:




2 months of age 
4 months of age 
618 months of age 
46 years of age

 

Other vaccines may be given at the same time as OPV. 


Who Should Get OPV? 


Most doctors recommend that almost all young children get OPV. 
But there are some cautions. Tell your doctor or nurse if the 
person getting the vaccine or anyone else in close contact with 
the person getting the vaccine is less able to fight serious 
infections because of: 
&bull;A disease she/he was born with. 
&bull;Treatment with drugs such as long-term steroids. 
&bull;Any kind of cancer. 


</SIGNJOB>
