 

<DATE>
DATES:

 Written comments will be considered if we receive them at the appropriate address, as provided below, and must be received
no later than 5:00 p.m. on January 17, 1995. 

 

</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Mail written comments (one original and two copies) to the following address: 

 


Health Care Financing Administration, Department of Health and Human Services, Attention: MB60P,
P.O. Box 7518, Baltimore, Maryland 212070518. 

 


If you prefer, you may deliver your written comments (one original and two copies) to one of the following addresses:


 


Room 309G, Hubert H. Humphrey Building, 200 Independence Ave., SW., Washington, DC or

Room 132, East High Rise Building, 6325 Security Boulevard, 
Baltimore, Maryland. 

 


Due to staffing and resource limitations, we cannot accept comments by facsimile (FAX) transmissions. 

In commenting, please refer to file code MB60P. Written comments received timely will be available
for public inspection as they are received, beginning approximately three weeks after publication of this document,
in Room 309G of the Department's offices at 200 Independence Ave., SW., Washington, DC on Monday through Friday
of each week from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (phone: 6907890). 

If you wish to submit written comments on the information collection requirements contained in this proposed rule,
you may submit written comments to: 

 


Laura Oliven, HCFA Desk Officer, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Room 3001, New Executive Office Building,
Washington, D.C. 20503. 

 

</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Winona Hocutt, (410) 9664625. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 

I. Background 



Medicaid is the Federally assisted State program authorized under title XIX of the Social Security Act (the Act) to
provide funding for medical care provided to certain needy aged, blind and disabled persons, families with dependent
children, and low-income pregnant women and children. Each State determines the scope of its program, within limitations
and guidelines established by the law and the implementing regulations at 42 CFR chapter IV, subchapter C. Each State
submits a State plan that, when approved by HCFA, provides the basis for granting Federal funds to cover part of the
expenditures incurred by the State for medical assistance and the administration of the program. 

Section 1902(a) of the Act specifies the eligibility requirements that individuals must meet in order to receive
Medicaid. Other sections of the Act describe the eligibility groups in detail and specify limitations on what may
be paid for as ``medical assistance.'' 



II. Statutory and Regulatory History_Inpatient Psychiatric Hospital Services Benefit for Individuals Under Age
21 



The Social Security Amendments of 1972 (Public Law 92603) amended the Medicaid statute to, among other things,
allow States the option of covering inpatient psychiatric hospital services for individuals under age 21. In this
preamble, we will refer to inpatient psychiatric hospital services for individuals under age 21 as the ``psychiatric

L

21 benefit.'' Originally the statute required that the psychiatric

L

21 benefit be provided by psychiatric hospitals that were accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Hospitals. This organization is now called the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations.
We will refer to this organization as the ``Joint Commission.'' 


</SUPPLEM>
