 

&bull;role of academic performance, athletics or other extracurricular activities as a protective factor for violent
behavior; 
&bull;history of prior victimization as a predictor of risk for future homicide/assault perpetration or victimization.


Also of interest is research that more accurately defines the cost of violent injuries and the cost effectiveness
or prevention effectiveness of interventions. Cost analysis should be included in the plans, where appropriate,
to evaluate an intervention(s) that addresses one of the three priority areas of violence-related injury research
previously outlined, (i.e., youth suicide, firearm injuries, and interpersonal youth violence). A more complete
discussion of methodologies for assessing cost analysis is presented in, A Framework for Assessing the Effectiveness
of Disease and Injury Prevention, (CDC, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, March 27, 1992, Volume 41, Number
RR3, pages 511). (To receive information on these reports see the section 

WHERE TO OBTAIN ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

.) 


Evaluation Criteria 




Upon receipt, applications will be screened by CDC staff for completeness and responsiveness as outlined under the
previous heading, Program Requirements (AF). Incomplete applications and applications that are not responsive
will be returned to the applicant without further consideration. Applications which are complete and responsive
may be subjected to a preliminary evaluation by a peer review group to determine if the application is of sufficient
technical and scientific merit to warrant further review (triage); the CDC will withdraw from further consideration
applications judged to be noncompetitive and promptly notify the principal investigator/program director and
the official signing for the applicant organization. Those applications judged to be competitive will be further
evaluated by a dual review process. Awards will be made based on priority score ranking by the Injury Research Grants
Review Committee (IRGRC), programmatic priorities and needs by the Advisory Committee for Injury Prevention and
Control, and the availability of funds. 

A. The first review will be a peer review to be conducted on all applications. Factors to be considered will include:


1. The specific aims of the research project, i.e., the broad long-term objectives, the intended accomplishment
of the specific research proposal, and the hypothesis to be tested; 


2. The background of the proposal, i.e., the basis for the present proposal, the critical evaluation of existing knowledge,
and specific identification of the injury control knowledge gaps which the proposal is intended to fill; 
3. The significance and originality from a scientific or technical standpoint of the specific aims of the proposed
research, including the adequacy of the theoretical and conceptual framework for the research; 
4. For competitive renewal and supplemental applications, the progress made during the prior project period. For
new applications, (optional) the progress of preliminary studies pertinent to the application; 
5. The adequacy of the proposed research design, approaches, and methodology to carry out the research, including
quality assurance procedures, plan for data management, and statistical analysis plan; 
6. The extent to which the evaluation plan will allow for the measurement of progress toward the achievement of the
stated objectives; 
7. Qualifications, adequacy, and appropriateness of personnel to accomplish the proposed activities; 
8. The degree of commitment and cooperation of other interested parties (as evidenced by letters detailing the nature
and extent of the involvement); 
9. The reasonableness of the proposed budget to the proposed research and demonstration program; 
10. Adequacy of existing and proposed facilities and 
resources. 
B. The second review will be conducted by the Advisory Committee for Injury Prevention and Control. The factors to
be considered will include: 
1. The results of the peer review; 


