 

Juvenile Restitution: Balanced Approach_$100,000 

 

OJJDP proposes to continue to support the juvenile restitution training and technical assistance program in fiscal
year 1995. The project design is based on practitioner recommendations for current needs in the field. OJJDP initiated
a survey on how best to integrate and institutionalize restitution as a key component of juvenile justice dispositions.
In addition to the survey, a working group was convened to help map out the course of OJJDP's support for optimum development
of the components of restitution. These components include community service, victim reparation, victim-offender
mediation, offender employment and supervision, employment development, and potential program elements designed
to establish restitution as an important alternative in improving the juvenile justice system. This project is guided
by the need to provide a balance of community protection and offender competency development and accountability
in the provision of community-based sanctions. 

 The Division of Applied Research of Florida Atlantic University was competitively selected in fiscal year 1992 to
implement this project. The grant would be extended in fiscal year 1995 to support States that have enacted balanced
approach legislation. No additional applications would be solicited in fiscal year 1995. 

 

Professional Development for Youth Workers_$50,000 

 

The primary purpose of this program is to promote professional development of youth service and juvenile justice
system providers through formal training. The program will include an inventory of existing training programs and
their effectiveness, a needs assessment training survey, development of curricula for several program settings,
design of a dissemination strategy, and an implementation plan for the third year of a three-year program. 

 Initially funded in fiscal year 1992, the Academy for Educational Development, Inc., will continue the project for
six months to train trainers in the new curricula. No additional applications will be solicited in fiscal year 1995.


 

Insular Area Support*_$403,000 

 

The purpose of this program is to provide supplemental financial support to the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa,
the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (Palau), and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Funds are
available to address the special needs and problems of juvenile delinquency in these insular areas, as specified
by Section 261(e) of the JJDP Act, 42 U.S.C. 5665(e). 

 

Permanent Families for Abused and Neglected Children*_$225,000 

 

This is a national project to prevent unnecessary foster care placement of abused and neglected children, to reunify
the families of children in care, and to ensure permanent adoptive homes when reunification is impossible. The purpose
is to ensure that foster care is used only as a last resort and as a temporary solution. Accordingly, the project is designed
to ensure that government's responsibility to children in foster care is acknowledged by the appropriate disciplines.
Project activities include national training programs for judges, social service personnel, citizen volunteers,
and others under the Reasonable Efforts Provision of 42 U.S.C. 671(a)(15), training in selected lead States; and
development of a model guide for risk assessment. The program will be implemented by the current grantee, the National
Council of Family and Juvenile Court Judges. No additional applications will be solicited in fiscal year 1995. 

 

Robeson County, North Carolina*_$202,645 

 

This grant is to the State of North Carolina to continue implementing a pilot program for African-American males,
ages 12 to 15, who, in lieu of confinement, will be supervised in the community and assigned to a weekend academy where
they will receive intensive services including counseling, tutoring, conflict resolution, and job training. In
the first year, 100 juveniles were expected to be served. Second-year funds will be used to continue and expand the
program. 

 

Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania*_$50,000 

 

With fiscal year 1995 funds, the District Attorney's Office in Lackawanna County created a Comprehensive Juvenile
Crime Unit to investigate, prosecute, and prevent juvenile crime and to coordinate with other county agencies that
are helping youth avoid delinquent behavior and become productive citizens. The primary activity will be to establish
a Juvenile Justice Task Force to work with the Juvenile Probation Office to assess the needs and services of Lackawanna
County. The Task Force will also review the last five years of the Juvenile Probation Office files to determine demographics,
numbers of juvenile crimes committed, recidivism, and school district disciplinary and rehabilitation programs.
Fiscal year 1995 funds will complete implementation of this program. 

 

Improvement of the Juvenile Justice System_New Programs 

 

The new programs funded under this objective support OJJDP's Comprehensive Strategy for Serious, Violent, and Chronic
Juvenile Offenders. In addition, program development will be provided to the PACT (Pulling America's Communities
Together) program sites. The four violence studies will provide valuable information on community violence patterns,
focusing on homicides, and will identify strategic law enforcement responses. Child-centered community policing
will be furthered in New Haven, Connecticut, and the city's exemplary program will serve as a host site for training
other jurisdictions. In another effort, promising program models for prevention, intervention, and treatment
of female juvenile offenders will be identified, documented, and made available to jurisdictions across the country.
Other projects will focus on detention and corrections to help the juvenile justice system refocus resources on confined
offenders and improve conditions of confinement. 

 Finally, a major program under this objective will focus on community interventions with violent youth gangs. Additional
Part D funds will expand the OJJDP Integrated Gang Program in the areas of evaluation, research, training, technical
assistance, and information dissemination. Cities experiencing gang problems will benefit directly from expanded
information and technical assistance to address gang violence. 




