 

(h) 

Procedures for removing flood control restoration zone designation due to adequate progress or complete restoration
of the flood protection system. 

At any time during the restoration period, the community may provide written evidence of certification from a Federal
agency having flood protection design or construction responsibility that the necessary improvements have been
completed and that the system has been restored to provide a minimum 100-year level of protection, or may submit a request
for a finding of adequate progress that meets all requirements of section 61.12. If the Director determines that adequate
progress has been made, FEMA will revise the zone designation from a flood control restoration zone designation to
Zone A99. After the improvements have been completed and certified by a Federal agency as providing a minimum 100-year
level of protection, FEMA will revise the Flood Insurance Rate Map to reflect the completed flood control system.

(i) 

Procedures for removing flood control restoration zone designation due to non-compliance with the restoration
schedule or as a result of a finding that satisfactory progress is not being made to complete the restoration. 

At any time during the restoration period, should the Director determine that the restoration will not be completed
in accordance with the time frame specified in the restoration plan, or that satisfactory progress is not being made
to restore the flood protection system to provide complete flood protection in accordance with the restoration plan,
the Director shall notify the community and the responsible Federal agency, in writing, of the determination, the
reasons for that determination, and that the Flood Insurance Rate Map will be revised to remove the flood control restoration
zone designation. Within thirty (30) days of such notice, the community may submit written information that provides
assurance that the restoration will be completed in accordance with the time frame specified in the restoration plan,
or that satisfactory progress is being made to restore complete protection in accordance with the restoration plan,
or that, with reasonable certainty, the restoration will be completed within the maximum restoration period, which
may not exceed ten (10) years from the date of submittal of the community's application for designation of a flood control
restoration zone. On the basis of this information the Director may suspend the decision to revise the Flood Insurance
Rate Map to remove the flood control restoration zone designation. If the community does not submit any information,
or if, based on a review of the information submitted, there is sufficient cause to find that the restoration will not
be completed as provided for in the restoration plan, the Director shall revise the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in accordance
with 44 CFR Part 67, and shall remove the flood control restoration zone designations and shall redesignate those
areas as Zone A130, AE, AH, AO, or A. 



PART 70_PROCEDURE FOR MAP CORRECTION 


12. The authority citation for Part 70 is revised to read as follows:






Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.; Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1978, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 329; E.O. 12127, 3 CFR, 1979 Comp., p.
376.




13. Section 70.1 is revised to read as follows: 



70.1


Purpose of part. 


The purpose of this part is to provide an administrative procedure whereby the Director will review the scientific
or technical submissions of an owner or lessee of property who believes his property has been inadvertently included
in designated A, AO, A130, AE, AH, A99, AR, AR/A130, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V130, VE, and
V Zones, as a result of the transposition of the curvilinear line to either street or to other readily identifiable
features. The necessity for this part is due in part to the technical difficulty of accurately delineating the curvilinear
line on either a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map. These procedures shall not apply when there
has been any alteration of topography since the effective date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map (i.e.,
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map) showing the property within an area of special flood hazard.
Appeals in such circumstances are subject to the provisions of part 65 of this subchapter. 
14. Section 70.3(a) is revised to read as follows: 


70.3

 Right to submit technical information. 


(a) Any owner or lessee of property (applicant) who believes his property has been inadvertently included in a designated
A, AO, A130, AE, AH, A99, AR, AR/A130, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V130, VE, and V Zones on a Flood
Hazard Boundary Map or a Flood Insurance Rate Map, may submit scientific or technical information to the Director
for the Director's review. 


* * * * * 


15. The heading and paragraphs (a) and (b) of 70.4 are revised to read as follows: 


70.4 

Review by the Director. 


* * * * * 


(a) The property is within a designated A, AO, A130, AE, AH, A99, AR, AR/A130, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V130, VE, or V Zone, and shall set forth the basis of such determination; or 
(b) The property should not be included within a designated A, AO, A130, AE, AH, A99, AR, AR/A130, AR/AE,
AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V130, VE, or V Zone and that the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map
will be modified accordingly; or 


* * * * * 


16. Paragraph (c) of section 70.5 is revised to read as follows: 









