 

(2) 

Bankruptcy.

 When the credit information shows that the borrower or spouse has been discharged in bankruptcy under the ``straight''
liquidation and discharge provisions of the bankruptcy law, this would not in itself disqualify the loan. However,
in such cases it is necessary to develop complete information as to the facts and circumstances concerning the bankruptcy.
Generally speaking, when the borrower or spouse, as the case may be, has been regularly employed (not self-employed)
and has been discharged in bankruptcy within the last 2 or 3 years, it probably would not be possible to determine that
the borrower or spouse is a satisfactory credit risk unless both of the following requirements are satisfied:

(i) The borrower or spouse has obtained credit subsequent to the bankruptcy and has met the credit payments in a satisfactory
manner over a continued period, and

(ii) The bankruptcy was caused by circumstances beyond control of the borrower or spouse, e.g., unemployment, prolonged
strikes, medical bills not covered by insurance. The circumstances alleged must be verified. If a borrower or spouse
is self-employed, has been adjudicated bankrupt, and subsequently obtains a permanent position, a finding as to
satisfactory credit risk may be made provided there is no derogatory credit information prior to self-employment,
there is no evidence of derogatory credit information subsequent to the bankruptcy, and the failure of the business
was not due to misconduct. A bankruptcy discharged more than 5 years ago may be disregarded. A bankruptcy discharged
between 3 and 5 years ago may be given some consideration, depending upon the circumstances of the bankruptcy and submission
of evidence that the veteran has been paying his or her obligations in a timely manner.

(3) 

Petition under Chapter 13 of Bankruptcy Law.

 A wage earner's petition under chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy Law filed by the borrower or spouse is indicative of an effort
to pay their creditors. Some plans may provide for full payment of debts while others arrange for payment of scaled
down debts. Regular payments are made to a court-appointed trustee over a 2- to 3-year period (or up to 5 years in some
cases). When the borrowers have made all payments in a satisfactory manner, they may be considered as having reestablished
satisfactory credit. When they apply for a home loan before completion of the payout period, favorable consideration
may nevertheless be given if at least three-fourths of the payments have been made satisfactorily and the Trustee
or Bankruptcy Judge (Referee) approves of the new credit.

(4) 

Foreclosures.

 (i) When the credit information shows that the veteran or spouse has had a foreclosure on a prior mortgage, e.g., a VA
guaranteed, or HUD insured mortgage, this will not in itself disqualify the borrower from obtaining the loan. Lenders
and field station personnel should refer to the preceding guidelines on bankruptcies for cases involving foreclosures.
As with a borrower who has been adjudicated bankrupt, it is necessary to develop complete information as to the facts
and circumstances of the foreclosure.

(ii) When VA pays a claim on a VA guaranteed loan as a result of a foreclosure, the original veteran may be required to
repay any loss to the Government. In some instances VA may waive the veteran's debt, in part or totally, based on the
facts and circumstances of the case. However, guaranty entitlement cannot be restored unless the Government's loss
has been repaid in full, regardless of whether or not the debt has been waived, compromised, or discharged in bankruptcy.
Therefore, a veteran who is seeking a new VA loan after having experienced a foreclosure on a prior VA loan will in most
cases have only remaining entitlement to apply to the new loan. The lender should assure that the veteran has sufficient
entitlement for its secondary marketing purposes.

(5) 

Federal debts.

 An applicant for a Federally-assisted loan will not be considered a satisfactory credit risk for such loan if the applicant
is presently delinquent or in default on any debt to the Federal Government, e.g., a Small Business Administration
loan, a U.S. Guaranteed Student loan, a debt to the Public Health Service, or where there is a judgment lien against
the applicant's property for a debt owed to the Government. The applicant may not be approved for the loan until the
delinquent account has been brought current or satisfactory arrangements have been made between the borrower and
the Federal agency owed, or the judgment is paid or otherwise satisfied. Of course, the applicant must also be able
to otherwise qualify for the loan from an income and remaining credit standpoint. Refinancing under VA's interest
rate reduction refinancing provisions, however, is allowed even if the borrower is delinquent on the VA guaranteed
mortgage being refinanced. Prior approval processing is required in such cases.

(6) 

Absence of credit history.

 The fact that recently discharged veterans may have had no opportunity to develop a credit history will not preclude
a determination of satisfactory credit. Similarly, other loan applicants may not have established credit histories
as a result of a preference for purchasing consumer items with cash rather than credit. There are also cases in which
individuals may be genuinely wary of acquiring new obligations following bankruptcy, consumer credit counseling
(debt proration), or other disruptive credit occurrence. The absence of the credit history in these cases will not
generally be viewed as an adverse factor in credit underwriting. However, before a favorable decision is made for
cases involving bankruptcies or other derogatory credit factors, efforts should be made to develop evidence of timely
payment of non-installment debts such as rent and utilities. It is anticipated that this special consideration in
the absence of a credit history following bankruptcy would be the rare case and generally confined to bankruptcies
which occurred over 3 years ago.


