 

(1) Whether or not the resident, because of the resident's physical and mental condition, requires the level of services
of an intermediate care facility described under section 1905(d) (ICF/MR); and 


(2) Whether or not the resident requires specialized services for mental retardation. 


We assume that the evaluation of need noted above would be accomplished during the annual resident review. (The requirement
that the States use the PASARR process in conducting these evaluations was established by HCFA and is not contained
in section 1915(c)(2)(B) of the Act.) 



Section 411(k)(10)(H) of MCCA amended section 1915(c)(7)(B) of the Act to clarify that, in making estimates as to
cost-neutrality in a waiver that applies exclusively to developmentally disabled individuals under section 1915(c)(7)(B)
of the Act, who have been identified as inappropriately placed in NFs, yet requiring the level of services provided
by an ICF/MR, the State may estimate utilization without regard to the availability of ICF/MR beds for such inpatients.
Therefore, section 1915(c)(7)(B) exempts States from the requirement to demonstrate ICF/MR bed capacity for recipients
served by waivers proposed under section 1915(c)(7)(B) of the Act. 


b. 

Provisions of the final rule. 

We have added a new 441.303(f)(4) to provide that, in making estimates for a separate waiver program that applies
only to individuals (1) who are developmentally disabled, (2) who are inpatients of a NF, and (3) who have been determined
by the State through the PASARR process (section 1919(e)(7)(B) of the Act) to require the level of care provided in
an ICF/MR, the State may determine the average per capita expenditures that would have been made in a fiscal year for
those individuals based on the average per capita expenditures for inpatients in an ICF/MR. When submitting estimates
of institutional costs without the waiver, the State may use the average per capita costs of ICF/MR care even though
the deinstitutionalized developmentally disabled individuals were inpatients of NFs. We will consider timely
comments submitted on this addition. 





4. Computation of Expenditure Estimates for Persons With Mental Retardation or a Related Condition in a Decertified
Facility 





a. 

Background. 

Section 4742(c)(1) of OBRA '90 added a new section 1915(c)(7)(C) to the Act relating to waivers for individuals with
mental retardation or a related condition who are residents in an ICF/MR that has had its participation under the State's
Medicaid plan terminated. This added provision allows a State, when making estimates under section 1915(c)(2)(D)
of the Act, to determine the average per capita expenditures under a waiver that would have been made in a fiscal year
for those individuals without regard to the termination and as if Medicaid institutional payment continued. Termination
of an ICF/MR's participation under a State plan does not affect estimates made under section 1915(c)(2)(D). 


Section 4742(c)(2) provides that this provision applies as if included in the enactment of OBRA '81, but only applies
to facilities terminated on or after November 5, 1990, the enactment date of OBRA '90. 


b. 

Provisions of the final rule. 

We are adding a new 441.303(f)(7) to state that in making estimates for waivers that apply to persons with mental
retardation or related conditions, States may include costs and utilization of Medicaid residents in ICFs/MR that
have been terminated on or after November 5, 1990, when determining the average per capita expenditure that would
have been made in a waiver year. We will consider timely comments submitted on this addition. 





5. Adjustments in Estimates To Include Preadmission 
Screening Requirements 




a. 

Background. 

Section 4742(e) of OBRA '90 provides that, under section 1915(c) of the Act, a State may adjust its waiver estimates,
submitted under section 1915(c)(2)(D) of the Act, of average per capita expenditures for individuals with mental
retardation or a related condition to include expenditures made on or after January 1, 1989, that result from the preadmission
screening program required under section 1919(e)(7)(B) of the Act. The State may include increases in expenditures
for, or utilization of, ICFs/MR resulting from its preadmission screening program for making determinations for
individuals with mental retardation admitted to NFs on or after January 1, 1989. 


b. 

Provisions of the final rule. 

We are adding a new section 441.303(f)(9) to incorporate the provisions of section 4742(e) of OBRA '90. We will consider
timely comments submitted on this addition. 



