 

(d) Requests for Treasury check advance payment shall be submitted on SF270, ``Request for Advance or Reimbursement,''
or other forms as may be authorized by OMB. This form is not to be used when Treasury check advance payments are made to
the recipient automatically through the use of a predetermined payment schedule or if precluded by special DOL instructions
for electronic funds transfer. 
(e) Reimbursement is the preferred method when the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section cannot be met. DOL
may also use this method on any construction agreement, or if the major portion of the construction project is accomplished
through private market financing or Federal loans, and the Federal assistance constitutes a minor portion of the
project. 
(1) When the reimbursement method is used, DOL shall make payment within 30 days after receipt of the billing, unless
the billing is improper. 
(2) Recipients are authorized to submit requests for reimbursement monthly when electronic funds transfers are
not used. 

(f) If a recipient cannot meet the criteria for advance payments and DOL has determined that reimbursement is not feasible
because the recipient lacks sufficient working capital, DOL may provide cash on a working capital advance basis.
Under this procedure, DOL shall advance cash to the recipient to cover its estimated disbursement needs for an initial
period generally geared to the awardee's disbursing cycle. Thereafter, DOL shall reimburse the recipient for its
actual cash disbursements. The working capital advance method of payment shall not be used for recipients unwilling
or unable to provide timely advances to their subrecipient to meet the subrecipient's actual cash disbursements.


(g) To the extent available, recipients shall disburse funds available from repayments to and interest earned on
a revolving fund, program income, rebates, refunds, contract settlements, audit recoveries and interest earned
on such funds before requesting additional cash payments. 
(h) Unless otherwise required by statute, DOL shall not withhold payments for proper charges made by recipients at
any time during the project period unless paragraphs (h)(1) or (h)(2) of this section apply. 

(1) A recipient has failed to comply with the project objectives, the terms and conditions of the award, or Federal
reporting requirements. 
(2) The recipient or subrecipient is delinquent in a debt to the United States as defined in OMB Circular A129,
``Managing Federal Credit Programs.'' Under such conditions, DOL may, upon reasonable notice, inform the recipient
that payments shall not be made for obligations incurred after a specified date until the conditions are corrected
or the indebtedness to the Federal Government is liquidated. 
(i) Standards governing the use of banks and other institutions as depositories of funds advanced under awards are
as follows: 
(1) Except for situations described in paragraph (i)(2) of this section, DOL shall not require separate depository
accounts for funds provided to a recipient or establish any eligibility requirements for depositories for funds
provided to a recipient. However, recipients must be able to account for the receipt, obligation and expenditure
of funds. 




