 

As proposed in the NPRM, specific references in ADAAG 4.1.1(1) to the scoping requirements for accessible sites and
exterior facilities (4.1.2), newly constructed buildings (4.1.3), and alterations (4.1.6) have been deleted.
ADAAG 4.1.1(2) has been amended to delete the reference to specific special applications sections currently in ADAAG.
These modifications do not change the substance of this provision but merely remove unnecessary references for clarity.



4.1.1(5)General Exceptions



ADAAG 4.1.1(5)(b), as revised, exempts from the requirements for accessibility prison guard towers, fire towers,
fixed life guard towers, and other areas raised for purposes of security or life or fire safety; non-occupiable spaces
accessed only by tunnels and frequented by service personnel for maintenance or occasional monitoring of equipment;
and single-occupancy structures accessed by passageways above or below grade.

 

Comment.

 The NPRM asked for comment on the basis or rationale for any recommended exception. There was no clear consensus among
commenters responding to this question. Recommendations were made for exceptions based on the nature, use, or size
of the facility, the cost of providing accessibility, occupancy load, and the safety and security of occupants. Some
commenters, including several disability organizations, noted that certain facilities may merit exemption. For
example, the Disability Rights and Education Defense Fund, stated that ``very small occupancy facilities ***
which house only one or two persons could be treated differently (possibly exempted).'' Several commenters, however,
cautioned that any exception should be carefully and specifically written so as not to be interpreted more broadly
than was intended. A few comments suggested that exceptions list specific facilities and structures while others
recommended exceptions that would allow facilities to be considered for exception on a case-by-case basis. Some
comments urged that no further exception be provided. 



Response.

 Exceptions that list specific facilities are more easily interpreted than exceptions stated in general terms. However,
exceptions based on specific facilities may exclude other facilities of a more unique nature that were not noted in
comments or considered during rulemaking. Consequently, exceptions have been provided in ADAAG 4.1.1(5) (General
Exceptions) according to the structural limitations that make accessibility infeasible. These exceptions contain
examples of specific facilities.

 

Comment.

 Prison operators and corrections officials recommended that prison guard towers and other raised security posts
be exempt. In addition, it was recommended that access not be required to upper level prison cells where multi-tier
housing is provided since elevator and other confined spaces present security risks.



Response.

 Prison guard towers and other elevated security areas are similar in nature and use to ``observation galleries used
primarily for security purposes'' currently exempt in ADAAG 4.1.1(5)(b)(i) and have been incorporated into this
exception. With respect to upper level prison cells, ADAAG 12 (Detention and Correctional Facilities) requires
that only a percentage of prison cells be accessible. An accessible route is not required to all cells, including those
that may be located on upper tiers accessed only by stairs. See ADAAG 12.

 

Comment.

 The NPRM asked whether design solutions are available for making certain structures accessible such as fire towers
and fixed life guard stands. These facilities are typically not considered to be ``multi-story'' according to building
codes or the definition of ``story'' in ADAAG 3.5 (Definitions) and thus are not subject to the requirement in ADAAG
4.1.3(5) for a passenger elevator. However, such facilities are otherwise subject to the requirements for accessibility,
including the requirement for an accessible route in ADAAG 4.1.3(1). Ramps and, in some cases platform lifts, may
be part of an accessible route. A majority of commenters recommended that fire towers and life guard stands be exempt
due to the lack of design solutions to provide access.



Response.

 The standard design and elevation of fire towers typically prohibit installation of a ramp or elevator in accordance
with appropriate local or State building codes. Similarly, fixed life guard stands by their design and construction
cannot easily sustain platform lifts or ramps. The exception in ADAAG 4.1.1(5)(b)(i) which addresses ``raised areas
used primarily for purposes of security'' has been revised to cover those areas that are raised for purposes of life
or fire safety, such as fire towers and fixed life guard towers which are listed in this provision as examples. 

 

Comment.

 ADAAG 4.1.1(5)(b)(ii) exempted ``non-occupiable spaces accessed only by ladders, catwalks crawl spaces, very
narrow passageways, or freight (non-passenger) elevators, and frequented only by service personnel for repair
purposes.'' Commenters recommended that this exception be revised to address certain limited use utility facilities
often found in the public sector. Such facilities include water and sewage treatment pump rooms and stations, electric
substations, transformer vaults, and highway and tunnel utility facilities. These facilities do not qualify for
the existing exception because they may be frequented not only for repair purposes but for maintenance and monitoring
of equipment as well. Further, some of these facilities may be accessed by tunnels instead of ladders, catwalks, crawl
spaces, very narrow passageways, or freight elevators.



Response.

 The existing exception has been revised to include non-occupiable spaces accessed by tunnels. In addition, the phrase
``frequented only for repair purposes'' has been modified to include ``maintenance'' and ``occasional monitoring
of equipment.'' Water and sewage treatment pump rooms and stations, electric substations, transformer vaults,
and highway and tunnel utility facilities are listed as examples of the exception.

 

Comment.

 The NPRM asked whether design solutions exist for providing access to toll booths. The response to this question was
mixed. Several commenters indicated that toll booths are currently required to be accessible in the State of California.
In addition, the Institutional and Municipal Parking Congress noted that cashier booths, such as those found in large
parking facilities, are ``virtually indistinguishable'' from toll booths, and have been made accessible according
to ADAAG. However, other commenters noted that some toll booths are accessed from below through underground tunnels
so that toll booth operators need not cross vehicular traffic. While access is considered feasible from grade level,
access from tunnels or passageways below grade would be difficult according to existing toll booth design. Some State
transportation departments noted that requiring grade-level access would compromise employee safety. 



Response.

 An exception has been provided in ADAAG 4.1.1(5)(b)(iii) for single occupant structures accessed only by passageways
above or below grade, such as toll booths that are required to be accessed from tunnels below grade. This exception
does not apply to toll booths accessed at grade level.

 

Comment.

 Other facilities recommended by commenters for exception include: cashier booths, border station inspection booths,
guard booths, and portable classroom structures.



Response.

 These recommendations did not point to specific structural conditions that would make access infeasible. Consequently,
such facilities would not be exempt unless the conditions listed in ADAAG 4.1.1(5) (General Exceptions) are met.


