 

STATE: NEBRASKA 


COMBINATION: Truck-trailer 
LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 68 feet 
OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: 




WEIGHT: 

This combination must operate in compliance with State laws and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject
to the ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight. 


DRIVER: 

The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the appropriate endorsement. 


VEHICLE: 

The overall vehicle length, including load, cannot exceed 75 feet. 


PERMIT: 

No permit is required. 


ACCESS: 

Statewide during daylight hours only. 
ROUTES: All NN routes. 
LEGAL CITATIONS: Neb. Rev. Stat. 396,179.


STATE: NEVADA 


COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units_LCV 
LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet 
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds 
OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: 




WEIGHT: 

The single-axle weight limit is 20,000 pounds, the tandem-axle weight limit is 34,000 pounds, and the gross weight
is subject to the Federal Bridge Formula limits, provided that two consecutive tandems with a distance of 36 feet or
more between the first and last axle may carry 34,000 pounds on each tandem. 


DRIVER: 

The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the appropriate endorsement, be at least 25 years old, and
have had a medical exam within previous 24 months. Every operator must be covered by a liability insurance policy with
personal injury and property damage limits meeting State requirements. 


VEHICLE: 

No trailer may be longer than 48 feet. If one trailer is 48 feet long, the other trailer cannot exceed 42 feet. Towed vehicles
must not shift or sway more than 3 inches to right or left and must track in a straight line on a level, smooth paved highway.
Vehicles must be able to accelerate and operate on a level highway at speeds which are compatible with other traffic
and with the speed limits and must be able to maintain a minimum of 20 miles per hour on any grade on which they may operate.
All vehicles must have safety chains on converter dollies. Vehicles must carry snow chains for each drive wheel. 
Vehicle operations may be suspended in adverse weather and high winds, as determined by police or the Nevada DOT. 
The shortest trailer must be in the rear of a combination unless it is heavier than the longer trailer. 
Brakes must comply with all State and Federal requirements for commercial vehicles including automatic braking
for separation of vehicles, parking brakes, and working lights. 
Vehicles must not exceed posted speed limits and cannot operate on any highway on which they cannot at all times stay
on the right side of the center line. All LCV's must keep a distance of at least 500 feet from each other. 
Every full-sized truck or truck tractor used in a combination of vehicles must be equipped with at least the following
emergency and safety equipment: 
1. One fire extinguisher which meets ``Classification B'' of the National Fire Protection Association. 
2. One spare light bulb for every electrical lighting device used on the rear of the last vehicle in a combination of
vehicles. 
3. One spare fuse for each different kind and size of fuse used in every vehicle in the combination of vehicles. If the
electrical system of any vehicle in the combination contains any devices for protection of electrical circuits from
overloading, other than fuses and circuit breakers which can be reset, one spare of each such device must be kept as
emergency and safety equipment. 
4. Any flares, reflectors or red electrical lanterns which meet State or Federal law or regulation. 
Before operating a combination of vehicles on a highway of this State, the owner or operator of the combination shall
certify to the Nevada DOT, on a form provided by it, that all vehicles and equipment in the combination meet the requirements
of and will be operated in compliance with NAC 484.300 to 484.440, inclusive. 
All axles except for steering axles and axles that weigh less than 10,000 pounds must have at least four tires unless
the tire width of each tire on the axles is 14 inches or greater. 


PERMIT: 

Permits are required and a fee is charged. They may be revoked for violation of any of the provisions of the legal regulations.
The State may suspend operation on roads deemed unsafe or impracticable. Permits must be carried in the vehicle along
with identification devices issued by the Nevada Department of Motor Vehicles. 


ACCESS: 

As authorized by the Nevada DOT. 
ROUTES: All NN routes, except US 93 from Nevada State route 500 to Arizona. 
LEGAL CITATIONS: NRS 484.400, .405(4), .425, .430, .739, 408.1004, .1006(a), and 706.531. Also, ``Regulations
for the Operation of 70 to 105 foot Combinations'' (1990). 



