 

This tentative final monograph addresses specifically the use of these topical antiseptic drug products by health-care
professionals and in health-care facilities. The labeling proposed for those products in this document represents
that labeling which the agency believes health-care professionals need to properly use these products. Therefore,
the agency believes that the warnings proposed in 333.450(c) of this tentative final monograph should appear
in the labeling of these products that are directed to health-care professionals and health-care facilities, even
if the product is marketed principally to these sources only. However, the agency believes that one of these warnings
can be modified if the product is labeled ``For Hospital and Professional Use Only.'' In such cases, the second sentence
of the warning proposed in 333.450(c)(3), regarding consulting a doctor, can be deleted. This concept is being
included in this tentative final monograph. (See 333.450(d).) 

In responding to the comments regarding the warnings in the ``Professional labeling'' section (333.99) of
the previous tentative final monograph, the agency has determined that these warnings are no longer necessary. Accordingly,
333.99 is not being included in this amended tentative final monograph. (See section I.D., comment 9 for discussion
of 333.99(a), and section I.J., comment 21 for discussion of 333.99(b). Also, see section II.B., paragraph
14 in the first aid antiseptic segment of this tentative final monograph (56 FR 33644 at 33675) for discussion of 333.99(c).)


9. Several comments made recommendations regarding the requirement that professional labeling for all classes
of OTC topical antimicrobial drug products must contain the caution statement in proposed 333.99(a), ``Caution:
Overuse of this and other antimicrobial products may result in an overgrowth of gram-negative micro-organisms,
particularly 

Pseudomonas

.'' Some of the comments stated that this caution statement should be required only for antimicrobials where there
is valid scientific evidence to show that such caution is appropriate, for example, quaternary ammonium compounds
and triclosan, which have been associated with the overgrowth of gram-negative micro-organisms, specifically


Pseudomonas

. Three comments contended that reports of contamination of benzalkonium chloride solutions with 

Pseudomonas

 and 

Enterobacteria

 species were basically the result of misuse, improper storage and dilution, poor technique, and contamination with
neutralizing chemicals. One comment recommended that the proposed caution statement in 333.99(a) should
be changed to read: ``Improper use or overuse ***.'' and cited the discussion of the proposed warning
for quaternary ammonium compounds by the agency at 43 FR 1237 where the phrase ``misuse or overuse'' was included.
Another comment objected to the caution, arguing that it is based on theoretical considerations only and there is
no published clinical evidence implicating quaternary ammonium compounds. Still another comment stated that its
quaternary ammonium compound product passed the commonly used test for 

Pseudomonas

 activity. 

In defense of triclosan's implication in 

Pseudomonas

 overgrowth, one comment argued that overgrowth was just an unproven hypothesis and submitted the ``Summary for Basis
of Approval'' from an approved new drug application (NDA) for chlorhexidine gluconate (Ref. 1) which included data
on a skin flora study that indicated an increasing, continuous gram-negative growth only in the axillary area over
a 6-month period, even though chlorhexidine is active against gram-negative micro-organisms. The comment referred
to FDA's Division of Anti-Infective Drug Products as having recognized that gram-negative overgrowth can be adequately
controlled by restricting use to indications provided in the labeling of a product. 

Several comments pointed out that data on povidone-iodine have proven broad spectrum effectiveness, referring
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) recommendation (Ref. 2) for using this ingredient for skin
preparation before intravenous catheter insertion and other procedures to reduce infection. The comments also
noted that in a study by Houang et al. (Ref. 3), in which 20 transfers of 7 gram-negative micro-organisms (including


Pseudomonas aeruginosa

 (

P.

 

aeruginosa

)) were made, the minimum inhibitory concentration did not change, supporting the fact that repeated use of povidone-iodine
would not result in resistant micro-organisms. For these reasons, these comments recommended that 333.99(a)
should be revised to exclude povidone-iodine. 

After a thorough review and evaluation of the available data, the agency concludes that the professional labeling
caution that overuse of an antimicrobial drug product may cause an overgrowth of gram-negative micro-organisms
is not necessary. In the previous tentative final monograph (43 FR 1210 at 1212), the agency stated its awareness of
the theory that gram-negative bacteria will replace gram-positive bacteria that are reduced in number or eliminated
by use of antimicrobials and encouraged research to test the validity of the theory. The agency also recalled the Panel's
highlighting the need for research on microbial ecology of the skin and its concern about the effect of overuse of antimicrobial
drug products, especially products with a limited spectrum, in hospitals and other closed populations. Therefore,
the agency proposed the professional labeling caution in 333.99(a) ``for certain antimicrobial ingredients
approved for OTC drug use *** used in health-care facilities'' (43 FR 1213). However, the agency concluded
that the limited consumer use of these products in the population at large did not constitute a risk that would warrant
such a label warning. Although benzalkonium chloride has been frequently implicated in 

Pseudomonas

 hospital infections, the agency's review of numerous reports and studies on quaternary ammonium compounds and other
antimicrobials (Refs. 4 through 10) indicates that specific causes for contamination, such as lack of aseptic technique
when applying intravenous infusions and sterilization failure of the items used (bottles, tubing, distilled water
used in diluting benzalkonium chloride), were the problem and not overuse of benzalkonium chloride. The agency discussed
this problem in the previous tentative final monograph and stated that it appears that practices in the health-care
facility environments where quaternary ammonium compounds are commonly used often fall short of the minimum necessary
to prevent outbreaks of infection. (See comment 51 43 FR 1210 at 1218.) Benzalkonium chloride is more prone to become
contaminated for several reasons that were brought out in the studies: (1) 

Pseudomonas

 species are among the bacteria most resistant to surface-active agents like quaternary ammonium compounds. (2)
The usual quaternary ammonium compound concentration appears to be ineffective against some species, such as 

Pseudomonas cepacia

, an organism which has been reported to have been associated with hospital infections. One study showed that this
organism survived 14 years in a salt solution preserved with 0.05 percent benzalkonium chloride. (3) Organic materials
(gauze, cotton, cork in stoppers, soaps), inorganic matter, protein, and anionic substances inactivate quaternary
ammonium compounds. (4) Hospital personnel are unfamiliar with these problems and with procedures for using quaternary
ammonium compounds safely and effectively. Based on these reports, the agency agrees with the comments that ``improper''
use, not ``overuse,'' is the cause of benzalkonium chloride being implicated in 

Pseudomonas

 contamination and that there is a lack of data demonstrating ``overuse'' to be the cause. 




