 

(2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the airman medical certificate applied for or held, to
make the person unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges. 



67.315 

Discretionary issuance. 



A person who does not meet the provisions of 67.303 through 67.313 of this subpart may apply for the discretionary
issuance of a certificate under 67.401. 



Subpart E_Certification Procedures 



67.401 

Special issuance of medical certificates. 



(a) At the discretion of the Federal Air Surgeon, an Authorization for Special Issuance of a Medical Certificate (Authorization),
valid for a specified period, may be granted to a person who does not meet the provisions of subparts B, C, or D of this
part if the person shows to the satisfaction of the Federal Air Surgeon that the duties authorized by the class of medical
certificate applied for can be performed without endangering public safety during the period in which the Authorization
would be in force. The Federal Air Surgeon may authorize a special medical flight test, practical test, or medical
evaluation for this purpose. A medical certificate of the appropriate class may be issued to a person who does not meet
the provisions of subparts B, C, or D of this part if that person possesses a valid Authorization and is otherwise eligible.
An airman medical certificate issued in accordance with this section shall expire no later than the end of the validity
period or upon the withdrawal of the Authorization upon which it is based. At the end of its specified validity period,
for grant of a new Authorization, the person must again show to the satisfaction of the Federal Air Surgeon that the
duties authorized by the class of medical certificate applied for can be performed without endangering public safety
during the period in which the Authorization would be in force. 

(b) At the discretion of the Federal Air Surgeon, a Statement of Demonstrated Ability (SODA) may be granted, instead
of an Authorization, to a person whose disqualifying condition is static or nonprogressive and who has been found
capable of performing airman duties without endangering public safety. A SODA does not expire and authorizes a designated
Aviation Medical Examiner to issue a medical certificate of a specified class if the examiner finds that the condition
described on its face has not adversely changed. 

(c) In granting an Authorization or a SODA, the Federal Air Surgeon may consider the person's operational experience
and any medical facts that may affect the ability of the person to perform airman duties including_

(1) The combined effect on the person of failure to meet more than one requirement of this part and 

(2) The prognosis derived from professional consideration of all available information regarding the person. 

(d) In granting an Authorization under this section, the Federal Air Surgeon specifies the class of medical certificate
authorized to be issued and may do any or all of the following: 

(1) Limit the duration of the Authorization; 

(2) Condition the granting of a new Authorization on the results of subsequent medical tests, examinations, or evaluations;


(3) State on the Authorization, and any certificate based upon it, any operational limitation needed for safety;
or 

(4) Condition the continued effect of an Authorization, and any second- or third-class medical certificate based
upon it, on compliance with a statement of functional limitations issued to the person in coordination with the Director
of Flight Standards or the Director's designee. 

(e) In determining whether an Authorization or SODA should be granted to an applicant for a third-class medical certificate,
the Federal Air Surgeon considers the freedom of an airman, exercising the privileges of a private pilot certificate,
to accept reasonable risks to his or her person and property that are not acceptable in the exercise of commercial or
airline transport privileges, and, at the same time, considers the need to protect the safety of persons and property
in other aircraft and on the ground. 


