 

For research involving animals, which are of a size or have growth requirements that preclude the use of conventional
primary containment systems used for small laboratory animals, four biosafety levels (BL1N through BL4N)
are described in Appendix Q. BL1N describes containment for animals that have been modified by stable introduction
of recombinant DNA, or DNA derived therefrom, into the germ-line (transgenic animals) and experiments involving
viable recombinant DNA-modified microorganisms and is designed to eliminate the possibility of sexual transmission
of the modified genome or transmission of recombinant DNA-derived viruses known to be transmitted from animal parent
to offspring only by sexual reproduction. Procedures, practices, and facilities follow classical methods of avoiding
genetic exchange between animals. BL2N describes containment which is used for transgenic animals associated
with recombinant DNA-derived organisms and is designed to eliminate the possibility of vertical or horizontal transmission.
Procedures, practices, and facilities follow classical methods of avoiding genetic exchange between animals or
controlling arthropod transmission. BL3N and BL4N describe higher levels of containment for research
with certain transgenic animals involving agents which pose recognized hazard. 
In constructing the NIH Guidelines, it was necessary to define boundary conditions for the different levels of physical
and biological containment and for the classes of experiments to which they apply. These definitions do not take into
account all existing and anticipated information on special procedures that will allow particular experiments
to be conducted under different conditions than indicated here without affecting risk. Individual investigators
and Institutional Biosafety Committees are urged to devise simple and more effective containment procedures and
to submit recommended changes in the NIH Guidelines to permit the use of these procedures.'' 



C. Amendment to Section III, Experiments Covered by the NIH Guidelines 

The previous version of Section III-A2 will be deleted as follows: Section III-A2. Deliberate release
into the environment of any organism containing recombinant DNA except those listed below. The term `deliberate
release' is defined as a planned introduction of recombinant DNA-containing microorganisms, plants, or animals
into the environment. 
Section III-A2-a. Introduction conducted under conditions considered to be accepted scientific practices
in which there is adequate evidence of biological and/or physical control of the recombinant DNA-containing organisms.
The nature of such evidence is described in Appendix L. 
Section III-A2-b. Deletion derivatives and single base changes not otherwise covered by the NIH Guidelines.

Section III-A2-c. For extrachromosomal elements and microorganisms (including viruses), rearrangements
and amplifications within a single genome. Rearrangements involving the introduction of DNA from different strains
of the same species would not be covered by this exemption.'' 
The amended version of Section III reads as follows: 
Section III. Experiments Covered by the NIH Guidelines. 
This section describes five categories of experiments involving recombinant DNA: (i) Those that require RAC review
and NIH and Institutional Biosafety Committee approval before initiation (see Section III-A), (ii) those that require
NIH/ORDA and Institutional Biosafety Committee approval before initiation (see Section III-B); (iii) those that
require Institutional Biosafety Committee approval before initiation (see Section III-C), (iv) those that require
Institutional Biosafety Committee notification simultaneous with initiation (see Section III-D), and (v) those
that are exempt from the NIH Guidelines (see Section III-E). 






Note: 

If an experiment falls into either Section III-A or Section III-B and one of the other categories, the rules pertaining
to Section III-A or Section III-B shall be followed. If an experiment falls into Section III-E and into either Sections
III-C or III-D categories as well, the experiment is considered exempt from the NIH Guidelines. 




Any change in containment level, which is different from those specified in the NIH Guidelines, may not be initiated
without the express approval of NIH/ORDA (see Minor Actions, Section IV-C1-b-(2) and its subsections). 



Section IIIA. Experiments That Require Institutional Biosafety Committee Approval, RAC Review, and NIH
Approval Before Initiation 



Experiments in this category are considered Major Actions (see Section IV-C1-b-(1)) and cannot be initiated
without submission of relevant information on the proposed experiment to the Office of Recombinant DNA Activities,
National Institutes of Health, Building 31, Room 4B11, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, (301) 4969838, the publication
of the proposal in the 

Federal Register

 for 15 days of comment, reviewed by the RAC, and specific approval by the NIH (not applicable for Expedited Review single
patient human gene transfer experiments considered under Appendix M-VI). The containment conditions for such experiments
will be recommended by the RAC and set by the NIH at the time of approval. Such experiments require Institutional Biosafety
Committee approval before initiation. Specific experiments already approved are included in Appendix D which may
be obtained from the Office of Recombinant DNA Activities, National Institutes of Health, Building 31, Room 4B11,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, (301) 4969838. 

