 

(C) Individuals in the RCP program who fail the exam and wish to re-take the exam shall pay an application processing
charge of $50. Individuals wishing to re-take the exam will not be reassessed the charge under paragraphs (a)(4)(i)
(A) and (B) of this section.





(ii) An organization or individual who is not a listed participant in EPA's radon proficiency programs on the effective
date of this section and/or whose proficiency program application has not yet been accepted by EPA becomes subject
to the fees described above once its application has been accepted by EPA. Fees for such organizations or individuals
will be prorated quarterly, based on the acceptance date of the application. To remain listed, each participant in
the RMP or RCP programs, whether individual or organization, shall submit a renewal application and appropriate
annual fee to EPA each year.

(b) Exemptions. 

State and local governments are exempted from these fees under section 305(e)(2) of TSCA, 15 U.S.C. 2665.

(c) 

Determination of fees. 

(1) Participants listed in the RMP and RCP programs on the effective date of this section will be sent, by EPA, an annual
renewal application with appropriate fee calculation at least 30 days prior to the payment due date. This renewal
application also serves as an organization's or individual's payment invoice. Fees will be assessed based on the
information in EPA's proficiency program data bases. Participants who intend to pay the invoiced fee amount shall
complete the renewal application and send the appropriate payment to EPA following the procedures in 195.20(d).
Organizations or individuals who believe the invoiced fee amount is incorrect or wish to amend or adjust their listing
status shall do so by indicating the appropriate corrections or adjustments on their renewal application. Corrected
renewal applications for the RMP Program or the RCP Program shall be sent to: Radon Proficiency Program Information
Service, c/o Sanford Cohen and Associates, Inc., 1418 I85 Parkway, Montgomery, AL, 36016. EPA will review
the corrected renewal application, adjust the payment invoice amount (if appropriate) and issue a revised invoice.
Participants shall pay the corrected amount within 30 days of receipt of the revised invoice.

(2) If the appropriate fee or revised renewal application for an individual or organization participating in the
RMP or RCP program has not been received by EPA on or before the payment due date, EPA will send, by certified mail, notice
to the individual or organization that they will be delisted from the proficiency program unless they pay the fee within
30 days of receipt of this second notice. If payment has not been received by EPA within 30 days of the participant's
receipt of the second payment invoice, the organization's or individual's listing will be removed from the proficiency
program.

(3) New or initial applicants to the RMP or RCP programs will be assessed a fee at the time of their initial application.
EPA will send a payment invoice to the new applicant upon acceptance of its initial application. The invoice will state
that the applicant will be given 30 days to remit payment. The fee assessed will be prorated quarterly, based on the
acceptance date of the application. If the appropriate fee has not been received by EPA by the payment due date, the
application will be returned to the submitter and the applicant will not be listed in the proficiency program.

(d) 

Payment procedures. 

Each remittance to EPA under this rule shall be in United States currency and shall be paid by certified check, personal
check, or money order made payable to the order of the ``U.S. Environmental Protection Agency'' and sent to: U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Headquarters Accounting Operations Branch, Radon Proficiency Program User Fees, P.O. Box 952491,
St. Louis, MO 631952491. The fee shall be submitted with the original copy of the EPA invoice. Collection of
fees shall begin in the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1993. Additional specific information on how and when fees
must be paid can be found in the guidance document How to Pay Your Fees, U.S. EPA/Office of Radiation and Indoor Air.
Copies of this document can be obtained by contacting the RIS at (205) 2722797 or by FAX at (205) 2609051.

(e) 

Adjustment of fees. 

(1) EPA shall collect 100 percent of its operating costs associated with its radon proficiency programs within five
years of the effective date of this section. In order to do this, EPA shall adjust the initial fees established by this
subpart each year over the next five years to collect the following percentages of program costs:



<TABLE>




1Initial fees

2Year 1

2Year 2

2Year 3

2Year 4

2Year 5




30%

47.5%

65%

82.5%

100%


</TABLE>



The actual fees for each fiscal year will be calculated based on program costs and participation rates. New fee schedules
will be published in the 

Federal Register

 by January 1 of each year as a technical amendment final rule to this part to become effective 30 days or more after publication.

(2) EPA will use a three-step process to adjust fees annually. First, EPA will estimate the costs of providing each
of the proficiency programs for the upcoming year. EPA will account for future additional fixed costs (e.g., updating
examinations) and increases/decreases in variable costs due to inflation and other factors. In order to calculate
increases/decreases in costs due to inflation, EPA may use one of the three following indices: the Federal General
Schedule (GS) pay scale, the Consumer Price Index (CPI), and/or a component of the CPI, such as services. Second, EPA
will estimate the number of participants for each program. At a minimum, these participation rates will be based on
past and current program participation rates. Third, EPA shall calculate the per capita costs that individuals or
organizations should pay to enable it to recover its fixed and variable costs each year for each program. EPA shall
also consider potential industry impacts as it adjusts to levels to ultimately achieve full cost recovery over the
period of five years.



195.30


Failure to remit fee.



EPA will not process an application or continue a participant's listing in the National Radon Measurement Proficiency
program, individual proficiency component of the RMP program, or the National Radon Contractor Proficiency program
until the appropriate remittance provided in 195.20(a) has been received by EPA. Failure by a currently EPA-listed
organization or individual to remit the required fees in a timely manner will result in the loss of that organization's
or individual's listing status as specified in 195.20(c).



PART 700_[AMENDED]



2. In subchapter R, by amending part 700 as follows:

a. By revising the authority citation for part 700 to read as follows:







Authority: 

15 U.S.C. 2625 and 2665.




b. By adding 700.41 to read as follows:



700.41

Radon user fees.



User fees relating to radon proficiency programs authorized under the Toxic Substances Control Act appear at 40 CFR
part 195.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946156 Filed 31794; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>

