 


Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion To Alter or Amend Recommended Decision and Order


In the matter of 

United States Department of Labor, Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, 

Plaintiff v. 

United States Construction of SE Wisconsin, 

Defendant, 94OFC18.




Dated: September 8, 1994.







It appearing 

that by document styled ``Recommended Decision and Order'' entered in the above-captioned proceeding on August
31, 1994, all of the relief sought in the Plaintiff's Motion for a Default Judgment and Entry of Sanctions, filed August
29, 1994, was granted.



It further appearing 

that, pursuant to the appropriate regulations at 41 C.F.R. 4630.32(c), where, as here, the defendant in a proceeding
instituted by the OFCCP has failed to timely answer the complaint and request a hearing within 20 days of service of
the complaint, the administrative law judge shall, in a final administrative order, adopt as findings of fact the
material facts alleged in the complaint, and shall order the appropriate sanctions and/or penalties sought in the
complaint.



And it further appearing 

that, in light of the mandatory language of the regulations, the entry of a recommended decision and order was inappropriate
and the plaintiff's timely-filed motion to alter or amend the document properly lies.

Wherefore, for good cause shown,



Order





It is ordered, 

That the order entered August 31, 1994 in the above-captioned proceeding by, and it is hereby, amended by deleting
from the first page thereof the heading 

``Recommended Decision and Order'', 

and substituting in lieu thereof, the following:



Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for a Default Judgment and for Entry of Sanctions





It is further ordered, 

That page 3 of the said order of August 31, 1994, be deleted and that the appended page 3 be substituted in lieu thereof.



And it is further ordered, 

That, in all other respects, the order of August 31, 1994, remain in full force and effect.



<SIGNER>
George P. Morin,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrative Law Judge.




slip. op. at 3, wherein the Secretary affirmed the administrative law judge's entry of an order imposing sanctions
in a situation similar in all respects to that in the instant case. Furthermore, sanctions are appropriate where,
as here, a contractor has failed to abide by the terms of a conciliation agreement and is in violation of the Executive
Order.



Accordingly, 

it is ordered, 

That:

1. All federal and federally assisted contracts and subcontracts of State Construction of SE Wisconsin, its officers,
agents, successors and assigns, are immediately cancelled.

2. State Construction of SE Wisconsin, its officers, agents, successors and assigns are declared ineligible to receive
any federal contracts or subcontracts or for extensions or other modifications of any existing Government contracts
or subcontracts for a period of 180 days, and thereafter until State Construction of SE Wisconsin has demonstrated
to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Federal Contract Compliance Programs that it is currently in compliance with
the provisions of Executive Orders Nos. 11246, 11375 and 12086 and the regulations promulgated thereunder, and that
it has undertaken to correct past acts of noncompliance, including identifying and making whole any victims of its
past noncompliance, and that it will carry out employment practices in compliance with Executive Orders Nos. 11246,
11375 and 12086.


</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
George P. Morin,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrative Law Judge.


</SIGNJOB>
