 

The final regulations do not narrow the definition of ``relative'' as suggested. To do so would narrow the scope of
the exception from the lending and borrowing prohibition and the reach of the recusal provision. The suggested narrowing
would have deleted ``aunts, uncles, nephews, nieces, and grandchildren,'' and these relationships are often close
enough that it would be unreasonable to restrict borrowing and lending between family members when such family members
are borrowers. Similarly, these relationships are often close enough that it is not unreasonable to require recusal
from matters affecting their interests. However, the standard for reporting the names of relatives in the final regulations
is whether the individual ``knows or has reason to know'' that a relative or entity transacts business with the institution
or a supervised institution or a borrower of such institutions. The ``knows or has reason to know'' standard is adopted
to address concerns that ``to the best of his or her knowledge after reasonable inquiry'' imposes a duty to inquire,
the reasonableness of which could lead to disputes. The ``knows or has reason to know'' standard is a common legal standard
that is used to ensure that a person's assertion about the state of his or her knowledge can be challenged in circumstances
in which any reasonable person would be deemed to have knowledge. The ``actual knowledge'' standard suggested by
the FCC is not adopted because it does not allow any basis for the FCA to question a director's assertion regarding his
or her subjective state of mind even in the most obvious circumstances. 
The reporting requirements supporting the disclosure requirements of part 620 of this chapter have been more narrowly
focused in the final regulations on information needed by the institution to make appropriate disclosures under
part 620 of this chapter, and more clearly specify the information required to be reported. In addition, the final
regulations also permit greater flexibility in determining the frequency of reporting for matters required to be
reported, other than matters that are required to be reported for part 620 of this chapter. 
The FCC also recommended that the reporting requirement for a director or employee who becomes or plans to become involved
in any relationship, transaction, or activity that is required to be reported or could constitute a conflict of interest
be expanded to require the Standards of Conduct Official to determine whether such involvement is, in fact, a conflict
of interest. The Board has adopted the FCC's suggestion in the final regulations and has also added a requirement that
the determination specify what controls, such as recusal, are necessary to ensure that the appearance of conflict
is minimized. 
A commenter noted that the proposed requirement that all new directors report all matters listed in the director reporting
section within 1 month after election or appointment perpetuates the present reporting redundancy involving a director
candidate's disclosure. In response to this concern, the final regulations require reporting only if no disclosure
was made as a director candidate under part 620 of this chapter within the preceding 180 days, as this would be considered
sufficient disclosure. 


Section 612.2150_Employees_Prohibited Conduct 


Comments were received from the FCC regarding the prohibition against employees borrowing from, lending to, or becoming
financially obligated with or on behalf of a director, employee, or agent of the employing, supervising, or a supervised
institution or a borrower or loan applicant of the employing institution. The FCA also considered the appropriateness
of the FCC's comments on the parallel director prohibition for the employee prohibition. The FCC recommended that
there be an additional exception under which an otherwise prohibited transaction would be permissible if approved
by the Standards of Conduct Official after a determination that the transaction does not present any significant
risk of impairing the director's or employee's ability to perform his or her duties with impartiality and in compliance
with the regulations. 
The FCA concluded that the same modification that was made to 612.2140(g) should be made to the employee prohibition.
See discussion above. 





