 

As many eligible applications as possible will be funded within the available Field Office allocation of funds. If
after fully funding all eligible applications within its jurisdiction a Field Office has funds remaining from its
original allocation, the Field Office will notify Headquarters of the amounts remaining. Headquarters will redistribute
the funds based on remaining needs in other Field Offices. Headquarters will redistribute funds from Field Offices
that do not have enough fundable applications, to other Field Offices that have insufficient funds for fundable applications.

(5) 

Subassignment of funds to non-Indian and Indian Field Offices. 

Area Offices shall subassign funds to each non-Indian and Indian Field Office based on funding decisions made pursuant
to this NOFA. 
(6) 

Remaining funds. 

In the event that the funds awarded under this NOFA total less than the amount available, the remaining amount will
be carried over to FY 1995, because the Appropriations Act specifically targets these funds for the assessment of
risks associated with lead-based paint. If funds are carried over to FY 1995, a subsequent NOFA for these remaining
set-aside funds will be published. 


B. Eligibility and Requirements


(1) All HAs with pre-1980 family developments are eligible (i.e., both large HAs funded under the Comprehensive Grant
Program (CGP) and small HAs funded under the Comprehensive Improvement Assistance Program (CIAP)). Specific developments
targeted for funding within an application must meet the requirements set forth in Section II.B. of this NOFA. 
(2) HAs, especially smaller ones, are encouraged to form a consortium for purposes of having risk assessments conducted.
Such a consortium would enable a number of HAs to obtain coordinated services for those risk assessments. 
(3) In accordance with section 14(a)(3) of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (1937 Act) (added by the 1992 Appropriations
Act, 105 Stat. 759), pre-1980 family developments within a HA's inventory may be the subject of a LBP risk assessment.
As stated in section 14(a)(3), risk assessments are intended ``to assess the risks of lead-based paint poisoning
*** in all projects constructed before 1980 that are, or will be, occupied by families.'' Risk assessments
are not mandatory; however, HAs are strongly encouraged to conduct them. In undertaking a risk assessment, a HA shall
use a risk assessment protocol that, at a minimum, follows the Department's protocol. Upon completion of the risk
assessment, the HA must provide a copy of the results of the risk assessment to the appropriate Field Office. The risk
assessment must be completed within eighteen (18) months of HUD's fund reservation notification to the HA. 
While the scope of the risk assessment may exceed the contents of the Department's protocol, funding shall be requested
based on this protocol. The goal of the protocol is to enable a HA to identify lead hazards so that appropriate in-place
management can be implemented until testing and abatement can be fully undertaken. Section 14(a)(3) of the 1937 Act
requires that professional risk assessments include dust and soil sampling and laboratory analysis. The risk assessment
protocol has been developed by the Department to ensure compliance with this provision and with certain requirements
of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act. 
HAs are expected to implement the in-place management recommendations resulting from the completed risk assessment,
especially in cases where abatement will not be undertaken within a reasonable timeframe (one year). However, actual
implementation of recommendations that result from the risk assessment conducted is not eligible for funding under
this NOFA. The implementation of resulting recommendations (

e.g.

, comprehensive or random testing, abatement of lead, in-place management measures, and work order modifications)
may be funded from other HA sources (i.e., CIAP, CGP, operating subsidy, operating reserves or State/local contributions).



In no instance shall the implementation of in-place management measures satisfy the HA's obligation under the Lead-Based
Paint Poisoning Prevention Act to abate lead-based paint hazards, rather they are interim measures to be used until
testing and/or full abatement can be undertaken, as appropriate. Similarly, in no instance shall conducting a risk
assessment satisfy the HA's obligation under the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act to test for and abate
lead-based paint hazards. 
(4) CIAP requirements, as set forth in 24 CFR part 968, subpart B, and the CIAP Handbook, 7485.1 REV4, are applicable
to HAs funded under this NOFA. These requirements encompass implementation schedules, progress reports, budget
revisions, requests for extensions, closeouts, etc. Fund requisitions are to be processed through the LOCCS/VRS
system. 
(5) HAs must follow the requirements of 24 CFR part 85 for the procurement of risk assessments. 
(6) In accepting funding to perform a risk assessment, HAs must agree to participate, if requested by HUD, in a subsequent
evaluation of the risk assessment protocol. This evaluation will entail a review of collected sampling data and the
effectiveness of recommended in-place management procedures. 


C. Ineligible Costs and Activities


(1) A specific development targeted within an application is not

 eligible for funding, in accordance with the threshold requirements set forth in Section II.B. of this NOFA, where
the development has been: 

&bull;Tested and abated; or 






