 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Fish and Wildlife Service</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>50 CFR Part 23</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>RIN 1018AC31</RINDOCK>



Changes in List of Species in Appendices to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES or the Convention) regulates
international trade in certain animals and plants. Species for which such trade is controlled are listed in Appendices
I, II, and III to the Convention. The countries participating in this treaty, including the United States, have adopted
species amendments to Appendices I and II. The United States did not enter a reservation on any of these listing amendments
approved at the eighth meeting of the Conference of the Parties. This document incorporates these amendments into
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's regulations implementing the Convention.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The amendments set forth in this rule entered into effect and became enforceable on June 11, 1992, under the terms of
the Convention. Therefore, this rule is effective August 16, 1994.




</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Please send correspondence concerning this document to Chief, Office of Scientific Authority; Mail stop: Room 725,
Arlington Square Building; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; 1849 C St., NW.; Washington, DC 20240; fax number 7033582276.
Express and messenger deliveries should be addressed to the Office of Scientific Authority; 4401 North Fairfax Drive,
room 750; Arlington, Virginia 22203. Materials received will be available for public inspection by appointment,
from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday at the above address in Arlington, Virginia (room 750).



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Dr. Charles W. Dane, Chief, Office of Scientific Authority, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, at telephone 7033581708.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Background



The Convention regulates import, export, re-export, and introduction from the sea of certain animal and plant species.
Species for which trade is controlled are included in three appendices. Their inclusion in Appendix I or II is by agreement
of CITES Party countries. Appendix I include species threatened with extinction that are or may be affected by trade.
Appendix II includes species that although not necessarily now threatened with extinction may become so unless trade
in them is strictly controlled. It also lists species that must be subject to regulation in order that trade in other
currently or potentially threatened species may be brought under effective control (

e.g

., because of difficulty in distinguishing specimens of the currently or potentially threatened species from the
specimens of other species). Appendix III includes species that any Party country unilaterally designates as being
subject to regulation within its jurisdiction for purposes of restricting or preventing exploitation, and for which
cooperation of other Parties is needed to control trade. 



Any CITES Party may propose amendments to Appendices I and II for consideration at meetings of the Conference of the
Parties. The text of proposals must be communicated to the CITES Secretariat at least 150 days before a meeting. The
Secretariat must then consult the other Parties and appropriate intergovernmental agencies, and communicate responses
to all Parties no later than 30 days before the meeting. Amendments are adopted by consensus or a two-thirds majority
of the Parties present and voting. 



Actions of the Parties 



The eighth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to CITES was held on March 213, 1992, in Kyoto, Japan. At the
meeting (COP8), the Parties considered 81 different proposals to amend the appendices for animals and 27 different
proposals for plants. The 108 proposals were described in earlier 

Federal Register

 notice; and addressed in the 

Federal Register

 on March 4, 1992, for proposals submitted by the United States (57 FR 7719) and by other Parties (57 FR 7713). the proposals
that were approved by this Conference of the Parties were announced in a May 13, 1993, 

Federal Register

 notice (57 FR 20443); note this clarifying correction to 57 FR 20445, that the 

Anthracoceros 

spp. (hornbills) also were proposed for addition to Appendix II by the Netherlands (and approved). As also announced
in that May 13, 1992, notice, some proposals were withdrawn by their proponents or rejected by the Parties.



That notice (57 FR 20443) requested comments from the public on whether the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service)
should recommend that the United States enter reservations on any of the listing amendments. The effect of a reservation
would be to exempt this country from completely implementing the Convention for the particular species. More comprehensive
discussions of any practical effects of entering a reservation and reasons for or against entering reservations
are contained in November 22, 1985, and December 15, 1989, 

Federal Register

 notices (50 FR 48212 and 54 FR 51432, respectively). Changes to the CITES appendices as a result of the eighth meeting
of the Conference of the Parties that are incorporated into the U.S. 

Code of Federal Regulations 

are printed as the conclusion of this notice.


Related Considerations 


Namibia and Zimbabwe proposed to transfer the cheetak (

Acinonyx jubatus

) populations of Botswana, Malawi, Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe from Appendix I to Appendix II, with export quotas.
In the March 4, 1992, 

Federal Register

 (57 FR 7713), the United States opposed this amendment, since the Service had not received the proponents' supporting
statement from the CITES Secretariat prior to COP8. The proposal was redrafted at COP8 as a resolution [see Doc. 8.22
(Rev.)] retaining the species in Appendix I and establishing the following quotas (for trophies and skins: 2 per person):
Botswana, 5; Namibia, 100; and Zimbabwe, 50. However, such a resolution was deemed to be unnecessary, and the quotas
have been reflected in the Secretariat's annotations to the appendices.

The original proposal to transfer the sub-Saharana population of leopards (

Panthera pardus

) from Appendix I to appendix II, with export quotas, was redrafted as a revision of resolution Conf. 7.7, with the quotas
(for trophies and skins: 2 per person) increased for Malawi (50) and South Africa (75), and initiated (new quota) for
Namibia (100). the Service supports the continuation of this quota system for leopard trophies and skins for personal
use as previously provided for in resolution Conf. 7.7 and now in Conf. 8.10. 

Resolution Conf. 8.18 adopted a nomenclatorial reference as a guideline for cacti (Cactaceae); therefore, several
less familiar names are added to the 
existing listings. Also, by an amendment at COP5 and Resolution Conf. 6.18, the flasked artificially propagated
seedlings of all Appendix II species are excluded from regulation. Resolution Conf. 8.17(c), by interpretation
of CITES Article VII(4) and Article I(b)(iii), exempts the flasked artificially propagated seedlings of Appendix
I orchid species (details are in the March 4, 1992, 

Federal Register

; 57 FR 7774). A subsequent postal-procedures amendment also addresses this topic (details are in the November 6,
1992, 

Federal Register

; 57 FR 53090). All the flasked artificially propagated orchid seedlings (Orchidaceae) thus are not regulated by
CITES. 

</SUPPLEM>
