 

5. Demonstrates that the applicant has considered and, as appropriate, will use alternative cost effective methods
or material in the execution of the project. 
6. Public health and safety concerns are fully resolved by the project. 
7. Project would significantly address serious deficiencies in accessibility for disabled persons and/or provide
a substantial increase in the number of public facilities accessible to disabled persons. 
8. Significantly supports the strategic plan of a designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community. 


Substantial (300 Points) 


1. Serious need is shown. 
2. Program would resolve the problem completely. 
3. There are no major feasibility questions. 
4. Benefits a substantial number of persons. 
5. There is evidence that efforts have been made to minimize project costs through use of alternative methods and materials,
as appropriate. 
6. Public health and safety concerns are substantially resolved by the project. 
7. Project would substantially address serious deficiencies in accessibility for disabled persons and/or provide
a significant increase in the number of public facilities accessible to disabled persons. 
8. Substantially supports the strategic plan of a designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community. 


Moderate (200 Points) 


1. Serious need is shown, but is not as serious or well documented as other applications. 
2. Program may not meet the need as completely as in some other applications. 
3. There may be some questions relative to feasibility. 
4. Benefits a significant number of persons. 
5. There is evidence that efforts have been made to minimize project costs. 
6. Public health and safety concerns are partially met by the project. 
7. Project would somewhat address serious deficiencies in accessibility for disabled persons and/or provide some
increase in the number of public facilities accessible to disabled persons. 
8. Moderately supports the strategic plan of a designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community. 


Minimal (100 Points) 


1. Some need is evident, but is not serious. 
2. Only a portion of the need would be met or the problem would not be resolved completely. 
3. There are serious feasibility questions. 
4. Benefits only a small number of persons. 
5. There is little evidence that efforts have been made to minimize costs. 
6. Public health and safety concerns are minimally addressed by the project. 
7. Project would minimally address serious deficiencies in accessibility for disabled persons and/or provide a
minimal increase in the number of public facilities accessible to disabled persons. 
8. Minimally supports the strategic plan of a designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community. 


Insignificant (0 Points) 


1. No clear need has been demonstrated. 
2. Program is not appropriate to meeting described needs, or there is serous doubt that there would be much impact on
needs. 
3. There are major feasibility questions. 
4. Benefits a very small number of people. 
5. There is no evidence that efforts have been made to minimize project costs. 
6. Public health and safety needs are not addressed by the project. 
7. Project would not address serious deficiencies in accessibility for disabled persons and/or would not provide
an increase in the number of public facilities accessible to disabled persons. 
8. Project does not support the strategic plan of a designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community. 




(c) 

Program Impact_Single Purpose_Economic Development Projects. 


As discussed earlier in this section of the NOFA, each individual Single Purpose project will receive a separate impact
rating. Applicants whose proposed economic development program will include multiple proposals should determine
the most appropriate form of submission. This determination will require a choice as to either the incorporation
of all proposals into a single project or the submission of separate projects for each proposal (each transaction
will be considered a separate project). The single project format presents an ``all or nothing'' situation. In determining
the appropriate submission format, applicants should consider the ability of a transaction to rate well on its own,
based on the magnitude of employment impact, size of the financial transaction and the other factors discussed in
this section. 
The submission of proposals as separate projects must be clearly designated by the applicant with individual Needs
Descriptions, Community Development Activities, Impact Descriptions and Program Schedule forms, including an
appropriate name for each project on HUD Form 4124.1. 
Section 807(c)(3) of the 1992 Act provides that it is the sense of Congress that each grantee should devote one percent
of its grant for the purpose of providing assistance under section 105(a)(23) of the HCD Act to facilitate economic
development through commercial microenterprises. A microenterprise is defined as a commercial enterprise with
five or fewer employees, one or more of whom owns the enterprise. This should be considered in developing an economic
development application. 
It is noted that in accordance with section 806 of the 1992 Act, the Department published on May 31, 1994, a proposed
rule relating to evaluation and selection of Economic Development activities by grantees. It is strongly suggested
that you read the proposed rule as it reflects the Department's latest proposed policy on the evaluation of Economic
Development Projects. 




