 



Changes: 

Section 472.34 has been changed to clarify that all of the conditions described in this section must be met if a project
is to be allowed to continue after the withdrawal of a partner. 



Union and Worker Involvement (Part 472) 





Comments: 

Several commenters thought unions should be involved in the development and implementation of projects. Some of
these commenters recommended requiring a written statement indicating consultation with and concurrence by the
union. Others suggested requiring a statement from the union that it either agrees to full partnership with the education
partner and business partner or it acknowledges the collaboration between the education and business partner. One
commenter suggested that points be awarded to proposals with employer and union partnerships. 

One commenter suggested that, in the absence of a union, workers should be involved in planning the project. Another
commenter suggested that points be awarded to applications_(1) with effective plans to involve workers in the educational
provider's decision-making process; and (2) that emphasize participatory teaching methods. 

Several commenters thought that union and worker involvement would improve the recruitment, interest, and commitment
of the workforce, and help to allay fears that a project would result in the loss of jobs for employees failing to demonstrate
learning gains. 



Discussion: 

Section 371(a)(1) of the Act permits, but does not require, a labor organization to be a partner in an application under
this program. This provision is reflected in 472.2(a) and (b). As indicated in 472.2(c), a labor organization,
like any partner, must participate in a joint application for funding and sign a partnership agreement. However,
the Secretary does not believe that a written statement regarding union consultation should be required of partnerships
that do not include a labor organization. Nevertheless, the Secretary encourages all partnerships to involve workers
and, as appropriate, labor organizations in matters related to the project. This arrangement should provide a number
of benefits, including allaying any concerns that workers may have about participating in a project. 



Changes: 

None. 



Intergovernmental Review 



These programs are subject to the requirements of Executive Order 12372 and the regulations in 34 CFR part 79. The objective
of the Executive order is to foster an intergovernmental partnership and a strengthened federalism by relying on
processes developed by State and local governments for coordination and review of proposed Federal financial assistance.


In accordance with the order, this document is intended to provide early notification of the Department's specific
plans and actions for this program. 



Assessment of Educational Impact 



In the notice of proposed rulemaking, the Secretary requested comments on whether the proposed regulations would
require transmission of information that is being gathered by or is available from any other agency or authority of
the United States. 

Based on the response to the proposed rules and on its own review, the Department has determined that the regulations
in this document do not require transmission of information that is being gathered by or is available from any other
agency or authority of the United States. 



List of Subjects 



34 CFR Part 462 



Adult education, Business and industry, Labor unions, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, and Workplace
literacy. 



34 CFR Part 472 



Adult education, Business and industry, Labor unions, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, and Workplace
literacy.




Dated: January 3, 1994.

 


<SIGNER>
Richard W. Riley, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of Education. 



(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number 84.198 National Workplace Literacy Program. Catalog of Federal
Domestic Assistance Number has not been assigned for the State-Administered Workplace Literacy Program.) 



</SIGNJOB>
