 

(b) 

Resources

_(1) 

Federal resources. 

The plan must describe the expected Federal resources to be available to address the needs identified in accordance
with 91.305. 

(2) 

Other resources. 

The plan must indicate resources from private and non-Federal public sources that are reasonably expected to be made
available to address the needs identified in the plan. The plan must explain how Federal funds will leverage those
additional resources, including a description of how matching requirements of the HUD programs will be satisfied.
Where the State deems it appropriate, it may indicate publicly owned land or property located within the jurisdiction
that may be used to carry out the purposes stated in 91.1. 

(c) 

Affordable housing. 

The plan must include the number of families to whom the State will provide affordable housing, as defined in 92.252
of this chapter for rental housing and 92.254 of this chapter for homeownership, and must include the priority
housing needs table prescribed by HUD. The plan must indicate how those characteristics will influence the use of
funds made available for rental assistance, production of new units, rehabilitation of old units, or acquisition
of existing units. 

(d) 

Homelessness. 

The plan must include the priority homeless needs table prescribed by HUD and must describe the jurisdiction's strategy
for the following: 

(1) Helping low-income families avoid becoming homeless; 

(2) Reaching out to homeless persons and assessing their individual needs; 

(3) Addressing the emergency shelter and transitional housing needs of homeless persons; and 

(4) Helping homeless persons make the transition to permanent housing and independent living. 

(e) 

Community development. 

If the State seeks assistance under the Community Development Block Grant program, the plan must describe the State's
priority nonhousing community development needs that affect more than one unit of general local government and involve
activities typically funded by the State under the CDBG program. These priority needs must be described by CDBG eligibility
category, reflecting the needs of persons or households, as appropriate, for each type of activity. This community
development component of the plan must state the State's long-term and short-term community development objectives,
which must be developed in accordance with the statutory goals described in 91.1. 

(f) 

Barriers to affordable housing. 

The plan must describe the State's strategy to remove or ameliorate negative effects of its policies that serve as
barriers to affordable housing, as identified in accordance with 91.310. 

(g) 

Public housing resident initiatives. 

For a State that has a State housing agency, the plan must describe the State's activities to encourage public housing
residents to become more involved in management and participate in homeownership. 

(h) 

Lead-based paint hazards. 

The plan must outline the actions proposed or being taken to evaluate and reduce lead-based paint hazards, and describe
how the lead-based paint hazard reduction will be integrated into housing policies and programs. 

(i) 

Anti-poverty strategy. 

The plan must describe the State's goals, programs, and policies for reducing the number of poverty level households
and how the State's goals, programs, and policies for producing and preserving affordable housing will be coordinated
with other programs and services for which the State is responsible and the extent to which they will reduce (or assist
in reducing) the number of households with incomes below the poverty line. 

(j) 

Institutional structure. 

The plan must describe what the State will do to overcome gaps in the institutional structure for carrying out its strategy
for addressing its priority needs. 

(k) 

Coordination. 

The plan must describe the State's activities to enhance coordination between public and assisted housing providers
and private and governmental health, mental health, and service agencies. With respect to the public entities involved,
the plan must describe the means of cooperation and coordination among the State and any units of general local government
in the implementation of its strategy, including activities to encourage public housing residents to become more
involved in management and participate in homeownership. 




