 

EPA has evaluated information contained in CMA's petition and is now reconsidering the leak repair provisions. Moreover,
EPA believes that this information warrants review and response pursuant to section 307(d)(7)(B) of the Clean Air
Act. In order to review and evaluate the ability of the owners and operators of industrial process refrigeration equipment
to comply with the leak repair provisions when extenuating circumstances exist, EPA will reconsider the regulatory
requirements applicable to repairing leaks in accordance with section 307(d) of the Clean Air Act. 



III. Issuance of a Three-Month Stay 



On August 17, 1994, EPA issued a three-month administrative stay effective September 16, 1994, of provisions of 82.156(i)
as they apply to industrial process refrigeration equipment, including all applicable compliance dates. These
provisions had been promulgated as final federal rules requiring the reduction of emissions of ozone-depleting
substances during the servicing and disposal of air-conditioning and refrigeration equipment (August 17, 1994,
59 

FR 

42169). EPA is reconsidering these rules, as discussed above and, following the notice and comment procedures of
section 307(d) of the Clean Air Act, will take appropriate action.

3

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


3

</FOOTNAME>
If, after reconsideration of these provisions, EPA determines that it is appropriate to impose leak repair requirements
that are stricter than the existing rules, EPA will propose an adequate compliance period from the date of final action
on reconsideration. EPA will seek to ensure that the affected parties are not unduly prejudiced by the Agency's reconsideration.
Any EPA proposal regarding changes to the leak repair requirements and the appropriate compliance period would be
subject to the notice and comment procedures of Clean Air Act section 307(d). 

</FOOTNOTE>


IV. Proposed Additional Temporary Stay 



EPA will not be able to complete the reconsideration (including any appropriate regulatory action) of the rules stayed
by the Administrator within the three-month period expressly provided in section 307(d)(7)(B). That stay will expire
on December 16, 1994. Therefore, EPA believes it is appropriate to extend temporarily the stay of the effectiveness
of the leak repair requirements for industrial process refrigeration and applicable compliance dates from December
16, 1994, until EPA completes final rulemaking action upon reconsideration. 

Because the settlement agreement between EPA and CMA set a tight deadline for the completion of the rulemaking, EPA
is reconsidering the rules in question as expeditiously as practicable. However, EPA will not be able to complete
the reconsideration process during the three-month administrative stay of these regulations. EPA will not be able
to issue proposed action, seek public comment, and take final action before the temporary stay expires on December
16, 1994. 

As proposed, this action will only remain effective to the extent necessary to complete reconsideration of the rules
in question. The settlement agreement between EPA and CMA expressly requires that final action regarding reconsideration
be signed by June 1, 1994. Therefore, the stay would expire when the final action regarding the reconsideration of
the leak repair requirements become effective. 



V. Comments Received 



EPA received five comments concerning the proposal to extend the administrative stay beyond the three months expressly
provided in section 307(d)(7)(B). All the commenters agreed with the need for such an extension. Two comments discussed
some of the specific reasons why it is not practical for the owners and operators of industrial process refrigeration
equipment to comply with the requirements originally promulgated under 82.156(i). The reasons included,
but were not limited to: 




_the need for a process shutdown in order to complete certain repairs; 

_delays stemming from compliance with other applicable federal, state, or local regulations; and 

_the inability to receive the necessary parts and/or appropriate replacement refrigerant within the specified
times. 




In addition, one commenter addressed the need for a stay to ensure that no enforcement action was initiated by EPA or
undertaken in response to citizen suits, during the reconsideration of the leak repair requirements. The commenter
was particularly concerned with the potential for unfair imposition of penalties during the pendency of the reconsideration.
The commenter stated that while compliance personnel may have been advised of the settlement agreement, they are
not legally required to refrain from imposing penalties. Penalties stemming from actions undertaken during reconsideration
could be substantial. 



VI. Response to Comments 



EPA agrees with the five commenters concerning the need for a stay. EPA believes that it is essential to continue staying
the effectiveness of 82.156(i) and the applicable compliance dates, as these provisions relate to industrial
process refrigeration equipment only. Therefore, through this action, EPA is extending the stay of 82.156(i)
and the applicable compliance dates, for industrial process refrigerant only, until EPA completes reconsideration
of these regulations in accordance with the settlement agreement reached between EPA and CMA. This stay will expire
when the final action regarding 82.156(i) and compliance dates, with respect to industrial process refrigeration
equipment are completed and effective. 

Based on internal Agency review, the regulatory language of this stay has been slightly modified for purposes of clarification.




VII. Effective Date 



This action will become effective on December 16, 1994, the date on which the administrative stay expires. 



List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 82 



Administrative practice and procedure, Air pollution control, Chemicals, Chlorofluorocarbons, Exports, Hydrochlorofluorocarbons,
Imports, Interstate commerce, Nonessential products, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Stratospheric
ozone layer. 




Dated: November 4, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Carol M. Browner, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Administrator.




Part 82, chapter I, title 40, of the Code of Federal Regulations, is amended to read as follows: 



PART 82_PROTECTION OF STRATOSPHERIC OZONE 



1. The authority citation for part 82 continues to read as follows: 






Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 7414, 7601, 76717671q. 




2. Section 82.156 is amended by revising paragraph (i)(5) to read as follows: 



82.156

 Required practices. 



* * * * * 



(i) *** 

(5) Rules stayed for reconsideration. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subpart, the effectiveness
of the 40 CFR 82.156(i)(1), (i)(3), and (i)(4) as these provisions apply to industrial process refrigeration equipment
only is stayed from December 16, 1994, until the EPA takes final action on its reconsideration of these provisions.
EPA will publish any such final action in the 

Federal Register

. 




</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9428295 Filed 111694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>





