 

Analysis of Public Comment 


A. A number of commenters raised issues relating to cask handling and 
the ability of the cask to withstand drop and tipover accidents. 
A.1. 

Comment. 

Several commenters wanted the transfer cask containing 
the Dry Storage Canister (DSC) to be analyzed for the maximum possible drop, 
regardless of whether that drop can occur inside or outside the spent fuel 
building. One commenter alleged that a drop of the transfer cask into the 
spent fuel pool would damage fuel assemblies in the pool. Another commenter 
was concerned about jamming the transfer cask in the spent fuel pool. What 
would happen to the cask if jammed fuel could not be extricated? Would the 
entire 40 ton transfer cask be left in the fuel pool? 


Response. 

Use of the Standardized NUHOMS inside the fuel handling 
building would be conducted in accordance with the 10 CFR Part 50 reactor 
operating license. These cask handling operations, including loading, 
retrieval, and training, must be evaluated by the general licensee as required 
by 10 CFR 72.212(b)(4) to ensure that procedures are clear and can be 
conducted safely. Load handling activities and possible load drop events with 
structural and radiological consequences related to transfer cask drops inside 
the spent fuel building are subject to the provisions of 10 CFR 50.59. Thus, 
the licensee must determine whether the activities involve any unreviewed 
facility safety question or any change in facility technical specifications. 
The transfer cask and DSC designs were evaluated by the NRC against the 
criteria for controlling heavy loads that are found in NRC's NUREG0612,
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>
 
``Control of Heavy Loads at Nuclear Power Plants,'' and American National 
Standards Institute (ANSI) N14.6, ``Special Lifting Devices for Shipping 
Containers Weighing 10,000 Pounds or More.'' The lifting yoke associated with 
the transfer cask is a special purpose device designed to ANSI N14.6 criteria 
to ensure that the yoke can safely lift the wet transfer cask containing the 
DSC out of the spent fuel pool and can safely lift the dry transfer cask and 
DSC to the transport trailer. Pursuant to 10 CFR 50.59, for those reactor 
plants with a shipping cask drop analysis, the licensee must verify that the 
shipping cask drop analysis adequately describes the consequences of a 
postulated transfer cask drop and that no unreviewed safety question exists. 
For those reactor plants that may lack a shipping cask drop analysis, each 
licensee must perform a transfer cask drop analysis pursuant to 10 CFR 50.59. 




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
Copies of NUREG0612 and NUREG/CR 1815 may be purchased from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government
Printing Office, Mail Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 204029328. Copies are also available from the National Technical
Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161. A copy is also available for inspection and copying
for a fee in the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW (Lower Level), Washington, DC 205550001.

</FOOTNOTE>


Specific requirements for lifting the transfer cask are contained in the 
Certificate of Compliance and SER. However, movement of the transfer cask in 
the spent fuel pool building must, as required by 10 CFR 72.212(b)(4), be 
evaluated by the licensee pursuant to 10 CFR 50.59. The possibility of 
jamming a transfer cask while in the spent fuel pool is one of many issues to 
be evaluated under 10 CFR 50.59. 
A.2. 

Comment. 

One commenter asked why the transfer cask with the DSC 
can be lifted to 80 inches outside the spent fuel pool building when it has to 
be unloaded and inspected for damage if it drops from above 15 inches. Why 
not limit the height to 15 inches? 


Response. 

The transfer cask with the DSC rides on the transport 
trailer at a height of greater than 15 inches and therefore was analyzed for a 
drop from that height (80 inches). A drop from a height between 15 and 
80 inches does not pose a public health and safety hazard. However, to ensure 
safety the NRC requires the DSC to be unloaded and inspected for damage. 
A.3. 

Comment. 

One commenter asked about the tipover analysis or drop 
analysis result. 


Response. 

The tipover, end drops, and horizontal drop analyses 
form part of the structural design basis for the Standardized NUHOMS design. 
The designer, VECTRA, described these drop and tipover analyses in SAR, 
Section 8.2.5. The NRC's evaluation of the vendor's analyses is described in 
SER, Section 3.2.2.3E. The NRC found the results of these analyses to be 
satisfactory, because the calculated stresses were all within the allowable 
criteria of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Code. 
A.4. 

Comment. 

Several commenters, citing Section 1.1.1 of the draft 
Certificate of Compliance, requested that the postulated cask drop accident in 
the plant fuel handling area be included in the list of parameters and 
analyses that will need verification by the system user (for the 10 CFR 50.59 
safety evaluation). 


Response. 

As stated in Section 1.1.1 of the draft Certificate of 
Compliance, a holder of a 10 CFR Part 50 license before use of the general 
license under 10 CFR Part 72, must determine whether activities related to 
storage of spent fuel involve any unreviewed facility safety issues or changes 
in facility technical specifications as provided under 10 CFR 50.59. Fuel 
handling including the possible drop of a spent fuel cask is among the 
activities that are required to be verified. Fuel handling operations, 
including spent fuels and fresh fuels, are routine within the nuclear power 
plant and are subject to NRC regulation under 10 CFR Part 50. A holder of a 
10 CFR Part 50 license is required to establish operating procedures for spent 
fuel handling and to provide emergency planning to address a potential cask 
drop accident in the reactor's fuel handling area (Certificate of Compliance, 
Section 1.1.4). Therefore the NRC considers it clear that the spent fuel 
operation in the nuclear power plant should be evaluated to verify that the 
possible drop of a spent fuel cask does not raise an unreviewed safety issue 
or require a facility technical specification change appropriately regulated 
under 10 CFR Part 50. 
A.5. 

Comment. 

One commenter stated that there is no place to unload 
the spent fuel in the event of a canister breach. There is no indication that 
the canister, the canister lifting mechanism, or the transport mechanism to 
move the canister into the cask, are nuclear grade equipment or have been 
designed to prevent a single failure from breaching the canister and 
circumventing the protection provided by the sole barrier provided by the 
canister wall itself. 


Response. 

According to 10 CFR 72.122(1), storage systems must be 
designed to allow ready retrieval of the spent fuel in storage. A general 
licensee using an NRC-approved cask must maintain the capability to unload a 
cask. Typically, this will be done by maintaining the capability to unload a 
cask in the reactor fuel pool. Other options are under consideration that 
would permit unloading a cask outside the reactor pool. 





