 



Response:

 REA feels the existing language clearly identifies the intent of this provision. Also, a Bidder's responsibility
to complete the Project as originally bid should not be diminished because of neglect by the Bidder to notify the Owner
of unproven or unavailable features or capabilities. The last sentence remains. 



Section 3:

 Four commenters remarked on this section. From the comments received, it appears this section is still of great concern
to the equipment manufacturers. The comments and recommendations received are summarized below: 

(i) Two commenters remarked that ten times the Contract price is excessive. Three commenters remarked that they should
be able to disclaim consequential damages. Two commenters remarked that that much exposure is probably not insurable
but if it was, the premiums would be excessive and would be passed on to the Owner. One commenter recommended that consequential
damages be the lesser of five times the purchase price of the affected central office and its associated remote terminals,
or $5.0 million. 

(ii) One commenter recommended that the Owner retain the liability since the Owner is in a better position to prevent
losses by properly maintaining its network. One commenter felt that consequential damages should only be available
during the warranty period. 



Response:
 
(i) The existing Form 525 does not limit the liability for incidental or consequential damages. REA's intent is to
place a limit of liability on consequential and incidental damages, except for personal injury or tangible property
damage, which will: enable Bidders to insure for a risk of known limit; provide Owners with protection against losses
related to product failure; protect the government's loan security; and serve as a standard that Bidders and Owners
alike can expect to see on every Contract so competitive bidding can be facilitated. REA has established a liability
limit of ten times the total Contract amount, which will result in a limit in the range of $2.5 million to $10 million
for typical REA Contracts. 

(ii) Consequential damages provide a measure of protection from loss due to product failure or other causes related
to the Bidder's performance. Since the risk of loss still exists after the warranty period, consequential damages
must also be available. 

Section 5:

 One commenter remarked that in order to make the proposed draft consistent with the suggested addition of exclusive
remedies language in other sections, some minor language adjustments are needed for this section. 



Response:

 REA has not added exclusive remedy language so no language adjustments were made. 



Section 5:

 One commenter remarked that cumulative remedies should not apply for a normal warranty claim. The warranty provisions
of the Contract provide for a remedy and course of conduct in the event of a product failure. 



Response:

 The warranty provisions may not fully protect the Borrower in some situations. For example, a defective component,
serviced under Article II, section 6, could cause a consequential damages claim. The language in section 5 is unchanged.



