 

Previous Board Actions


In May 1990, the Board proposed to levy a penalty fee, at a rate equal to the overnight overdraft penalty rate, on the
maximum daily daylight overdrafts incurred by bankers' banks that do not maintain reserves and Edge corporations
(55 FR 22086, May 31, 1990). In August 1993, the Board adopted a modified version of the 1990 proposal, but sought further
comment on the rate at which the daylight overdraft penalty fee would be assessed (58 FR 44672, August 24, 1993). The
policy adopted by the Board in 1993 provides that the daylight overdraft penalty fee will be levied on the daily average,
rather than maximum, daylight overdraft of institutions that do not have regular discount window access. The Board
also determined to apply the daylight overdraft penalty fee to limited-purpose trust companies as well as bankers'
banks that do not maintain reserves and Edge corporations. The Board retained the requirement that, in the event a
bankers' bank, Edge corporation, or limited-purpose trust company incurs a daylight overdraft, the overdraft should
be collateralized.

5

 Reserve Banks will have the ability to waive the penalty fee if, for example, the overdraft resulted from a Reserve
Bank error. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
As these institutions do not normally maintain collateral pledged to the Federal Reserve on an ongoing basis, if a
bankers' bank, Edge corporation, or limited-purpose trust company incurs a daylight overdraft, the Reserve Bank
generally requests a pledge of collateral (that would be eligible collateral for a discount window loan) for an appropriate
period. 
</FOOTNOTE>


The daylight penalty rate proposed in 1993 was equal to the overnight penalty rate plus the federal funds rate (e.g.,
given a 10 percent overnight penalty rate and a 3 percent federal funds rate, the daylight penalty rate would be 13 percent),
adjusted for the length of the Fedwire operating day. The Board proposed the addition of the federal funds rate to make
the daylight penalty rate more comparable to the overnight penalty rate. As noted above, institutions are required
to make up any reserve or clearing account deficiency resulting from an overnight overdraft, thereby incurring a
loss of interest earnings on the make-up funds. Rather than instituting a make-up requirement for daylight overdrafts
subject to the penalty fee, the Board proposed that the daylight overdraft penalty rate include a factor to account
for the cost of holding make-up funds. 
The Board also proposed to adjust the manner in which the penalty fee is calculated to make it similar to the calculation
of the ``regular'' daylight overdraft fee. The regular daylight overdraft fee is quoted on a 24-hour basis, for a 360-day
year, and adjusted for the length of the Fedwire operating day. This adjustment maintains a constant per-minute charge
in the event that Fedwire hours change. The Board proposed that the daylight penalty rate be quoted on a similar basis.
Under the 1993 proposal, assuming an overnight overdraft rate of 10 percent and a federal funds rate of 3 percent, the
annual 24-hour daylight penalty rate would be 22.3 percent, adjusted to 9.3 percent for a 10-hour Fedwire operating
day. 


Daylight Overdraft Penalty Rate Adopted by the Board


The Board believes that it is appropriate to retain a relatively high overnight penalty rate (i.e., greater than the
federal funds rate) to provide a strong incentive for all depository institutions to avoid overnight overdrafts.
However, a daylight penalty rate tied to the overnight rate would also be relatively high, perhaps higher than necessary
to provide an incentive for institutions to avoid daylight overdrafts. Therefore, the daylight overdraft penalty
rate adopted by the Board is tied to the regular daylight overdraft rate, rather then the overnight penalty rate. 
The daylight overdraft penalty rate adopted by the Board is equal to the regular Federal Reserve daylight overdraft
rate plus 100 basis points. The annual daylight penalty rate will equal 124 basis points as of April 14, 1994, rising
to 160 basis points when the regular daylight overdraft fee is fully phased in. The daylight penalty rate, like the
regular daylight rate, will be adjusted to take account of the length of the Fedwire operating day, yielding a rate
of 52 basis points as of April 14, 1994 (given a 10-hour Fedwire day), and rising to 67 basis points after full phase-in
of the regular daylight fee. There is no deductible associated with the daylight overdraft penalty fee. In addition,
the Board has set a minimum fee of $25 for any two-week period in which a penalty fee is assessed (i.e., any fee greater
than zero and less than $25 over a two-week period would be rounded up to $25). 




