 

The proposed amendments apply the uncertainty test with 
reference to ``the information reasonably available to the 
taxpayer.'' The Treasury Department and the IRS agree with 
the commentators that the meaning of the phrase 

reasonably 
available

 is unclear. Further, the phrase could be read to 
impose an unintended restriction on the definition of 
research or experimental expenditures. Information could be 
considered to be 

reasonably available

 to a taxpayer if the 
taxpayer can obtain the information through procedures that, 
while not particularly involved, are nonetheless in the 
nature of research activities. To avoid the ambiguities 
resulting from the term 

reasonably,

 the final amendments 
provide for the application of the uncertainty test with 
reference to the information actually available to the 
taxpayer. The removal of the term 

reasonably

 is not 
intended to expand the information considered to be 
available to the taxpayer. 


B. Validation Testing



The 1957 regulations exclude from the definition of 
research the ordinary testing or inspection of materials or 
products for quality control. Several commentators on the 
proposed amendments asked for clarification that research 
includes validation testing to ensure that a product design 
meets its intended objectives. In response to these 
comments, the final amendments clarify that the existing 
exclusion for quality control testing does not apply to 
testing to determine if the design of a product is 
appropriate. 


C. Effective Date 


The final amendments retain the effective date of the 
proposed amendments, and thus apply to taxable years 
beginning after October 3, 1994. Some commentators requested that 
the proposed amendments apply to all open taxable years. 
Because the amendments merely clarify the existing 
definition of 

research or experimental expenditures,

 
retroactive application of the amendments is unnecessary. 
Return positions consistent with the amendments will be 
consistent with the existing regulations and will be 
recognized as such by the IRS. 


Special Analyses 


It has been determined that this Treasury decision is 
not a significant regulatory action as defined in EO 12866. 
Therefore, a regulatory assessment is not required. It has 
also been determined that section 553(b) of the 
Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 5) and the 
Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 6) do not apply 
to these regulations, and, therefore, a Regulatory 
Flexibility Analysis is not required. Pursuant to 
section 7805(f) of the Internal Revenue Code, the notice of 
proposed rulemaking preceding these regulations was 
submitted to the Small Business Administration for comment 
on their impact on small business. 


Drafting Information 


The principal author of these regulations is Lisa J. 
Shuman of the Office of Assistant Chief Counsel 
(Passthroughs and Special Industries), IRS. However, other 
personnel from the IRS and Treasury Department participated 
in their development. 


List of Subjects in 26 CFR Part 1 


Income taxes, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 


Amendments to the Regulations 


Accordingly, 26 CFR part 1 is amended as follows: 


PART 1_INCOME TAXES 




Paragraph 1.

 The authority citation for part 1 
continues to read in part as follows:

 



Authority:

 26 U.S.C. 7805 ***

 



