 

Attachment A._Geographic Areas With Cholesterol-Related Advertising or Promotion Pursuant to Paragraph V.B of
Agreement Containing Consent Order


1. Iowa
2. Maine
3. Rhode Island
4. Western and Central Pennsylvania
5. Virginia
6. Maryland
7. Washington, DC
8. Georgia
9. South Carolina
10. Alabama
11. Mississippi
12. Louisiana
13. Arkansas
14. California
15. Nevada
16. Idaho
17. Michigan
18. Colorado
19. South Dakota
20. Washington
21. Montana
22. Alaska
23. Wyoming
24. Missouri
25. Oklahoma
26. Salt Lake City, Utah
27. Raleigh-Durham, North Carolina
28. Southern Illinois (St. Louis Market)


Analysis of Proposed Consent Order To Aid Public Comment


The Federal Trade Commission has accepted an agreement to a proposed consent order from Eggland's Best, Inc. (``Eggland's'').
The proposed consent order has been placed on the public record for sixty (60) days for reception of comments by interested
persons. Comments received during this period will become part of the public record. After sixty (60) days, the Commission
will again review the agreement and the comments received and will decide whether it should withdraw from the agreement
or make final the agreement's proposed order.
This matter concerns claims made by Eggland's in its advertising and promotional materials for eggs.
The Commission's complaint in this matter charges Eggland's with engaging in unfair or deceptive practices in connection
with the advertising of its eggs. According to the complaint, Eggland's falsely represented that it had a reasonable
basis for claims that eating its eggs will not increase serum cholesterol in an absolute sense and that eating its eggs
will not increase serum cholesterol as much as eating ordinary eggs.
The complaint also alleges that Eggland's falsely represented that clinical studies have proven that adding twelve
Eggland's eggs per week to a low-fat diet does not cause an increase in serum cholesterol.
Finally, the complaint alleges that Eggland's falsely represented that its eggs are both low in saturated fat in an
absolute sense, and are lower in saturated fat than ordinary eggs.
The consent order contains provisions designed to remedy the violations charged and to prevent Eggland's from engaging
in similar deceptive and unfair acts and practices in the future.
Part I of the order prohibits Eggland's from misrepresenting the absolute or comparative amount of cholesterol,
total fat, saturated fat or any other nutrient or ingredient in eggs or in any food containing egg yolk.
Part II of the order prohibits Eggland's from making any claims about the absolute or comparative effect on serum cholesterol
of eggs or any food containing egg yolk unless, prior to making such claims. Eggland's has competent and reliable scientific
evidence to substantiate the claims. This requirement applies to claims about the effect of such foods on serum cholesterol
when consumed either as part of a regular, unrestricted diet or as part of a specific dietary regimen, for instance,
a low-fat diet. Part II of the order also provides that representations that would be specifically permitted in food
labeling, under regulations issued by the Food and Drug Administration (``FDA'') pursuant to the Nutrition and Labeling
Education Act of 1990 (``NLEA''), will be deemed to be adequately substantiated.
Part III of the order prohibits Eggland's from making any claims about the health benefits, including the effect on
heart disease, of eggs or food containing egg yolk unless, prior to making such claims, England's has competent and
reliable scientific evidence to substantiate the claims. This requirement applies to claims about both the absolute
and comparative health benefits associated with consuming such foods. Like Part II, this Part provides that claims
specifically permitted in food labeling, under regulations issued by FDA pursuant to the NLEA, will be deemed to be
adequately substantiated.
Part IV of the order prohibits Eggland's from misrepresenting the existence, contents, validity, results, conclusions
or interpretations of any test or study.
Part V.A of the order requires a clear and prominent disclosure of the cholesterol content of eggs or any food containing
egg yolk, in any advertisement or promotional material that references the absolute or comparative amount of cholesterol,
fat or saturated fat in such food. This disclosure of cholesterol content must be expressed both in terms of the number
of milligrams and as a percentage of the ``Maximum Daily Value'' for cholesterol intake as established by FDA or other
specified organizations. Part V.A exempts from this disclosure requirement any representation that is specifically
permitted in food labeling under regulations issued by FDA pursuant to the NLEA.
Part V.B of the Order requires Eggland's to include a clear and prominent notice on the package label for its eggs that
``There are no studies showing that these eggs are different from other eggs in their effect on serum cholesterol.''
This corrective notice requirement applies for a period of one year beginning forty-five (45) days from the date the
order becomes final in those geographic areas where Eggland's disseminated advertising or promotional materials
discussing the effect of its eggs on serum cholesterol either for a period of twelve (12) weeks or more, or at any time
between January 1, 1993 and to the date of the acceptance of this order by the Commission for public comment.
Part V also includes various specific provisions as to what constitutes a clear and prominent disclosure and corrective
notice for purposes of this order.


