 

41. For FY 1994, we intend to permit installment payments by a reasonable number of regulatees whose fees greatly exceed
the average fee in a particular service category. Through this means we can ensure that we are able to structure a fee
collection system that can be fairly and efficiently administered, given our available resources and our relative
inexperience with the regulatory fee program and its installment component.
<FOOTCITE>15</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
15

</FOOTNAME>
Because our fee collection program is not yet capable of accounting for installment payments aggregated on other
than a single service basis, regulatees must pay their fee payments on a service by service basis.

</FOOTNOTE>


42. Since little time is left in which to collect fees for FY 1994, the practical impact of permitting licensees to make
installment payments this year should be minimal in any event. In these circumstances, we thus find it both fair and
prudent to decline to expand significantly installment payment eligibility for FY 1994. Also, we decline to permit
installment payments for radio licensees, since no fee greater than $900.00 is imposed on these licensees.

43. As we gain experience with the regulatory fee program and, in particular, with its installment payment component,
we will consider increasing eligibility to make installment payments. Therefore, with a limited exception, we will
adopt our proposed installment fee standards. As discussed above, if a licensee concludes that payment of a fee in
its entirety would constitute a financial hardship or if it cannot otherwise submit a full payment, the licensee may
submit a partial payment of the fee with a petition to defer payment of the remaining portion of the fee. Interested
parties may renew their arguments for increased installment opportunities in their comments concerning the assessment
and collection of regulatory fees for 1995.

44. Notwithstanding our decision not to expand significantly installment payment eligibility this year, we have
decided to permit space station and system licensees to submit their fees in installments. These licensees are relatively
few in number, and the uniform fee structure for this service does not lend itself to the mechanism we used to establish
installment payments in categories of services with progressive fee structures. Thus, we will permit licensees
of geosynchronous satellite space stations and low earth orbit satellite systems to file their fee payments in installments.

45. As proposed, regulatees qualifying for installment payments for FY 1994 may make their fee payments in two separate
and equally divided payments with the first payment due on the date set for paying standard annual fees. The date for
each installment will be announced by Public Notice and in the 

Federal Register

. For future fiscal years, we plan to permit four installments annually. We have decided not to impose an administrative
fee with each installment payment. However, any late filed installment payment will be subject to a 25 percent late
fee and the payment of interest for the delinquent amount. Further, any regulatee paying its fees by installment will
automatically lose its eligibility to pay by installments if it fails to make any of its payments in a timely fashion.



3. Advance Payments



46. FIT and UTC support our proposal to require that regulatory fee payments in the Private Radio services be made in
advance. We will require that full payment for Private Radio service regulatory fees due over the entire term of the
authorization be submitted at the time an applicant in the Private Radio service submits its new, renewal or reinstatement
application.
<FOOTCITE>16</FOOTCITE>
 For example, regulatees in the private, shared use services would submit a one time regulatory fee of $35.00 per license
to cover the entire five-year term of their license or authorization. Moreover until expiration of that authorization,
we will not subject regulatees submitting advance fee payments to submit another (supplementary) fee payment for
the same authorization until expiration of that authorization, notwithstanding any subsequent increase in the
applicable annual fee. In instances in which a license is transferred to another service and, therefore, becomes
subject to a different annual fee, as in the case of Private Radio licensees as they become Commercial Mobile Radio
Service licensees, we have generally decided to apply any advance payment to the new annual fee requirement resulting
from that reclassification. Thus, the licensee would become subject to payment of the difference between its initial
fee payment and the amount required under the fee schedule for its new service.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
16

</FOOTNAME>
Regulatory fee payments submitted with applications that are subsequently dismissed or denied will be returned
upon request.

</FOOTNOTE>


47. For FY 1994, no Mass Media or Common Carrier regulatory fees will be subject to collection as small fees. However,
in future years, we may decide to collect advance payments of fees in these services in the event that we conclude that
the fee required is small and our experience shows that it is inefficient to collect the fee on an annual basis.

