 

As noted in Section I. of this document, these two proposed regulations respond to different principles and are based
on different relationships with external communities. Nevertheless, there is potential for the two regulations
to overlap in a small number of instances involving PHS-funded clinical research on FDA-regulated products. Public
comment is sought on whether, in such instances, clinical investigators should be required to disclose financial
interests both to the institution receiving PHS funds and to the sponsor submitting a marketing application to FDA,
and whether meeting the PHS requirement for disclosure to the institution should be considered to satisfy FDA's requirement
for disclosure to the sponsor of a marketing application. 

III. Legal Authority 


The agency is generally authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) and the Public Health Service
Act to approve drugs, devices, and biological products for marketing if the products are demonstrated to be safe and
effective for their intended uses and are properly labeled. More specifically, new drugs are approved for marketing
if they meet the safety and effectiveness criteria set forth in section 505(d) of the act (21 U.S.C. 355(d)) and the
implementing regulations (21 CFR part 314). To demonstrate effectiveness, the law requires evidence from adequate
and well-controlled clinical studies on the basis of which qualified experts could fairly and responsibly conclude
that the drug has the effect it is purported to have. Section 505(j)(3)(F) of the act authorizes the approval of an abbreviated
new drug application if, among other things, there is sufficient information to show that the drug is ``bioequivalent
to the listed drug referred to in the application.'' Under section 505(e) of the act, approval of a new drug application
is to be withdrawn if new information shows that the drug has not been demonstrated to be either safe or effective. Approval
may also be withdrawn if new information shows that the drug's labeling is false or misleading. Under section 505(d)(4)
of the act, in determining whether a drug is ``safe for use'' under the conditions proposed, the agency may consider
not only information such as data from clinical studies, but also ``any other information'' before the agency relevant
to the determination. In deciding whether the drug's proposed labeling would be ``false or misleading'' under section
505(d)(7) of the act, the agency is also to evaluate ``all material facts.'' 
Section 505(k) of the act authorizes the agency to promulgate regulations requiring applicants to make records and
reports of data or other information that are necessary to enable the agency to determine whether there is reason to
withdraw approval of a new drug application or an abbreviated new drug application. 
There is similar authority under section 351(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) to approve biological
products if their ``safety, purity, and potency'' are demonstrated; section 351 also authorizes the promulgation
of regulations designed to ensure the continued safety, purity, and potency of the products. 
FDA's authority to regulate medical devices arises from the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938, as amended
by the Medical Device Amendments of 1976 (the 1976 amendments), the Safe Medical Device Amendments of 1990, and the
Medical Device Amendments of 1992. 



