 

Subpart B_Real Estate Title Clearance and Loan Closing 



1927.51 

General. 



(a) 

Types of loans covered by this subpart.

 This subpart sets forth the authorities, policies, and procedures for real estate title clearance and closing of
loans, assumptions, voluntary conveyances and credit sales in connection with the following types of Farmers Home
Administration (FmHA) loans: Farm Ownership (FO), Nonfarm Enterprise (FONFE), Emergency (EM), Operating
(OL), Rural Housing (RH), Farm Labor Housing (LH), Rural Rental Housing (RRH), Rural Cooperative Housing (RCH),
Soil and Water (SW), Indian Land acquisition loans involving nontrust property, and NonProgram (NP) loans. This
subpart does not apply to guaranteed loans. 

(b) 

Programs not covered by this subpart.

 Title clearance and closing for all other types of FmHA loans and assumptions will be handled as provided in the applicable
program instructions or as provided in special authorizations from the National Office. 

(c) 

Review by the Office of the General Counsel (OGC).

 When required by applicable program regulations, such as for multi-family housing (MFH) organizations or other
complex cases as determined by the State Director, the State Director will request OGC to review the docket and issue
closing instructions. 



1927.52 

Definitions. 





Approval official.

 The FmHA employee who has been delegated the authority to approve, close, and service the particular kind of loan will
approve an attorney or title company as closing agent to close these loans. If a loan must be approved at a higher level
because of the dollar amount or for other reasons, the initiating office may approve the closing agent. 



Approved attorney.

 A duly licensed attorney who provides title opinions directly to FmHA and the borrower or upon whose certification
of title an approved title insurance company issues a policy of title insurance. 
Approved attorneys also close loans, assumptions, credit sales, and voluntary conveyances, and disburse funds
in connection with FmHA loans. 



Approved title insurance company.

 A title insurance company (including its local representatives, employees, agents, and attorneys) that issues
a policy of title insurance. Depending on the local practice, an approved title insurance company may also close loans,
assumptions, credit sales, and voluntary conveyances, and disburse funds in connection with FmHA loans. If the approved
title insurance company does not close the loan itself, the loan closing functions may be performed by approved attorneys
or closing agents authorized by the approved title insurance company. 



Borrower. 

The party(ies) indebted after the loan, assumption, or credit sale is closed. 



Certificate of Title.

 A certified statement as to land ownership, based upon examination of record title. 



Closed loan.

 A loan is considered to be closed when the mortgage is filed for record. 



Closing agent.

 The approved attorney or title company selected by the applicant and approved by FmHA to provide closing services
for the proposed loan. Unless a title insurance company also provides loan closing services, the term ``title company''
does not include ``title insurance company.'' 



Closing protection letter.

 An agreement issued by an approved title insurance company which is an American Land Title Association (ALTA) form
Closing Protection Letter (Rev. 3/27/87) or is otherwise acceptable to FmHA and which protects FmHA against damage,
loss, or injury as a result or negligence by the issuing agent, approved attorney, or title company when title clearance
is done by means of a policy of title insurance. Depending on the area, Closing Protection Letters may also be known
as ``Insured Closing Letters,'' ``Indemnification Agreements,'' ``Insured Closing Service Agreements,'' or
``Statements of Settlement Service Responsibilities.'' 



Cosigner.

 A party who joins in the execution of a promissory note or assumption agreement to guarantee repayment of the debt.




Credit sale.

 A sale in which FmHA provides credit to the purchaser(s) of FmHA inventory property. Title clearance and closing of
a credit sale are the same as for an initial loan except the property is conveyed by quitclaim deed. 



Exceptions.

 Exceptions include but are not limited to recorded covenants, conditions, restrictions, reservations, liens,
encumbrances, easements, rights-of-way, leases, mineral, oil, gas and geothermal rights (with or without the right
of surface entry), timber and water rights, judgments, pending court proceedings, probate proceedings and agreements
which limit or affect the title to the property. 



Fee simple.

 An estate in land of which the owner has unqualified ownership and power of disposition. 



FmHA.

 The United States of America acting through the Farmers Home Administration of the Department of Agriculture. 



General warranty deed.

 A deed in which the grantor or seller warrants or guarantees as a whole that a good quality title is being conveyed. 



Indemnification agreement.

 An agreement that protects FmHA against damage, loss, or injury as a result of negligence on behalf of the issuing agent,
approved attorney, or Title Company. May also be known as: (1) Insured closing letter, (2) Closing protection letter,
(3) Insured closing service agreement, (4) Statement of settlement service responsibilities, or letters which
provide similar protection. 



Issuing agent.

 An agent who performs loan closing services and who is authorized to issue title insurance for an approved title insurance
company. This term includes ``title company.'' 



Land contract (Contract for Deed).

 This is a contract between the buyer and seller of land in which the buyer has the right to possession and use of the land
and over a period of time (usually in excess of one year) makes periodic payments of a portion of the purchase price to
the seller. The seller retains legal title to the property until the final payment is made, at which time the buyer will
receive a deed to the land vesting fee title in the buyer. This is a security device whereby the seller finances a portion
of the purchase price for the buyer. 



Mortgage. 

Real estate security instrument, includes deed of trust and deed to secure debt. Forms FmHA 19277 ``Real Estate
Mortgage or Deed of Trust For 

XXX

'' (state), FmHA 192711 ``Warranty Deed (

XXX

)'' (state), and FmHA 192712 ``Warranty Deed'' (state) will be used to secure a mortgage to FmHA. 


