 



Comment 11: 

This program would divert scarce resources from NMFS Highly Migratory Species (HMS) program's more urgent needs.



Response: 

Data collection and analysis of any kind require an investment of program resources. For the HMS Division, the requirements
of collecting the data and giving the specimens to the needy take no more effort than collecting the data and disposing
of the specimens after the data are collected. 


Comment 12: 

NMFS must address Executive Order 12898 to insure that minorities will not be adversely affected by mercury contamination
of swordfish. 


Response: 

Mercury is cumulative with size and age in swordfish. The Food and Drug Administration has set 1.0 parts per million
(ppm) as the action level for methyl mercury in fish products. Swordfish at the minimum size and lower test in the 0.2
ppm to 0.6 ppm range. Based on available data, swordfish consumed through charitable programs will not result in a
contamination problem. Additionally, NMFS will test for methyl mercury levels in donated swordfish each semester
throughout the first year. 


Comment 13: 

This pilot program would take away any incentive for longline fishermen to reduce the incidence of juvenile swordfish
being hooked and killed. 


Response: 

The pilot program volunteers will encompass less than 3 percent of the longline fleet when fully in operation. Restrictions
and requirements are included in the program to prevent any increase in juvenile swordfish mortality beyond what
would have occurred without the program. 


Changes From the Proposed Rule 


Changes in this final rule from the proposed rule include some operational changes. The responsibility for tagging
donated fish now rests with the owner or operator of the volunteer vessel, and all donated fish must be tagged prior
to offloading. Volunteer vessel owners or operators must notify NMFS enforcement 24 hours prior to landing and offloading
the donated fish. NMFS plans in the first year of operation to place observers on all participating vessels. The number
of vessels selected in the first year is not expected to exceed six vessels. Volunteer vessels who have been issued
a Notice of Violation and Assessment may be excluded from the program. All unused tags must be accounted for by the vessels
owners or operators. In addition to operational changes some minor changes were made in wording of the text to make
the meaning of certain passages more clear. 


Classification 


This final rule is published under the authority of the ATCA. The Assistant Administrator for Fisheries, NOAA (AA),
has preliminarily determined that this final rule is consistent with the recommendations of ICCAT and is necessary
for management of the Atlantic swordfish fishery. 
This final rule has been determined to be not significant for purposes of E.O. 12866. 
This final rule contains four new collection-of-information requirements subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act,
specifically, application to participate in the donation program, 24-hour advance notice of landing donated swordfish,
tagging and reporting of undersized fish for voluntary participants, and submission of bills of lading and landing
receipts by Second Harvest headquarters to dealers and to NMFS. The public reporting burdens for these collections
of information are estimated to average 10, 3, 2, and 15 minutes, respectively, per response, including the time for
reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing
and reviewing the collections of information. Requests to collect this information have been approved by OMB (OMB
Control number 06480277). This final rule also involves three collections of information subject to the Paperwork
Reduction Act that have previously been approved by OMB, specifically, fishing vessel reports (OMB Control Number
06480016), dealer reports (OMB Control Number 06480013), and tagging requirements (OMB Control Number
06480247). The public reporting burdens for these collections of information are estimated to average 6,
30, and 2 minutes, respectively, per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing
data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collections of information.
Send comments regarding burden estimates or any other aspect of these collections of information, including suggestions
for reducing the burdens, to NMFS or OMB (see 

ADDRESSES

). 


List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 630 


Fisheries, Fishing, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Treaties. 



Dated: October 27, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
Charles Karnella, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Program Management Officer, National Marine Fisheries Service. 



</SIGNJOB>
