 

<TABLE>



NO

X

 

Emission Inventory Summary1 (Tons Per Day) 

1 
11990 
11995 
12000 
12005



Point 
131 
130 
141 
146

Area 
15 
16 
17 
18

Mobile On-Road 
251 
194 
166 
158

Mobile Non-Road 
159 
164 
176 
186



Total 
557 
504 
499 
508 


1Entries are rounded to the nearest whole number, totals may not equal to sum of column entries.

</TABLE>



The BAAQMD provided EPA with the appropriate documentation for technical (Base Year 1990 Emission Inventory_Source
Category Methodologies) and administrative requirements. The revised VOC and NO

X

 inventories are 3.4 and 13.5 percent lower, respectively, than the reactive organic compound (ROG) and NO

X

 inventories previously submitted by the State. The primary reason for the difference between the inventories is
the use of the BURDEN7F model in place of the BURDEN7C model to estimate vehicular emissions. In addition, ROG inventories
include ethane, which are approximately 4 percent higher than VOC inventories. 



5.B. Demonstration of Maintenance_Projected Inventories. 

The BAAQMD developed projected VOC and NO

X

 emissions inventories for the years 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005 by applying growth factors in accordance with EPA guidance.
The CARB included these 1990 emissions inventories for VOC, NO

X

 and CO in the maintenance plan submission. These 1990 emission inventories will be entered into AIRS. 

The projected inventories show that the ozone standard will be maintained and that emissions are not expected to exceed
the level of the 1990 inventory during the maintenance period. EPA's TSD contains a detailed analysis of the projected
emission inventories for the San Francisco Bay Area. 



5.C. Verification of Continued Attainment. 

Continued attainment of the ozone NAAQS in the San Francisco Bay Area depends, in part, on the State's efforts to track
indicators of continued attainment during the maintenance period. The BAAQMD will analyze annually the three most
recent consecutive years of air quality monitoring data to verify continued attainment of the national ozone standard,
in accordance with 40 CFR part 50, appendix H. The BAAQMD will submit to EPA an annual report by July 1 of each year for
data collected from the previous calendar year. This information in conjunction with the reports from the previous
two years will provide adequate information for determining continued compliance with the ozone NAAQS. The BAAQMD
has chosen a violation of the NAAQS as the trigger for the contingency plan. 



5.D. Contingency Plan. 

The level of VOC and NO

X

 emissions in the San Francisco Bay Area will largely determine its ability to stay in compliance with the ozone NAAQS
in the future. Despite best efforts to demonstrate continued compliance with the NAAQS, the ambient air pollutant
concentrations may exceed or violate the NAAQS. Therefore, as required pursuant to section 175A, the BAAQMD has provided
contingency measures with a schedule for implementation in the event of a future ozone air quality problem. 

At the time of local adoption of the redesignation request and maintenance plan, the BAAQMD identified the enhanced
vehicle inspection and maintenance program (I/M), required for serious and above ozone nonattainment areas, as
the contingency measure which would be triggered in the event of a violation during the maintenance period. Since
that time, the State of California has passed legislation for an enhanced I/M program which restricts the implementation
of the test-only program to nonattainment areas which are required to implement the program under the Clean Air Act.
Thus, BAAQMD is prohibited from opting into the test-only portion of the enhanced I/M program. However, the BAAQMD
has selected new measures to fulfill the contingency plan requirements of section 175A(d) which are discussed below.


On April 15, 1994, the BAAQMD, MTC, and ABAG sent a letter to the CARB Executive Officer, James Boyd, which committed
to adopt basic improvements to the I/M program and NO

X

 control measures as the new contingency provisions for the maintenance plan. In this letter, the BAAQMD, MTC and ABAG,
have proposed to implement the basic improvements to the I/M program beginning in January 1995 in order to ensure continued
maintenance of the NAAQS. The emission reductions associated with this program go beyond the necessary emission
reductions required for maintenance and the reductions are not included in the BAAQMD's projected inventories in
the maintenance plan. These improvements yield approximate emission reductions in the amount of 8 tons per day (TPD)
VOC and 7 TPD NO

X

. The early implementation of this contingency provision provides an additional margin of safety for the area in maintaining
the NAAQS. In addition, in the event of a violation during the maintenance period, the BAAQMD will meet with EPA within
30 days following the violation to determine which additional measures would be appropriate to implement. The additional
measures contained in the proposal include numerous NO

X

 RACT control measures which yield additional NO

X

 reductions through the year 2001. The chart below lists the additional measures and their associated emission reductions.
The TSD contains detailed information concerning the basic improvements to the I/M program and the NO

X

 RACT control measures. 





