 

F. Relationship to the Federal Response Plan (FRP) 



1. Without a Stafford Act Declaration 



Federal agencies will respond to radiological emergencies using the FRERP, 
each agency in accordance with existing statutory and funding resources. The LFA has responsibility for coordination
of the overall Federal response to the emergency. FEMA is responsible for coordinating non-radiological support
using the structure of the Federal Response Plan (FRP). 



2. With a Stafford Act Declaration 



When a Stafford Act Declaration has activated the FRP and an associated radiological emergency exists, the functions
and responsibilities of the FRERP remain the same. The LFA coordinates the management of the radiological response
with the Federal Coordinating Officer (FCO). Although the direction of the radiological response remains with the
LFA, the FCO has the overall responsibility for coordination of Federal response in support of State and local governments
under the FRP. 



G. Authorities 



The following authorities are the basis for the development of this Plan: 

(1) Nuclear Regulatory Commission Appropriation Authorization, Public Law 96295, June 30, 1980, sec. 304.
This authorization requires the President to prepare and publish a ``National Contingency Plan'' (subsequently
renamed the FRERP) to provide for expeditious, efficient, and coordinated action by appropriate Federal agencies
to protect the public health and safety in case of accidents at commercial nuclear power plants. 

(2) Executive Order (E.O.) 12241, National Contingency Plan, September 29, 1980. This E.O. delegates to the Director
of FEMA the responsibility for publishing the National Contingency Plan (i.e., the FRERP) for accidents at nuclear
power facilities and requires that it be published from time to time in the 

Federal Register

. 

Authorities for the activities of individual Federal agencies appear in 
Appendix C. 



II. Concept of Operations 



A. Introduction 



The concept of operations for a response provides for the designation of one agency as the Lead Federal Agency (LFA)
and for the establishment of onscene, interagency response centers. The FRERP describes both the responsibilities
of the LFA and other Federal agencies that may be involved and the functions of each of the onscene centers. 

The concept of operations recognizes the preeminent role of State and local governments for determining and implementing
any measures to protect life, property, and the environment in areas not under the control of a Federal agency. 



B. Determination of Lead Federal Agency (LFA) 



The agency which is responsible for leading and coordinating all aspects of the Federal response is referred to as
the LFA and is determined by the type of emergency. In situations where a Federal agency owns, authorizes, regulates,
or is otherwise deemed responsible for the facility or radiological activity causing the emergency and has authority
to conduct and manage Federal actions onsite, that agency normally will be the LFA. 

The following identifies the LFA for each specified type of radiological 
emergency. 



1. Nuclear Facility 





a. Licensed by Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) or an Agreement State.

 The NRC is the LFA for an emergency that occurs at a fixed facility or regarding an activity licensed by the NRC or an Agreement
State. These include, but are not limited to, commercial nuclear power reactors, fuel cycle facilities, gaseous
diffusion facilities, and radiopharmaceutical manufacturers. 



b. Owned or Operated by DOD or DOE.

 The LFA is either DOD or DOE, depending on which agency owns or authorizes operation of the facility. These emergencies
may involve reactor operations, nuclear material and weapons production, radioactive material from nuclear weapons,
or other radiological activities. 



c. Not Licensed, Owned, or Operated by a Federal Agency or an Agreement State.

 The EPA is the LFA for an emergency that occurs at a facility not licensed, owned, or operated by a Federal agency or an
Agreement State. These include facilities that possess, handle, store, or process radium or accelerator-produced
radioactive materials. 



2. Transportation of Radioactive Materials 





a. Shipment of Materials Licensed by NRC or an Agreement State.

 The NRC is the LFA for an emergency that involves radiological material licensed by the NRC or an Agreement State. 


