 




EPA is proposing that the California FIP I/M program would be a centralized, test-only network operated by a private
entity or entities (if each FIP area is to be treated separately) that have entered into a legal agreement with the federal
government. This entity or entities will be known generically as the test provider(s). Program oversight would be
facilitated through the award of a contract to provide for the collection of data in the form of overt and covert auditing
of the testing contractor's sites and performance. The test provider(s) would be reimbursed through the collection
of a fee paid directly to the test provider(s) by motorists at the time of testing. Once EPA has entered into an agreement
with the test provider(s), it will be the State's obligation to enter into its own agreement with the test provider(s)
when the State wants to replace the FIP program with its own. EPA does not intend to place itself in the position of assuming
any legal penalty through termination of a contract with a test provider as a result of California starting its own
program; comments are requested on how this result may be achieved. 
The test provider(s) would perform many program activities, with the exception of enforcement of the registration
requirement (which shall remain a State responsibility) and any oversight requirements which would constitute
a conflict of interest, such as covert and overt auditing of the test sites and testing personnel. In addition to establishing
the test sites and conducting the testing, therefore, the testing provider would provide for both mechanic and inspector
training, tracking and reporting of effectiveness data, performing other program data collection and reporting
requirements, conducting a campaign of public information, establishing and maintaining a repair technician hotline,
performing motorist compliance surveys, designing and issuing program documentation such as certificates of compliance
and waivers, and designing and managing a program of onroad vehicle testing via remote sensing technology. Separately,
EPA would award a contract to a different entity or entities to collect the information needed to oversee the performance
of the test provider(s) and to evaluate the effectiveness of the I/M program. Duties under this oversight contract
would include purchasing vehicle records or otherwise entering into a cooperative agreement with the California
Department of Motor Vehicles to facilitate testing and database comparisons for program effectiveness and enforcement
analyses, procuring vehicles for covert testing, conducting covert station audits, and performing periodic overt
audits to confirm that the testing equipment is accurate within the quality specifications. 
Under the legal agreement EPA envisions entering into with the test provider(s), no funds would accrue to EPA, because
that is prohibited by the Miscellaneous Receipts Act, which only allows each Federal agency to retain those funds
which have been specifically appropriated for its use by the Congress. Awarding of the oversight contract and program
administration duties would, therefore, require EPA to divert funds and human resources from other activities to
perform the role currently performed in California by the Bureau of Automotive Repair. 
EPA requests comment on its proposal to establish a centralized, test-only network and to enter into a legal agreement
with one or more test providers as well as awarding a separate contract for data collection in support of program oversight.
EPA also requests comment on whether the Agency should enter into separate agreements and award separate contracts
for each FIP area, or if a single agreement and a single oversight contract for all FIP areas are appropriate. 
(d) Test Type and Procedure. The California Smog Check program currently employs a steady-state, unloaded, tailpipe
test, which is conducted with the vehicle parked and idling. The test is called ``steady-state'' because the vehicle
is operated in only one or two operating modes (typically at idle, or at both idle and 2500 rpm, depending upon the model
year of the vehicle); it is considered ``unloaded'' because the vehicle is parked and therefore encounters no additional
power demands to overcome road resistance. Emissions are measured by placing a probe in the tailpipe to gather a sample
which is analyzed to determine the relative concentrations (i.e., percentage or parts per million) of CO, carbon
dioxide, and hydrocarbons in the exhaust (the analyzer-test type combination used in the Smog Check program is currently
unable to measure NO

X

 emissions). Given that the volume of exhaust from any vehicle is unknown, the concentration of pollutants measured
during a Smog Check cannot indicate the emission level of the vehicle in terms of grams of pollutant emitted per mile
driven_or from the fleet all together in terms of tons of pollutant emitted per day. 
Studies conducted by EPA's Office of Mobile Sources, at the National Vehicle and Fuels Emission Laboratory and elsewhere
have shown that steady-state, idle, concentration-based tests such as those used in California's Smog Check program
are not highly effective at identifying and reducing in-use emissions from the types of vehicles which currently
dominate the fleet (and will continue to dominate the fleet in the future). (See the I/M rule's technical support document,
entitled ``I/M Costs, Benefits, and Impacts,'' November 1992, for more details on these studies and their results.)
Steady-state idle tests were originally designed to detect excess emissions from relatively low- technology, pre-1981,
carbureted, non-computerized passenger cars and worked well enough for these vehicles because the typical emission
control problems they experienced tended to involve ``rich'' air/fuel mixtures which are detectable at idle as well
as other driving modes. To meet increasingly stringent emission standards, however, current high-technology cars
must use an elaborate array of sensors and computer feedback controls to continuously adjust engine operations,
optimizing the air/fuel mixture depending upon the current driving mode. Such vehicles are more effectively tested
with procedures that address the full range of driving modes, including cruise, idle, acceleration, and deceleration
cycles under loaded conditions. 


