 

(iii) In the case of those fuels and additive/base fuel 
mixtures which contain alcohol and/or ether compounds in the 
uncombusted state, determination of the identity and 
concentration of individual species of alcohol and ether 
compounds containing six or fewer carbon atoms. For fuel and 
additive formulations containing alcohols or ethers with more 
than six carbon atoms in the uncombusted state, alcohol and ether 
species with that higher number of carbon atoms or less must be 
identified and measured in the emissions. Such characterization 
shall begin within four hours after emission collection is 
completed. 
(iv) In the case of those fuels and additive/base fuel 
mixtures which contain atypical elements, determination of the 
identity and concentration of individual emission products 
containing such atypical elements. 

(4) 

Laboratory quality control. 

(i) At a minimum, laboratories performing the procedures 
specified in this section shall conduct calibration testing of 
their emissions characterization equipment before each new 
fuel/additive product test start-up. Known samples 
representative of the compounds potentially to be found in 
emissions from the product to be characterized shall be used to 
calibrate such equipment. 
(ii) Laboratories performing the procedures specified in 
this section shall agree to permit quality control inspections by 
EPA, and for this purpose shall admit any EPA Enforcement 
Officer, upon proper presentation of credentials, to any facility 
where vehicles are conditioned or where emissions are generated, 
collected, stored, sampled, or characterized in meeting the 
requirements of this section. Such laboratory audits may include 
EPA distribution of ``blind'' samples for analysis by participating 
laboratories. 
(5) 

References. 

For additional background information on 
the emission characterization procedures outlined in this 
paragraph, the following references may be consulted: 
(i) ``Advanced Emission Speciation Methodologies for the 
Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Program_I. Hydrocarbons and 
Ethers,'' Auto Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program, SP920, 920320, SAE, February 1992. 
(ii) ``Advanced Speciation Methodologies for the Auto/Oil 
Air Quality Improvement Research Program_II. Aldehydes, 
Ketones, and Alcohols,'' Auto Oil Air Quality Improvement 
Research Program, SP920, 920321, SAE, February 1992. 
(iii) ASTM D 519791, ``Standard Test Method for 
Determination of Formaldehyde and Other Carbonyl Compounds in Air 
(Active Sampler Methodology).'' 
(iv) Johnson J. H., Bagley, S. T., Gratz, L. D., and Leddy, 
D. G., ``A Review of Diesel Particulate Control Technology and 
Emissions Effects_1992 Horning Memorial Award Lecture,'' SAE 
Technical Paper Series, SAE 940233, 1994. 
(v) Keith 

et al., 

ACS Committee on Environmental 
Improvement, ``Principles of Environmental Analysis,'' The Journal 
of Analytical Chemistry, Volume 55, pp. 22102218, 1983. 
(vi) Perez, J.M., Jabs, R.E., Leddy, D.G., eds. ``Chemical 
Methods for the Measurement of Unregulated Diesel Emissions (CRCAPRAC Project No. CAPI164),
Coordinating Research Council, CRC 
Report No. 551, August, 1987. 
(vii) Schuetzle, D., ``Analysis of Nitrated Polycyclic 
Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Diesel Particulates,'' Analytical 
Chemistry, Volume 54, pp. 265271, 1982. 
(viii) Siegl, W.O., 

et al., 

``Improved Emissions Speciation 
Methodology for Phase II of the Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement 
Research Program_Hydrocarbons and Oxygenates'', SAE Technical 
Paper Series, SAE 930142, 1993. 
(ix) Tejada, S. B. 

et al., 

``Analysis of Nitroaromatics in 
Diesel and Gasoline Car Emissions,'' SAE Paper No. 820775, 1982. 
(x) Tejada, S. B. 

et al., 

``Fluorescence Detection and 
Identification of Nitro Derivatives of Polynuclear Aromatic 
Hydrocarbons by On-Column Catalytic Reduction to Aromatic 
Amines,'' Analytical Chemistry, Volume 58, pp. 18271834, July 
1986. 
 
(xi) ``Test Method for Determination of C1C4 Alcohols and 
MTBE in Gasoline by Gas Chromatography,'' 40 CFR part 80, appendix 
F. 
(c) 

Exposure Analysis. 

Using annual and projected 
production volume, marketing, and distribution data submitted as 
part of the basic registration data, specified in 79.59(b), 
manufacturers shall provide a qualitative discussion of the 
potential public health exposure(s) of the general population and 
any special at-risk populations to the emission products of their 
fuel or additive product(s). The analysis accompanying a group 
submission shall address the characteristics of the cumulative 
exposure resulting from the use of all fuel or additive products 
in the group. Modeling and other quantitative approaches to the 
analysis are encouraged when the appropriate data is available. 
(d) 

Literature Search. 

(1) Manufacturers of fuels and fuel additives shall conduct 
a literature search and compilation of information on the 
potential toxicologic, environmental, and other public welfare 
effects of the emissions of such fuels and additives. The 
literature search shall include all available relevant 
information from in-house, industry, government, and public 
sources pertaining to the emissions of the subject fuel or fuel 
additive or the emissions of similar fuels or additives, with 
such similarity determined according to the provisions of 79.56. 
 
(2) The literature search shall address the potential 
adverse effects of whole combustion emissions, evaporative 
emissions, relevant emission fractions, and individual emission 
products of the subject fuel or fuel additive except as specified 
in the following paragraph. The individual emission products to 
be included are those identified pursuant to the emission 
characterization procedures specified in paragraph (b) of this 
section, other than carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen 
oxides, benzene, 1,3-butadiene, acetaldehyde, and formaldehyde. 
(3) In the case of the individual emission products of non-baseline or atypical fuels and additives (pursuant to 79.56(e)(2)),
the literature data need not be submitted for those 
emission products which are the same as the combustion emission 
products of the respective base fuel for the product's fuel 
family (pursuant to 79.55). For this purpose, data on the base 
fuel emission products for the product's fuel family: 
(i) May be found in the literature of previously-conducted, 
adequate emission speciation studies for the base fuel, or for a 
fuel or additive/fuel mixture capable of grouping with the base 
fuel (see, for example, the references in paragraph (b)(5) of 
this section). 




