 

(5) In connection with an appeal proceeding under this section, the recipient organization will be afforded an opportunity
to explain its position directly to the Committee, either in person or in writing. 
(6) If a request for a hearing is made, the Committee may solicit additional information or material before reaching
its decision to grant or deny a hearing. 
(7) If a request for a hearing is granted, the Committee will issue appropriate written instructions to the recipient
organization pertaining to the hearing. 
(8) The Committee will reach a decision on the merits of the appeal as soon as practicable. The Committee may solicit
additional information or material before reaching its final decision. 
(9) The Chairperson, with advice from the Office of General Counsel, will prepare a written final decision to be transmitted
to the recipient organization with copies to the Grants Management Specialist and the Project Officer. This will
be the final decision of the Agency on the Dispute. 
(c) Expedited dispute appeal process. When a Dispute which may affect refunding arises within 120 days of the end of
the Budget period, the Committee, in consultation with the AA/SBDCs, shall meet, with at least a majority of the members
in attendance. By an affirmative vote constituting a majority of its total membership, the Committee shall have discretion
to shorten all response times as necessary to attain final resolution of the Dispute before the date on which a new Cooperative
Agreement would be due to be issued. At any time during the appeal process within 120 days of the end of the Budget period,
the recipient organization may submit a written request to use an expedited process. 


130.640 

Conflict resolution procedures. 


(a) Any Conflict that is not resolved at the SBA district office level within 15 calendar days shall be referred by the
SBA Project Officer to the next SBA administrative level having authority to review such Conflict. The SBA Project
Officer shall make the referral in writing and shall include the comments of the SBDC Director. 
(b) If such Conflict is not resolved at any intermediate SBA administrative level within 15 calendar days, it shall
be forwarded, in writing, to the AA/SBDCs for final resolution. All comments of the SBDC Director must be included
in any package forwarded to the AA/SBDCs.
(c) The AA/SBDCs shall transmit a final decision in writing to the recipient organization, the SBDC Director, the
SBA Project Officer and other appropriate SBA field office personnel within 30 calendar days of receipt of such documentation,
unless an extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the recipient organization and the AA/SBDCs.


130.650 

Non-renewal procedure for non-performance. 


(a) In situations where the SBS District Director believes there is sufficient evidence of an SBDC's nonperformance
or poor performance under the terms of the Cooperative Agreement or these regulations, and subject to the provisions
of 130.700(a), the SBA District Director shall notify the SBDC Director any other appropriate official of
the recipient organization of an intention not to renew the SBDC. 
(b) This notification can be forwarded to the recipient organization at any time during the budget year, but normally
should be sent no later than 3 months prior to the deadline for receipt of an application by the SBA Project Officer.
When there is sufficient evidence of an SBDC's violation of these regulations, or of any other causes which may lead
to the initiation of suspension or termination procedures as set forth in 130.700 of this part, the SBA District
Director may waive the notification period with the concurrence of the AA/SBDCs. 
(c) This notification shall specifically cite the reasons for the intention not to renew the SBDC. It shall allow the
recipient organization a 60-day period within which to change and adjust its operations in order to correct any problems
cited in the notice, and to report to the SBA district office, in writing on the results of such changes or adjustments.

(d) If the recipient organization is unwilling or unable to resolve the specific problem areas to the satisfaction
of the SBA district office within the 60-day period, the SBA Project Officer shall have ten (10) calendar days after
expiration of such period to submit to the AA/SBDCs, through appropriate SBA channels, a written description of any
unresolved issues, a summary of the positions of the District office on the issues, and any supportive documentation.

(e) The AA/SBDCs shall transmit a final decision in writing to the recipient organization, the SBDC Director, the
SBA Project Officer and other appropriate SBA field office personnel within 30 calendar days of receipt of such documentation,
unless an extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the recipient organization and the AA/SBDCs. 
(f) To reach a final decision, the AA/SBDCs shall consider written documentation of the issues to be resolved, including
all relevant correspondence between the Project Officer, District Director and any other SBS personnel and the affected
recipient organization. At a minimum, such documentation shall commence with the first written notice of issues
resulting in the invocation of the non-renewal procedure. In addition to the written documentation, the AA/SBDCs
shall also communicate in person, in writing or by E-Mail with both the recipient organization and appropriate SBA
personnel. 
(g) If the AA/SBDCs determines that the evidence submitted establishes nonperformance, ineffective performance
or an unwillingness to implement suggested changes to improve performance, the AA/SBDCs shall have full discretion
to order termination of the SBDC. The SBA district officer shall then pursue proposals from other organizations interested
in applying for SBDC designation. The incumbent SBDC shall have 60 days to conclude operations and to submit close-out
documents to the appropriate SBA district office. Close-out procedures shall be in conformance with OMB Circular
A133. 


