 

(14) 

Shift activity log. 

The facility shall maintain a written record of the following:

(i) personnel on duty;

(ii) juvenile population at the beginning and end of each shift;

(iii) record of counts taken;

(iv) shift activities;

(v) entry and exit of professional and other visitors;

(vi) unusual occurrences or incidents;

(vii) hours of programs provided; and

(viii) clothing and linen exchange.

(15) 

Weekly inspection. 

The administrator or designee shall inspect all facility spaces and devices at least weekly to determine the status
of all security items and the sanitary condition of the facility. The administrator or designee shall document the
inspection and shall initiate corrective action if needed.

(16) 

Monthly Inspection. 

The administrator shall inspect all areas of the facility at least monthly to inventory security equipment to determine
numbers, usefulness and expiration dates, to determine the status of all security and safety items and to determine
the sanitary condition of the facility. The administrator shall document the inspection and shall initiate corrective
action if needed. 

(17) 

Fire safety inspection. 

A qualified fire protection specialist shall inspect the facility to test the fire suppression and detection system,
equipment and facility training in compliance with 29 CFR 1910.36(d), 1910.37(m), 1910.37(n), 1910.38, and 29 CFR
1960, Subpart D. 

(18) 

Use of restraints. 

Staff shall use instruments of restraint only as a precaution against escape during transfer, for medical reasons
at the direction of the health authority and as a prevention against juvenile self-injury, injury to others or property
damage. Staff shall apply restraints only with the approval of the administrator or designee and only for the amount
of time that is absolutely necessary. 

(19) 

Security equipment issue. 

The administrator shall maintain a written record of routine and emergency distributions of security equipment.


(20) 

Contraband control. 

The administrator shall provide for searches of facilities and juveniles to control contraband and to provide for
its disposition. When a new crime is suspected, the administrator shall be notified. The administrator shall maintain
and make available to the appropriate authorities all evidence. 

(21) 

Body cavity and visual inspections. 

Manual or instrument inspection of juvenile body cavities shall be conducted only by health care staff when there
is reason to do so and when authorized by the administrator or designee. Trained staff shall conduct visual inspections
of unclothed juveniles only when there is a reasonable belief that the juvenile is carrying contraband or other prohibited
material. Medical personnel shall conduct all manual or instrument inspections in private by medical personnel.
Trained staff of the same sex as the juvenile shall conduct all visual inspections in private. 

(22) 

Key and tool control. 

The administrator shall govern the control, issuance, use and storage of keys, tools and culinary and medical equipment.


(23) 

Use of force and firearms. 

The facility shall comply with 25 CFR 11.304 with regard to the use of force, firearms, chemical agents, or any other
weapon. 

(b) 

Safety and emergency procedures

_(1) 

Fire prevention. 

The administrator shall govern the storage and use of all flammable, toxic and caustic materials, the use of non-combustible
receptacles for smoking materials, the amount of personal items, including reading materials, which juveniles
may keep in their living units and the amount and location of items stored in the facility. 

(2) 

Preventive maintenance. 

The administrator or designee shall develop a written plan for preventive maintenance of the facility. The administrator
shall review the plan annually and update it as needed. If tribally operated, the plan shall be supported by a Memorandum
of Agreement between the tribe and the Agency. 

(3) 

Emergency generator testing. 

In compliance with 29 CFR 1910.38, emergency power generators shall be inspected weekly and tested under load at intervals
of not more than thirty days. 

(4) 

Evacuation plan. 

The administrator shall develop a written evacuation plan prepared in case of fire or major emergency. The plan shall
comply with 29 CFR 1910.38 or comparable tribal code. The applicable Safety Officer or designee shall review and approve
the plan initially and annually. The administrator shall update and reissue the plan if necessary. The plan shall
include: 

(i) means of immediate release of juveniles from locked areas; 

(ii) location of floor plans; 

(iii) use of exit signs and directional arrows for traffic flow; 

(iv) location of a publicly posted plan; 

(v) at least quarterly drills in all facility locations; and 

(vi) coordination with the fire department which services the facility. 

(5) 

Emergency plans. 

The administrator or designee shall develop written plans that specify procedures to be followed in emergency situations.
The administrator shall make these plans available to applicable personnel and shall review and update them at least
annually. All facility personnel shall be trained in the implementation of these plans. Emergency situations shall
include, but not limited to: 

(i) riots and disturbances; 

(ii) hunger strikes; 

(iii) hostage situations; 

(iv) work stoppages; 

(v) unattended deaths, including successful suicides; 

(vi) attempted suicides; 

(vii) escapes and unauthorized absences; and 

(viii) other threats to the security of the facility. 

(6) 

Incident reporting. 

The administrator shall require the immediate reporting of all incidents that result in physical harm to any person,
threaten the safety of any person, result in the need for emergency care, result in damage to the facility or facility
property, threaten the security of the facility, or involve the commission of a criminal offense. The administrator
shall forward the reports to the Agency Superintendent through the appropriate chain of command. 

(7) 

Medical treatment (incident). 

The administrator or designee shall ensure that all persons injured in an incident receive an immediate medical examination
and treatment. 

(8) 

Notification of family. 

The administrator shall provide for the notification of persons designated by the juvenile in the event of serious
illness, injury or death. 


