 

2400.66Completion of fellowships.






Subpart H_Summer Institute on the Constitution






2400.70Institute's relationship to fellowship.

2400.71Fellows' participation in institute.

2400.72Contents of institute.

2400.73Allowances and institute costs.

2400.74Institute accreditation.








Authority: 

20 U.S.C. 4501 et seq.





Subpart A_General





2400.1

Purposes.






(a) The purposes of the James Madison Memorial Fellowship Program are to: (1) Provide incentives for master's degree
level graduate study of the history, principles, and development of the United States Constitution by outstanding
in-service teachers of American history, American government, and social studies in grades 712 and by outstanding
college graduates who plan to become teachers of the same subjects; and thereby to (2) Strengthen teaching in the nation's
secondary schools about the principles, framing, ratification, and subsequent history of the United States Constitution.



(b) The Foundation may from time to time operate its own programs and undertake other closely related activities to
fulfill these goals.






2400.2

Annual competition.




To achieve its principal purposes, the Foundation holds an annual competition to select teachers in grades 712,
college seniors, and college graduates to be James Madison Fellows.




2400.3

Eligibility.




Individuals eligible to apply for and hold James Madison Fellowships are United States citizens, United States nationals,
or permanent residents of the Northern Mariana Islands who are: (a) Teachers of American history, American government,
or social studies in grades 712 who: (1) Are teaching full time during the year in which they apply for a fellowship;


(2) Are under contract, or can provide evidence of being under prospective contract, to teach full time as teachers
of American history, American government, or social studies in grades 712;


(3) Have demonstrated records of willingness to devote themselves to civic responsibilities and to professional
and collegial activities within their schools and school districts;





(4) Are highly recommended by their department heads, school heads, school district superintendents, or other supervisors;



(5) Qualify for admission with graduate standing at accredited universities of their choice that offer master's
degree programs allowing at least 12 hours or their equivalent of study of the origins, principles, and development
of the Constitution of the United States and of its comparison with the constitutions of other forms of government;




(6) Are able to complete their proposed courses of graduate study within five calendar years from the commencement
of study under their fellowships, normally through part-time study during summers or in evening or weekend programs;



(7) Agree to attend the Foundation's four-week Summer Institute on the Constitution, normally during the summer
following the commencement of study under their fellowships; and




(8) Sign agreements that, after completing the education for which the fellowship is awarded, they will teach American
history, American government, or social studies full time in secondary schools for a period of not less than one year
for each full academic year of study for which assistance was received, preferably in the state listed as their legal
residence at the time of their fellowship award. For the purposes of this provision, a full academic year of study is
the number of credit hours determined by each university at which Fellows are studying as constituting a full year
of study at that university. Fellows' teaching obligations will be figured at full academic years of study; and when
Fellows have studies for partial academic years, those years will be rounded upward to the nearest one-half year to
determine Fellows' total teaching obligations.











