 

(4) Prior to any repair work, the cargo tank must be emptied of any hazardous material lading. Cargo tanks containing
flammable or toxic lading must be purged.
(5) Any repair of a cargo tank involving welding on the shell or head must be certified by a Registered Inspector. Any
repair of an ASME Code ``U'' stamped cargo tank must be in accordance with the National Board Inspection Code.
(6) The suitability of any repair affecting the structural integrity of the cargo tank must be determined by testing
as prescribed in 180.407.
(c) 

Maintenance or replacement of piping, valves, hoses or fittings.

 In the event of repair, maintenance or replacement, any piping, valve, or fitting must be properly installed in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable specification before the cargo tank is returned to hazardous materials service.
After maintenance or replacement which does not involve welding on the cargo tank wall, the repaired piping, valves
or fittings, the replaced segment of the piping must be leak tested. After repair or replacement of piping, valves
or fittings which involves welding on the cargo tank wall, the entire cargo tank, including the repaired or replaced
piping, valve or fitting, must be pressure tested in accordance with the applicable specification. Hoses permanently
attached to the cargo tank must be tested either before or after installation.
(d) 

Modification, stretching, or rebarrelling.

 Modification, stretching or rebarrelling of a cargo tank must conform to the following provisions:
(1) 

Non-ASME Code stamped cargo tanks.

 If the modification, stretching, or rebarrelling will result in a design type change, then it must be approved by a
Design Certifying Engineer. Any work involving modification, stretching, or rebarrelling on an MC 300, MC 301, MC
302, MC 303, MC 304, MC 305, MC 306, MC 307, MC 310, MC 311, or MC 312 cargo tank that is not ASME stamped must be performed
by:
(i) A cargo tank manufacturer holding a valid ASME Certificate of Authorization for the use of the ASME ``U'' stamp
and registered with DOT; or
(ii) A repair facility holding a valid National Board Certificate of Authorization for the use of the National Board
``R'' stamp and registered with DOT.
(2) 

ASME Code stamped cargo tanks.

 The modification, stretching, or rebarrelling on any ASME Code stamped cargo tank must be performed by a repair facility
holding a valid National Board Certificate of Authorization for the use of the National Board ``R'' stamp and registered
in accordance with subpart F of part 107 of subchapter B of this chapter. If the modification, stretching, or rebarrelling
will result in a design type change, then it must be approved by a Design Certifying Engineer.
(3) All new material and equipment, and equipment affected by the modification, stretching or rebarrelling must
conform with requirements of the specification in effect at the time of such work. In addition, the modification,
stretching or rebarrelling must be performed such that the cargo tank, as modified, stretched or rebarrelled, meets
the applicable structural integrity requirements (178.3373, 178.3383, or 178.3453
of this subchapter) of the specification in effect at the time of such work. The work must conform to the requirements
of the applicable specification as follows:


