 

The majority of occupational disease tort activity has involved workers exposed to asbestos. These employees could
avoid the exclusive remedy of Workers' Compensation by suing suppliers, whereas asbestos exposures are best controlled
by employers. 
In a consolidated class-action case in 1990, a Texas court awarded more than $3.5 million in compensatory damages
to 2,366 workers who had been exposed to asbestos in refineries. Punitive damages were to be awarded on the basis of
gross negligence on the part of the suppliers [Dallas Morning News, 1990]. 
In 1993, a settlement was reached in a lawsuit involving future personal injury claims against 20 asbestos product
manufacturers represented by the Center for Claims Resolution (Carlough v. Amchem Products, Inc). It would provide
$1 billion over the next ten years to settle about 100,000 claims as people exposed to the manufacturers' products
contract asbestos-related conditions. Payments would depend on the type of condition and attorneys' fees would
be capped at 25 percent of each payment [BNA, 1993]. The settlement was reached by parties aware of the decades-long
impasses in asbestos litigation that have frustrated the tort liability process. 
It is unusual for insurance and liability costs to be borne in full by the specific employer responsible for the risk
involved. For firms using insurance, the premium determination process is such that premiums only partially reflect
changes in risk associated with changes in asbestos or other hazardous exposures. This results in the so-called ``moral
hazard problem,'' which is the risk that arises from the possible dishonesty or imprudence of the insured. As the insured
has paid for an insurance company to assume some of his or her risks, he or she has less reason to exercise the diligence
necessary to avoid losses. This transfer of risk is a fundamental source of imperfection in markets. 
For firms that self-insure or carry liability insurance with a large deductible, the costs of a single claim may be
fully borne by the firm. Very small firms, and large firms with a large number of claims, however, may fail to meet the
full costs by declaring bankruptcy, as has happened with Johns Manville and other former asbestos producers. The
attempts at financial restructuring by defendants of asbestos litigation further reduce the chances that workers
who contract asbestos-related diseases as employees of these companies or as employees of companies that used their
products will collect compensation [Washington Post, 1990]. 


Workers' Compensation 


The Workers' Compensation system came about as the result of perceived inadequacies in liability or insurance systems
to compel employers to prevent occupational disease or compensate workers fully for their losses. This system was
designed to internalize some of the social costs of production, but in reality it has fallen short of compensating
workers adequately for occupationally related disease. Thus, society shares the burden of occupationally related
adverse health effects, premature mortality, excess morbidity, and disability through taxpayer support of social
programs such as welfare, Social Security disability payments, and Medicare. 


Government Regulations and Rejected Alternative Standards 


In order to compensate for market imperfections (some of which are detailed above), a number of federal and state regulations
have been promulgated in the attempt to improve the allocation of resources. While some of these regulations may have
a limiting effect on occupational exposures to asbestos, OSHA does not believe that these regulations obviate the
need for an OSHA standard regulating occupational exposure to asbestos. 
OSHA's current permissible exposure level (PEL) for asbestos of 0.2 fibers per cubic centimeter (f/cc) does not eliminate
all significant risk to workers. Given the recent health evidence of carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic hazards,
OSHA believes that to fully protect workers it is necessary to lower the asbestos PEL and establish ancillary provisions.

For public, commercial, residential and industrial buildings, OSHA rejected, on the basis of cost and feasibility
considerations, alternative approaches requiring owners to conduct up-front inspections for asbestos-containing
materials or to inspect before ACM is disturbed. These approaches have also been examined by the Environmental Protection
Agency. An analysis by EPA's contractor [Abt, 1992] projected potential compliance costs of $13.2 billion to $16.2
billion for an up-front survey approach and potential costs of $3.2 billion to $14.5 billion for an identify-before-disturb
option. OSHA's approach, instead, specifies parameters for making reasonable assumptions about the presence of
asbestos-containing materials within building components and notifying and protecting maintenance workers,
custodians and building occupants as prescribed elsewhere in the revised standard. 


D. Benefits of the Revision to the Final Asbestos Standard 
Introduction 


The inhalation of asbestos fiber has been clearly associated with three clinical conditions: asbestosis, mesothelioma
(a cancer of the lining of the chest or abdomen), and lung cancer. Studies have also observed increased gastrointestinal
cancer risk. Risk from cancer at other sites, such as the larynx, pharynx, and kidneys, is also suspected. 
Initial exposure limits for asbestos were based on efforts to reduce asbestosis which was known to be associated with
asbestos exposure. The reduction in cases of asbestosis, however, resulted in workers living long enough to develop
cancers that are now recognized as associated with asbestos exposure. The following discussion of the benefits associated
with a reduction in exposures, therefore, focuses on the number of cancer cases avoided within the exposed work force.
The results are expressed in terms of deaths avoided because these cancers almost always result in death. 


Methodology 


OSHA calculated expected benefits following promulgation of the final revised asbestos standard for workers employed
in the general industry, shipyards, and construction sectors. In this benefits analysis, the following types of
preventable asbestos-related cancer mortalities were evaluated: (1) Preventable lung cancers, (2) preventable
mesotheliomas, and (3) preventable gastrointestinal cancers. The risk assessment used to derive OSHA's estimate
of the number of cancers prevented is discussed in Chapter 5 of the regulatory impact analysis of the 1986 final asbestos
standard [OSHA, 1986]. For this analysis, OSHA updated the 1986 risk assessment to include 1991 data on the gender
and age distribution within affected industry sectors [BLS, 1991] and the 1991 mortality rates associated with malignant
neoplasms of respiratory and intrathoracic organs [NCHS, 1993]. 
The benefits of a reduction in the PEL depend upon current exposure levels, the number of workers exposed, and the risk
associated with each exposure level. OSHA's estimates for current exposures, the number of full-time equivalent
workers exposed, and the exposure levels after compliance with the revision to the final rule are presented in Table
5 for general industry and shipyards and Table 6 for construction. 




