 

(1) If the birds and poultry are buried, all birds and poultry infected with END must be buried in the quarantined area.
The birds and poultry must be buried in a location that meets all United States Environmental Protection Agency, State,
and local requirements for landfills. They must be buried at least 6 feet deep and be covered at the time of burial with
soil;

(2) If the birds and poultry are composted, all birds and poultry infected with END must be composted in the quarantined
area. The birds and poultry must be composted according to the following instructions:

(i) Place a 1-foot layer of litter and manure in a free-standing composter bin, unless the compost pile will be covered
in accordance with paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section. Add a 6-inch layer of straw, peanut hulls, or wood chips.
Add a layer of dead birds or dead poultry, leaving 6 inches between the carcasses and the bin walls. Add water sparingly
and cover with 6 inches of a dry mixture of litter and manure. Repeat the layering process two more times and cap with
a double layer of dry manure cake. After the bin is capped off and covered, monitor the temperature in the compost pile
daily, using a 36-inch probe-type thermometer. The temperature of the compost pile must reach at least 140
&cir; F. After 30 days from the date the compost pile is created, turn over to aerate the entire mixture. Allow mixture
to reach at least 140
&cir; F once again. After completion of the second cycle, the mixture must remain covered with any material that prevents
penetration of air and moisture until spread or otherwise utilized. The composted material may not be spread or otherwise
utilized until at least 30 days following completion of the second heating cycle.

(ii) Composting of birds and poultry may be accomplished outside of covered bins by following the layering and temperature
requirements set forth in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, then covering the compost pile with tarpaulins or
6-mm polyethylene sheets anchored with tires or straw bales. The mixture must be kept moist. The final product may
not be spread or otherwise utilized until at least 30 days following completion of the second heating cycle.

(iii) Composting of birds and poultry must be carried out at least 50 yards from any building or pen where poultry and
birds are housed and be inaccessible to birds and poultry. Composted material may not be commingled with, or otherwise
be brought into contact with, non-composted manure cake.

(d) All eggs produced by birds or poultry infected with or exposed to END in the quarantined area have been buried, reduced
to ashes by incineration, or rendered. If the eggs are buried, the eggs must be buried in the quarantined area in a location
that meets all United States Environmental Protection Agency requirements and all State and local requirements
for landfills. The eggs must be buried at least 6 feet deep and be covered at the time of burial with soil;

(e) All manure generated by or litter used by birds or poultry infected with or exposed to END in the quarantined area
has been reduced to ashes by incineration, or has been buried, composted, or spread on a field and turned under, as follows:

(1) 

Burial. 

If the manure or litter is buried, the manure and litter must be buried at least 6 feet deep and covered at the time of burial
with soil. The manure and litter must be buried in the quarantined area in a location that meets all United States Environmental
Protection Agency and State and local requirements for landfills;

(2) 

Composting. 

If the manure and litter is composted, the manure and litter must be composted in the quarantined area according to
the following method: Place the manure and litter in rows 3 to 5 feet high and 5 to 10 feet at the base. The area where the
manure, litter, and other material used in composting are placed must be such that there is no runoff from the composted
material out of the area, no saturation into the ground, and no moisture, except for that required by this paragraph,
onto the composted material from above. The composting area must be at least 50 yards from any building or pen where
birds or poultry are housed and be inaccessible to birds and poultry. The manure and litter must be mixed so as to attain
a carbon to nitrogen ratio of approximately 30:1, a moisture content of between 40 to 50 percent, and a supply of oxygen
to the composted material. If a carbon source other than manure or litter is needed, wood chips, straw, or peanut hulls
may be used. The manure and litter must be covered with tarpaulin or 6-mm polyethylene sheets, be anchored with tires
or straw bales, and be mixed to ensure adequate ventilation every 10 to 15 days. The composted material must rise to
a temperature of 140
&cir; F, as determined by use of a 36-inch probe-type thermometer. The composted material may not be spread or otherwise
utilized for at least 30 days from the time the 140
&cir; F temperature is reached.

(3) 

Spreading and turning under. 

If the manure or litter is spread on a 
field and turned under, the field must be in the quarantined area, at least 
50 yards away from any building or pen where poultry or birds are housed, and 
inaccessible to birds and poultry. The manure or litter must be turned under within 24 hours of being spread on the field,
and the field must be left undisturbed for at least 30 days; 




