 

This species is now recognized as 

Lynx lynx canadensis (Jones et al. 1992) and is often referred to as the Canada lynx. The Service accepts both of these
names.
The petitioners assert that the Canada lynx population in the contiguous United States should be added to the List
of Threatened and Endangered Species because of the following factors: 1. Intensive logging that eliminates foraging
and denning habitat for Canada lynx and snowshoe hare until the vegetation has regrown sufficiently, creates openings
in the forest that Canada lynx avoid, and causes habitat fragmentation that creates barriers to dispersal and colonization;
2. Logging roads allow human accessibility that may increase incidental trapping of Canada lynx and disrupt Canada
lynx travel and hunting; 3. Forest fire suppression adversely affects Canada lynx through the reduction of hare habitat;
4. Few comprehensive management plans for Canada lynx have been developed or implemented by government agencies;
5. State agencies have not adequately modified their furbearer regulations; 6. The Canada lynx's inherent characteristics,
including naturally low population densities, specialized prey requirements, and large home ranges, make it vulnerable
to extinction; and 7. The southern Rockies population is further threatened by ski area developments that may reduce
habitat and prey base and increase human disturbance and accidental trapping. The petitioners requested that the
southern Rocky Mountain population of the lynx be protected by emergency listing because it is severally imperiled,
the population level is low, and it is reproductively isolated.


Listing Factors


The following are the five listing criteria as set forth in section 4(a)(1) of the Act and regulations (50 CFR Part 424)
promulgated to implement the listing provisions of the Act and their applicability to the current status of the Canada
lynx.


A. The Present or Threatened Destruction, Modification, or Curtailment of Its Habitat or Range


The suppression of forest fires and intensive logging prescriptions have had a detrimental effect on Canada lynx
habitat, and logging roads have increased human accessibility to the species.


B. Overutilization for Commercial, Recreational, Scientific, or Educational Purposes


Past overharvest has had a detrimental effect on Canada lynx populations.


C. Disease or Predation


Canada lynx may be displaced or eliminated when competitors, such as the bobcat (Lynx rufus

) or coyote (

Canis latrans

), expand into the range of the Canada lynx.


D. The Inadequacy of Existing Regulatory Mechanisms


States managed the Canada lynx as a furbearer in the past, but as a result of declining Canada lynx populations, Canada
lynx are classified as threatened or endangered in Colorado, Michigan, New Hampshire, Vermont, Washington, and
Wisconsin. It is also fully protected from harvest in Maine, Minnesota, New York, North Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming.
Only Idaho and Montana currently allow the harvest of Canada lynx. The above States either prohibit or control the
``take'' of Canada Lynx, but their laws are relative ineffective in controlling the loss or modification of the species'
habitat.


E. Other Natural or Manmade Factors Affecting Its Continued Existence


Human development has had a determinental effect on the Canada lynx habitat and population.


Finding


The Service may issue an emergency rule when there is an emergency posing a significant risk to the well-being of a species.
Although the Canada lynx population in the southern Rockies may be small, the Service is not aware of any actions that
immediately threaten the population. The petition did not present substantial information to indicate that emergency
listing is warranted.
After finding that a 1991 petition to list the North Cascades population of the Canada lynx as endangered was not warranted,
the Service concluded that a rangewide status review of the Canada lynx should be conducted (58 FR 36924). As a result
of a court settlement in November 1993, the Service is now in the process of formally reviewing the status of the contiguous
United States population of the Canada lynx to determine whether it should be added to the List of Threatened and Endangered
Species. On February 2, 1994, the Service published a notice (50 FR 4887) announcing a continuation of the status review
initiated in 1982. The findings from this review, which must be published by the court appointed date of November 15,
1994, will constitute the 12-month finding for this petition. Considering the language agreed to by the Service in
the court settlement, information provided by the petitioners, and the fact that the Canada lynx is a category 2 candidate
species, the Service finds that there is substantial information to indicate that listing the contiguous population
of the Canada lynx may be warranted.
The Services' 90-day administrative finding contains more detailed information regarding the above decisions.
A copy may be obtained from the Service's Helena office (see 

ADDRESSES

 section).


References Cited


 Jones, J.R., Jr., R.S. Hoffman, D.W. Rice, C. Jones, R.J. Baker, and M.D. Engstrom, 1992. Revised checklist of North
American mammals north of Mexico, 1991. Occas. Papers Mus. No. 146, Texas Tech Univ., Lubbock.


Author


