 

2. Post-Foreclosure Operation 


If a borrower defaults on its loan obligation and the holder, primarily to protect its security interest, forecloses
on the borrower's UST or UST system, the holder is faced with the decision to continue or suspend the storage or dispensing
of product from the UST. As with activities prior to foreclosure, a holder who operates an UST following foreclosure
(in any manner other than placing the UST in temporary or permanent closure as specified in this proposal) would, under
the current regulatory scheme, be an ``operator'' and subject to all subtitle I requirements. If the holder complies
with the requirements of this rule for placing a tank into temporary or permanent closure, a holder, although nevertheless
an operator, would be exempt from the subtitle I corrective action regulatory requirements otherwise applicable
to operators. 
The strategies for complying with the UST technical standards described in this proposal include emptying tanks,
leaving vent lines open and functioning, capping and securing lines within 15 days after foreclosure, and performing
either temporary or permanent closure of the UST or UST system. Conversely, a foreclosing security holder who exercises
some other strategy for complying with the subtitle I technical requirements (or who fails to comply) could be an ``operator''
under the subtitle I regulations and would therefore be subject to the full panoply of subtitle I regulatory obligations
applicable to all operators of tanks including the corrective action regulations. 


As long as an UST or UST system continues to store product, future releases are possible. Consequently, EPA believes
that the best way to ensure that a holder's tanks will not contribute to contamination after the holder has taken possession
of the UST or UST system (particularly if the holder is exempted from EPA's corrective action regulations) is to require
the holder to empty its tanks of all petroleum product. An UST or UST system is empty_in accordance with 280.70_when
all materials have been removed using commonly employed practices so that no more than 2.5 centimeters (one inch)
of residue, or 0.3 percent by weight, of the total capacity of the UST system, remain in the system. To ensure that the
UST system has been adequately secured, vent lines must be left open and functioning, and all other lines, pumps, manways,
and ancillary equipment must be capped and secured (280.70). Under today's proposal, holders who engage in
these activities within 15 days after foreclosure will be exempted from the corrective action requirements applicable
to ``operators.'' This is a reasonable condition on which to base this exemption since the threat of future contamination
will have been effectively abated for the temporary period of time that the property remains in foreclosure by emptying
the tank and complying with the other requirements of 40 CFR part 280, as described in this proposed rule. Compliance
with these requirements will also satisfy the technical requirements applicable to foreclosing holders as ``operators''
under the rule proposed today. 




EPA is proposing that 15 days be allowed to empty the tank, and cap and secure all lines and equipment based on its familiarity
with companies that specialize in providing UST technical services and on the Agency's knowledge of the steps required
to properly complete these tasks. Based on this, EPA proposes that 15 days is a reasonable and adequate time frame that
limits the period of time during which a tank containing petroleum product may be left largely unattended. However,
the Agency is interested in receiving comments from any holders who feel that a 15-day time frame would be inadequate
for a holder to arrange for the completion of these tasks. EPA requests comments and data about the adequacy of a 15-day
time frame and information supporting an alternative time frame. Information supporting EPA's proposed time frame
is available from the Agency OUST docket, reference number UST 316. 
In addition to emptying and securing the UST or UST system, a holder who wishes to take advantage of the proposed exemption
from subtitle I corrective action regulatory requirements as an operator must comply with the subtitle I requirements
for either temporary or permanent closure. A holder who chooses to permanently close its UST or UST system, must do
so in accordance with 280.71 through 280.74, Subpart G_Out of Service UST Systems and Closure. A holder
who chooses to temporarily close its tanks is required, throughout the first 12 months following foreclosure, to
maintain corrosion protection and report any known or suspected releases from the UST system. In accordance with
280.70, release detection is not required as long as the UST system is empty. 
If, after 12 months in temporary closure status, the holder possesses an UST or UST system that does not meet either
the performance standards in 280.20 for new UST systems or the upgrading requirements in 280.21 (excluding
the spill and overfill equipment requirements), and the holder has not successfully disposed of the UST or UST system,
the holder must either permanently close the UST system in accordance with 280.71 through 280.74 or
perform a site assessment in accordance with 280.72(a) and apply for an extension through the appropriate
implementing agency. 
A holder will only need to perform a site assessment if it has failed to sell or otherwise divest of its UST or UST system
property within 12 months after entering temporary closure and only if the tanks it has acquired have not been upgraded
or replaced to meet the requirements of 280.20 for new UST systems or 280.21 for upgraded systems. (UST
systems that are adequately protected from corrosion and equipped with leak detection devices pose a significantly
lower threat to human health and the environment than do substandard tanks.) The site assessment requirement can
also be satisfied if one of the external release detection methods allowed in 280.43(e) or (f) is operating
at the end of the 12-month period, and the release detection method operating indicates that no release has occurred.
For those who are still in possession of tanks 12 months after foreclosure, many are expected to possess upgraded or
replaced tanks since much of the credit that is expected to be extended subsequent to this rule should be used for upgrading
or replacing substandard tanks. Under these circumstances, the holder would be allowed to remain in temporary closure
indefinitely. Therefore, EPA believes that few situations should call for a site assessment while the holder is in
temporary closure. For those cases in which a holder will find it necessary to perform a site assessment and apply for
a temporary closure extension, EPA does not believe that such a requirement will pose a significant additional burden
upon the holder, since it is increasingly a standard business practice for a site assessment to be conducted upon most
transfers of commercial property. (See Guidelines for an Environmental Risk Program, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, February 25, 1993.) While in some cases the requirement may oblige a holder to perform a site assessment
sooner (within 12 months after foreclosure) rather than later (upon the date of sale or disposition of the UST or UST
system), EPA expects that in most cases a site assessment will, in all probability, be performed before the UST or UST
system is transferred to a subsequent purchaser. 






