 




<DOCTITLE>Approval of Noise Compatibility Program, St. Lucie County International Airport, Ft. Pierce, FL</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration. DOT.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announces its findings on the noise compatibility program submitted
by the St. Lucie County Port and Airport Authority under the provisions of Title I of the Aviation Safety and Noise Abatement
Act of 1979 (Public Law 96193) and 14 CFR Part 150. These findings are made in recognition of the description
of Federal and nonfederal responsibilities in Senate Report No. 9652 (1980). On February 2, 1994, the FAA determined
that the noise exposure maps submitted by the St. Lucie County Port and Airport Authority under Part 150 were in compliance
with applicable requirements. On July 29, 1994, the Administrator approved the St. Lucie County International Airport
noise compatibility program. All of the recommendations of the program were approved.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE: 

The effective date of the FAA's approval of the St. Lucie County International Airport noise compatibility program
is July 29, 1994.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Tommy J. Pickering, P.E., Federal Aviation Administration, Orlando Airports District Office, 9677 Tradeport Drive,
Suite 130, Orlando, Florida 328273596, (407) 6486583. Documents reflecting this FAA action may be
reviewed at this same location.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

This notice announces that the FAA has given its overall approval to the noise compatibility program for St. Lucie
County International Airport, effective July 29, 1994.


Under Section 104(a) of the Aviation Safety and Noise Abatement Act (ASNA) of 1979 (hereinafter referred to as ``the
Act''), an airport operator who has previously submitted a noise exposure map may submit to the FAA a noise compatibility
program which sets forth the measures taken or proposed by the airport operator for the reduction of existing noncompatible
land uses and prevention of additional noncompatible land uses within the area covered by the noise exposure maps.
The Act requires such programs to be developed in consultation with interested and affected parties including local
communities, government agencies, airport users, and FAA personnel.
Each airport noise compatibility program developed in accordance with Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part
150 is a local program, not a Federal program. The FAA does not substitute its judgment for that of the airport proprietor
with respect to which measure should be recommended for action. The FAA's approval or disapproval of FAR Part 150 program
recommendations is measured according to the standards expressed in Part 150 and the Act, and is limited to the following
determinations:
a. The noise compatibility program was developed in accordance with the provisions and procedures of FAR Part 150;
b. Program measures are reasonably consistent with achieving the goals of reducing existing noncompatible land
uses around the airport and preventing the introduction of additional noncompatible land uses;
c. Program measures would not create an undue burden on interstate or foreign commerce, unjustly discriminate against
types or classes of aeronautical users, violate the terms of airport grant agreements, or intrude into areas preempted
by the Federal Government; and
d. Program measures relating to the use of flight procedures can be implemented within the period covered by the program
without derogating safety, adversely affecting the efficient use and management of the navigable airspace and air
traffic control systems, or adversely affecting other powers and responsibilities of the Administrator prescribed
by law.
Specific limitations with respect to FAA's approval of an airport noise compatibility program are delineated in
FAR Part 150, 150.5. Approval is not a determination concerning the acceptability of land uses under Federal,
state, or local law. Approval does not by itself constitute an FAA implementing action. A request for Federal action
or approval to implement specific noise compatibility measures may be required, and an FAA decision on the request
may require an environmental assessment of the proposed action. Approval does not constitute a commitment by the
FAA to financially assist in the implementation of the program nor a determination that all measures covered by the
program are eligible for grant-in-aid funding from the FAA. Where Federal funding is sought, requests for project
grants must be submitted to the FAA Airports District Office in Orlando, Florida.

</SUPPLEM>
