 

Certification Regarding Lobbying



Certification for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements



The undersigned certifies, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:

(1) No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned, to any person for
influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee
of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making
of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension,
continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.


(2) If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or
attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress,
or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan or cooperative agreement,
the undersigned shall complete and submit Standard FormLLL, ``Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,'' in accordance
with its instructions.


(3) The undersigned shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award documents for all
subawards at all tiers (including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative
agreements) and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly.


This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was
made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction
imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject
to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.



State for Loan Guarantee and Loan Insurance




The undersigned states, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:

If any funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee
of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection
with this commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan, the undersigned shall complete
and submit Standard FormLLL ``Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,'' in accordance with its instructions.


Submission of this statement is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352,
title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required statement shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less
than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.







Signature






Title






Organization






Organization






Date




<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 418401P

</BILLING>





<IMPORT>




E:GRAPHICSEN18MR94.010



</IMPORT>



<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946306 Filed 31794; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 418401C 

</BILLING>



