 

(2) The enclosure shall be sealed tightly and thoroughly 
inspected for leaks before work begins on brake and clutch 
inspection, disassembly, repair, and assembly. 
(3) The enclosure shall be such that the worker can clearly see 
the operation and shall provide impermeable sleeves through which 
the worker can handle the brake and clutch inspection, 
disassembly, repair and assembly. The integrity of the sleeves 
and ports shall be examined before work begins. 
(4) A HEPA-filtered vacuum shall be employed to maintain the 
enclosure under negative pressure throughout the operation. 
Compressed-air may be used to remove asbestos fibers or particles 
from the enclosure. 
(5) The HEPA vacuum shall be used first to loosen the asbestos 
containing residue from the brake and clutch parts and then to 
evacuate the loosened asbestos containing material from the 
enclosure and capture the material in the vacuum filter. 
(6) The vacuum's filter, when full, shall be first wetted with a 
fine mist of water, then removed and placed immediately in an 
impermeable container, labeled according to paragraph (j)(2)(ii) 
of this section and disposed of according to paragraph (k) of 
this section. 
(7) Any spills or releases of asbestos containing waste material 
from inside of the enclosure or vacuum hose or vacuum filter 
shall be immediately cleaned up and disposed of according to 
paragraph (k) of the section. 


[B] Low Pressure/Wet Cleaning Method 


(1) A catch basin shall be placed under the brake assembly, 
positioned to avoid splashes and spills. 
(2) The reservoir shall contain water containing an organic 
solvent or wetting agent. The flow of liquid shall be controlled 
such that the brake assembly is gently flooded to prevent the 
asbestos-containing brake dust from becoming airborne. 
(3) The aqueous solution shall be allowed to flow between the 
brake drum and brake support before the drum is removed. 
(4) After removing the brake drum, the wheel hub and back of the 
brake assembly shall be thoroughly wetted to suppress dust. 
(5) The brake support plate, brake shoes and brake components 
used to attach the brake shoes shall be thoroughly washed before 
removing the old shoes. 
(6) In systems using filters, the filters, when full, shall be 
first wetted with a fine mist of water, then removed and placed 
immediately in an impermeable container, labeled according to 
paragraph (j)(2)(ii) of this section and disposed of according to 
paragraph (k) of this section. 
(7) Any spills of asbestos-containing aqueous solution or any 
asbestos-containing waste material shall be cleaned up 
immediately and disposed of according to paragraph (k) of this 
section. 
(8) The use of dry brushing during low pressure/wet cleaning 
operations is prohibited. 


[C] Equivalent Methods 


An equivalent method is one which has sufficient written detail 
so that it can be reproduced and has been demonstrated that the 
exposures resulting from the equivalent method are equal to or 
less than the exposures which would result from the use of the 
method described in paragraph [A] of this appendix. For purposes 
of making this comparison, the employer shall assume that 
exposures resulting from the use of the method described in 
paragraph [A] of this appendix shall not exceed 0.004 f/cc, as 
measured by the OSHA reference method and as averaged over at 
least 18 personal samples. 


[D] Wet Method


(1) A spray bottle, hose nozzle, or other implement capable of 
delivering a fine mist of water or amended water or other 
delivery system capable of delivering water at low pressure, 
shall be used to first thoroughly wet the brake and clutch parts. 
Brake and clutch components shall then be wiped clean with a 
cloth. 
(2) The cloth shall be placed in an impermeable container, 
labelled according to paragraph (j)(2)(ii) of this section and 
then disposed of according to paragraph (k) of this section, or 
the cloth shall be laundered in a way to prevent the release of 
asbestos fibers in excess of 0.1 fiber per cubic centimeter of 
air. 
(3) Any spills of solvent or any asbestos containing waste 
material shall be cleaned up immediately according to paragraph 
(k) of this section. 
(4) The use of dry brushing during the wet method operations is 
prohibited.

