 

Text of Draft Generic Risk Disclosure Statement 


Risk Disclosure Statement for Futures and Options 


This brief statement does not disclose all of the risks and other significant aspects of trading in futures and options.
In light of the risks, you should undertake such transactions only if you understand the nature of the contracts (and
contractual relationships) into which you are entering and the extent of your exposure to risk. Trading in futures
and options is not suitable for many members of the public. You should carefully consider whether trading is appropriate
for you in light of your experience, objectives, financial resources and other relevant circumstances. 


Futures 


1. Effect of ``Leverage'' or ``Gearing'' 


Transactions in futures carry a high degree of risk. The amount of initial margin is small relative to the value of the
futures contract so that transactions are ``leveraged'' or ``geared.'' A relatively small market movement will
have a proportionately larger impact on the funds you have deposited or will have to deposit: this may work against
you as well as for you. You may sustain a total loss of initial margin funds and any additional funds deposited with the
firm to maintain your position. If the market moves against your position or margin levels are increased, you may be
called upon to pay substantial additional funds on short notice to maintain your position. If you fail to comply with
a request for additional funds within the time prescribed, your position may be liquidated at a loss and you will be
liable for any resulting deficit. 


2. Risk-reducing Orders or Strategies 



The placing of certain orders (e.g. ``stop-loss'' orders, where permitted under local law, or ``stop-limit'' orders)
which are intended to limit losses to certain amounts may not be effective because market conditions may make it impossible
to execute such orders. Strategies using combinations of positions, such as ``spread'' and ``straddle'' positions
may be as risky as taking simple ``long'' or ``short'' positions. 


Options 


3. Variable Degree of Risk 


Transactions in options carry a high degree of risk. Purchasers and sellers of options should familiarize themselves
with the type of option (i.e. put or call) which they contemplate trading and the associated risks. You should calculate
the extent to which the value of the options must increase for your position to become profitable, taking into account
the premium and all transaction costs. 
The purchaser of options may offset or exercise the options or allow the options to expire. The exercise of an option
results either in a cash settlement or in the purchaser acquiring or delivering the underlying interest. If the option
is on a future, the purchaser will acquire a futures position with associated liabilities for margin (see the section
on Futures above). If the purchased options expire worthless, you will suffer a total loss of your investment which
will consist of the option premium plus transaction costs. If you are contemplating purchasing deep-out-of-the-money
options, you should be aware that the chance of such options becoming profitable ordinarily is remote. 
Selling (``writing'' or ``granting'') an option generally entails considerably greater risk than purchasing options.
Although the premium received by the seller is fixed, the seller may sustain a loss well in excess of that amount. The
seller will be liable for additional margin to maintain the position if the market moves unfavorably. The seller will
also be exposed to the risk of the purchaser exercising the option and the seller will be obligated to either settle
the option in cash or to acquire or deliver the underlying interest. If the option is on a future, the seller will acquire
a position in a future with associated liabilities for margin (see the section on Futures above). If the option is ``covered''
by the seller holding a corresponding position in the underlying interest or a future or another option, the risk may
be reduced. If the option is not covered, the risk of loss can be unlimited. 
Certain exchanges in some jurisdictions permit deferred payment of the option premium, exposing the purchaser to
liability for margin payments not exceeding the amount of the premium. The purchaser is still subject to the risk of
losing the premium and transaction costs. When the option is exercised or expires, the purchaser is responsible for
any unpaid premium outstanding at that time. 


Additional Risks Common to Futures and Options 


4. Terms and Conditions of Contracts 


You should ask the firm with which you deal about the terms and conditions of the specific futures or options which you
are trading and associated obligations (e.g. the circumstances under which you may become obligated to make or take
delivery of the underlying interest of a futures contract and, in respect of options, expiration dates and restrictions
on the time for exercise). Under certain circumstances the specifications of outstanding contracts (including
the exercise price of an option) may be modified by the exchange or clearing house to reflect changes in the underlying
interest. 






