 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO> 21 CFR Part 173</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 78G0027]</RINDOCK>


Secondary Direct Food Additives Permitted in Food for Human Consumption; Cellulose Triacetate


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending its food additive regulations to provide for the safe use of cellulose
triacetate as an immobilizing agent for lactase for use in reducing the lactose content of milk. This action is in response
to a petition filed by Vitenco, Inc.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Effective July 20, 1994; written objections and requests for a hearing by August 19, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Submit written objections to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

F. Owen Fields, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS207), Food and Drug Administration, 200 C
St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022549528.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

In a notice published in the 

Federal Register

 of March 17, 1978 (43 FR 11266), FDA announced that a generally recognized as safe (GRAS) affirmation petition (GRASP
7G0088) had been filed by Vitenco, Inc., 594 Marett Rd., Lexington, MA 02173, requesting that lactase from 

Kluyveromyces

 (

Saccharomyces

) 

lactis

 entrapped in cellulose triacetate fibers be affirmed as GRAS for use in reducing the lactose content of milk. Subsequent
to the filing of this petition, FDA affirmed, in response to a separate petition (GRASP 6G0077), that lactase enzyme
from 

K

. 

lactis

 is GRAS for this use (21 CFR 184.1388) (49 FR 47384 at 47387, December 4, 1984). Therefore, this document deals only
with the use of cellulose triacetate as an immobilizing agent and with any potential contaminants that might be introduced
into food from this use. 


Although the information submitted in GRASP 7G0088 allows the agency to conclude that the use of cellulose triacetate
as an immobilizing agent is safe, the petition did not establish that the critical data are generally available as
required by 21 CFR 170.30(b). Consequently, the agency has evaluated those portions of the petition that relate to
cellulose triacetate as a food additive (rather than as a GRAS affirmation) petition and is issuing this decision
in accordance with 21 CFR 170.38(c)(1).


I. Determination of Safety


Under section 409(c)(3)(A) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C. 348(c)(3)(A)), the so-called
``general safety clause,'' a food additive cannot be listed for a particular use unless a fair evaluation of the evidence
establishes that the additive is safe for that use. FDA's food additive regulations (21 CFR 170.3(i)) define safe
as ``a reasonable certainty in the minds of competent scientists that the substance is not harmful under the intended
conditions of use.''
The Delaney anticancer provision of the general safety clause of the act (section 409(c)(3)(A)) further provides
that no food additive shall be deemed safe if it is found to induce cancer when ingested by man or animal. Importantly,
however, the Delaney clause applies to the additive itself and not to constituents of the additive. That is, where
an additive itself has not been shown to cause cancer, but contains a carcinogenic impurity, the additive is properly
evaluated under the general safety clause using risk assessment procedures to determine whether there is a reasonable
certainty that no harm will result from the proposed use of the additive (see 

Scott

 v. 

FDA

, 728 F.2d 322 (6th Cir. 1984)).


II. Evaluation of Safety of the Petitioned Use of the Additive


The requested use of cellulose triacetate is as an immobilizing agent for the enzyme lactase in the production of reduced
lactose milk. Cellulose triacetate containing physically entrapped lactase enzyme is added to milk that is to be
treated; enzymatic digestion of lactose is allowed to occur; and the immobilizing agent and entrapped enzyme are
then quantitatively removed from the treated milk. Data submitted by the petitioner demonstrate that when cellulose
triacetate is used as an immobilizing agent, it does not affect the milk in which it is used in any way. The data in the
petition also demonstrate that no detectable cellulose triacetate is present in the final product intended for human
consumption. Based on these factors, FDA concludes that the ingredient itself is safe under these conditions of use.
FDA, in its evaluation of the safety of this additive, has reviewed not only the safety of the additive itself but also
the safety of the chemical impurities that may be present in the additive from the manufacturing process. Residual
amounts of reactants and manufacturing aids are commonly found as contaminants in chemical products, including
food additives.
Methylene chloride is used as a solvent in the initial stages of manufacture of cellulose triacetate-immobilized
lactase. Subsequent to the use of methylene chloride, the resultant fibers are completely dried to eliminate any
remaining volatile contaminants (such as residual methylene chloride). Furthermore, before it is used in food,
the product is washed several times to ensure removal of any such residual contaminants. Data submitted by the petitioner
demonstrate that methylene chloride could not be detected in the final product immediately prior to its use in food
at a detection limit of 0.5 parts per million (ppm).
Nevertheless, the agency has used risk assessment procedures to estimate the upper-bound risk presented by methylene
chloride, a carcinogenic chemical, that may be present as an impurity in the additive. This risk evaluation has two
aspects: (1) Assessment of the hypothetical worst-case exposure to the impurity from the proposed use of the additive;
and (2) extrapolation of the risk observed in the animal bioassays to the conditions of hypothetical worst-case human
exposure.

FDA has estimated the hypothetical worst-case exposure to methylene chloride from the proposed use to be 6.0 nanograms
per person per day (ng/p/day) (Ref. 1). This estimate is based on the assumption that methylene chloride is present
in the additive at its detection limit, although it was not actually detected in any of the samples tested.

Using risk assessment procedures, FDA used data from the National Toxicology Program report (Ref. 2) of a bioassay
on methylene chloride to calculate the potency, or unit risk, from exposure to this chemical (Ref. 3). The results
of the bioassay on methylene chloride demonstrated that the material was carcinogenic for mice under the conditions
of the study. The test material induced benign and malignant neoplasms in both the liver and lung of both sexes when
administered by the inhalation route. 
The agency also evaluated data from a second study in mice of the same strain as used in the inhalation study. In this
study, methylene chloride was administered in the drinking water of the mice (Ref. 4). In this second study, there
was no significant increase in the incidence of neoplasms at any site examined. However, assuming that methylene
chloride would induce neoplasia at a dose just above the highest level tested in the drinking water study, a maximum
potency can be estimated. This estimate is approximately the same as the potency calculated from the data of the inhalation
study, providing confidence that using the inhalation study for upper bound risk assessment is not likely to underestimate
any potential risk due to ingested methylene chloride (Ref. 3).


Based on a calculated hypothetical worst-case potential exposure of 6.0 ng/p/day, FDA estimates that the upper-bound
limit of individual lifetime risk from the potential exposure to methylene chloride resulting from the use of cellulose
triacetate as an immobilizing agent in the production of reduced lactose milk to be 4.4x10

-11

, or approximately 4 in 100 billion (Ref. 5). Because there is no evidence to suggest, or any reason to believe, that
methylene chloride will be present in the final product at the assumed level, the calculated estimate of the upper-bound
limit of risk is likely to be substantially higher than any actual risk. Thus, the agency concludes that there is a reasonable
certainty of no harm from the exposure to methylene chloride that might result from the proposed use of cellulose triacetate
as an immobilizing agent in the production of reduced lactose milk.


III. Conclusion on Safety


Having evaluated data in the petition and other relevant material, the agency concludes that the proposed use of the
food additive is safe, and that the regulations in 173.357 (21 CFR 173.357) should be amended as set forth below.
The agency has considered whether a specification is necessary to control the amount of methylene chloride in the
food additive. The agency finds that a specification is not necessary for the following reasons: (1) The steps utilized
in the manufacture of cellulose triacetate that are intended to remove contaminants such as methylene chloride (drying
to completion and washing of the resin to remove volatile and nonvolatile components, respectively, either of which
could interfere with the intended enzymatic reaction) are a necessary part of the manufacturing process. Therefore,
the agency would not expect this impurity to become a component of food at other than extremely small levels; (2) when
the additive is manufactured under these conditions, methylene chloride could not be demonstrated to be present
in the additive at a level of detection of 0.5 ppm; and (3) the upper-bound limit of lifetime risk from exposure to this
impurity, even when calculated by using several worst-case assumptions, is extremely low, less than 4.4 in 100 billion.
In accordance with 171.1(h) (21 CFR 171.1(h)), the petition and the documents that FDA considered and relied
upon in reaching its decision to approve the petition are available for inspection at the Center for Food Safety and
Applied Nutrition by appointment with the information contact person listed above. As provided in 21 CFR 171.1(h),
the agency will delete from the documents any materials that are not available for public disclosure before making
the documents available for inspection.


IV. Environmental Impact


The agency has carefully considered the potential environmental effects of this action and has concluded that the
action will not have a significant impact on the human environment, and that an environmental impact statement is
not required. The agency's finding of no significant impact and the evidence supporting that finding, contained
in an environmental assessment, may be seen in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.


 V. Objections


Any person who will be adversely affected by this regulation may at any time on or before August 19, 1994, file with the
Dockets Management Branch (address above) written objections thereto. Each objection shall be separately numbered,
and each numbered objection shall specify the particular provisions of the regulation to which objection is made
and the grounds for the objection. Each numbered objection on which a hearing is requested shall specifically so state.
Failure to request a hearing for any particular objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing on that
objection. Each numbered objection for which a hearing is requested shall include a detailed description and analysis
of the specific factual information intended to be presented in support of the objection in the event that a hearing
is held. Failure to include such a description and analysis for any particular objection shall constitute a waiver
of the right to a hearing on the objection. Three copies of all documents shall be submitted and shall be identified
with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document. Any objections received in response to the
regulation may be seen in the Dockets Management Branch between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


VI. References



The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.



1. Memorandum from Gregory Cramer, Regulatory Food Chemistry Branch, to L. Lin, Direct Additives Branch, dated July
7, 1986.

2. ``Technical Report on the Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of Dichloromethane (Methylene Chloride) in
F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice,'' NTP Draft Report, NTPTR306, National Institute of Health Publication
No. l 852562, 1985.

3. Memorandum from the Quantitative Risk Assessment Committee, dated November 15, 1985.

4. National Coffee Association, ``24Month Oncogenicity Study of Methylene Chloride in Mice_Final Report,''
Hazelton Laboratories America, Inc., Vienna, VA, November 30, 1983.

5. Memorandum from the Quantitative Risk Assessment Committee dated October 30, 1992.



List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 173


Food additives.
Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, 21 CFR part 173 is amended as follows:


PART 173_SECONDARY DIRECT FOOD ADDITIVES PERMITTED IN FOOD FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION


1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 173 continues to read as follows:





Authority: 

Secs. 201, 402, 409 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 342, 348).



2. Section 173.357 is amended in the table in paragraph (a)(2) by alphabetically adding a new entry under the headings
``Substances'' and ``Limitations'' to read as follows:


173.357 

Materials used as fixing agents in the immobilization of enzyme preparations.



 * * * * *


(a) * * *
(2) * * *


<TABLE>



1Substances

1Limitations


Cellulose triacetate

May be used as a fixing material in the immobilization of lactase for use in reducing the lactose content of milk. 


*******


</TABLE>



* * * * *




Dated: July 13, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
 Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
 Deputy Commissioner for Policy.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9417577 Filed 71994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

