 

Sergio Gallenero, M.D., 9750 Northwest 33rd Street, Coral Springs, Florida 33065;
Kwang-Jae Joh, M.D., One West Sample Road, Suite 207, Pompano Beach, Florida 33064;
Richard A. Johnson, M.D., 1625 Southeast 3rd Avenue, Suite 721, Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33316;
J.R. Nabut, M.D., 1500 Hillsboro Boulevard, Suite 207, Deerfield Beach, Florida 33441;
Aiden O'Rourke, M.D., 315 Southeast 13th Street, Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33316;
Santiago Triana, M.D., Medical Building, 150 Northwest 70th Avenue, Suite 7, Plantation, Florida 33317.



2. Proposed respondents admit all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the draft of complaint here attached.
3. Proposed respondents waive: (a) Any further procedural steps;
(b) The requirement that the Commission's decision contain a statement of findings of fact and conclusions of law;
(c) All rights to seek judicial review or otherwise to challenge or contest the validity of the order entered pursuant
to this agreement; and
(d) Any claim under the Equal Access to Justice Act.
4. This agreement shall not become part of the public record of the proceeding unless and until it is accepted by the
Commission. If this agreement is accepted by the Commission it, together with the draft of complaint contemplated
thereby, will be placed on the public record for a period of sixty (60) days and information with respect thereto will
be publicly released. The Commission thereafter may either withdraw its acceptance of this agreement and so notify
the proposed respondents, in which event it will take such action as it may consider appropriate, or issue and serve
its complaint (in such form as the circumstances may require) and decision, in disposition of the proceeding.
5. This agreement is for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an admission by proposed respondents that
the law has been violated as alleged in the draft of complaint here attached.
6. This agreement contemplates that, if it is accepted by the Commission, and if such acceptance is not subsequently
withdrawn by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of 2.34 of the Commission's Rules, the Commission may,
without further notice to proposed respondents, (1) issue its complaint corresponding in form and substance with
the draft of complaint here attached and its decision containing the following order to cease and desist in disposition
of the proceeding and (2) make information public in respect thereto. When so entered, the order to cease and desist
shall have the same force and effect and may be altered, modified, or set aside in the same manner and within the same
time provided by statute for other orders. The order shall become final upon service. Delivery by the U.S. Postal Service
of the complaint and decision containing the agreed-to order to proposed respondents' addresses as stated in this
agreement shall constitute service. Proposed respondents waive any right to any other manner of service. The complaint
may be used in construing the terms of the order, and no agreement, understanding, representation, or interpretation
not contained in the order or the agreement may be used to vary or contradict the terms of the order.
7. Proposed respondents have read the proposed complaint and order contemplated hereby. They understand that once
the order has been issued, they will be required to file one or more compliance reports showing that they have fully
complied with the order. Proposed respondents further understand that they may be liable for civil penalties in the
amount provided by law for each violation of the order after the order becomes final.


Order


I


It is ordered that, for purposes of this order, the following definitions shall apply:
A. ``Trauma Associates'' means Trauma Associates of North Broward, Inc., a corporation organized, existing, and
doing business under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Florida, with its office and principal place of business
located at 2170 Southeast 17th Street, Suite 305, Forth Lauderdale, Florida 33316, its Board of Directors, committees,
officers, members, representatives, agents, employees, successors, and assigns.
B. ``Surgeon respondents'' means Carl Amko, M.D., Lucien Armand, M.D., Frantz Chery, M.D., William Cohen, M.D.,
Sergio Gallenero, M.D., Kwang-Jae Joh, M.D., Richard A. Johnson, M.D., J.R. Nabut, M.D., Aiden O'Rourke, M.D., and
Santiago Triana, M.D., each of whom is a general surgeon licensed to practice medicine in the State of Florida, and
is engaged in the business of providing surgical services to patients for a fee in Broward County, Florida.
C. ``The District'' means the North Broward Hospital District, a tax-supported hospital authority, with its principal
offices located at 1625 Southeast Third Avenue, Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33316, its subsidiaries, affiliates,
commissioners, officers, administrators, directors, committees, agents, employees, representatives, successors,
and assigns.
D. ``Broward General'' means the Broward General Medical Center, one of the hospitals of the North Broward Hospital
District, located at 1600 South Andrews Avenue, Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33316, its subsidiaries, affiliates,
officers, administrators, directors, committees, agents, employees, representatives, successors, and assigns.
E. ``North Broward'' means the North Broward Medical Center one of the hospitals of the North Broward Hospital District,
located at 201 Sample Road, Pompano Beach, Florida 33064, its subsidiaries, affiliates, officers, administrators,
directors, committees, agents, employees, representatives, successors, and assigns.


