 



Developed area

 means an area of a community that is: 
(a) A primarily urbanized, built-up area that is a minimum of 20 contiguous acres, has basic urban infrastructure,
including roads, utilities, communications, and public facilities, to sustain industrial, residential, and commercial
activities, and 
(1) Within which 75 percent or more of the parcels, tracts, or lots contain commercial, industrial, or residential
structures or uses; or 
(2) Is a single parcel, tract, or lot in which 75 percent of the area contains existing commercial or industrial structures
or uses; or 
(3) Is a subdivision developed at a density of at least two residential structures per acre within which 75 percent
or more of the lots contain existing residential structures at the time the designation is adopted. 
(b) An undeveloped single parcel, tract, or lot of less than 20 acres that is contiguous on at least three sides to areas
meeting the criteria of paragraph (a) at the time the designation is adopted. 
(c) A subdivision that is a minimum of 20 contiguous acres that has obtained all necessary government approvals, provided
that the actual ``start of construction'' of structures has occurred on at least 10 percent of the lots or remaining
lots of a subdivision or 10 percent of the maximum building coverage or remaining building coverage allowed for a single
lot subdivision at the time the designation is adopted and construction of structures is underway. Residential subdivisions
must meet the density criteria in paragraph (a)(3). 


* * * * * 


3. Section 59.24(a) is revised to read as follows: 


59.24

Suspension of community eligibility. 


(a) A community eligible for the sale of flood insurance shall be subject to suspension from the Program for failing
to submit copies of adequate floodplain management regulations meeting the minimum requirements of paragraphs
(b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) of 60.3 or paragraph (b) of 60.4 or 60.5, within six months from the date
the Director provides the data upon which the flood plain regulations for the applicable paragraph shall be based.
Where there has not been any submission by the community, the Director shall notify the community that 90 days remain
in the six month period in order to submit adequate flood plain management regulations. Where there has been an inadequate
submission, the Director shall notify the community of the specific deficiencies in its submitted flood plain management
regulations and inform the community of the amount of time remaining within the six month period. If, subsequently,
copies of adequate flood plain management regulations are not received by the Director, he shall, no later than 30
days before the expiration of the original six month period, provide written notice to the community and to the state
and assure publication in the 

Federal Register

 under part 64 of this subchapter, of the community's loss of eligibility for the sale of flood insurance, such suspension
to become effective upon the expiration of the six month period. Should the community remedy the defect and the Director
receive copies of adequate flood plain management regulations within the notice period, the suspension notice shall
be rescinded by the Director. If the Director receives notice from the State that it has enacted adequate flood plain
management regulations for the community within the notice period, the suspension notice shall be rescinded by the
Director. The community's eligibility shall remain terminated after suspension until copies of adequate flood
plain management regulations have been received and approved by the Director. 


* * * * * 


PART 60_CRITERIA FOR LAND MANAGEMENT AND USE 


4. The authority citation for Part 60 is revised to read as follows:





Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.; Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1978, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 329; E.O. 12127, 3 CFR, 1979 Comp., p.
376.



5. Section 60.2(a) is revised to read as follows: 


60.2

Minimum compliance with flood plain management criteria. 


(a) A flood-prone community applying for flood insurance eligibility shall meet the standards of 60.3(a)
in order to become eligible if a FHBM has not been issued for the community at the time of application. Thereafter, the
community will be given a period of six months from the date the Director provides the data set forth in 60.3(b),
(c), (d), (e) or (f), in which to meet the requirements of the applicable paragraph. If a community has received a FHBM,
but has not yet applied for Program eligibility, the community shall apply for eligibility directly under the standards
set forth in 60.3(b). Thereafter, the community will be given a period of six months from the date the Director
provides the data set forth in 60.3 (c), (d), (e) or (f) in which to meet the requirements of the applicable paragraph.



* * * * * 





