 

597.103



Poverty rate.



(a) 

General. 

The poverty rate shall be established in accordance with the following criteria:

(1) In each census tract within a nominated urban area, the poverty rate shall be not less than 20 percent;

(2) For at least 90 percent of the population census tracts within the nominated urban area, the poverty rate shall
not be less than 25 percent; and

(3) For at least 50 percent of the population census tracts within the nominated urban area, the poverty rate shall
be not less than 35 percent.

(b) 

Special rules relating to the determination of poverty rate. 

(1) 

Census tracts with no population. 

Census tracts with no population shall be treated as having a poverty rate which meets the standards of paragraphs
(a)(1) and (2) of this section, but shall be treated as having a zero poverty rate for purposes of applying paragraph
(a)(3) of this section.

(2) 

Census tracts with populations of less than 2,000. 

A population census tract which has a population of less than 2,000 shall be treated as having a poverty rate which meets
the requirements of paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section if more than 75 percent of the tract is zoned for commercial
or industrial use.

(3) 

Adjustment of poverty rates for Enterprise Communities. 

Where necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, the Secretary may reduce by 5 percentage points one of the following
thresholds for not more than 10 percent of the census tracts, or, if fewer, five population tracts in the nominated
urban area:

(i) The 20 percent threshold in paragraph (a)(1) of this section;

(ii) The 25 percent threshold in paragraph (a)(2) of this section; and

(iii) The 35 percent threshold in paragraph (a)(3) of this section;






Provided that

, the Secretary may in the alternative reduce the 35 percent threshold by 10 percentage points for three population
census tracts.




(4) 

Rounding up of percentages. 

In making the calculations required by this section, the Secretary shall round all fractional percentages of one-half
percent or more up to the next highest whole percentage figure.

(c) 

Noncontiguous areas. 

A nominated urban area may not contain a noncontiguous parcel unless such parcel separately meets the criteria set
forth at paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of this section.

(d) 

Areas not within census tracts. 

In the case of an area which does not have population census tracts, the block numbering area shall be used.



Subpart C_Nomination Procedure



597.200



Nominations by State and local governments.



(a) 

Nomination criteria. 

One or more local governments and the State or States in which an urban area is located may nominate such area for designation
as an Empowerment Zone and/or as an Enterprise Community, if:

(1) The urban area meets the requirements for eligibility set forth in 597.100 and 597.103 of this part;

(2) The urban area is within the jurisdiction of a State or States and local government(s) that have the authority to
nominate the urban area for designation and that provide written assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the
strategic plan described in paragraph (c) of this section will be implemented;

(3) All information furnished by the nominating State(s) and local government(s) is determined by the Secretary
to be reasonably accurate; and

(4) The State(s) and local government(s) certify that no portion of the area nominated is already included in an Empowerment
Zone or Enterprise Community or in an area otherwise nominated to be designated under this section.

(b) 

Nomination for designation. 

No urban area may be considered for designation pursuant to subpart D of this part unless the nomination for designation:

(1) Demonstrates that the nominated urban area satisfies the eligibility criteria set forth at 597.100;



