 

(3) Each Class III railroad (including a switching and 
terminal or other railroad not otherwise classified) shall 
implement mandatory reasonable suspicion testing according to the 
procedures listed in paragraph (b) of this section beginning on 
January 1, 1996. Prior to that date, a Class III railroad may 
use the procedures described in paragraphs (c) through (e) of 
this section. 
(4) In the case of a railroad commencing operations after 
January 1, 1996, the railroad shall implement mandatory 
reasonable suspicion testing not later than the expiration of 60 
days from approval by the Administrator of the railroad's random 
testing programs. 
(b) As provided for in subparagraph (a)(1) of this section, 
the conduct of alcohol testing under this subpart is governed by 
Subpart H of this part and Part 40 of Subtitle A of this title. 
(c) As provided for in subparagraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) of 
this section, and except as provided in paragraph (f), the 
following conditions apply to breath testing authorized by this 
subpart. 
(1) Testing devices shall be selected from among those 
listed on the Conforming Products List of Evidential Breath 
Measurement Devices amended and published in the 

Federal Register

 
from time to time by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA), Department of Transportation. 
(2) Each device shall be properly maintained and shall be 
calibrated or verified as to correct calibration by use of a 
breath alcohol simulator (calibrating unit) listed on the NHTSA 
Conforming Products List of Calibrating Units for Breath Alcohol 
Testers (as amended and published) with sufficient frequency to 
ensure the accuracy of the device (within plus or minus .01 
percent), but not less frequently than provided in the 
manufacturer's instructions. 
(3) Tests shall be conducted by a trained and qualified 
operator. The operator shall have received training on the 
operational principles of the particular instrument employed and 
practical experience in the operation of the device and use of 
the breath alcohol calibrating unit. A copy of the training 
program shall be filed with FRA in conjunction with the filing 
required by 217.11 of this title. 
(4) Tests shall be conducted in accordance with procedures 
specified by the manufacturer of the testing device, consistent 
with sound technical judgment, and shall include appropriate 
restrictions on ambient air temperature. 
(5) If an initial test is positive, the employee shall be 
tested again after the expiration of a period of not less than 15 
minutes, in order to confirm that the test has properly measured 
the alcohol content of deep lung air. 
(d) Because of the inherent limitations of the 
instrumentation, any indicated breath test result of less than 
.02 percent shall be deemed a negative test. 
(e)(1) In any case where a breath test is intended for use 
in the railroad disciplinary process and the result is positive, 
the employee shall be given the prompt opportunity to provide a 
blood sample at an independent medical facility for analysis by 
a competent independent laboratory. The railroad shall provide 
the required transportation to facilitate the blood test. 
(2) A blood test under this section shall conform to the 
following standards: 
(i) The specimen shall be collected in a medically 
acceptable manner by a qualified medical professional or 
technician using a non-ethanol swab and shall be deposited into 
a single-use sterile vacuum tube containing at least one percent 
sodium fluoride (and an anticoagulant). 
(ii) While the specimen remains in full view of the 
employee, the specimen shall be clearly labeled with the 
employee's name and/or a unique identifying number and shall be 
sealed with a tamperproof seal. 
(iii) The sample shall be handled in accordance with chain 
of custody procedures from the point of collection through 
analysis and secure storage at the laboratory. 
(iv) The sample shall be screened for alcohol only by a 
method reliable at a detection limit of not higher than .02 
percent. Any presumptive positive shall be confirmed by gas 
chromatography with a suitable internal standard. The screening 
run shall include at least 10% quality control samples. The 
confirmation run shall include ethanol standards (including an 
ethanol standard certified against or traceable to a primary 
standard), at least one blank specimen, other appropriate 
volatiles (e.g., isopropanol), and at least one control purchased 
commercially or provided through an external quality control 
program. Results declared positive on confirmation shall be 
consistent with pre-established criteria for retention time of 
internal and external standards. Blood alcohol concentration 
shall be reported only at values of .02 percent or greater within 
the linear portion of the standard curve. Unconfirmed 
presumptive positive results and values below .02 percent shall 
be reported as negative. Any quantitations to the third digit 
shall be rounded downward to two digits (i.e., .238% to .23%). 
(v) The remaining portion of any specimen testing positive 
shall be retained in secure frozen storage for at least one year, 
and the employee shall have the right to request a retest of the 
specimen at a competent independent laboratory within 60 days of 
the date of the laboratory report. 
(vi) Test results shall be reported to the Medical Review 
Officer who shall review and act upon the results in the same 
manner provided for drug urine testing in Subpart H of this part, 
except that fully quantitated results shall be made available to 
the employer representative. 
(3) If the blood test under this section is reported as 
negative, the breath test shall be deemed negative for all 
purposes. 
(f)(1) Under the circumstances set forth in 219.301, a 
railroad may require an employee to participate in a breath 
alcohol screening test solely for the purpose of determining 
whether the conduct of a test meeting the criteria of paragraph 
(a) is indicated. If the screening test is negative within the 
meaning of paragraph (b), the employee shall not be required to 
submit to further breath testing under this subpart. If the 
screening test is positive, no consequence shall attach except 
that the employee may be removed from covered service for the 
period necessary to conduct a breath test meeting the criteria of 
paragraph (a). 
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this 
section, the conduct of a screening test under paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section does not excuse full compliance with paragraph 
(a) of this section with respect to any breath test procedure 
which is then undertaken. If a screening test is positive, the 
following procedures govern: 
(i) An initial breath test shall be conducted meeting the 
criteria of paragraph (a) of this section. 
(ii) If that test is positive, a second breath test shall be 
conducted meeting the criteria of paragraph (a) of this section. 
(iii) The second test meeting the criteria of section (a) of 
this section must be conducted at least 15 minutes after the 
positive screening test conducted under paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section. However, since a waiting period of 15 minutes is 
sufficient to permit the dissipation of any alcohol in the mouth, 
the requirement of paragraph (a)(5) of this section that there be 
a period of at least 15 minutes between the two tests meeting the 
criteria of paragraph (a) of this section does not apply. 




