 

NHTSA has decided to require test shielding of the pressure 
relief device during the horizontal bonfire test. The agency 
notes that the purpose of this test is to replicate the effect of 
fires on the pressure relief device and the fuel container as a 
system. Requiring shielding will assure that the bonfire test is 
evaluating the fuel container as a whole, rather than merely the 
pressure relief device, since a flame that impinges on the 
pressure relief device, could activate prematurely. Requiring 
shielding, rather than simply allowing it, will assure repeatable 
and consistent test results. The rule also requires shielding of 
the pressure relief device during the vertical bonfire test, 
except where the container is fitted with a pressure relief 
device on only one end. In that case, the container is 
positioned with the pressure relief device on top, so as to avoid 
direct contact with the flame. 


4. Test Gas and Pressure 



In the NPRM, NHTSA proposed that the CNG container be 
pressurized with either nitrogen or air to 100 percent of service 
pressure for the bonfire test. The agency acknowledged that NGV2 
specifies the use of CNG, but tentatively concluded that using 
nitrogen or air as the test gas would be safer than using CNG. 

AAMA and Tecogen recommended that CNG be used as the test 
gas. Tecogen further commented that the container manufacturers 
have historically conducted such tests using CNG and are 
therefore well aware of the necessary safety precautions. It 
further stated that using CNG as the test gas would reveal the 
pressure relief valve's effectiveness with respect to the 
discharge rate. AAMA commented that CNG should be used as the 
test gas because the thermal properties of CNG differ from those 
of nitrogen and air and NGV2 specifies the use of CNG as the test 
gas. AAMA also recommended that the CNG containers be 
pressurized at the start of the test to 95 to 100 percent of 
service pressure, but offered no rationale. 

After reviewing the comments, NHTSA has determined that 
using CNG as the test gas would better reflect the real-world 
conditions in a fire, since the test gas would be the same as the 
gas used in CNG containers. The agency notes that the bonfire 
test addresses the responsiveness of the pressure relief device 
and that air and nitrogen have different thermal properties than 
CNG. Therefore, the pressure relief device might perform 
differently if air or nitrogen were used instead of CNG. In the 
NPRM, the agency explained that using CNG as a test gas might not 
be safe. These initial concerns have been allayed by the 
comments indicating that manufacturers are aware of and 
accustomed to taking the necessary safety precautions when using 
CNG as a test gas to evaluate a container. NHTSA notes that it 
decided not to specify CNG as the test gas in the CNG vehicle 
standard. Nevertheless, the agency believes that differences in 
reaction to heat are important for the bonfire test, which 
involves high temperatures, but not for crash tests, which do not 
involve such temperatures. 

NHTSA continues to believe that it is necessary to 
pressurize the CNG container to 100 percent of service pressure 
at the outset of the test. The agency has determined that the 
containers need to be tested at full service pressure to 
represent the worst case scenario. 



5. Wind Velocity and Direction 



In the NPRM and SNPRM, NHTSA did not address the allowable 
wind velocity and direction. The agency received comments from 
NGVC, CGA, and PST stating that a limit should be placed on wind 
velocity to increase the bonfire test's repeatability. 

After reviewing the comments, NHTSA has decided to specify 
that the average wind velocity at the container during the test 
may not exceed 2.24 meters per second (5 mph). The agency 
believes that permitting higher crosswinds would vary or reduce 
the flame's heat. Therefore, placing limits on the crosswind 
assures the test's repeatability and the level of stringency that 
the agency anticipated in proposing this test. 



6. Bonfire Fuel 



In the NPRM, NHTSA proposed that the fire for the bonfire 
tests be generated using No. 2 diesel fuel. This fuel type was 
proposed so that the standard would be consistent with the 
bonfire test in NGV2, which also specifies this type of fuel. 

NGVC, CGA, AAMA, and Norris commented that the agency should 
specify a different fuel to generate the bonfire that is more 
environmentally sound. CGA stated that the large amounts of 
smoke that would be created by burning the diesel fuel are 
contrary to the environmental objectives of developing CNG 
vehicles. NGVC and Norris suggested using a CNG or propane grill 
for the test. 

After reviewing the comments and other available 
information, NHTSA has decided to specify the use of No. 2 diesel 
fuel in the final rule. The agency is aware of the environmental 
problems associated with this type of fuel and will further study 
whether other fuels should be used to generate the bonfire test. 
However, until the agency can determine that a different fuel is 
an appropriate replacement for diesel fuel, the Standard will 
specify No. 2 diesel fuel for use in the bonfire test. 



7. Bonfire Test Fuel Pan Depth 



In the NPRM, NHTSA proposed that the bonfire test pan 
containing No. 2 diesel fuel be at least 100 centimeters (cm) 
deep. The agency specified a depth to ensure that there would be 
an adequate amount of fuel to run the test. 

AAMA, Comdyne, CGA, Alusuisse, and PST commented that the 
fuel pan depth was excessive. Alusuisse stated that a pan of the 
proposed size would contain more than 1,000 liters of fuel. PST 
stated that a 100 millimeter (mm) depth would be more reasonable. 
CGA, AAMA, and Comdyne stated that the depth of the fuel pan 
should not be specified so long as a sufficient quantity of fuel 
is provided for the test. 

The agency intended to propose a depth of 100 mm. However, 
due to a typographical error, it proposed a depth of 100 cm. 
NHTSA agrees that a fuel pan with a depth of at least 100 cm 
would be too deep. NHTSA also agrees that the fuel pan's depth 
does not need to be specified, provided that there is a 
sufficient amount of fuel to maintain the fire for the duration 
of the test. Accordingly, the agency has removed the requirement 
for fuel pan depth and has replaced it with the provision that 
 there be ``sufficient fuel to burn for at least 20 minutes.'' 
The agency believes that this provision is consistent with the 
test's purpose of simulating a severe fire by raising the 
container's temperature and pressure by completely surrounding it 
with flames produced by a specific fuel type. 



F. Labeling Requirements 



In the NPRM, NHTSA proposed to require that container 
manufacturers certify that each of their containers complies with 
the proposed equipment requirements and permanently label the 
container with the following information: the symbol ``DOT'' to 
constitute a certification by the manufacturer that the container 
conforms to all requirements of the standard; the date of 
manufacture of the container; the name and address of the 
container manufacturer; and the maximum service pressure. The 
agency stated that labeling the container would provide vehicle 
manufacturers and consumers with assurance that they are 
purchasing containers that comply with the Federal safety 
standards. In addition, the agency believed that the proposed 
requirement would facilitate the agency's enforcement efforts by 
providing a ready means of identifying the container and its 
manufacturer. 




