 

NHTSA notes that the Conference Report includes the following explanation concerning combined treatment of U.S.
and Canadian content: 




The conferees also note the reasons that the percentage of USA and Canadian content value required to be listed in this
bill is combined. The conferees believe it is appropriate to make this new labeling requirement as consistent as possible
with existing laws and regulations. The conferees also do not want this legislation to increase the cost of automobiles
to consumers. 
The conferees also recognize that the USA and Canada have a longstanding and specific automobile free trade pact (the
US and Canada Automotive Parts Agreement), one that predates the USA-Canada Free Trade Agreement by over 20 years.
This special relationship in automotive trade, and other factors, justify listing both US and Canadian automobile
value as a combined percentage. The conferees do not intend that any other country is to be combined with the USA and
Canada in the percentage of total automotive value required to be listed by this legislation. 


7. Consumer Guide



AIADA stated that it believes the labeling law will be misleading and confusing for consumers, and that the dealer
will ultimately bear the burden and be in the difficult position of explaining what it believes to be illogical content
information. That organization stated that to aid dealers and consumers, it believes NHTSA should publish and make
publicly available a consumer guide that explains just what the content figures represent and do not represent. It
stated, for example, that the guide should explain the distinction between allied and outside suppliers and how that
affects the value of motor vehicle content. 
NHTSA believes that a consumer guide that attempted to explain the details of the content calculation procedures,
such as the distinction between allied and outside suppliers, would not be helpful to consumers but would instead
cause unnecessary confusion. NHTSA believes that the vehicle labels required by this final rule will be readily understood
by consumers and help those that wish to do so to take content information into account in making a purchase decision.



L. May 1994 Congressional Comment


In May 1994, NHTSA received a letter concerning this rulemaking signed by Senator Carl Levin and Representatives
Sander Levin, Marcy Kaptur and Nancy Johnson. The agency was also advised by phone that Representative Ralph Regula
supported the letter. The letter reads as follows:



We are writing to urge you to draft American Automobile Labeling Act implementing regulations that reflect the legislation's
intent to provide an accurate means of measuring the parts value content of a vehicle. 
The trend has been for Japanese transplants to purchase parts assembled in the U.S. by Japanese affiliated parts makers,
a high percentage of which are merely assembled here using subcomponents and materials imported from Japan. Nonetheless,
they are erroneously counted as U.S. parts for the purposes of calculating U.S. content levels. The Labeling Act was
an attempt by Congress to establish a tool to more accurately measure the ``actual'' U.S. and Canadian content of vehicles
sold in the U.S. based on the origin of where the parts are made, not where the parts are purchased or assembled. It is
our hope that the Labeling Act will achieve this objective by imposing a stringent definition of what is an ``American
or Canadian made'' auto part. 
Currently, Japanese transplant auto makers claim high levels of U.S. content in their U.S. made vehicles. But they
will not provide the necessary data to measure accurately the U.S. content levels of the auto parts used in these vehicles,
and thus, it is impossible to verify their claims. After tracing the actual source of parts, a 1992 Economic Strategy
Institute study found that the U.S. auto part used in a 1991 Honda accord contained 2/3 Japanese content and only 1/3
``actual'' U.S. content. Even with these low levels of U.S. content, Honda took credit for these parts being totally
U.S.-made. 
In order to adequately distinguish between parts assembled in the U.S. using imported materials and parts made in
the U.S. using U.S. materials, the Labeling Act must include tracing requirements similar to the tracing requirements
in the NAFTA rule of origin, with the exception that Mexican parts would not be included as U.S. or Canadian. Tracing
should be used to determine if suppliers can be designated as North America (U.S. or Canadian)_if they achieve the
70% North American content value_as well as to determine the country of origin for the engine and transmission. For
example, if tracing were required, an engine or transmission that contains 75% Japanese content but is assembled
in the U.S. would be correctly found to be primarily of Japanese origin, not of U.S. origin. 



