 




<USBUREAU>Health Care Financing Administration</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[BPO123GNC] </RINDOCK>



Medicare Program; Criteria and Standards for Evaluating Intermediary and Carrier Performance During FY 1995 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), HHS. 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 General notice with comment period. 






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This notice describes the criteria and standards to be used for evaluating the performance of fiscal intermediaries
and carriers in the administration of the Medicare program beginning October 1, 1994. The results of these evaluations
are considered whenever HCFA enters into, renews, or terminates an intermediary agreement or carrier contract or
takes other contract actions (for example, assigning or reassigning providers of services to an intermediary or
designating regional or national intermediaries). 



This notice is published in accordance with sections 1816(f) and 1842(b)(2) of the Social Security Act. We are publishing
for public comment in the 

Federal Register

 those criteria and standards against which we evaluate intermediaries and carriers. 




</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 The criteria and standards are effective October 1, 1994. 




COMMENTS: 

Comments will be considered if we receive them at the appropriate address as provided below no later than 5 p.m. (EDT)
on October 7, 1994. 




</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Mail written comments (1 original and 3 copies) to the following address: Health Care Financing Administration,
Department of Health and Human Services, Attention: BPO123GNC, P.O. Box 26676, Baltimore, MD 21207.




If you prefer, you may deliver your written comments (1 original and 3 copies) to one of the following addresses:

 


Room 309G, Hubert H. Humphrey Building, 200 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, D.C. 20201, or 

Room 132, East High Rise Building, 6325 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland 21207.

 


Because of staffing and resource limitations, we cannot accept comments by facsimile (FAX) transmission. In commenting,
please refer to file code BPO123GNC. Comments received timely will be available for public inspection
as they are received, generally beginning approximately 3 weeks after publication of a document, in Room 309G
of the Department's office at 200 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, D.C., on Monday through Friday of each week
from 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. (phone: (202) 6907890). 




</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Bob Loyal, (410) 9667403.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:


I. Background 



Under section 1816 of the Social Security Act (the Act), public or private organizations and agencies participate
in the administration of Part A (Hospital Insurance) of the Medicare program under agreements with the Secretary
of Health and Human Services. These agencies or organizations, known as fiscal intermediaries, determine whether
medical services are covered under Medicare and determine correct payment amounts. The intermediaries then make
payments to the health care providers on behalf of the beneficiaries. Section 1816(f) of the Act requires us to develop
criteria, standards, and procedures to evaluate an intermediary's performance of its functions under its agreement.
We evaluate intermediary performance through the contract management process. 

Under section 1842 of the Act, we are authorized to enter into contracts with carriers to fulfill various functions
in the administration of Part B (Supplementary Medical Insurance) of the Medicare program. Beneficiaries, physicians,
and suppliers of services submit claims to these carriers. The carriers determine whether the services are covered
under Medicare and the payable amount for the services or supplies and then make payment to the appropriate party.
Under section 1842(b)(2) of the Act, we are required to develop criteria, standards, and procedures to evaluate a
carrier's performance of its functions under its contract. We also evaluate carrier performance through the contract
management process. 

We are publishing the criteria and standards in the 

Federal Register

 in order to allow the public an opportunity to comment before implementation. In addition to the statutory requirement,
our regulations at 42 CFR 421.120 and 421.122 provide for publication of a 

Federal Register

 notice to announce criteria and standards for intermediaries prior to implementation. Regulations at 42 CFR 421.201
provide for publication of a 

Federal Register

 notice to announce criteria and standards for carriers prior to implementation. The current criteria and standards
were published in the 

Federal Register

 on September 30, 1993 (58 FR 51085). 

To the extent possible, we make every effort to publish the criteria and standards prior to the beginning of the Federal
fiscal year, which is October 1st. 
</SUPPLEM>
