 

The FAA has received a report of an accident report where a Cessna Model 172 airplane experienced engine loss because
a six-inch piece of gasket material was lodged in the carburetor venturi throat. The material matched the remaining
neoprene gasket on the Brackett air filter, Assembly No. BA5110, installed in accordance with STC SA71GL.
The Brackett Aircraft Company, Inc., has issued Brackett Air Filter Document I194, dated March 16, 1994. This
document specifies inspection and replacement procedures for these Brackett air filters utilizing neoprene gaskets
installed in accordance with STC SA71GL.
After examining the circumstances and reviewing all available information related to the incident described above
including the referenced service information, the FAA has determined that AD action should be taken to prevent gasket
particles from entering the carburetor because of air filter gasket failure, which could result in partial or complete
loss of engine power.
Since an unsafe condition has been identified that is likely to exist or develop in other airplanes incorporating
the Brackett air filter neoprene gasket design installed in accordance with STC SA71GL, the proposed AD would require
repetitively inspecting (visually) the air filter frame for a loose or deteriorated gasket, and replacing any gasket
found loose or deteriorated. The proposed actions would be accomplished in accordance with Brackett Air Filter Document
I194, dated March 16, 1994.
The FAA estimates that 50,000 airplanes in the U.S. registry would be affected by the proposed AD, that it would take
approximately 1 workhour per airplane to accomplish the proposed inspection, and that the average labor rate is approximately
$55 an hour. Based on these figures, the total cost impact of the proposed AD on U.S. operators is estimated to be $2,750,000
or $55 per operator. This figure does not reflect costs for repetitive inspections or possible replacements; only
the initial inspection. The FAA has no way of determining how many gaskets may need replacement or how many repetitive
inspections each operator may incur.
The regulations proposed herein would not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this proposal would not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.
For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this action (1) Is not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive
Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034, February
26, 1979); and (3) if promulgated, will not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative, on a substantial
number of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. A copy of the draft regulatory evaluation
prepared for this action has been placed in the Rules Docket. A copy of it may be obtained by contacting the Rules Docket
at the location provided under the caption 

ADDRESSES

.


List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39


Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Safety.


The Proposed Amendment


Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration
proposes to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) as follows:


PART 39_AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES


1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows:





Authority:

 49 U.S.C. App. 1354(a), 1421 and 1423; 49 U.S.C. 106(g); and 14 CFR 11.89.


39.13


[Amended]


2. Section 39.13 is amended by adding a new AD to read as follows:





Brackett Aircraft Company, Inc.: 

Docket No. 94CE08AD.





Applicability:

 The following air filter assemblies that utilize a neoprene gasket incorporated in accordance with Supplemental
Type Certificate (STC) SA71GL and installed on, but not limited to, the following corresponding airplanes, certificated
in any category:


