 





Tuesday


April 26, 1994





Part XIII


The President





Executive Order 12908_Order of Succession






Executive Order 12909_Order of Succession of Officers To Act as Secretary of the Air Force












Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 80/Tuesday, 
April 26, 1994/Presidential Documents 



<SIGNJOB>
Federal Register



Vol. 59, No. 80



Tuesday, April 26, 1994






</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
Title 3_



The President



</SIGNER>
<FRFILING>
Executive Order 12908 of April 22, 1944




<RINDOCK>Order of Succession of Officers To Act as Secretary of the Army </RINDOCK>



By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including
section 3347 of title 5, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows: 



Section 1. 

Succession to Act as the Secretary of the Army. 



(a) In the event of the death, permanent disability, or resignation of the Secretary of the Army, the incumbents holding
the positions designated below, in the order indicated, shall act for and exercise the powers of the Secretary of the
Army: 






(1) The Under Secretary of the Army.  






(2) The Assistant Secretaries and General Counsel of the Army, in the order fixed by their length of service as permanent
appointees in such positions.  






(3) The Chief of Staff of the Army. 






(b) In the event of the absence or temporary disability of the Secretary of the Army, the incumbents holding the Department
of the Army positions designated in paragraph (a) of this section, in the order indicated, shall act for and exercise
the powers of the Secretary of the Army. 






(1) The designation of an Acting Secretary of the Army under this subsection applies only for the duration of the Secretary's
absence or disability, and does not affect the authority of the Secretary to resume the powers of the Secretary's office.
 






(2) When the Secretary of the Army is temporarily absent from the position, the Secretary of the Army may continue to
exercise the powers and fulfill the duties of his office during his absence, notwithstanding the provisions of this
order.  






(c) Precedence among those officers designated in paragraph (a) of this section who have the same date of appointment
shall be determined by the Secretary of the Army at the time that such appointments are made. 

(d) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, an officer shall not act for or exercise the powers of the
Secretary of the Army under this order if that officer serves only in an acting capacity in the position that would otherwise
entitle him to do so. 





Sec. 2. 

Temporary Nature of Succession. 

Succession to act for and exercise the powers of the Secretary of the Army pursuant to this order shall be on a temporary
or interim basis and shall not have the effect of vacating the statutory appointment held by the successor. 





wj








THE WHITE HOUSE, 


April 22, 1994.



[FR Doc. 9410241
Filed 42594; 10:59 am]


Billing code 319501P


</FRFILING>

