 

16. Before the creation of any new class of shares and once the characteristics of such proposed class have been decided,
the Expert (as defined in condition 6), or a suitable substitute Expert, will review the methodologies and control
procedures used with respect to the net asset values and dividends and distribution determinations for such new class
of shares.

17. The Funds' CDSC arrangements (including any waivers) will be identical to those described in the Existing Orders
except that instead of being limited to only Class B shares in a Fund, such CDSC arrangements may apply to more than one
class of shares in the same Fund.
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>
Applicants received a no-action letter from the SEC allowing waiver of the CDSC in connection with redemptions by
qualified retirement plans regardless of whether such redemptions occur before or after an employee's retirement.
Merrill Lynch Retirement Benefit Government Securities Fund, Inc. (Aug. 30, 1990).

</FOOTNOTE>


18. Applicants will comply with Article III, Section 26 of the Rules of the Fair Practice of the National Association
of Securities Dealers, Inc. in determining the maximum limitation on sales charges that may be imposed.



Applicants' Legal Analysis



Applicants believe that the granting of the relief requested will let applicants respond to competition from others
and changing customer demands while relieving the SEC and its staff of the burden of repeatedly reviewing requests
for greater flexibility in administering the Funds' distribution and shareholder servicing arrangements. Applicants
believe that the relief requested is appropriate in the public interest and consistent with the protection of investors
and the purposes fairly intended by the policy and provisions of the Act.



Applicants' Conditions



Applicants request an order of the SEC pursuant to section 6(c) amending the Existing Orders so that the conditions
thereto read in their entirety as follows:

1. Each class of shares will represent interests in the same portfolio of investments of a Fund and be identical in all
respects, except as set forth below. Any differences among the terms of the various classes of shares of the same Fund
will relate solely to: (a) The impact of different 12b1 Plan payments and non-rule 12b1 shareholder
servicing plan payments made by a particular class of shares (and any other costs relating to the implementation of
a 12b1 Plan or non-rule 12b1 shareholder servicing plans) which will be borne solely by shareholders
of such class, shareholder servicing costs attributable solely to a particular class, and any incremental expenses
subsequently identified that should be properly allocated to one class which shall be approved by the SEC pursuant
to an amendment order, (b) voting rights on matters that pertain to 12b1 Plans, or if presented to shareholders,
voting rights on matters that pertain to non-rule 12b1 shareholder servicing plans, (c) redemption fees,
(d) exchange privileges, (e) the designation of each class of shares of a Fund, and (f) an automatic conversion feature
pursuant to which shares of one class automatically would convert into shares of another class after a period of time.

2. The Directors/Trustees of each of the Funds, including a majority of the independent Directors/Trustees, shall
have approved the Multi-Class System, including the conversion feature, prior to the implementation of the Multi-Class
System by a particular Fund. The minutes of the meetings of the Directors/Trustees of each of the Funds regarding the
deliberations of the Directors/Trustees with respect to the approvals necessary to implement the Multi-Class System,
including the conversion feature, will reflect in detail the reasons for determining that the proposed Multi-Class
System is in the best interests of both the Funds and their respective shareholders.

3. On an ongoing basis, the Directors/Trustees of the Funds, pursuant to their fiduciary responsibilities under
the Act and otherwise, will monitor each Fund for the existence of any material conflicts among the interests of the
various classes of shares. The Directors/Trustees, including a majority of the independent Directors/Trustees,
shall take such action as is reasonably necessary to eliminate any such conflicts that may develop. The Advisers and
the Distributor will be responsible for reporting any potential or existing conflicts to the Directors/Trustees.
If a conflict arises, the Advisers and the Distributor at their own costs will remedy such conflict up to and including
establishing a new registered management investment company.

