 

(a) 

General.

 An alteration that affects or could affect the usability of or access to an area of a facility that contains a primary
function shall be made so as to ensure that, to the maximum extent feasible, the path of travel to the altered area and
the restrooms, telephones, and drinking fountains serving the altered area, are readily accessible to and usable
by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless the cost and scope of such alterations
is disproportionate to the cost of the overall alteration. 
(b) 

Primary function.

 A ``primary function'' is a major activity for which the facility is intended. Areas that contain a primary function
include, but are not limited to, the meeting rooms in a conference center, as well as offices and other work areas in
which the activities of the public entity using the facility are carried out. 
(1) Mechanical rooms, boiler rooms, supply storage rooms, employee lounges or locker rooms, janitorial closets,
entrances, and corridors are not areas containing a primary function. Restrooms are not areas containing a primary
function, unless the provision of restrooms is the principal purpose of the area, 

e.g.

, in highway rest stops. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, alterations to windows, hardware, controls, electrical outlets, and signage
shall not be deemed to be alterations that affect the usability of or access to an area containing a primary function.

(c) 

Path of travel.

 (1) A ``path of travel'' includes a continuous, unobstructed way of pedestrian passage by means of which the altered
area may be approached, entered, and exited, and which connects the altered area with an exterior approach (including
sidewalks, streets, and parking areas), an entrance to the facility, and other parts of the facility. 
(2) An accessible path of travel may consist of walks and sidewalks, curb ramps and other interior or exterior pedestrian
ramps; clear floor paths through lobbies, corridors, rooms, and other improved areas; parking access aisles; elevators
and lifts; or a combination of these elements. 
(3) For the purposes of this part, the term ``path of travel'' also includes the restrooms, telephones, and drinking
fountains serving the altered area. 
(d) 

Disproportionality.

 (1) Alterations made to provide an accessible path of travel to the altered area will be deemed disproportionate to
the overall alteration when the cost exceeds 20% of the cost of the alteration to the primary function area. 
(2) Costs that may be counted as expenditures required to provide an accessible path of travel may include: 
(i) Costs associated with providing an accessible entrance and an accessible route to the altered area, for example,
the cost of widening doorways or installing ramps; 
(ii) Costs associated with making restrooms accessible, such as installing grab bars, enlarging toilet stalls,
insulating pipes, or installing accessible faucet controls; 
(iii) Costs associated with providing accessible telephones, such as relocating the telephone to an accessible
height, installing amplification devices, or installing a telecommunications device for deaf persons (TDD); 
(iv) Costs associated with relocating an inaccessible drinking fountain. 
(e) 

Duty to provide accessible features in the event of disproportionality.

 (1) When the cost of alterations necessary to make the path of travel to the altered area fully accessible is disproportionate
to the cost of the overall alteration, the path of travel shall be made accessible to the extent that it can be made accessible
without incurring disproportionate costs. 
(2) In choosing which accessible elements to provide, priority should be given to those elements that will provide
the greatest access, in the following order: 
(i) An accessible entrance; 
(ii) An accessible route to the altered area; 
(iii) At least one accessible restroom for each sex or a single unisex restroom; 
(iv) Accessible telephones; 
(v) Accessible drinking fountains; and 
(vi) When possible, additional accessible elements such as parking, storage, and alarms. 
(f) 

Series of smaller alterations.

 (1) The obligation to provide an accessible path of travel may not be evaded by performing a series of small alterations
to the area served by a single path of travel if those alterations could have been performed as a single undertaking.

(2) (i) If an area containing a primary function has been altered without providing an accessible path of travel to
that area, and subsequent alterations of that area, or a different 
area on the same path of travel, are undertaken within three years of the original alteration, the total cost of alterations
to the primary function areas on that path of travel during the preceding three-year period shall be considered in
determining whether the cost of making that path of travel accessible is disproportionate. 
(ii) Only alterations undertaken after the effective date of this amendment shall be considered in determining if
the cost of providing an accessible path of travel is disproportionate to the overall cost of the alterations. 


35.154 

Alterations: Historic preservation. 


(a) Alterations to buildings or facilities that are ``historic properties'' as defined in 35.104 shall comply,
to the maximum extent feasible, with section 4.1.7 of appendix A to part 37 of this chapter. 
(b) If it is determined under the procedures set out in section 4.1.7 of appendix A to part 37 of this chapter that it is
not feasible to provide physical access to an historic property in a manner that will not threaten or destroy the historic
significance of the building or facility, alternative methods of access shall be provided pursuant to the requirements
of 35.150. 



