 

_Academic program costs (e.g. tuition, book allowance);
_ESL training (if necessary);
_Travel and maintenance costs for accompanying faculty or resident directors; for no more than one program supervisor
per ten students; 
_Participant recruitment costs; 
_Orientation costs (speaker honoraria are not to exceed $150 per day per speaker);
_Cultural enrichment expenses (admissions, tickets, etc., limited to $150 per participant);
_Medical insurance for participants (participants are covered by the Agency's self-insurance policy when USIA
is funding over fifty percent of the total cost of the projects);
_Withholding for taxes; and
_Visa fees. 


Administrative Costs_Not To Exceed 20% of the Requested Budget 


_Salaries and benefits;
_Communications (e.g. fax, telephone, postage);
_Office Supplies;
_Administration of tax withholding and reporting as required by Federal, State and local authorities and in accordance
with relevant tax treaties; recipient organization should demonstrate tax regulation adherence in the proposal
narrative and budget; 
_Other Direct Costs;
_All Indirect Costs.





Please note: 

It is required that requested administrative funds, including indirect costs and administrative expenses for orientation,
not exceed 20 percent of the total amount requested from USIA; administrative expenses should be cost-shared. 



Applications should demonstrate substantial cost-sharing (dollar and in-kind) in both program and administrative
expenses, including tuition waivers and overseas partner contributions. (See the accompanying guidelines for
complete cost-sharing and auditing requirements.) 


Additional Criteria for Category A


President's University Student Exchange Program (the 10001000 Student Exchange) With the Baltic Countries
and the New Independent States 


Grant funding under this category is intended to enhance and expand the scope of U.S. academic exchanges with undergraduate
and graduate students from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyia, Latvia, Lithuania,
Moldova, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan. For accident year 199596
the intention is to exchange 1,000 students in each direction. Priority will be given to applications from international
exchange organizations and consortia of universities that have a demonstrated ability to exchange students from
multiple countries in the former USSR. Preference will then be given to applications from single institutions for
programs outside the Russian Federation. For projects in the Russian Federation, preference will be given to applications
involving multiple foreign partner institutions, especially outside of Moscow and St. Petersburg. Both existing
and new projects are eligible. 


(1) Awards 


Project awards to U.S. organizations will be made in a wide range of amounts. The Agency reserves the right to reduce,
revise or increase proposal budgets in accordance with the needs of the program. For organizations with less than
four years of experience in international exchange activities, grants will be limited to a maximum of $60,000, and
proposed budgets should not exceed this amount. 


(2) Participants 


Participants must be citizens either of the U.S. or of the host country. Undergraduate students are defined as students
who have not received their baccalaureates prior to participation in this program. Graduate students for this program
should be studying at the equivalent of the Master's degree level. Doctoral candidates are not eligible. Students
in all academic fields are eligible; students of agricultural are especially encouraged to apply (please note special
conditions for agricultural programs below). Projects that include graduate students must delineate between the
number of graduate and undergraduate participants, separately describe the academic programs, and include for
each a separate line item in the budget. All projects must include undergraduate students. It is important that the
selection process ensure equal opportunities for both male and female students. 


(3) Language Qualifications


Students should have sufficient fluency in the institutional language of the host country to be able to pursue university
study in that language and to be able to converse with the citizens of the country without the aid of interpreters. Generally,
the equivalent of two years of college-level study is considered the minimum. 


(4) Duration 


Applications will be accepted for projects with durations of at least eight weeks to no more than one year, including
programs lasting an academic quarter, trimester, or semester. Exchanges of less than eight weeks duration or more
than one year will be considered technically ineligible. Although grant awards may begin earlier, the actual exchange
of participants may not begin before February 1, 1995, and must be completed by December 31, 1996. Programs for exchanges
in subsequent academic years will be considered technically eligible. 


(5) Preference Factors 


a. Preference will be given to proposals in which incoming students study in the U.S. for a full academic year. 
b. Preference will be given to programs that reflect wide geographic distributions in recruitment of participants.

c. Preference will be given to programs that recruit foreign and U.S. participants through merit-based, open competition.



(6) Reciprocity 


Proposals should be reciprocal, but not necessarily equal in numbers. In cases where political or practical circumstances
do not allow for the placement of U.S. students, one-way programs will be considered. The proposal should provide
detailed information on the activities in both the U.S. and the partner country. 


(7) Internships


While programs may include internships, the focus of projects should be classroom work or research. If internships
are included in the exchange experience, students should have completed at least one semester of classroom work.
The duration of the internship should not exceed the duration of the classroom work. Institutions are encouraged
to grant academic credit for the internship experience. 


(8) Special Allowances for Agriculture Programs


In order to give added encouragement to the participation of students of agriculture as provided for in the bilateral
agreement, language standards may be modified for participating students of agriculture. Programs including agriculture
students need not exchange agriculture students in both directions. 


Additional Criteria for Categories B and C 


Category B: Samantha Smith Memorial Exchange With the Baltic Countries and the New Independent States 


Grant funding is intended to enhance and expand the scope of academic exchanges with Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzia, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, and Uzbekistan for undergraduate students under the age of 26. Participants must be citizens either of the
U.S. or of the host country. Programs designed specifically for foreign participants to teach their native language
or area studies in American institutions are ineligible for support. 


