 

(e) 

Prohibited health claims.

 No express or implied health claim may be made on the label or in labeling for a meat or meat food product unless: 

(1) The claim is specifically provided for in 317.371; and 

(2) The claim conforms to all general provisions of this section as well as to all specific provisions in the appropriate
section of 317.371; 

(3) None of the disqualifying levels identified in paragraph (a)(4) of this section is exceeded in the meat or meat
food product, unless specific alternative levels have been established for the substance in 317.371; or,
unless the Administrator has permitted a claim despite the fact that a disqualifying level of a nutrient is present
in the product based on a finding that such a claim will assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices,
and, in accordance with the regulation in this part that makes such a finding, the labeling bears a referral statement
disclosing the nutrient(s) that exceeds the disqualifying level as follows: ``See [appropriate panel or Nutrition
Facts] for information about [nutrient requiring disclosure] and other nutrients.'' The statement shall be in easily
legible boldface print or type, in distinct contrast to other printed or graphic matter, that is no less than that required
for net quantity of contents, except where the size of the claim is less than two times the required size of the net quantity
of contents statement, in which case the referral statement shall be no less than one-half the size of the claim but
no smaller than one-sixteenth of an inch. 

(4) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(3) of this section, no substance is present at an inappropriate level as determined
in the specific provision authorizing the claim in 317.371. 

(5) The label does not represent or purport that the food is for infants and toddlers less than 2 years of age, except
if the claim is specifically provided for in 317.371. 

(6) Except where provided for in other regulations in this Part, the meat or meat food product contains 10 percent or
more of the Reference Daily Intake or the Daily Reference Value as defined in 317.309 for vitamin A, vitamin
C, iron, calcium, protein, or fiber per reference amount customarily consumed prior to any nutrient addition, except
the basis for meal-type products as defined in 317.313(l) shall be per labeled serving size prior to any nutrient
addition. 

(f) 

Applicability.

 The requirements of this section apply to meat and meat food products intended for human consumption that are offered
for sale. 




3. A new section 317.370 would be added to read as follows: 



317.370 

Labeling applications for health claims. 



(a) Any interested person may submit a labeling application to FSIS for approval of the use of a particular health claim
in the labeling of a meat or meat food product. The labeling application shall be submitted in quadruplicate, except
that the supporting documentation may be submitted on a computer readable disk. Contents of the disk should be in a
standard format, such as ASCII format. (Applicants interested in submitting a disk should contact the Director,
Product Assessment Division, Regulatory Programs, FSIS, Washington, DC 20250 for details). If any part of the material
submitted is in a foreign language, it shall be accompanied by an accurate and complete English translation. The labeling
application shall state the applicant's post office address. 

(b) Pertinent information will be considered as part of a labeling application on the basis of specific reference
to such information submitted to and retained in the files of FSIS. Such information may include any findings, along
with the basis of the findings, of an outside panel with expertise in the subject area. However, any reference to unpublished
information furnished by a person other than the applicant will not be considered unless use of such information is
authorized (with the understanding that such information may in whole or in part be subject to release to the public)
in a written statement signed by the person who submitted it. Any reference to published information shall be accompanied
by reprints or easily readable copies of such references. 

(c) If nonclinical laboratory studies accompany a labeling application, the applicant shall include, with respect
to each nonclinical study included with the labeling application, either a statement that the study has been conducted
in compliance with the good laboratory practice regulations as set forth in part 58 of chapter I, title 21, or, if any
such study was not conducted in compliance with such regulations, a brief statement of the reason for the noncompliance.


(d) If clinical or other human investigations accompany a labeling application, the applicant shall include, with
respect to each clinical investigation included with the application, either a statement that the investigation
was conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional review set forth in part 56 of chapter I, title
21, or was not subject to such requirements in accordance with 21 CFR 56.104 or 56.105, and that it was conducted in compliance
with the requirements for informed consent set forth in part 50 of chapter I, title 21. 

(e) All data and information in a health claim labeling application are available for public disclosure after the
notice of filing of labeling application is issued to the applicant (317.370(j)(2)), except that clinical
investigation reports, adverse reaction reports, product experience reports, consumer complaints, and other
similar data and information shall only be available after deletion of: 

(1) Names and any information that would identify the person using the meat or meat food product. 

(2) Names and any information that would identify any third party involved with the report, such as a physician or hospital
or other institution. 

(f) Labeling applications for a health claim shall be submitted to the Director, Food Labeling Division, Regulatory
Programs, Food Safety and Inspection Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC 20250 and shall include
the following data and be submitted in the following form: 








(Date) 



Name of applicant


Post office address


Subject of the labeling application




The undersigned, 

XXX

 submits this labeling application pursuant to 9 CFR 317.370 with respect to (statement of the substance and its health
claim). 

Attached hereto, and constituting a part of this labeling application, are the following: 

A. Preliminary requirements. A complete explanation of how the substance conforms to the requirements of 317.314(b).
For labeling applications where the subject substance is a food ingredient or a component of a food ingredient, the
applicant should compile a comprehensive list of the specific ingredients that will be added to the meat or meat food
product to supply the substance in the meat or meat food product bearing the health claim. For each such ingredient
listed, the applicant should state how the ingredient complies with the requirements of 317.314(b)(3)(ii),
e.g., that its use is generally recognized as safe (GRAS), listed as a food additive, or authorized by a prior sanction
issued by FSIS, and what the basis is for the GRAS claim, the food additive status, or prior sanctioned status. 


