 

(2) The dealer making payments on behalf of the borrower potentially disguising past due accounts.
(3) The borrower/purchaser applying for the title potentially resulting in an improperly recorded lien.
(4) The dealer financing the down payment thus allowing the borrower to have no stake in the collateral.
(5) The credit union permitting or initiating overdrafts in the vendor reserve or holdback accounts. (Sometimes
the credit union requires deposits from the dealer to be held by the credit union to better assure good faith performance
by the vendor.)
(6) The credit union placing full reliance on the dealer for credit checks.
(7) Financing indirect loans that are out of the credit union's normal trade area.
(8) The dealer adds costs to the purchase price, such as insurance, warranties, and taxes, thus leaving the borrower
with no equity in the car, and the lender with an undercollateralized loan.
(9) Dealers generate a large volume of loans in an attempt to overwhelm credit union staff in hopes that the weaker loans
will be approved. (There are instances where dealers resubmit previously denied loans during peak periods in attempts
to get them approved.)
(10) The dealer inflates the purchase price or the trade in values, resulting in undercollateralized loans.
(11) An increased potential for making loans to persons who are not eligible to be credit union members exists because
of dealer involvement.
(12) By allowing the dealer to negotiate the contract, including interest rates, there is a possibility of inequity
among members.
In many instances, the prospective credit union member was pressured to solicit his employer for inclusion into the
credit union's field of membership. In certain of these instances, the employer group had existing credit union affiliation
with another credit union. In certain other instances, the vendor indicated the prospective member was affiliated
with a legitimate group in the credit union's field of membership, when, in fact, the person was not employed by the
group. The vendor failed to properly complete required documentation for loans and lease agreements. In some cases
the vendor indicated excessively high annual mileage limits in lease agreements.


Recommended Investigative Procedures


Before entering into an agreement with a vendor acting as the credit union's agent in soliciting membership, a federally
insured credit union should thoroughly investigate the impact of this action on its financial operations and condition;
determine its legal liabilities; clearly define its moral responsibilities; and assure proper control of these
activities. The following steps are recommended:
&bull;Thoroughly investigate the financial condition of all corporations, partnerships or other entities involved
in the activities. Obtain and review financial statements and credit reports, such as Dun and Bradstreet, on each
entity. Consider the need for appropriate bonding by each company.
&bull;Review the organizational structure and reputation of each entity. Included in the review should be a certification
that each entity is authorized to do business in the state where the credit union is authorized to do business.
&bull;Review and approve the contracts or policies to be offered. Since members may hold the credit union morally
responsible for problems which may occur, the officials should consider the impact of each contract or policy on its
public relations with members.
&bull;Determine through a written legal opinion that all forms, documents and procedures used by the credit union
to obtain membership, payroll deductions or to transfer funds to a vendor are legal and protect the credit union.
&bull;Ascertain the credit union's liability under the Holder in Due Course rule.
&bull;Determine the type of recourse agreement (full recourse, limited recourse or without recourse) that the credit
union will enter into with the vendor.
&bull;Develop cash flow and budget projections showing the effect of increased membership on the credit union's
financial condition and ability to serve new members.
&bull;Track by individual vendor, loans, loan delinquency and loan losses for each financing derived from the indirect
lending relationship.
&bull;Develop procedures to monitor the activities of vendors as discussed below under Agreements.
&bull;Develop brochures and handouts to be presented to potential members. Among these should be a disclaimer that
the credit union does not endorse the products or services and that the vendor can make no commitments regarding membership
approval or the granting of loans. Other materials to be presented are discretionary by the credit union.
&bull;Obtain written confirmation from surety that such activities are bondable.
&bull;Ensure the individual in charge of indirect lending is experienced with indirect financing or contacts another
credit union with experience in this type of lending.
&bull;Start slow, utilizing only one or two reputable new car dealerships.


Agreements


All arrangements with a vendor should be in writing and reviewed by credit union legal counsel. Such agreements should
include, but not be limited to, the following:
&bull;Scope of the vendor's authority to contact sponsors, such as limits on sponsor's assets, number of employees/potential
members, financial condition, organizational structure, geographical location, and sponsor stability in the
area.
&bull;Procedures for the vendor to follow in contacting sponsors. These should require the vendor to present any
product or service as separate and distinct from credit union membership and to state that inclusion in the field of
membership is subject to regulatory approval. There should be absolute indication that the credit union is not endorsing
any product or services marketed by the vendor.
&bull;Procedures for vendors to follow once a sponsor is included in the credit union's field of membership.
&bull;Procedures for automobile dealers to follow when shopping sales contracts to lenders.
&bull;Understanding and agreements on fees or points paid to automobile dealers.
&bull;Agreement that products or services to be offered and materials, brochures and handouts to be presented by
the vendor are to be approved, in advance, by the credit union.


