 

If the sale of products occurs during the project period, the costs and income generated by the sales must be reported
on the Quarterly Financial Status Reports and documented in an auditable manner. 
Whenever possible, the intent to sell a product should be disclosed in the concept paper and application or reported
to the Institute in writing once a decision to sell products has been made. The grantee must request approval to recover
its product development, reproduction, and dissemination costs as specified in section X.V. 


5. Other 


Other project income shall be treated in accordance with disposition instructions set forth in the project's terms
and conditions. 


G. Payments and Financial Reporting Requirements 


1. Payment of Grant Funds 


The procedures and regulations set forth below are applicable to all Institute grant funds and grantees. 

a. 

Request for Advance or Reimbursement of Funds.

 Grantees will receive funds on a ``Check-Issued'' basis. Upon receipt, review, and approval of a Request for Advance
or Reimbursement by the Institute, a check will be issued directly to the grantee or its designated fiscal agent. A
request must be limited to the grantee's immediate cash needs. The Request for Advance or Reimbursement, along with
the instructions for its preparation, will be included in the official Institute award package. 
For purposes of submitting Requests for Advance or Reimbursement, recipients of continuation and on-going support
grants should consider these grants as supplements to and extensions of the original award and number their requests
on a project rather than a grant basis. (See Recommendations to Grantees in the Introduction for further guidance.)

Payment requests for projects within a package grant may be submitted at the same time, but must be calculated separately
by component project. The alphabetic project identifier (A, B, C, etc.) should be appended to the grant number in Block
5 of the Request for Advance or Reimbursement. (See Recommendations to Grantees in the Introduction for further guidance.)

b. 

Termination of Advance and Reimbursement Funding.

 When a grantee organization receiving cash advances from the Institute: 
i. Demonstrates an unwillingness or inability to attain program or project goals, or to establish procedures that
will minimize the time elapsing between cash advances and disbursements, or cannot adhere to guideline requirements
or special conditions; 
ii. Engages in the improper award and administration of subgrants or contracts; or 
iii. Is unable to submit reliable and/or timely reports; 



the Institute may terminate advance financing and require the grantee organization to finance its operations with
its own working capital. Payments to the grantee shall then be made by check to reimburse the grantee for actual cash
disbursements. In the event the grantee continues to be deficient, the Institute reserves the right to suspend reimbursement
payments until the deficiencies are corrected. 





