 

The introduction to this section has been simplified to remove information that is provided elsewhere in the regulations.
The sentence referring to the application of paid rental fees to the maintenance fee was removed, because it confused
the two fees and erroneously applied the succeeding statutes. There is no possibility under either statute that the
rental fees covering 199293 and 199394 could be applied to the maintenance fees covering assessment
years beginning with 199495. Also, the reference to 3833.18 has been changed to 3833.11
because of a redesignation in the final rule. 

Paragraph (h)(2)(i) is removed in the final rule because it contains information provided elsewhere in the regulations.


Three comments questioned whether it was correct to say that the assessment years covered under the Act of August 10,
1993, end on September 1, 1999. It is correct because a maintenance fee paid on or before August 31, 1998, will hold the
claim through September 1, 1999. 

One comment questioned whether this section allows claimants to have more than 10 claims waived. The answer is no.
The language clearly refers to 3833.16, which explains that the waiver can apply only to those with 10
claims or fewer. 

One comment said that the reference in the first sentence of this section to 3833.18 in the proposed rule
was incorrect because 3833.18 did not make an exception from payment of the maintenance fee. This first
sentence refers to 3833.18 in the proposed rule, redesignated as 3833.11 in the final
rule, because the section referred to provides for refunds in certain cases. Therefore, the reference is necessary
because it shows that the maintenance fee is not always nonrefundable, not because the section referred to provides
for some exception to the payment requirement. 

One comment asked whether maintenance fees can be paid for years in the future despite the fact that assessment work
always has had to be performed annually. The answer is yes because the maintenance fee has only to be paid on or before
the August 31 deadlines, so that a claimant could pay $500 to hold a claim through September 1999. In the event, however,
that the fee is adjusted pursuant to Section 10105(c) of the Act, reconciliation payments or refunds may be necessary.
Assessment work requirements for small miners remain the same. 

One comment stated that paragraph (a)(1) was unclear in its reference to the ``time of recording.'' The final rule
has been amended to make it clear that this refers to filing with BLM. 

One comment said that it was incorrect for paragraph (a)(2) to allow no waiver for the initial claim maintenance fee
due upon recordation of a new claim. The small miner waiver is a discretionary waiver. A waiver of the initial maintenance
fee for small miners would be unnecessarily difficult to administer and impossible to apply equally to all miners.
Varying filing requirements arise when miners perform assessment work at different times during the assessment
year, and, in some instances, new locations could change the status of some small miners. As a matter of discretion,
therefore, BLM will not allow a waiver for the initial maintenance fee required upon location of a new claim. 

Several comments stated that paragraph (a)(1) does not account for the situation where the August 31 filing deadline
falls within a new location's 90-day recording period. Language similar to that in the rental fee regulations has
been added in paragraph (a) to cover this situation. 

One comment requested that a requirement be added to paragraph (b) in which the claimant would indicate for which year
a submitted maintenance fee is intended. This extra requirement was not added because in almost all cases it will be
apparent which year the fee is intended. 

One comment said that paragraph (g) should be removed because a small miner who transfers a claim has complied with
the Act, but would have to sell the claim for $100 less to a non-small miner transferee. The comment stated that this
would effectively take away the small miner's waiver. Such a result in claim transfer negotiations is not certain.
In addition, this provision cannot be changed because the statute is very explicit that a claimant who has more than
10 claims is required to pay the fee. The purchase price that is negotiated could be any amount decided by the two parties
and by no means has to reflect the maintenance fee to be paid by the non-small miner transferee. 

Two comments addressing paragraph (g) asked what would happen if only a percentage of the interest in a claim subject
to a waiver, rather than the whole interest, was transferred to a party not entitled to a waiver. Because a response
to this question depends on whether the parties are related, a general answer cannot be given here. However, the paragraph
is amended to add the phrase ``or in part.'' 

Two comments asked what would happen if, unlike the situation described in paragraph (g), a waived mining claim was
transferred to someone who qualified for a waiver. In such a case the claim would be waived as long as the new owner still
qualified for the waiver with the addition of the new claim. 

One comment stated that the reference in paragraph (g) to the ``time of filing'' the transfer of interest should be
changed to the effective date under State law. This is correct and the amendment has been made in the final rule. 

One comment stated that paragraph (g) should not allow payments after the applicable August 31 deadline in cases where
claims are transferred to an entity not entitled to a waiver, because there is no statutory authority for such extensions.
This is correct and the final rule has been amended accordingly. 

One comment asked whether paragraph (h) will cause claimants who had already paid under the old rate to have to make
additional partial payments. For purposes of clarification, paragraph (h)(2) has been amended in the final rule
to eliminate the possibility of second payments being required in any given year as a result of an increase. If payments
are made in advance of the year in which the fee is due, additional partial payments would be required if the fee is adjusted
upward for that year. 

One comment stated that the public notice provided for in paragraph (h)(1) should be done by letter to each individual
miner. No decision has been made on how public notice under this paragraph will be accomplished, but it will be within
the guidelines of the Administrative Procedure Act, which controls all such methods of official notification, and
applicable case law. 






