 

The petitioner believes that other regulatory trends are also decreasing public access to information. OCRE states
that the Technical Specification Improvement Program encourages the removal of material from the plant technical
specifications and the relocation of it to internal plant documents. The petitioner included a list of recent generic
letters that enable licensees to relocate material from the plant technical specifications, a public document,
into other plant documents that may not be available to the public. According to the petitioner, about 36 percent of
current technical specification material will be relocated to internal plant documents under this program. 

The petitioner states that NRC's revised rules of practice place an even greater burden on public petitioners to provide
as much documentation and factual basis for contentions as early as possible while the access of petitioners to detailed
information is diminishing. The petitioner further states that if detailed information is never submitted to the
NRC, and thus never becomes accessible to the public, participants in proceedings will never be able to supply a basis
sufficient to support admission of contentions under the new rules of practice. 

OCRE believes that lack of public access to information on nuclear regulation undermines public confidence in the
NRC's regulatory program and is contrary to the public's statutory right to participate in the NRC regulatory process.
The petitioner also states that members of the public cannot fulfill the role of participating in the NRC regulatory
process, which Congress has bestowed upon them, without access to the detailed information that current NRC policies
are placing beyond the public's reach. 

In the amendment to the petition, OCRE cited two additional examples of the lack of public access to licensee-held
information. The first example is NRC's proposed rule entitled ``Codes and Standards for Nuclear Power Plants; Subsection
IWE and Subsection IWL'' (59 FR 979, January 7, 1994), which states that ``In order to further reduce the burden on licensees
and NRC staff, the Subsection IWE and IWL portions of the ISI plan will not have to be submitted to the NRC for approval.
Licensees may simply retain their initial Subsection IWE and Subsection IWL plans at the site for audit.'' The second
example is NRC's final rule entitled ``Storage of Spent Fuel in NRC-Approved Storage Casks at Power Reactor Sites''
(55 FR 29161, July 18, 1990) which does not appear to require nuclear power plant users of the approved storage casks
to submit their site-specific evaluations, as required by 72.212(b)(2), to the NRC. This section states that
``A copy of this record must be retained until spent fuel is no longer stored under the general license issued under
72.210.'' The petitioner further states that 72.212(b)(10) only requires that general licensees
make records available to the NRC for inspection. 

In the amendment to the petition, the petitioner amended the language in its suggested 9.301(b) to include
persons required by the proposed rule entitled ``Certification of Gaseous Diffusion Plants,'' published on February
11, 1994 (59 FR 6792), to obtain NRC certification of gaseous diffusion plants under proposed Part 76 in the definition
of ``possessor.'' OCRE requests that the NRC clarify that this proposed definition would include entities authorized
to dispose of radioactive materials. 

The petitioner recommends a change to Part 9 to establish the public's right-to-know and to provide the public access
to copies of internal plant documents, subject to the exceptions necessary to protect sensitive information. The
suggested amendment would not require that licensees generate information that does not already exist in response
to a request. The petitioner believes that its suggested amendment would strike a proper balance between the public's
right to know and the rights of the licensees. 

The petitioner's suggested amendment would include appeal procedures. If a
 requester is not satisfied with a licensee's response to a request for information, the requester could appeal the
matter to an Administrative Law Judge on the Atomic Safety and Licensing Board Panel. According to the petitioner,
this option is the most appropriate and efficient one for appeals. 

OCRE believes that its suggested amendment to Part 9 would impose a minimal burden on licensees and that this minor
burden would be justified by the substantial increase in meaningful public participation. According to the petitioner,
the proposed amendment to Part 9 would also enhance the public's confidence in the NRC's regulatory program. 



The Suggested Amendments 



The petitioner requests that the NRC amend 10 CFR Part 9 by adding subpart E to read as follows: 



Subpart E_Public Right of Access to Licensee-Held Information 



Section 9.300Scope of Subpart



This subpart establishes the public's right of access to licensee-held information, subject to certain exceptions.
This subpart sets forth the procedures to be followed by persons requesting documents held by NRC licensees or applicants
and by the licensees or applicants in responding to requests for documents. This subpart also establishes procedures
for appealing adverse licensee responses to public requests for records. 



Section 9.301Definitions



As used in this subpart, 

(a) ``Person'' has the meaning given in 10 CFR 2.4. 

(b) ``Possessor'' means any holder of or applicant for any license to possess, use, dispose of, and/or transfer source
material, byproduct material, special nuclear material, and/or spent fuel, or to construct, manufacture, possess,
own, operate, and/or transfer any production or utilization facility or independent spent fuel storage installation,
or any holder of or applicant for any construction permit, or any holder of or applicant for an early site permit under
subpart A of 10 CFR part 52, or any holder of or applicant for a standard design certification under subpart B of part
52, or any holder of or applicant for a certificate of compliance or approved compliance plan under part 76. 

(c) ``Record'' means any document, writing, book, data, paper, brochure, photograph, punch card, magnetic tape
or disk, paper tape, sound recording, pamphlet, slide, motion picture, map, drawing, graph, correspondence, contract,
report, microfilm, 
microfiche, optical storage medium, or other documentary material, regardless of form or characteristics, made
by, in the possession of, or under the control of a possessor. 



Section 9.302Designation of Responsible Official



Each possessor shall designate, by name or title, a responsible official to whom requests for records are to be sent.
Each possessor shall report to the NRC the name and/or title of the responsible official so designated. Possessors
shall promptly notify the NRC, in writing, of any changes to the name or title of the designated responsible official.
The NRC will periodically publish a list of possessors and their designated responsible officials. 




