 




<DOCTITLE>Denial of Motor Vehicle Petition</DOCTITLE>


This notice sets forth the reasons for denial of a petition submitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
(NHTSA) under Section 30162 of Chapter 301, Title 49, United States Code (formerly Section 124 of the National Traffic
and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (the Act)).
Mr. Lawrence J. Hutchens, an attorney representing Ms. Gloria Ody-Costello, petitioned the Administrator of NHTSA
with respect to the automatic transmission dipstick and dipstick tube on all 1994 Mercury Cougar model vehicles.
The petitioner maintains that when the subject vehicle is brought to a sudden stop, transmission fluid spills out
of the dipstick tube and ignites on the catalytic converter located below the tube. The petitioner requests that NHTSA
order the recall of all 1994 Mercury Cougars for the installation of a clamp to be installed on the subject dipstick
to retain the dipstick in the dipstick tube in a more positive manner and ``look into'' relocating or increasing the
length of the dipstick tube.
Mr. Hutchens' petition specifically calls for the recall of all 1994 Mercury Cougars vehicles. According to the Vehicle
Identification Number (VIN) provided by Mr. Hutchens, Ms. Ody-Costello owns a 1993 Mercury Cougar, which is equipped
with an automatic transmission and 5.0 liter V8 engine. Mr. Hutchens states in his letter that Ms. Ody-Costello
took her vehicle into a Ford dealer for unspecified transmission repairs. When the vehicle was returned to Ms. Ody-Castello,
the transmission dipstick was allegedly not pushed completely into the top of the dipstick tube, which left the top
of the dipstick tube partially open. Also, according to Mr. Hutchens, this condition allowed automatic transmission
fluid to spill onto the catalytic converter during sudden braking and ignite. There is no mention of any damage to the
vehicle as a result of such ignition. As the vehicle owned by Ms. Ody-Costello is actually a 1993 model, this model was
also included in the NHTSA analysis.
Mr. Hutchens suggests three corrective actions in his letter:
1. Install a clamp on the dipstick tube to hold the dipstick in a more positive manner.
2. Relocate the dipstick tube, so that the opening of the tube is not above the catalytic converter.
3. Increase the length of the tube, to raise the opening of the tube into a higher location in the engine compartment.
The 1993 and 1994 Mercury Cougar are available with two engine options, either a 5.0 liter V8 or a 3.8 liter V6.
Both the 1993 and 1994 models are equipped with the same dipstick and have the same dipstick tube location, regardless
of engine size. The dipstick tube runs upward from the transmission to a location near the rear corner of the right side
engine valve cover, where the dipstick is inserted into the tube. The opening of the tube is located about 12 inches
above the heat shield that surrounds one of the engine's catalytic converters.
The upper end of the dipstick is fitted with a metal cap that fits over the top of the dipstick tube. This cap is about 1/2
inch deep. Inside the cap and extending about 1/2 inch from the opening of the cap is a rubber seal that closes the opening
of the dipstick tube. This seal is basically a rubber plug that fits snugly into the opening. The plug portion is tapered
for the first 1/4 inch to facilitate its entry into the opening of the tube. According to Ford Motor Company (Ford),
when the dipstick is inserted into the dipstick tube properly, so that the metal cap seats over the end of the tube, the
rubber plug will provide a seal that will prevent any transmission fluid from spilling from the tube under all foreseeable
driving conditions, including sudden or panic stops. Instructions in the Cougar owner's manual, contained in the
glove compartment of all new vehicles, advise the owner to make sure the dipstick is fully seated when checking transmission
fluid. The owner's manual also warns against overfilling of the transmission and instructs the owner to have any excess
fluid removed from the transmission if the fluid ever exceeds the recommended level.
A search of the Office of Defects Investigation's (ODI) consumer complaint file disclosed no other reports of fluid
spilling from the automatic transmission dipstick tube in either 1993 or 1994 Mercury Cougars. As the automatic transmission
dipstick in the 1993 and 1994 Cougar is identical or very similar to the dipstick is most other Fords products, a search
of ODI's consumer complaint file was also conducted involving all Ford vehicles from 1990 through 1994. Again, no
complaints of transmission fluid spilling from the automatic transmission dipstick tubes were located. Ford was
also contacted and reported that Ms. Ody-Costello's complaint was the only one it has received involving the subject
transmission dipstick.




