 

Moreover, under the provisions of the proposed regulation, challengers would only have to present proof with respect
to factual issues which are relevant to the invocation of the presumption of ownership or control. If the presumption
turns upon certain key factual issues, these are the issues upon which the challenge will focus. Challengers will
not be required to disprove irrelevant facts which may have been included in the administrative record of the agency
which initially established the presumption of ownership or control.

The industry commenters further objected to paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of proposed 773.26 which provides that
a person seeking to challenge a presumption could demonstrate that he or she did not have authority directly or indirectly
to determine the manner in which surface coal mining operations were conducted. The commenters questioned whether
the requirement that a person prove that he or she did not have such indirect authority was an attempt by OSM to impermissibly
extend the reach of the ownership or control regulations to cover persons remote from surface coal mining operations.

OSM denies that the proposed provision represents an attempt to impermissibly extend the reach of the ownership or
control regulations. In fact, the proposed standard was taken from currently operative ownership and control regulations.
The provisions of paragraph (b) of 30 CFR 773.5, which have been effective since November 2, 1988, state that a person
subject to one or more of the presumptions contained in paragraph (b) of that regulation is presumed to be an owner or
controller unless there is a demonstration that ``the person subject to the presumption does not in fact have the 

authority directly or indirectly

 to determine the manner in which the relevant surface coal mining operation is conducted.'' (Emphasis added.) This
is the same standard which is also contained in paragraph (a)(3) of 30 CFR 773.5. The purpose of this standard is to enable:




the regulatory authority *** [to] examine any relationships and the facts surrounding them, such
as informal agreements, personal relationships, and the mining history of the parties in question to determine if
the relationship results in control over a surface coal mining operation. The regulatory authority may also consider
any of the circumstances surrounding a surface coal mining operation to determine control. Such circumstances might
include, for example, the fact that a person has financed the operation, or owns the equipment or the rights to the coal,
or directs on-site operations.






See Preamble to Requirements for Surface Coal Mining and Reclamation Permit Approval; Ownership and Control; Final
Rule, 53 FR 38868 at page 38870 (October 3, 1988). Further, whether a person is ``remote'' in a corporate chain of command
is not the issue under the standard. The issue is whether the totality of the circumstances indicate that the person
had the authority to exercise control over the relevant surface coal mining operation. Such ``authority'' includes
control or the power to control. 

Id., 

at pages 3887038871. The resolution of such issues is necessary for the regulatory authority's analysis of
an ownership or control challenge. Accordingly, requiring a person challenging a presumption of ownership or control
to make such demonstration is appropriate.



Industry commenters proposed that paragraph (c) of proposed 773.26 be modified to provide that a person challenging
the presumption be able to prove that the agency relied upon incorrect facts to support its determination of ownership
or control; that the person subject to the presumption did not have knowledge of the violation, did not authorize the
activity that led to the violation, or did not have direct authority to determine the manner in which surface coal mining
operations were conducted; or that the ownership or control link has been severed.

OSM appreciates the commenters' proposal. Nevertheless, OSM will not adopt the commenters' proposed modifications
for the following reasons.

The provisions of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of proposed 773.26 already contain language providing for a challenger's
proof that the facts relied upon by regulatory authority to make a determination of ownership or control did not or
do not exist. Such language is inclusive of the commenters' proposal that a challenger be allowed to submit proof that
the agency relied upon incorrect facts to support its determination of ownership or control.



