 

June 7, 1994.



Michael London,


P.O. Box 2106, McAllen, Texas 785052106.




Dear Mr. London: I am responding to your letter to Assistant Attorney General Anne Bingaman concerning the proposed
consent decree between the Department of Justice, a number of major airlines and the Airline Tariff Publishing Company
(``ATP''), a computerized fare exchange system. The proposed decree settles a civil antitrust suit in which the Department
alleged that eight major airlines fixed prices and used the ATP system in a way that unnecessarily facilitated coordination
of airline fares. You express concern that the proposed decree's prohibitions on prenotification of fare adjustments
will deprive consumers of information regarding future fare discounts. You also express concern that the Department
may have filed the lawsuit against the airlines without substantial evidence to support its allegations.

In your letter, you state that pre-notification of fare changes enabled you to schedule travel for dates when fares
would be reduced. The proposed decree will not prohibit the airlines from publishing different fares applicable
for travel on different dates, provided the fares are currently available for sale. Thus, you will still be able to
plan your travel for days of the week or months of the year when the airlines charge lower fares.

The decree will prohibit the airlines from disseminating fares that can only be purchased at a later date. In the past,
the airlines used such fares to negotiate and agree upon fare increases or the elimination of discounts. Because these
fares changed frequently during negotiations, and often never became available for sale, they were extremely unreliable
and therefore not useful for consumers planning when to purchase their tickets.

You also suggest that the Department may have acted arbitrarily in its prosecution of the airlines because the government
did not believe that it could prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The Department filed this action because it had
compelling evidence that the airlines used ATP to reach agreements to raise prices and eliminate discounts, in violation
of the Sherman Act, raising prices in thousands of markets and for millions of travelers.

The government's decision whether to prosecute any particular violation of the Sherman Act civilly or criminally
is one that depends on a number of factors. In this case, the government's primary goal was to obtain injunctive relief
that would prevent the airlines from continuing their anticompetitive practices. We also recognized that the airlines'
collusive pricing practices evolved from a system that developed when the airlines were heavily regulated and not
subject to the antitrust laws; indeed, at one time the airlines were required to file fare changes in advance to allow
regulators time to review and disapprove them. That history would have made it considerably more difficult to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the airlines intended to reach price fixing agreements. For these and other reasons,
the Department elected to bring a civil case seeking injunctive rather than punitive relief against the airlines.
In a civil case, the government need only prove that the defendants violated the Sherman Act by a preponderance of the
evidence. The government is confident that it could easily have met that burden at trial.

I hope that this letter responds to your concerns. Thank you for your interest in this matter and in the enforcement
of the antitrust laws.




Sincerely,



<SIGNER>


Roger W. Fones,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Chief, Transportation, Energy and Agriculture Section.

 
</SIGNJOB>
