 

F. Summary of Citgo's Petition for a Treatability Variance 


Citgo submitted a site-specific treatability variance 
petition to EPA on April 13, 1994, and submitted additional 
materials as per EPA's request. The petition requests that EPA 
allow Citgo to continue land disposing the treated sludge 
generated by the remediation of the Surge Pond and to meet 
alternate LDR standards for their F037/F038 nonwastewaters. The 
alternative treatment standards suggested by Citgo are presented 
in table B. 

Citgo made the following arguments as justification for this 
request: 

(1) Citgo claimed that incineration is not an appropriate (technology for this waste because 

(a) the tremendous quantity of wastes generated by this 
remediation exceeds the annual excess capacity available 
nationwide for F037/F038 wastes (Citgo estimated that the eight 
incinerators willing to treat their F037/F038 waste can treat 374 
thousand tons of F037/F038 wastes per year; the Surge Pond 
remediation will generate approximately 427 thousand tons of waste after June 30), 

(b) the metal content of this waste (4,084 ppm reported average) 
is higher than that of typical F037/F038 wastes, such that 
incineration of this waste could release large quantities of metals to the atmosphere, and 

(c) the hazards of transporting the waste long distances for 
offsite incineration exceed the hazards of treating the waste 
onsite and disposing the residuals in the subtitle C landfill 
seven miles from the site. Citgo estimated that transportation 
of 427 thousand tons of waste to offsite incinerators would 
require a total of 24 million highway miles and result in 48 
traffic accidents (24 with a possible release of hazardous material to the environment) and 7 traffic fatalities.


(2) Citgo claimed that cement kiln combustion is inappropriate 
for this waste due to the low BTU content (less than 2,000 BTU/lb) of the waste. 
(3) Citgo claimed that, ``When compared with other treatment 
options, the CITGO approach is clearly the safest for the 
environment and human health.'' 
(4) The company could simply close the impoundment with the waste 
in place, thus doing no treatment at all. 


II. Basis for Proposed Treatability Variance 


A. EPA Evaluation of Citgo's Petition 


After careful evaluation, EPA is proposing to grant a 
treatability variance for the F037 and F038 nonwastewaters 
generated by the remediation of the Surge Pond, subject to the 
conditions described in section II.B. Our basis for proposing to 
grant the petition is described below: 
(1) EPA wants the remediation of the Surge Pond to be 
completed. Although Citgo has stated that they prefer to close 
the Surge Pond by removal of the sludge followed by a risk 
assessment, the closure regulations for interim status surface 
impoundments in 265.228 (52 FR 8708, March 19, 1987, amended 
at 57 FR 3493, Jan. 29, 1992) allow the option of closing the 
impoundment with the waste in place. This would mean that 
several hundred thousands tons of untreated hazardous waste could 
remain indefinitely in an unlined impoundment immediately 
adjacent to and in hydraulic communication with the Calcasieu 
River, several miles upstream from the Sabine National Wildlife 
Refuge. Hazardous waste constituents have already been detected 
in the groundwater collected and analyzed from monitoring wells 
in the vicinity of the Surge Pond. EPA, the authorized state, 
and the company have worked out an arrangement whereby the 
impoundment can be effectively closed and remediated, and the 
sludge securely disposed after treatment. Thus, the alternative 
of closing in place appears to be clearly less desirable than 
partial though substantial treatment of the sludge followed by 
disposal of the treatment residue in a subtitle C MTR landfill. 
EPA supports the ongoing remediation plan, Citgo's choice to 
close the pond by removal of hazardous waste, rather than closing 
with the waste in place. 
(2) As noted, Citgo's remediation plan has been approved by 
Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ). LDEQ has 
also approved a temporary variance to a small source exemption 
for air emissions which establishes operating specifications for 
temperature and residence time for the portable thermal oxidizer 
used to destroy stripped volatile organics. Although regional 
approval of the remediation plan was not required, EPA Region VI 
concurs with this proposed treatability variance and is currently reviewing Citgo's plan for risk based closure
of the Surge Pond. 

(3) EPA agrees that standards which could necessitate 
offsite incineration are not appropriate for this waste, within 
the meaning of 268.44(a). The quantity of waste being generated 
by this remediation exceeds the available incineration capacity 
for F037/F038 wastes. Although the national capacity variance 
for this waste has just expired, the fact remains that offsite 
incineration is not logistically feasible for this large quantity 
of waste. 
(4) The Citgo treatment system achieves oil recovery and 
substantial treatment of some of the regulated constituents. 
Citgo estimates that approximately 16 thousand tons of oil will 
be recovered during the course of this remediation. Waste 
minimization is a high priority for the Agency and activities 
achieving recovery of valuable resources are strongly encouraged. 
In addition, the Citgo treatment system achieves substantial 
reduction of most of the regulated constituents. 
In short, EPA is proposing to grant the variance request 
because the treatment technology that is the basis for BDAT ``is 
not appropriate to the waste'' under 268.44 (a) and (h). The 
treatment technology is not appropriate because of the enormous 
volume of sludge needed to be treated and because requiring those 
standards to be met could result in a net environmental 
detriment. (EPA is convinced that CITGO, for reasons that are 
legally permissible, will choose to close its impoundment with 
hundreds of thousands of tons of sludge left in place.) Under 
these exceptional circumstances, EPA believes that a treatability 
variance can be issued and accordingly is proposing to do so 
here. 
Although EPA is proposing to grant Citgo a treatability 
variance for the F037/F038 wastes contained in and to be removed 
from the Surge Pond, the company made a statement in their 
petition with which the Agency does not agree. In particular, 
the Agency does not agree that the chemical properties of the 
waste make thermal destuction inappropriate for this waste. 
Specifically, EPA does not agree that the metal content of the 
waste is sufficiently high to make the waste nonamenable to 
combustion. 


