 


1. Materials which, without stabilization, would present a near-term (i.e., 
approximately 5 years) risk of increasing worker radiation exposure or 
exposure to hazardous materials by an amount that is not insignificant. 



2. Materials which, without stabilization, would present a near-term risk 
of a release of radioactive or hazardous material to the public or the 
environment that is not insignificant.



3. Materials for which stabilization or use of an alternative storage 
method will, in the near-term, reduce the degree of hazard presented by 
the material in its current form by an amount that is not insignificant. 



4. Material for which stabilization in the near-term would reduce the 
generation of radioactive waste by an amount that is not insignificant. 

DOE intends that decisions regarding which materials merit near-term 
stabilization will be based exclusively on the risk they pose to the safety 
and health of workers or the public, or to the environment. Although DOE 
expects to realize some maintenance related cost savings by stabilizing 
at-risk materials, DOE does not intend to consider economics as a criterion in 
the categorization process. That is, DOE does not propose to process 
materials that DOE determines, after public input, will remain stable until 
decisions regarding disposition can be made, even if it were judged to be cost 
effective to process them in conjunction with materials to be stabilized. 



DOE solicits public comments on the criteria and approach described above. 




Identification of Environmental and Other Issues 





DOE has identified the 
following issues for analysis for proposed and alternative actions in the EIS. 




Environmental Issues 





1. Public and Worker Safety, Health Risk Assessment_Radiological and 
nonradiological impacts, including projected effects on workers and the public 
from normal operations and potential accidents. 



2. Waste Management_The impact on the generation, treatment, storage, 
and disposal of high-level radioactive waste, low-level radioactive waste, 
transuranic (TRU) waste, hazardous waste, and mixed waste on new and existing 
onsite waste management and storage facilities. The EIS will describe the 
types and quantities of waste that would be generated by implementation. It 
will not consider specific waste disposal alternatives (e.g., a comparison of 
the impacts caused by the treatment and interim storage of vitrified 
reprocessing waste with those caused by the treatment and interim storage of 
unprocessed forms). These will be evaluated in the SRS waste management EIS. 



3. Regulatory Compliance_A determination of the status of compliance 
with all applicable Federal, state, and local statutes and regulations; 
required Federal and state environmental consultations and notifications; and 

DOE Orders on waste management, including waste minimization initiatives, and environmental protection. 



4. Air Quality_Potential effects on air quality from radiological and 
nonradiological emissions. 



5. Water Resources_Effects on the quality and the quantity of ground- 
and surface-water resources, including wetlands, and on downstream water 
users. 



6. Onsite Transportation_Impacts on the onsite workers and 
transportation systems resulting from transportation of raw materials, 
supplies, equipment, products, and wastes for both routine transportation and 
accident scenarios. 



7. Socioeconomic_Socioeconomic impacts in the SRS area. 




Related NEPA Reviews





The following is a list of existing or forthcoming NEPA documentation related 
to materials or activities at SRS. 




Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS





DOE will shortly announce its 
intent to prepare an EIS on waste management activities at the SRS. The 
purpose of the EIS is to provide a basis for DOE to select a sitewide 
strategic approach to managing present and future SRS waste generated as a 
result of ongoing operations, environmental restoration activities, 
transition, and decontamination and decommissioning activities. The EIS will 
address, at a minimum, the generation, minimization, treatment, storage, and 
disposal of low-level waste, liquid high-level waste, nonradioactive hazardous 
waste, mixed waste, and transuranic waste. 




