 

The second exception, 222.7(b)(2)(ii) of the proposed rule, recognizes that where the permit or agreement
is issued to a grazing association or district, the members of the association or district must own the requisite base
property and livestock as specified in the term permit or grazing agreement. This is consistent with the intent of
the current rule (222.7) and agency practice as provided in the Forest Service Grazing Permit Administration
Handbook (FSH 2209.13, Chapter 20). Thus, the agency has concluded this provision belongs in the rule.

Under the third exception, 222.7(b)(2)(iii) of the proposed rule, holders of term private land permits would
not be required to own the livestock or base property under Forest Service permit. This is current agency practice
as provided in the Forest Service Manual (FSM 2231.22c). However, it belongs in the rules and, accordingly, is incorporated.


The fourth exception, at G222.7(b)(2)(iv) of the proposed rule, provides that term permit holders for developing
ranges on National Forest System lands in the Eastern States would not be required to own livestock or base property
for the initial permit, but must meet the livestock and base property ownership requirements for permit renewal.
This provision, which is not in the current rule, would allow new livestock operators to get into the livestock business
incrementally. This flexibility is desirable in the Eastern States where the Forest Service administers areas where
vegetation can be better and more economically managed through livestock grazing rather than by spraying, mowing,
or burning.

The fifth exception is found at proposed 222.7(b)(2)(v) and would allow a permittee who disposes or loses control
of all or part of the base property but retains the permit up to one year, to meet base property requirements. The proposed
rule is very similar to the current rule at 222.3(c)(1)(v) but is reworded to clarify its intent and to recognize
that the loss of control of the base property can result from actions other than disposal through sale. 

Proposed 222.7(b)(3) would grant authorized officers authority to impose additional requirements for term
permits including, but not limited to, nonuse of permits and upper limits on the total number of permitted livestock.
This is a continuation of existing authority currently located in 222.3(c)(1)(vi). 



Proposed Section 222.8_Waivers and Escrow Waivers



This section sets out the circumstances where term grazing permits may be waived in favor of another entity, where
escrow waivers may be executed, and the Forest Service role in each. Although escrow waivers have long been allowed
through Forest Service Manual direction, they have not been addressed in the grazing regulations. 

Proposed 222.8(a) would include provisions for the waiver of term grazing permits to the United States in favor
of another entity. The current rule at 222.3(c)(1)(vi)(F) provides for the establishment of conditions where
waived grazing privileges may be confirmed in favor of a new applicant. The proposed rule at 222.8(a)(1) would
include the current conditions established in the Forest Service Manual (FSM 2230) for waiver of term grazing permits
for National Forest System lands in the Western States. 

In addition, the proposed rule at 222.8(a)(2) would provide that an existing term grazing permit for National
Forest System lands in the Eastern States, issued under the noncompetitive procedures of 36 CFR 222.53, may be waived
to the United States in favor of the permittee's spouse or child who acquires title to base property or permitted livestock.
If such a permittee dies and the permit was not waived in favor of the spouse or child, the permit reverts to the United
States and would be competitively offered to other applicants pursuant to 222.5(a)(1). This proposed provision
merely placed into the rule what is the current practice in the Eastern States and clarifies the status of the permit
in event of a permittee's death. 

Under proposed 222.8(a)(3), the holder of a permit for National Forest System Lands in the Eastern States,
issued as a result of the competitive bidding process authorized in the current rule at 36 CFR 222.54, could not waive
a permit. This provision reflects current Forest Service practice in the Eastern States and is necessary to ensure
continuation of the competitive bidding process at 36 CFR 222.54.

Proposed paragraph (b) addresses escrow waivers. The Forest Service has been allowing permittees to execute escrow
waivers in favor of lenders since 1938 under a memorandum of understanding between the Farm Credit Administration
and the Department of Agriculture. That agreement is no longer in effect; however, a new memorandum of understanding
was agreed to by the Forest Service and six western Farm Credit Banks on December 21, 1990.

The current procedures governing escrow waivers are set forth in FSM Chapter 2230, section 2231.82. Under these procedures,
a permittee who mortgages base property or permitted livestock waives all grazing permit privileges (except the
privilege of continuing to graze livestock) to the United States to be held in escrow for a named lender. If the lender
forecloses on the mortgaged property, the lender or a subsequent purchaser who acquires the foreclosed property
has first priority for receipt of a new term grazing permit. This policy would be incorporated in the rules at 222.8(b).



