 

Rather, the proposed regulations attempt to reconcile the purposes underlying DR 7104 and Rule 4.2 with effective
law enforcement. Recognizing the importance of the attorney-client relationship and the desirability of an individual
who is represented by counsel being fully advised by counsel before negotiating legal agreements, the regulations
provide that federal attorneys may not negotiate plea bargains, settlement agreements, immunity agreements or
similar arrangements without the participation or consent of the individual's attorney. In this context, the prosecutor's
superior legal training and specialized knowledge could be used to the detriment of the untutored layperson. Thus,
the regulations comport with the principal purpose of DR 7104 and Rule 4.2 by insisting that the individual's
attorney participate in these types of negotiations. At the same time, the regulations would permit direct contacts
at the preindictment, prearrest investigative stage with any individual, whether or not he or she is represented
by counsel, to inquire about the matters under investigation. The regulations are drafted to conform to the approach
of most federal appellate courts that have considered the matter. See, e.g., 

United States

 v. 

Lopez,

 4 F.3d 1455 (9th Cir. 1993); 

United States

 v. 

Ryans

, 903 F.2d 731 (10th Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 855 (1990); 

United States

 v. 

Fitterer

, 710 F.2d 1328, 1333 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 852 (1983); 

United States

 v. 

Kenny

, 645 F.2d 1323, 1339 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 452 U.S. 920 (1981); and 

United States

 v. 

Lemonakis

, 485 F.2d 941, 95556 (D.C. Cir. 1973), cert. denied, 415 U.S. 989 (1974). The Department believes that public
policy and effective law enforcement would not be served if one could exempt himself or herself from lawful, court-sanctioned
investigative techniques simply by retaining an attorney. The Department believes that it is inappropriate to alter
investigative techniques based upon an individual's financial ability to retain counsel before the point at which
a court would appoint counsel for a person not able to afford counsel. 
The regulations and the accompanying changes to the United States Attorneys' Manual also would give effect to other
important aspects of the bar rules against contacts with represented parties. For example, the regulations would
preclude federal attorneys from disparaging an individual's counsel or from attempting to gain access to attorney-client
confidences or lawful defense strategy. The guidelines contained in the Manual provisions will also make clear that
once an individual is in a likely adversarial situation with the government and has retained an attorney to represent
him or her with respect to the particular subject matter under investigation, the government attorney must take greater
care before making any 

ex parte 

contacts. While the proposed regulations authorize most communications before arrest, the proposed Manual changes
provide that, as a matter of internal policy guidance, federal prosecutors generally should not make overt contacts
with represented targets of investigations. However, the Manual provisions permit overt contacts with a represented
target when initiated by the target; when necessary to prevent death or physical injury; when the relevant investigation
involves ongoing, additional or different crimes from that to which the representation relates; or when a United
States Attorney or an Assistant Attorney General expressly concludes, under all of the circumstances, that the contact
is needed for effective law enforcement. 
Finally, the proposed regulations and Manual provisions also address when a government attorney may communicate
with an employee, officer or director of a represented corporation or organization without the consent of counsel.
The regulations generally prohibit a government attorney from communicating with a current, high-level employee
of a represented organization who participates as a ``decision maker in the determination of the organization's
legal position in the proceeding or investigation of the subject matter'' and the organization has been named as a
defendant in a criminal or civil law enforcement proceeding. The Manual provisions further generally prohibit contacts
with controlling individuals of organizations that have not yet been named as defendants but are targets of federal
criminal or civil law enforcement investigations without the consent of counsel. 
The proposed regulations recognize that state courts and disciplinary bodies continue to play the primary role in
regulating the conduct of all attorneys, including those who work for the federal government. Further, Department
of Justice attorneys continue to be subject to state bar ethical rules except to the limited extent those rules conflict
with lawful federal procedures and practices. As noted above, however, because of the expanded participation of
federal prosecutors in preindictment investigations, DR 7104 and Model Rule 4.2 have inevitably affected
and circumscribed the power of federal law enforcement officials to carry out their legally mandated responsibilities.
State courts and disciplinary committees are not the appropriate final arbiters of the scope of federal policing.
The Department of Justice must assume this role, subject to the Constitution and the laws of the United States. The
new regulations would not supplant state discipline. Rather, the regulations would provide that attorneys who comply
with the new federal rule will be shielded from inconsistent state disciplinary rules. On the other hand, attorneys
who willfully violate the new regulations would continue to be subject to the full measure of state disciplinary jurisdiction.

The Department is confident that, taken together, the proposed regulations, Manual amendments and this supplemental
information will promote the public interest in effective law enforcement conforming to the highest standards of
legal ethics. 


II. Analysis of Comments and Revisions 


A detailed discussion of the comments received following the first publication of the earlier proposal is included
at 58 FR 39976 (July 26, 1993). 




