 

(3) Supported scaffolds and scaffold components shall be inspected for visible defects periodically and after any
occurrence which could affect a scaffold's structural integrity. Suspension scaffolds and scaffold components
shall be inspected for visible defects immediately after installation prior to their first use; periodically thereafter
(preferably before each use); and after any occurrence which could affect a scaffold's structural integrity.

 

This language does not specify who is to perform the inspection or what qualifications that person must possess, nor
does it specify how frequently inspections must occur. The Agency sought public comment in these matters for both
supported and suspension scaffolds in Issue 13 of the proposal. In that issue the Agency stated incorrectly that the
proposed rule required supported scaffolds and scaffold components to be inspected for visible defects prior to
each workshift and after any occurrence which could affect the scaffold's structural integrity. The Agency intended
all scaffolds and scaffold components to be inspected for visible defects prior to each workshift. However, proposed
paragraph 1915.252(d)(3) simply expresses a preference for inspection before each use. The Agency also sought
public comment on whether the scaffold inspector should be an engineer, a qualified person, or a capable person. 
OSHA received three comments (Exs. 61, 63, and 67) in response to Issue 13. Two of these commenters
(Exs. 61 and 63) stated that the proposed rule uses specification-oriented language and is unnecessarily
restrictive, and that a thorough inspection before each workshift would be impossible and expensive. These two commenters
added that existing rule 1915.71(b)(5), which requires that scaffolds be maintained in a safe and secure condition
and that defective components be replaced, is performance-oriented and has caused the industry to implement effective
programs to ensure safe scaffolds. They recommended the retention of existing 1915.71(b)(5), and that proposed
1915.252(d)(3) not be included in the final rule. The other commenter (Ex. 67) stated that ``[s]caffolds
should be inspected by a capable person during and immediately after the system is anchored. Thereafter, the system
should be inspected daily by the employees using the system.'' This commenter added that the proposed frequency of
inspections adequately reflects current shipyard practices. 
OSHA does not believe that proposed 1915.252(d)(3) is unnecessarily restrictive. To the contrary, OSHA is
concerned that proposed 1915.252(d)(3) and existing 1915.71(b)(5) might not adequately address
the hazards associated with the use of unsafe scaffolds. Accordingly, the Agency seeks public comment on the adequacy
of proposed 1915.252(d)(3), and on the appropriateness of replacing proposed 1915.252(d)(3) with
the following language, which is the same as the corresponding proposed requirement for scaffolds used in the construction
industry (51 FR 42706, November 25, 1986) except that ``competent person'' has been changed to ``qualified person''
(see discussion of Item B, above):

 

(3) Scaffolds and scaffold components shall be inspected for visible defects by a qualified person prior to each work
shift, and after any occurrence which could affect a scaffold's structural integrity. 


F. Correction to Proposed 1915.252(b)(18)(iv) 


The word ``not'' was inadvertently dropped from paragraph 1915.252(b)(18)(iv) when proposed subpart N was
published in the 

Federal Register

 (53 FR 48207, November 29, 1988). Due to a typographic error, proposed 1915.252(b)(18)(iv) read as follows:




(iv) Counterweights shall be removed from a scaffold until the scaffold is disassembled.

 

The preamble discussion for proposed 1915.252(b)(18)(iv) (53 FR 48188) clearly states that OSHA intended
to prohibit the removal of counterweights until the scaffold is disassembled. In addition, the Agency notes that
the corresponding provision in proposed part 1926, subpart L (1926.451(b)(18)(iv)) states that ``counterweights
shall not be removed***.'' Proposed paragraph 1915.252(b)(18)(iv) should have
read as follows:

 

(iv) Counterweights shall 

not

 be removed from a scaffold until the scaffold is disassembled (emphasis added).

 

OSHA seeks public comment on the appropriateness of the proposed provision as corrected. 


H. Performance of Electric Welding Operations From Suspension Scaffolds 


OSHA raised the issue of the regulation of electric welding on suspension scaffolds in Issue 2 of the NPRM (53 FR 46197).
The Agency asked for input on six precautions that might reduce the possibility of the welding current arcing through
the wire rope when welding is performed by employees on suspension scaffolds. OSHA received only one response to Issue
2. That commenter (Ex. 67) stated that the use of welding equipment on suspended platforms has not caused any
safety hazards. 
On the issue of welding work performed while on scaffolds, OSHA seeks public comment on the following provisions that
are being considered for inclusion in the final rule. These requirements are the same as those found in section 6.2.9
of ANSI A10.81988 except that in paragraph (b) the term ``unit'' has been changed to ``scaffold'' so that the
language clearly indicates the Agency's intent.

 

To reduce the possibility of the welding current arcing through the suspension wire rope during the course of welding
from suspension scaffolds, the following precautions shall be taken: 
(a) An insulated thimble shall be used to attach each suspension wire rope to its hanging support (such as cornice hook
or outrigger). Excess suspension wire rope and any additional independent lines from grounding shall be insulated.

(b) The suspension wire rope shall be covered with insulating materials at least 4 feet (1.22 m) above the hoist. In
the event a tail line exists below the hoist, it shall be insulated to prevent contact with the platform. The portion
of the tail line that hangs free below the scaffold shall be guided or retained, or both, so that it does not become grounded.

(c) Each hoist shall be covered with protective cover made from insulating materials. 
(d) In addition to a work lead attachment required by the welding process, a grounding conductor shall be connected
from the scaffold to the structure. The size of this conductor shall be equal to or greater than the size of the welding
process work lead and shall not be in series with the welding process or the work piece. 
(e) If the scaffold grounding lead is disconnected at any time, the welding machine shall be shut off. 




