 

Official functions falling within the representation and reception fund category would be activities of the FCA
Board or of individual members of the Board, acting in their official capacity as representatives of the FCA, that
involve extending official courtesies to public and foreign dignitaries on occasions associated with the mission
of FCA. Expenses for such activities could include, for example:
Food and beverages, either formal meals, snacks or refreshments; receptions; banquets; catering services; tips
and gratuities; invitations; rental of facilities and incidental equipment; and supplies and services that are
incurred in hosting such functions.
Typical examples of proper expenditures of FCA representation and reception funds include:
(a) The FCA Board hosting an FCA-sponsored reception for non-Government personnel, e.g., presidents and chief executive
officers of Farm Credit System associations; or
(b) A Board member hosting and paying for the lunch of a representative of the Farm Credit Council when the purpose of
the lunch is to discuss Farm Credit business.
No expenditure of representation and reception funds may be made for activities relating solely to personal entertainment,
such as attendance at a sporting event or a concert or for expenditures generally regarded as personal obligations.
Before expenditures for official representation and reception expenses are made by the FCA Board or individual members
of the Board, approval shall be obtained from the Chairman of the Board. FCA006 form, ``Official Representation
and Reception Expense,'' shall be submitted, through the Secretary to the Board, to the Chairman for approval. After
approval by the Chairman, the Secretary to the Board will submit the request to the FCA Certifying Official for final
approval. If circumstances necessitate expenditures for official representation and reception expenses without
prior approval by the chairman, form FCA006 shall be submitted, through the Secretary to the Board, to the Chairman
with an attached explanation of why prior approval could not be obtained. If the expenditure is not approved by the
Chairman or the FCA Certifying Official, the party making the expenditure will be responsible for all costs associated
with the expenditure.


Article IX


Amendments


Section 1


The business of the Board shall be transacted in accordance with these Rules as the same may be amended from time to time:
Provided, however, that upon agreement of at least two (2) Members convened in a duly called meeting, the Rules may
be waived in any particular instance, except that action may be taken on items at a Special Meeting only in accordance
with Article V, Section 3(b), hereof.


Section 2


These Rules may be changed or amended by the concurring vote of at least two (2) Members upon notice of the proposed change
or amendment's having been given at least thirty (30) days before such vote.


