 

Based on forecasted water supplies and reservoir storage conditions in February and March 1993, the Bureau met the
reasonable and prudent alternative requirement to maintain water temperatures at or below 56 degrees Fahrenheit
throughout the entire winter-run chinook salmon spawning and incubation season from Keswick Dam to Bend Bridge.
The CDFG conducted numerous aerial surveys of redd (nests) counts during the winter-run chinook spawning period
and observed an unusually large number of redds (in proportion to the estimated run size) due to excellent viewing
conditions in the river. Based on these surveys, virtually all redds were observed in the vicinity of Redding well
upstream from Ball's Ferry. Two redds were observed between Ball's Ferry and the Bend Bridge temperature control
point, and only a single redd was observed below Bend Bridge (immediately downstream from the Red Bluff Diversion
Dam). As a result of the temperature control maintained by the Bureau and the distribution of spawners in the river,
the incremental impact of temperature on winter-run chinook salmon egg and juvenile survival was minimal in 1993.
In addition to providing temperature control during the 1993 spawning, incubation, and rearing season, the Bureau's
operations in 1993 resulted in an end-of-water-year Shasta Reservoir storage (in excess of 3.0 million acre-feet)
that far exceeded the requirements of the reasonable and prudent alternative. 
The incidental take statement issued with the February 1993, long-term CVP biological opinion also contains specific
measures that must be implemented to minimize the effects of Shasta and Keswick Dam operations on winter-run chinook
salmon incidental take. These measures include (1) the continuation and expansion of temperature monitoring in
the upper Sacramento River to ensure compliance with the temperature criteria, (2) NMFS review of the Bureau's proposed
water allocation plans before delivery commitments are made each year to determine their potential effects on upper
river water temperatures, and (3) monitoring in the upper river when Keswick Dam releases are reduced to prevent the
stranding of juvenile winter-run chinook salmon. These measures were implemented by the Bureau as required by the
incidental take statement. 
Spawning habitat utilized by winter-run chinook salmon in the Sacramento River has also been degraded by decreases
in the rate of replenishment for gravel suitable for spawning (NMFS 1992c). In 1990, the California Department of
Water Resources placed 100,000 cubic yards of spawning gravel in the upper Sacramento River between Salt Creek and
Clear Creek to restore degraded spawning riffles in areas of the river used by winter-run chinook salmon. The FWS has
been evaluating these gravel restoration efforts and issued progress reports in 1992 and 1993. Thus far, the majority
of the gravel remains where it was originally placed because flows have not reached rates great enough to disperse
it in the upper river. Studies by the FWS are expected to continue through at least 1993 with a final report on the program
expected in 1994. 
Adult winter-run chinook salmon can also be adversely impacted by operation of the Keswick Dam stilling basin. Overflow
of water from the stilling basin during operation of the spillway attracts upstream migrating adult salmon into the
basin at the base of the Dam where they become trapped. The CDFG and FWS have conducted fish rescue operations at the
stilling basin and removed hundreds of trapped salmon. Until the facility is structurally modified to allow fish
free passage back to the river, it is likely that some adult winter-run chinook salmon will be lost. To remedy this long-standing
problem, the incidental take statement issued with NMFS' February 12, 1993, biological opinion requires the Bureau
to structurally modify the stilling basin by no later than December 31, 1993, so that adult winter-run chinook salmon
will be able to freely pass from the basin back into the Sacramento River. NMFS and the Bureau have been meeting to discuss
and evaluate alternative methods of correcting the problems with the stilling basin. 


Red Bluff Diversion Dam


Another serious habitat concern for winter-run chinook salmon is the impediment to adult upstream migration caused
by the Bureau's operation of this dam on the Sacramento River. Operation of the dam and the associated Tehama-Colusa
Canal also adversely impacts juvenile winter-run chinook salmon migrating downstream past the facility. Impacts
of the dam and its operations are discussed in the February 12, 1993, biological opinion addressing long-term operations
of the Central Valley and State Water Projects. 
The 1993 biological opinion also includes specific measures to minimize the impact of gate operations at Red Bluff
Diversion Dam on both the upstream passage of adult winter-run chinook salmon and the downstream passage of juveniles.
These measures require the Bureau to maintain the dam gates in the raised position at least through April 30, 1993,
and from November 1, 1993, through at least April 30, 1994. After the Bureau's proposed pilot pumping project is operational
in 1994, the Bureau must raise the dam gates from September 15 through at least May 14 in all subsequent years. Operation
of dam gates in accordance with this schedule is expected to provide unimpeded access to upper river spawning habitat
for most migrating adults and substantially reduce losses of downstream migrating juveniles due to predation. The
Bureau maintained the dam gates in the raised position through April 30, 1993. In a effort to provide additional protection
for outmigrating juveniles in 1993, the 
Bureau raised the dam gates in mid-October rather than on November 1 as required by the reasonable and prudent alternative.






