 



Note: 

The following Appendix will not appear in the Code of Federal Regulations. 



Appendix A 



Form Approved OMB No. 19020157; FERC Form No. 592 


Marketing Affiliates of Interstate Pipelines
Record Formats 



Revised December 7, 1993.



Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 66.2 hours per year per respondent,
including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate
or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing the burden, to each of the
following: 




Michael Miller,
 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
825 North Capitol Street, NE., 
Washington, DC 20426; 

Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, 
Office of Management and Budget, 
Washington, DC 20503, 
Attention: Desk Officer for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.



Table of Contents 



General Information 



I Purpose 

II Who must Comply 

III How to Comply 

IV Where to Submit 



General Instructions 

Specific Instructions 

Schedules: Marketing Affiliates of Interstate Pipelines, Schedule X1 



(1) The Header Record 

(2) The Transportation/Storage Request Record 

(3) The Transportation Discounted Rate Record 

(4) The Storage Discounted Rate Record 

(5) The Narrative Record 

(6) The Footnotes Record 



General Information 



I. Purpose



The information required is to support the monitoring of activities of pipeline marketing affiliates (which includes
holders of subpart J of part 284 blanket sales certificates) so as to deter undue discrimination by pipeline companies
in favor of marketing affiliates, and to prevent any harassment of non-affiliates. 



II. Who Must Comply



All interstate natural gas pipeline companies that 

&bull;Transport natural gas for others pursuant to subparts B or G of part 284 

&bull;Are affiliated in any way with a natural gas marketing or brokering entity, as that term is defined in 18 CFR 161.2,
and 

&bull;Conduct transportation transactions with an affiliate 




must maintain the requisite information for interruptible transportation service as specified in the FERC Form
No. 592 and in the manner prescribed herein. 



III. How to Comply 



A. Affiliate Data 



The required Form No. 592 information for interruptible transportation/storage service must be publicly available
on an electronic bulletin board (EBB) which satisfies the pipeline's obligations under Order No. 636. This Form No.
592 data/information is also required to be downloadable in ASCII flat files conforming with the specifications
of these instructions and record formats. 

The requirement for back-up, archive, and retrieval of the Form No. 592 interruptible transportation/storage information
on the EBB is the same as for information posted pursuant to 284.8(b)(4). Each affiliate interruptible transportation/storage
transaction must be posted for a 90 day period. EBB functionality shall be provided to permit users to extract currently
posted Form No. 592 data, for one or more months, and to download a flat file containing this material formatted in accordance
with these instructions. 



B. Affiliate and Nonaffiliate Data 



Pipelines must have the capability to create flat files containing the Form No. 592 interruptible transportation/storage
information, for a specified time period, for both pipeline affiliates and nonaffiliates. For discovery, the Commission
may require pipelines to submit these Form No. 592 flat files for both affiliates and nonaffiliates on 9-track tape
reel(s), 18-track tape cartridges(s), or on computer diskette(s). 

The pipeline may also be requested to provide one paper copy of the information submitted on the magnetic tape(s) or
diskette(s) formatted so as to assist Commission staff in reading the company's flat files. The paper copy, if requested,
must cover the same time period as the flat files submitted on the magnetic tape(s) or diskette(s). 



IV. Where to Submit



(1) Any required submission should be addressed to: Office of the Secretary, 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
825 N. Capitol Street, NE., 
Washington, DC 20426.

(2) Hand deliveries can be made to: 
Office of the Secretary, 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
room 3110, 
825 N. Capitol Street, NE., 
Washington, DC 20426.




