 

Symptom checklists are used in epidemiologic research to identify the pattern of 
subjective complaints, which can be used to guide the selection of objective assessment 
methods. The distribution of symptoms can be correlated with indices of exposure to 
determine if particular symptoms are more prevalent in exposed persons (Sjogren et al., 
1990). 
Self-report data are notable for biases that may influence them; these biases are well 
known in epidemiology, clinical practice, and social science. Even in the most superficial of 
questions, respondents may consciously or unknowingly bias the answer to fit what they 
believe to be the examiner's expectations. Details of objective events or subjective states are 
subject to alteration; recall and reporting of remembered occurrences may be biased to fit 
interpretations and expectations. The socioeconomic status, gender, and affiliation of the 
tester also have been identified as biasing variables. Bias occurs when information is 
requested about behaviors, beliefs, or feelings believed by the respondent to be socially 
undesirable or when reinforcement contingencies (e.g., litigation) strongly favor selective 
reporting. 
Biases in self-report data can be reduced by making the questionnaire anonymous or 
highly confidential; objective data can be used to validate self-reports. Ethnographic 
observations, objective measurement of behavior, biologic samples, and the observations of 
significant others are employed to validate self-report data. Consistent descriptions of events 
by several persons lend credence to the reliability of the report. Many clinical interviews 
and self-report assessment instruments include some mechanisms for detecting self-report 
bias, either by looking for endorsement of improbable behaviors, or by examining the 
consistency of information gathered in several ways or from several sources. Concordance 
among biologic indices, observations, and physical examinations increases the judged validity 
of self-reports. 


3.3.6.1. Mood scales. 


Changes in mood and emotionality can be consequences of 
neurotoxicity. For example, case reports have identified mood changes from exposure to 
mercury, lead, solvents, and organophosphate insecticides. The Taylor Manifest Anxiety 
Scale and the Profile of Mood States (POMS) are standardized self-report assessment 
instruments for which there is some evidence of sensitivity to chemical insult. 
The POMS, a component of the Neurobehavioral Core Test Battery, is a self-report 
measure that asks respondents to use a 5-point scale to rate the magnitude of 65 subjective 
states, such as ``tense,'' ``relaxed,'' ``hopeless,'' ``guilty,'' etc., that they have experienced 
within the past week. The responses are scored according to six mood factors, and a Total 
Mood Disturbance Score also may be calculated. Liang et al. (1990) used the POMS to 
evaluate lead-exposed workers (mean blood lead concentration of 41 

m

g/dL) from a battery 
plant and a control group from a fabric-weaving manufacturer. Exposed workers were 
significantly higher on tension, depression, anger, fatigue, and confusion scales. 
Mood scales were developed to aid in assessment of psychological disorders, such as 
depression, and to track treatment response. In addition, mood is modulated by metabolic 
and endocrine variables in health and disease and can change rapidly in response to 
interpersonal, workplace, and environmental events. The large number of nonchemical 
variables and the lability of mood make inclusion of carefully selected controls essential in 
using affect as an endpoint in neurotoxicity research. 
The validity of mood scales may be limited to the specific populations in which the 
validity studies were performed. As characterizations of internal states, the meaning of the 
descriptors in the POMS established for one culture may not be the same as the meaning of 
that concept or term in other cultures or in other language systems. There may be variations 
in interpretation of the terms by respondents across English-speaking subcultures, perhaps as 
a function of education or the size of the verbal community. While these differences may 
not impede a global clinical interpretation, the reduction in generalizability across study 
populations may be sufficient to decrease the usefulness of subjective scales in quantitative 
neurotoxicity risk assessment. 


3.3.6.2. Personality scales. 


The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), the 
Cattell 16 PF, and the Eysenck Personality Inventory have occasionally been used in 
neurotoxicity research. Exposed and nonexposed groups have differed on several scales 
derived from these standardized questionnaires. The diagnostic power of the MMPI, for 
example, is not in the individual scales but in the pattern of scores on the 10 clinical and 3 
validity scales. Because interpretation of the MMPI requires a trained diagnostician with 
experience in the population of interest, it is less likely to be useful in quantitative 
neurotoxicity assessment. 


3.4. Approaches to Neurotoxicity Assessment 





