 

In response to the suggested replacement of the word ``crush'' with the word ``chop'' in the proposed amendment of
the definition of meat, i.e., product derived from advanced meat/bone separators that ``do not crush, grind, or pulverize
bones'' to remove adhering muscle tissue, FSIS has concluded that ``crush'' is a more appropriate word. Crushing
involves altering or destroying structure and, thus, is the action which must be avoided in order for bones to emerge
essentially intact and in natural physical conformation from the advanced machinery. Therefore, the amendment
to the definition of meat to include as ``meat,'' product derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and
recovery systems remains as proposed. 



2. Calcium Content Criteria 



The proposal to amend the definition of meat to include product derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery
and recovery systems included criteria on maximum calcium content, as a measure of bone solids. A maximum calcium
content, as a measure of bone solids, of not more than 0.15 percent or 150 mg/100 gm of product (within a tolerance of
0.03 percent or 30 mg) was proposed. This equates to a bone solids content of 0.6 percent. 

FSIS has determined that a maximum calcium content restriction for meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation

and recovery systems is warranted. Because bones are composed primarily of calcium, calcium content is an indicator
that the advanced meat/bone separation operation is in control and that the bones with adhering tissue are not ground,
crushed, or pulverized during the process of removing the tissue from the bones. As such, by restricting the calcium
content of the product resulting from the advanced meat/bone separation and recovery systems, in combination with
the requirement that bones emerge from the advanced meat/bone separation systems essentially intact, there is an
assurance that the product derived from the advanced systems is comparable to ``meat'' derived by traditional means,
including that resulting from the use of mechanical knives. Moreover, calcium content criteria provides assurance
that the meat derived from the advanced systems is consistent with consumer expectations of ``meat,'' e.g., beef
trimmings, as traditionally defined, that is used to formulate further processed meat food products. 

FSIS has also concluded that the proposed maximum calcium content for meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation
and recovery systems is supported by data that reflect its comparability with meat produced by hand-deboning techniques
and other mechanical means of removing meat from bone that do not involve crushing, grinding, or pulverizing bone.
The maximum calcium content reflects what is achievable when good manufacturing practices (GMP's) are followed.
Additionally, the criteria reflect the expected statistical variability attributed to analytical methodology
for determining calcium. 
These data were available for public inspection during the comment period. The criteria on which these data are based
will assure that the meat derived from the advanced systems is both consistent with consumer expectations of ``meat,''
e.g., beef trimmings, and comparable to ``meat,'' as traditionally defined, that is used to formulate further processed
meat food products. 

In response to the suggestions that the criteria be changed to a calcium content of 235 mg/100 gm or a calcium content
of 250 mg/100 gm (i.e., 1 percent bone solids content), these comments were not supported by data. These values were
considered reasonable by the commenters because they relate to the current allowance for the maximum bone solids
content permitted in boneless poultry. However, FSIS believes that because there are inherent physical and compositional
differences between the bones from poultry and bones from livestock species, one calcium criteria cannot be applied
to both types of animals. The calcium criteria FSIS is adopting here and for mechanically separated poultry reflect
these differences and what FSIS considers achievable when the respective technologies are applied in accordance
with GMP's. Therefore, FSIS is maintaining the calcium criteria of 150 mg/100 mg of product (within a tolerance of
30 mg), as proposed. 



3. Protein Quality 



FSIS agrees with the commenters' views regarding the lack of need for a mandated protein quality requirement for the
meat derived from the advanced meat/bone separation machinery. 

In the proposed rule, FSIS proposed that meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation systems and recovery systems
meet a minimum protein quality requirement, i.e., a protein digestibility corrected amino acid score of not less
than 40 expressed as a percent or the alternative measurement of essential amino acids being at least 33 percent of
the total 17 amino acids present. FSIS has concluded that the lack of the need for a protein quality requirement is founded
on scientific literature provided and cited by comments from academia and statements made by other commenters regarding
the status of the quality of protein in diets of individuals in the U.S. with which FSIS agrees. According to scientific
literature,

11

 there has not been an indication of health problems identified with protein quality_consumption of enough high-quality
protein by humans in the U.S. is not a problem. In the preamble of the final nutrition labeling regulations, both FSIS
and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) stated that current evidence suggests that the diet typically consumed
in the U.S. provides for an adequate protein intake of sufficiently high quality to meet the nutritional needs of adults
and children 4 or more years of age (58 FR 632 and 2079). Furthermore, because there are no outstanding health implications
requiring the establishment of protein quality criteria for food products, in general, it would be unnecessary to
require such criteria for a specific product, viz., red meat. Therefore, FSIS is removing its proposed provision
for a protein quality requirement which would include the requirement for identifying product as ``(Species) fat''
and ``(Species) connective tissue.'' 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


11

</FOOTNAME>
Public comment, including attached research article, submitted by R.A. Field, University of Wyoming, is available
for review in the FSIS Docket Clerk's office. 
 

</FOOTNOTE>

