 

At the present time, the designation of F/FAs encompasses 
both leaded and unleaded gasoline F/FAs and diesel


F/FAs produced 
and commercially distributed for use in motor vehicles.
 F/FAs 
intended only for off-road use (e.g., farm and construction 
equipment, aircraft, boats, railroad engines) are not currently 
designated to be registered, and thus are not subject to the 
requirements of today's rule. However, if off-road F/FAs become 
designated in the future (according to provisions under CAA 
section 213), this rule will be modified, as needed, to cover 
them as well. 



While the designated F/FAs include leaded gasoline 
formulations, CAA section 211(n) provides that ``after December 
31, 1995 it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for 
sale, supply, offer for supply, dispense, transport, or introduce 
into commerce, for use as fuel in any motor vehicle (as defined 
in section 7554(a) of this title) any gasoline which contains 
lead or lead additives.'' Because of the upcoming ban of leaded 
F/FAs, compliance with the requirements in today's rule will be 
superfluous for manufacturers of leaded products. Thus, the 
leaded fuel family has been deleted from this final rule. 

While alternative fuels and their additives are currently on 
the market, they are not yet designated and thus not yet required 
to be registered. However, because they are currently used and 
EPA contemplates their future designation, this final rule 
includes provisions for their registration and testing. The 
alternative fuels for which provisions are included are: 
methanol, ethanol, compressed natural gas (CNG), liquified 
natural gas (LNG), and liquified petroleum gas (LPG). EPA is 
currently developing the proposal for the designation of these 
alternative fuels and their additives. In that proposal, EPA 
currently intends to propose to set an effective date for the 
final designation rule far enough in the future so that these 
F/FAs could complete whatever pre-registration testing would be 
required prior to the time they would be required to be 
registered. EPA currently believes the delay of the effective 
date of the designation rule would be justified by the need to 
minimize disruptions in an existing market for alternative F/FAs. 

This rule contains a number of special provisions which 
reduce or modify the program's requirements for certain 
manufacturers or certain classes of products. Such special 
provisions apply to small businesses (as defined in this rule) 
and manufacturers of experimental F/FAs, relabeled products, and 
aerosols. These provisions are described in Section X of this 
preamble. 



B. Health Evaluation Requirements 



The testing program established in this rule focuses on the 
identification and evaluation of potential adverse health effects 
associated with inhalation exposure to F/FA emissions. The Tier 
2 testing program of this rule addresses, in addition to the 
areas of inquiry mandated by the statute (carcinogenicity, 
teratogenicity, and mutagenicity), specific assessments designed 
to detect potential pulmonary, neurotoxic, and general 
reproductive effects of F/FA emissions. 

In the NPRM, short-term (42-day) tests were proposed under 
Tier 2 to address each of the health effect endpoints described 
above. However, in response to public commentary and EPA's own 
analysis, the Tier 2 testing requirements have been modified in 
this final rule to enhance the efficiency and feasibility of the 
program. Today's rule uses a comprehensive 90-day subchronic 
inhalation protocol and ancillary tests to examine general 
systemic and organ toxicity (including pulmonary toxicity), as 
well as the specific areas of concern described above. 

These evaluations require the exposure of laboratory animals 
to the whole emissions of F/FAs. Tier 2 tests are to be 
conducted for both combustion and (when applicable) evaporative 
emissions. The subchronic inhalation protocol allows the 
examination of specific endpoints within the 90-day testing 
framework. For example, pulmonary and neurotoxic effects are 
examined in conjunction with the subchronic study standard 
histopathological requirements. The neurotoxicity assessment 
also includes a biochemical assay to measure the level of glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Coordinated with the 90-day 
study is a battery of three assays used in the evaluation of 
carcinogenicity and mutagenicity: the in 

vitro 

Salmonella assay, 
the 

in vivo 

micronucleus assay, and the 

in vivo

 sister chromatid 
exchange assay. A fertility assessment that looks at both 
reproductive and teratogenic effects is also coordinated with the 
general toxicity study. The assessment for reproductive effects 
involves the mating of exposed animals, the measurement of 
reproductive cycles, and the histopathology of male and female 
reproductive organs. The teratogenic assessment requires the 
exposure of pregnant females to F/FA emissions and the subsequent 
examination of the uterus and its contents just prior to the 
normal time of parturition. 

In addition to the evaluation of the health effects 
described above, EPA retains the authority under Tier 3 to 
require additional testing on a case-by-case basis on those 
endpoints evaluated under Tier 2 and/or on other endpoints of 
concern. Further discussion about the specific requirements of 
Tiers 1, 2, and 3 is provided in Sections VIIIX. 





