 







<USDEPT>NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>Florida Power Corp.; Environmental Assessment and Finding of No Significant Impact</DOCTITLE>




<RINDOCK>Docket No. 50302</RINDOCK>



The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is considering issuance of an exemption from certain requirements
of its regulations to Facility Operating License No. DPR72, issued to Florida Power Corporation, (the licensee),
for operation of the Crystal River Unit 3 Nuclear Generating Plant, located in Citrus County, Florida.



Environmental Assessment



Identification of Proposed Action:



The proposed action is in accordance with the licensee's application dated June 7, 1993, as supplemented March 28,
1994, for exemption from certain requirements of Title 10 Code of Federal Regulations Part 50 (10 CFR 50), Appendix
R, ``Fire Protection Program for Nuclear Power Facilities Operating Prior to January 1, 1979,'' Section III. 0, ``Oil
collection system for reactor coolant pump.'' The exemption would allow installation of a new reactor coolant pump
motor with an oil collection system which is capable of collecting oil leakage from all potential pressurized and
unpressurized leakage sites except for four potential oil leakage sites. The four potential leakage sites are: the
anti-reverse device (ARD) vents, upper oil supply lines from the lift pump to the ARD, lower motor leak detection system
piping, and lower guide bearing thermocouple wells.



The Need for the Proposed Action:



10 CFR 50, Appendix A, ``General Design Criteria for Nuclear Power Plants,'' Criterion 3, ``Fire protection,'' specifies
that ``Structures, systems, and components important to safety shall be designed and located to minimize, consistent
with other safety requirements, the probability and effect of fires and explosions.'' 10 CFR 50, Appendix R, sets
forth fire protection features required to satisfy the general design Criterion 3 of the Commission's regulations.
Pursuant to 10 CFR 50, Appendix R, Section III. 0, the RCP shall be equipped with an oil collection system which ``***
shall be capable of collecting lube oil from all potential pressurized and unpressurized leakage sites in the reactor
coolant pump lube oil systems.''

As part of its design improvements program to enhance motor reliability and simplify maintenance activities, the
licensee proposed to replace the existing RCP motors with a new motor and implement, a re-designed RCP lube oil system.
As a result of physical interferences and other design difficulties, four specific sites in the RCP motor lube oil
system could not accommodate an oil collection system for collecting potential oil leakage. An exemption from 10
CFR 50, Appendix R, Section III. 0, is required to permit the four specific sites in the RCP lube oil systems without
an oil collection system, and thus, exclude them from leakage protection.



Environmental Impacts of the Proposed Action



The Commission has completed its evaluation of the licensee's application.

Section III. 0 of Appendix R to 10 CFR Part 50 states that: ``The oil collection system shall be so designed, engineered,
and installed that failure will not lead to fire during normal or design basis accident conditions and that there is
reasonable assurance that the system will withstand the Safe Shutdown Earthquake [SSE]. Such collection systems
shall be capable of collecting lube oil from all potential pressurized and unpressurized leakage sites in the reactor
coolant pump lube oil systems. Leakage shall be collected and drained to a vented closed container that can hold the
entire lube oil system inventory.''

The RCP motor lube oil system, with its pumps and associated piping, supplies oil to several parts of the RCP. The existing
RCP lube oil system includes a high pressure and an induced flow system. The high pressure system consists of two independent
pumps, and associated piping, and supplies oil, among other components, to the ARD. The induced flow system is driven
by the rotation of the RCP motor and provides lube oil to the thrust bearings, guide bearings, and to the ARD.

The new oil lubricating system would contain approximately 200 gallons of oil and would include several design features
such as spray shields, series of drip and drain pans and piping, and a lube oil collection system tank. The new system
eliminated one of the two lift pumps and its components which should result in a decrease in the number of potential
leakage sites. The oil collection system would be capable of collecting lube oil from all possible pressurized and
unpressurized leak sites except for the four specific locations. Of the four potential leakage sites, ARD vents and
lower RCP motor leak detection system piping do not contain oil under routine operating conditions. The upper oil
supply lines from the lift pump to the ARD are pressurized only during a brief period of motor startups and shutdowns.
The lower guide bearing thermocouple wells are passive in nature. Additionally, in the new design, vents would be
equipped with demisters and filters to prevent lube oil mist from escaping to the atmosphere. If leakage were to occur
during normal plant operations, the oil would channel to the drain pan. Any lube oil leak which may not have been fully
captured could potentially run down the RCP motor onto hot Reactor Coolant System surfaces. However, the flammability
characteristics of the oil, flashpoint of 452 
&cir;F, and an auto ignition temperature of 500 
&cir;F  7 
&cir;F, that would be used in the lube oil system, reduce the likelihood that the oil will readily ignite upon coming
in contact with hot RCS piping surfaces. Additionally, if the oil leak became ignited, the fire would be localized
in the area of the leakage and detected by the thermal fire detectors.

Fire protection features for the RCP motors include three temperature heat detectors with 190 
&cir;F setpoints located over each RCP. Any localized fire in the area due to oil leakage would be detected by the thermal
fire detectors and would provide an alarm function in both the reactor building and annunciate in the main control
room. Additional indications of a potential RCP fire would also be provided by control room alarms on low level oil,
low oil pressure or high vibrations. If an RCP fire alarm is received in the main control room, it is expected that the
control room operators would evaluate any alarm associated with the RCP and its lube oil system and initiate fire brigade
entry into the reactor building to investigate and fight the fire. The reactor building is equipped with an internal
firefighting standpipe hose station system and fire extinguishers are appropriately distributed throughout the
structure. RCP firefighting would be accomplished by using either portable fire extinguishers or water from a hose
stream or a combination of both. Access to the four RCPs for firefighting can be accomplished by making entry into the
``D'' rings.


