 

c. 

Wastes From the Production of Tetrabromobisphenol-A_

i. Solids. 
The solid wastes generated from the tetrabromobisphenol A process consist of spilled product and floor sweepings
from the production area. This material currently is managed in Subtitle C facilities. About 150 tons of this waste
are generated annually. Bisphenol-A is manufactured by condensation of phenol and acetone. As a result, commercial
grade bisphenol-A may contain variable low levels of phenol and, therefore, the brominated material is expected
to contain some brominated phenols. Some of these will co-precipitate with the product during the process and be incorporated
into the solid product. 

At present, the Agency has insufficient information to characterize the amount of the brominated phenols (including
tetrabromobisphenol-A) in the product or their leachability from the product matrix. EPA requests any information
on the amount of brominated phenols in the product and their leachability from the product matrix. At this time, the
Agency also does not have information on the toxicity of tetrabromobisphenol A, and requests any information commenters
may have on its toxicology, including the existence of any toxicological analogues for tetrabromobisphenol A. 

Record sampling of an on-site landfill at one plant where these solids were formerly disposed for a number of years
showed the absence of any brominated materials in the landfill leachate. Given the lack of adequate information to
perform a risk analysis at this time, the Agency is concerned about being conclusive about the potential hazard of
this waste stream and its potential to migrate to ground water if managed in an unlined landfill. The Agency proposes
to defer for this waste stream a listing determination and requests submission of both characterization and toxicological
data, if available. EPA will evaluate carefully all public comments and information received in response to this
notice. Particular attention will be paid to any data submitted which tend to either support or refute a finding of
risk to human health and the environment from wastes from the production of tetrabromobisphenol A. Based on comments
received, including any data, EPA may choose, rather than deferring, to promulgate a final determination to either
list or not list tetrabromobisphenol A waste as a hazardous waste under RCRA. 

ii. Wastewaters. Wastewaters from the manufacture of tetrabromobisphenol A are already listed and carry the hazardous
waste code of K131. Methyl bromide and tetrabromobisphenol A are produced in the same process. Process wastewater
originates from the distillation step where methyl bromide is recovered. The Agency feels that no further action
is needed for the waste stream. 

d. 

Wastes From the Production of Octabromodiphenyl Oxide._

i. Solids. 
Solid wastes such as filter cakes typically are disposed of in landfills. This has been the practice of the major organobromine
chemicals manufacturers for many years. Currently, these wastes are being shipped to Subtitle C hazardous waste
facilities. However, it would be possible for the generators to change their disposal practices and direct these
materials to Subtitle D landfills. The quantities of these wastes generated are not de minimis as was the case for dibromomethane
solid wastes. Toluene is present in filter cakes from the production of octabromodiphenyl oxide. To evaluate the
potential risks associated with filter cake containing toluene, EPA applied the Agency's Organic Leachate Model
(51 FR 27062, April 29, 1986) to estimate the maximum amounts of toluene that would be expected to leach from the filter
cake in an open landfill environment. The Agency also sampled the on-site landfill at one production site where some
of this waste was disposed. The sampling of the landfill leachate did not detect any toluene present. The toluene concentrations
in the filter cake were used as input to the Agency's Composite Model for Landfills (56 FR 32993, July 18, 1991) to estimate
high-end (95th percentile) concentrations of toluene in a hypothetical receptor well. The hypothetical well concentrations
derived from this analysis are about one order of magnitude below the Maximum Concentration Level (MCL) for toluene
promulgated by regulation under the Safe Drinking Water Act. The formulae used and a more detailed discussion of the
application of these models to the waste samples can be found in the Background Document, available in the RCRA public
docket. See 

ADDRESSES

 section. Because the modelled leachate levels are below acceptable drinking water levels, EPA does not believe that
toluene-containing filter cake wastes generated in the production of octabromodiphenyl oxide pose a threat to human
health and the environment; thus, the Agency proposes not to list this wastestream. The waste solids also contained
about 4.4 ppb of brominated dibenzofurans (most of which were the hepta isomer), which the Agency believes are among
the least toxic of the brominated dibenzofurans. The toxicities of these materials were evaluated in terms of equivalence
to that for tetrachlorodibenzo-dioxin (TCDD). The Agency has concluded that the risk posed by this constituent is
below the 10

^6

 level. 




