 

Appendix A to Supart A of Part 38


Form A_Disclosure and Acknowledgment of Lead-Based Paint Before Sale


OMB 

#



XXXXXX




Part I: Lead Warning Statement


Every purchaser of any interest in residential real property on which a residential dwelling was built prior to 1978
is notified that such property may present exposure to lead from lead-based paint that may place young children at
risk of developing lead poisoning. Lead poisoning in young children may produce permanent neurological damage,
including learning disabilities, reduced intelligence quotient, behavioral problems, and impaired memory. Lead
poisoning also poses a particular risk to pregnant women. The seller or any interest in residential real property
is required to provide the buyer with any information on lead-based paint hazards from risk assessments or inspections
in the seller's possession and notify the buyer of any known lead-based paint hazards. A risk assessments or inspection
for possible lead-based paint hazards is recommended prior to purchase.


Part II: Seller's Certification


Seller certifies to have disclosed to the purchaser and agent all information known to the seller regarding the presence
of lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards within this target housing (Seller initials box and insert date).
(a)


On


(insert date)
seller provided the purchaser with lead-hazard reports based on lead-based paint inspections, assessments, or
abatements conducted on the following dates:


(b)


On


(insert date)
the seller provided the purchaser with the following information on lead-based paint hazards in common areas:


(c)


On


(insert date)
the seller provided the purchaser with following additional information that may indicate lead-based paint and
lead-based paint hazards in the target housing.


(d)


On


(insert date)
Seller certifies that no additional information is known about this target housing. (Note: By selecting (d), seller
does not avoid liability for lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards known to the seller that are not noted under
(a), (b), or (c).


(e)


On


(insert date)
the seller provided the purchaser with the lead hazard information pamphlet 

Lead-Based Paint: Protect Your Family.


The seller is aware that Federal laws requires the seller to permit the purchaser a 10 calendar day period to conduct
a risk assessment or inspection for the presence of lead-based paint hazards before becoming obligated under a contract
to purchase target housing (unless mutually agreed otherwise in writing). That opportunity was or will be provided
between the following dates: 

XXXXXXXXX

.






Date






Seller






Seller


Part III: Agent's Certification (When Applicable)


Agent certifies to have informed the seller of his/her obligation to disclose to the purchasers and agent all information
known to the seller regarding the presence of lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards within this target housing
and that all information known to the agent regarding the presence of lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards
within this target housing has been disclosed to the purchaser. Agent further certifies that the purchaser received
the lead hazard information pamphlet 

Lead-Based Paint: Protect Your Family 

and that the purchaser has or will be given a 10 calendar-day period (unless otherwise agreed in writing) to conduct
a risk assessment or inspection for the presence of lead-based paint before becoming obligated under the contract
to purchase the target housing.






Date






Agent






Date






Agent


Part IV: Purchaser's Acknowledgment


I acknowledge that I have read and understood the attached lead warning statement in part I of this form and received
all information noted in Part II of this form, including the lead hazard information pamphlet 

Lead-Based Paint: Protect Your Family. 

I further acknowledge that, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 4852(d) and its implementing regulations, the attached contract
entitles me to 10 calendar days to conduct a risk assessment or inspection for the presence of lead-based paint hazards
before becoming obligated under a contract to purchase this target housing, unless mutually agreed otherwise, in
writing.






Date






Purchaser






Purchaser
 

