 

Appendix KVI. A closed system used for the propagation and growth of viable 
organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules and other primary containment 
equipment used to contain operations involving viable organisms containing 
recombinant DNA molecules shall include monitoring or sensing devices that 
monitor the integrity of containment during operations. 

Appendix KVJ. A closed system used for the propagation and growth of viable 
organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules shall be tested for integrity of 
the containment features using the organisms that will serve as the host for 
propagating the recombinant DNA molecules. Testing shall be accomplished prior 
to the introduction of viable organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules and 
following modification or replacement of essential containment features. Procedures 
and methods used in the testing shall be appropriate for the equipment design and 
for recovery and demonstration of the test organism. Records of tests and results 
shall be maintained on file. 

Appendix KVK. A closed system used for the propagation and growth of viable 
organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules shall be permanently identified. 
This identification shall be used in all records reflecting testing, operation, 
maintenance, and use of this equipment for research production activities involving 
viable organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules. 

Appendix KVL. The universal biosafety sign shall be posted on each closed system 
and primary containment equipment when used to contain viable organisms 
containing recombinant DNA molecules. 

Appendix KVM. Emergency plans required by Sections IVB2b(6) and IVB3c(3)
shall include methods and procedures for handling large losses of culture on an 
emergency basis. 

Appendix KVN. Closed systems and other primary containment equipment used in 
handling cultures of viable organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules shall 
be located within a controlled area which meets the following requirements: 

Appendix KVN1. The controlled area shall have a separate entry area. The entry 
area shall be a double-doored space such as an air lock, anteroom, or change room 
that separates the controlled area from the balance of the facility. 

Appendix KVN2. The surfaces of walls, ceilings, and floors in the controlled area 
shall be such as to permit ready cleaning and decontamination. 

Appendix KVN3. Penetrations into the controlled area shall be sealed to permit 
liquid or vapor phase space decontamination. 

Appendix KVN4. All utilities and service or process piping and wiring entering 
the controlled area shall be protected against contamination. 

Appendix KVN5. Hand washing facilities equipped with foot, elbow, or 
automatically operated valves shall be located at each major work area and near 
each primary exit. 

Appendix KVN6. A shower facility shall be provided. This facility shall be 
located in close proximity to the controlled area. 

Appendix KVN7. The controlled area shall be designed to preclude release of 
culture fluids outside the controlled area in the event of an accidental spill or 
release from the closed systems or other primary containment equipment. 

Appendix KVN8. The controlled area shall have a ventilation system that is 
capable of controlling air movement. The movement of air shall be from areas of 
lower contamination potential to areas of higher contamination potential. If the 
ventilation system provides positive pressure supply air, the system shall operate in a 
manner that prevents the reversal of the direction of air movement or shall be 
equipped with an alarm that would be actuated in the event that reversal in the 
direction of air movement were to occur. The exhaust air from the controlled area 
shall not be recirculated to other areas of the facility. The exhaust air from the 
controlled area may not be discharged to the outdoors without being high efficiency 
particulate air/HEPA filtered, subjected to thermal oxidation, or otherwise treated 
to prevent the release of viable organisms. 

Appendix KVO. The following personnel and operational practices shall be 
required: 

Appendix KVO1. Personnel entry into the controlled area shall be through the 
entry area specified in Appendix KVN1. 

Appendix KVO2. Persons entering the controlled area shall exchange or cover 
their personal clothing with work garments such as jump suits, laboratory coats, 
pants and shirts, head cover, and shoes or shoe covers. On exit from the controlled 
area the work clothing may be stored in a locker separate from that used for 
personal clothing or discarded for laundering. Clothing shall be decontaminated 
before laundering. 

Appendix KVO3. Entry into the controlled area during periods when work is in 
progress shall be restricted to those persons required to meet program or support 
needs. Prior to entry, all persons shall be informed of the operating practices, 
emergency procedures, and the nature of the work conducted. 



