 

b. 

Safety and efficacy of iron-containing drugs. 

The act 
also authorizes FDA to regulate the marketing of any products to 
help ensure that the products are safe and effective for their 
intended uses. ``New drugs'' may not be introduced into interstate 
commerce unless they are the subject of approved new drug 
applications (NDA's)(25 U.S.C. 355(a)). The act defines a ``new 
drug'' as: (1) Any drug (except a new animal drug or an animal 
feed bearing or containing a new animal drug) the composition of 
which is such that such drug is not generally recognized among 
experts qualified by scientific training and experience to 
evaluate the safety and effectiveness of drugs, as safe and 
effective for use under the conditions prescribed, recommended, 
or suggested in the labeling thereof; or (2) any drug the 
composition of which is such that such drug, as a result of 
investigations to determine its safety and effectiveness for use 
under such conditions, has become so recognized, but which has 
not, otherwise than in such investigations, been used to a 
material extent or for a material time under such conditions (21 
U.S.C. 321(b)). In order to be approved, an NDA must contain 
adequate data to demonstrate that the drug product is safe and 
effective for use under the conditions prescribed, recommended, 
or suggested in the labeling (21 U.S.C. 355(d)). In addition, 
for NDA approval, the product must be manufactured using current 
good manufacturing practice and the product labeling must not be 
false or misleading (21 U.S.C. 355(d)).

Section 411 of the act (21 U.S.C. 350) provides that the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services may not classify any 
natural or synthetic vitamin or mineral (or combination thereof) 
as a drug solely because it exceeds the level of potency which 
the Secretary determines is nutritionally rational or useful 
except in the case of a vitamin, mineral, other ingredient of 
food, or food, which is represented for use by individuals in the 
treatment or management of specific diseases or disorders, by 
children (individuals under the age of 12 years), or by pregnant 
or lactating women. 

Most of the iron-containing products that FDA regulates are 
considered dietary supplements. The iron-containing products 
that FDA currently regulates as drug products are generally 
prescription products and are so designated, in most cases, 
because they contain an amount of folic acid that exceeds the 
amount in which folic acid may be used as a food additive (see 21 
CFR 172.345). 





