 

This final rule is excluded from the scope of Executive Order 12372, Intergovernmental Consultation. A Notice of
Final Rule entitled Department Programs and Activities Excluded from Executive Order 12372 (50 FR 47034) exempts
REA and RTB loans and loan guarantees to governmental and nongovernmental entities from coverage under this Order.




Background 



On March 4, 1994, REA published this action as a proposed rule at 59 FR 10327 to clarify existing policy and ease requirements.


REA received no comment on revisions to 7 CFR part 1744, so the final rule is unchanged from the proposed rule. 

REA received comments on 7 CFR part 1753 from the United States Telephone Association, TDS Telecom on behalf of 25 TDS-affiliated
telephone companies in the southeast, Design South Professionals, Inc., ALLTEL Service Corporation, Coastal Utilities,
Inc., Farmers Telephone Cooperative, Inc. (of South Carolina), Citizens Utilities Rural Company, Inc., Carnes,
Burkett, Wiltsee  Associates, TDS Telecom (Madison, WI), and Reed Veach Wurdeman  Associates. These comments
were taken into consideration in preparing the final rule. 



Comment Summary:

 One commenter suggested that the phrase 
in 1753.15(b)(3), ``inspection of construction'' be changed to ``observation of construction'' because
the former is considered obsolete within the engineering profession. 



Response:

 The proposed rule did not change this subsection, but REA is revising the Form 217 contract, Engineering and Architectural
Services, in a separate effort, and REA is addressing this comment in that revision. The term ``inspection of construction''
is used in part 1753 in a generic sense, and it clearly describes the engineer's responsibility. The term ``observation
of construction'', without the further definition which would always accompany it in a professional services contract,
is too vague. The language in 1753.15(b)(3) is unchanged in the final rule. 



Comment Summary:

 One commenter observed that the proposed rule did not incorporate language in 1753.17(c)(1)(B) clarifying
REA's policy with regard to state engineering registration laws. This clarifying language was previously offered
by the Administrator in a May 10, 1990 letter. 



Response:

 The language requested would state that REA does not under part 1753 attempt to usurp any state engineering registration
laws. It has not been REA's intent to usurp state registration laws at any time, so the final rule incorporates the suggested
language. 



Comment Summary:

 Most commenters opposed the $400,000 annual financing limit placed on Form 773 contracts in 1753.46(c)(3)
and 1753.80(a). Two commenters observed that REA had given no rationale for the proposed limit. Several commenters
pointed out that the proposed limit would make it difficult for large REA borrowers to respond quickly to service demands.
One commenter argued that since the Form 773 contract is used for central office equipment, buildings, and special
equipment, as well as outside plant, using the Form 773 to its $400,000 limit on outside plant construction would deprive
a borrower of this valuable minor construction resource in those other categories. And finally, one commenter argued
that restricting use of the Form 773 contract would force borrowers to resort to the Form 515 contract, which the commenter
asserted is more complicated and expensive. This commenter argued that REA had presented no studies to support any
contention that construction performed under minor construction procedures was more expensive than construction
performed under the Form 515 contract. 



Response:

 To understand REA's imposition of the $400,000 limit, it is useful to view the entire package of changes in construction
procedures in the proposed rule. 

REA proposed relaxing the existing $100,000 limit on individual Form 773 contracts to help that contract close a gap
between minor construction procedures and REA's major construction contracts. The Form 773 contract is a very brief
agreement, covering only the most basic responsibilities of the parties. The Form 773 contract, unlike REA's major
contracts, does not require prior REA approvals of plans and specifications, pricing, or the contract itself. To
make the contract as flexible as possible, REA simply provides a space where the borrower fills in the statement of
work to be covered by the contract. The contractor may charge for work under the contract in any manner agreed upon:
lump sum, on a unit basis, hourly, or other. No provision is made in the contract to require or define a performance bond.
The contract was designed as a convenient vehicle for formalizing oral contracts which are common in the industry,
but which had historically failed to withstand REA audit scrutiny. The Form 773 was designed by REA in this manner because
a primary characteristic of its conception was that it would never exceed a specified limit: $100,000. Any dispute
that might occur involving such a small amount could not pose a significant risk to a borrower or REA's security interest
in a borrower. The more sophisticated major contracts, Forms 515, 525, 397 and 157, provide borrowers and REA with
necessary protections, and provide borrowers with agreement provisions that have evolved over the years to handle
construction administration. These major contracts also facilitate a very important tenet of the successful public
sector-private sector partnership that has been the key to the success of the REA Telephone Program: Competition.
Without these contracts, and their accompanying forms of specification, competitive bidding would be chaotic,
or impossible. 






