 

Monitoring for Airborne Concentrations 



In addition to the breathing zone samples taken as 
outlined in paragraph (f) of this section, samples of air should 
be taken to demonstrate the integrity of the enclosure, the 
cleanliness of the clean room and shower area, and the 
effectiveness of the HEPA filter. If the clean room is shown to 
be contaminated, the room must be relocated to an uncontaminated 
area. 

Samples taken near the exhaust of portable ventilation 
systems must be done with care. 



General Work Practices 



Preventing dust dispersion is the primary means of 
controlling the spread of asbestos within the enclosure. 
Whenever practical, the point of removal should be isolated, 
enclosed, covered, or shielded from the workers in the area. Waste asbestos containing materials must be bagged during
or 
immediately after removal; the material must remain saturated 
until the waste container is sealed. 

Waste material with sharp points or corners must be placed 
in hard air-tight containers rather than bags. 

Whenever possible, large components should be sealed in 
plastic sheeting and removed intact. 

Bags or containers of waste will be moved to the waste 
holding area, washed, and wrapped in a bag with the appropriate 
labels. 



Cleaning the Work Area 



Surfaces within the work area should be kept free of 
visible dust and debris to the extent feasible. Whenever visible 
dust appears on surfaces, the surfaces within the enclosure must 
be cleaned by wiping with a wet sponge, brush, or cloth and then 
vacuumed with a HEPA vacuum. 

All surfaces within the enclosure should be cleaned before 
the exhaust ventilation system is deactivated and the enclosure 
is disassembled. An approved encapsulate may be sprayed onto 
areas after the visible dust has been removed.




11. Appendix G to 1926.1101 is removed and reserved. 

12. Appendix H of 1926.1101 is revised to read as follows: 



Appendix H to 1915.1001_Substance Technical Information for 
Asbestos. Non-Mandatory
 



I. Substance Identification 



A. Substance: ``Asbestos'' is the name of a class of magnesium-silicate minerals that occur in fibrous form. Minerals
that are 
included in this group are chrysotile, crocidolite, amosite, 
anthophyllite asbestos, tremolite asbestos, and actinolite 
asbestos. 

B. Asbestos is and was used in the manufacture of heat-resistant clothing, automotive brake and clutch linings, and
a 
variety of building materials including floor tiles, roofing 
felts, ceiling tiles, asbestos-cement pipe and sheet, and fire-resistant drywall. Asbestos is also present in pipe
and boiler 
insulation materials and in sprayed-on materials located on 
beams, in crawlspaces, and between walls. 

C. The potential for an asbestos-containing product to release 
breathable fibers depends largely on its degree of friability. 
Friable means that the material can be crumbled with hand 
pressure and is therefore likely to emit fibers. The fibrous 
fluffy sprayed-on materials used for fireproofing, insulation, or 
sound proofing are considered to be friable, and they readily 
release airborne fibers if disturbed. Materials such as vinyl-asbestos floor tile or roofing felt are considered
non-friable if 
intact and generally do not emit airborne fibers unless subjected 
to sanding, sawing and other aggressive operations. Asbestos-cement pipe or sheet can emit airborne fibers if the
materials 
are cut or sawed, or if they are broken. 

D. Permissible exposure: Exposure to airborne asbestos fibers 
may not exceed 0.1 fibers per cubic centimeter of air (0.1 f/cc) 
averaged over the 8-hour workday, and 1 fiber per cubic 
centimeter of air (1.0 f/cc) averaged over a 30 minute work 
period. 



II. Health Hazard Data 



A. Asbestos can cause disabling respiratory disease and 
various types of cancers if the fibers are inhaled. Inhaling or 
ingesting fibers from contaminated clothing or skin can also 
result in these diseases. The symptoms of these diseases 
generally do not appear for 20 or more years after initial 
exposure. 



