 

Proposed Federal Information Processing Standards Publication XXX



1994 May 23



Announcing the Standard for Cryptographic Service Calls



Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS) are issued by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to Section 111(d) of the Federal Property
and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100235.




1. Name of Standard. Cryptographic Service Calls (FIPS PUB XXX).

2. Category of Standard. Computer Security, Cryptography.

3. Explanation. This standard specifies a set of generic cryptographic service calls, or applications program interface
(API), for application programs to interface with a cryptographic module for requesting cryptographic functions.
The service calls specify the interface for common cryptographic functions such as message encryption and decryption,
message authentication, digital signature generation and verification, key management, and user authentication.
Cryptographic algorithms that are supported include both secret-key based and public-key based algorithms. In
this standard, the terms 

cryptographic service calls

 and 

cryptographic APIs

 can be used interchangeably.

4. Approving Authority. Secretary of Commerce.

5. Maintenance Agency. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology, (Computer Systems
Laboratory).

6. Cross Index.




a. FIPS PUB 462, Data Encryption Standard.

b. FIPS PUB 74, Guidelines for Implementing and Using the NBS Data Encryption Standard.

c. FIPS PUB 81, DES Modes of Operation.

d. FIPS PUB 113, Computer Data Authentication.

e. FIPS PUB 171, Key Management Using ANSI X9.17.

f. FIPS PUB 180, Secure Hash Standard.

g. FIPS PUB XXX, Digital Signature Standard.

h. FIPS PUB 185, Escrowed Encryption Standard.

i. Special Publication 8002, Public Key Cryptography.

j. Federal Information Resources Management Regulations (FIRMR) subpart 201.20.303, Standards, and subpart 201.39.1002,
Federal Standards.




Other NIST publications may be applicable to the implementation and use of this standard. A list (NIST Publications
List 91) of currently available computer security publications, including ordering information, can be obtained
from NIST.




7. Objectives. A standard cryptographic interface will facilitate interoperability among different cryptographic
implementations. Specifically, a standard set of cryptographic service calls provides the following advantages:




a. Application programmers will need to learn only one set of cryptographic service calls for multiple cryptographic
applications.

b. Cryptographic modules from different vendors, which conform to this interface standard, may be interfaced to
a given application without requiring modification to the application program.

c. Contracts for additional cryptographic modules would not have to be sole sourced because multiple vendors would
offer the standard service calls.

d. Vendors could build cryptographic modules which would interface to a wide variety of applications.




8. Applicability. This standard is applicable to all Federal departments and agencies that use cryptographic-based
security systems for the protection of unclassified information that is not subject to Section 2315 of Title 10, U.S.
Code, or Section 3502(2) of Title 44, U.S. Code. The standard shall be used by all Federal departments and agencies
in designing, acquiring and implementing cryptographic services where a cryptographic interface is to be provided.
Not all of the service calls specified in this standard need to be used in its entirety by an application. The specific
service calls that shall be used depend on the security requirements for the particular application and environment
in which the system is to be utilized. Private and commercial organizations are encouraged to adopt and use this standard
in order to facilitate interoperability among different cryptographic products.

9. Applications. The standard may be used in any application which uses cryptography to provide any of the following
cryptographic functions: message encryption/decryption, message authentication, digital signature generation
and verification, and key management. Not all the service calls specified in this standard need to be used by an application.
An application can make use of additional service calls not available in this standard.

10. Specifications. Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) XXX, 

Cryptographic Service Calls.

11. Implementations. Though this document specifies a standard interface for requesting cryptographic functions,
the standard, however, does not mandate a specific implementation of these cryptographic functions other than what
are explicitly specified in the document. The cryptographic functions may in fact be implemented in software, firmware,
hardware, or any combination thereof. However, there may be other standards that are applicable to the implementation
of specific cryptographic functions. For specific requirements, the individual standard shall be referred to.
Conformance to this standard requires that the cryptographic service calls used by an application provide exactly
the same name and letter case for the service calls and their parameters as specified in the standard. In the rare case
where the standard naming and specification of the service calls and parameters may violate certain rules of a particular
programming language in use, the exception should be noted and the selected naming and case specification should
match the standard as much as possible.

12. Export Control. Certain cryptographic devices and technical data regarding them are deemed to be defense articles
(i.e., inherently military in character) and are subject to Federal government export controls as specified in Title
22, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 120128. Some exports of cryptographic modules conforming to this standard
and technical data regarding them must comply with these Federal regulations and be licensed by the U.S. Department
of State. Other exports of cryptographic modules conforming to this standard and technical data regarding them fall
under the licensing authority of the Bureau of Export Administration of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The Department
of Commerce is responsible for licensing cryptographic devices used for authentication, access control, proprietary
software, automatic teller machines (ATMs), and certain devices used in other equipment and software. For advice
concerning which agency has licensing authority for a particular cryptographic device, please contact the respective
agencies.

13. Implementation Schedule. This standard becomes effective six months after publication of a notice in the 

Federal Register

 of its approval by the Secretary of Commerce.

14. Qualifications. While this standard specifies a standard interface for application programs to request cryptographic
functions from a cryptographic module, conformance to this standard does not assure that a particular cryptographic
module or implementation is secure. Security requirements for a cryptographic module are addressed in FIPS 1401.
The responsible authority in each agency or department shall assure that the overall system provides an acceptable
level of security.


