 



(4) 

Exemptions for replacement equipment. 

The requirements of paragraphs (c) (2) and (3) of this section shall not apply to replacement equipment, as defined
in paragraph (b) of 52.3000 General Permit Requirements, providing the replacement does not result in any
emissions increase.

(5) 

Exemptions for temporary sources.

 The requirements of paragraphs (c) (2) and (3) of this section shall not apply to temporary stationary emission sources,
emission units, and portable equipment which will be operated on a temporary basis. This exemption requires the performance
of an air quality analysis pursuant to paragraph (c)(5) of this section.

(c) 

Standards.

(1) Best Available Control Technology.

 An applicant shall apply Best Available Control Technology to a new emissions unit or modification of an existing
emissions unit, except cargo carriers, for each emissions change of NO

X

 or ROC which would create an increase in emissions, according to procedures specified in paragraph (d)(10) of this
section, and the potential to emit of the new or modified emissions unit would equal or exceed the levels specified
in this paragraph. In addition, BACT shall be applied to each source that applies for a major modification as defined
and calculated in 52.3000(b). A condition which reflects BACT in a manner consistent with testing procedures,
such as ppmv NO

X

, g/liter VOC, or lbs/hr, shall be contained in the latest Authority to Construct and Permit to Operate.



<TABLE>





1Pollutant 
1lb/day





Reactive organic compounds 
10

Nitrogen oxides 
10



</TABLE>



(2) 

General offset requirements.

(i) Applicants for major modifications to major sources of NO

X

 or ROC shall provide offsets for the affected pollutant, obtained pursuant to 52.3002 Emissions Reduction
Credit Authorization, in the amount calculated pursuant to paragraphs (d) (12) and (13) of this section.

(ii) An applicant shall provide offsets for the affected pollutant, obtained pursuant to 52.3002 Emissions
Reduction Credit Authorization, for new and modified sources where the cumulative emission changes of ROCs or NO

X

 calculated pursuant to paragraph (d)(11) of this section exceed the level specified in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this
section. Sufficient offsets shall be provided, from the same calendar quarter as the emissions, to offset positive
emissions changes of ROCs or NO

X

 calculated according to procedures specified in paragraph (d)(13) of this section. Facilities shall be required
to curtail operations if sufficient offsets are not obtained as required by permit conditions. Offsets used to mitigate
emission increases must be of the same pollutant. The facility is ultimately responsible for ensuring offsets.



<TABLE>





1Pollutant  

1Pounds per quarter





ROC 
7,500

NO

X

 
7,500



</TABLE>



(iii) In no case shall halogenated hydrocarbons be used as offsets for ROCs, nor shall exempt compounds or other compounds
excluded from the definition of ROCs be used as offsets for ROCs.

(iv) Portable equipment shall be evaluated for offsets at the initial location only. In the event such portable equipment
is shutdown, emission reduction credits shall be granted based on the emissions calculated at the initially permitted
location. If operated a cumulative total of less than 90 days within a continuous 12-month period, at all locations
within the same non- attainment designated area and in any air basin of which the district is a part, the portable equipment
is considered a temporary source.

(v) Offsets can only come from regions with air quality classifications that are the same as or worse than those in which
the emissions unit or stationary source that requires the offsets is located.

(3) 

Location of offsets and offset ratios.

(i) Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(3) (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) of this section, an applicant shall provide offsets
for emissions from a proposed stationary source subject to the requirements of paragraph (c)(2) of this section according
to the following ratios and requirements as a minimum: 


