 

Eligible applicants may enter into contracts, including consortia agreements, as necessary to meet the requirements
of the program and strengthen the overall application; however, applicants must perform a substantial portion of
the activities for which funds are requested. 



Programmatic Interest Areas 



The studies must be in one of the following areas: 

1. Sources of lead exposure in children in high-risk communities or in the general population: Determine the relative
contribution of different sources of lead in children. Quantify and model the contribution of various sources of
lead exposure to blood lead levels among a probability sample of children living in a defined community (where an industrial
point source, such as a smelter, is NOT the predominant source of lead exposure) in an urban, suburban, or rural area.


2. Children in day care centers: Assess lead hazards in day care centers and their contribution to blood lead levels
among children 




6 years of age, while controlling for household lead exposure, and other potential determinants of blood lead levels.


3. Lead-based paint hazard predictors of childhood lead poisoning: Evaluate the relationship between housing characteristics
that do not require environmental sampling (e.g., housing age and condition) and the geometric mean (and distribution
of) blood lead levels in children, while controlling for other determinants of blood lead levels. 



Cooperative Activities 



In conducting activities to achieve the purpose of these cooperative agreements, the recipient will be responsible
for conducting activities under A. (Recipient Activities), and CDC will be responsible for conducting activities
under B. (CDC Activities): 



A. Recipient Activities



1. Conduct study activities, including: (1) enrolling eligible study subjects, after obtaining informed consent;
(2) collecting data; (3) ensuring appropriate medical and environmental management of study subjects; and (4) conducting
all other components required for implementation of the study. 

2. Enter and maintain data into a computerized database. 

3. Analyze collected data and prepare a report of the study findings. 



B. CDC Activities 



1. Collaborate with recipient in refining approved study protocol and data collection instrument(s), as appropriate.


2. Provide technical advice on data collection and management. 

3. Assist in assessment of quality of laboratory measurements, if needed. 



Evaluation Criteria 



Applications will be reviewed and evaluated according to the following criteria: 



1. Study Protocol (30%) 



The protocol's scientific soundness, quality, feasibility, consistency with the project goals, and adequacy of
the evaluation plan. 



2. Access to Study Subjects (20%) 



Documented ability to identify, access, enroll, and follow study subjects. 



3. Laboratory Capacity (15%) 



Documented availability of a laboratory with demonstrated proficiency in performing lead measurements (and other
laboratory measurements as indicated in applicant's proposed study). 



4. Medical and Environmental Management (15%) 



Documented ability to ensure that children identified with elevated blood lead levels receive appropriate medical
and environmental management. 



5. Project Personnel (10%) 



The qualifications, experience, (including experience in conducting relevant studies) and time commitment of
the staff needed to ensure implementation of the project. 



6. Plan for Administration of Project (10%) 



Schedule for implementing, monitoring, and evaluating the project. 



7. Budget Justification (Not Scored) 



The budget will be evaluated for the extent to which it is reasonable, clearly justified, and consistent with the intended
use of cooperative agreement funds. 



Executive Order 12372 Review 



Applications are not subject to the review requirements of Executive Order 12372 entitled, Intergovernmental Review
of Federal Programs. 



Public Health System Reporting Requirement 



This program is not subject to the Public Health System Reporting Requirements. 



Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number 



The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance number assigned to this program is 93.283. 




