 

The Canada lynx is widely distributed throughout the northern boreal forests of Canada and Alaska. Its extreme southern
limits are the U.S./Canada border areas with the southern-most extensions found in the Rocky Mountains. Historically,
lynx populations were minimal in the contiguous U.S. due to a lack of suitable habitat. During years of lynx abundance
in Canada increased densities of resident populations resulted along the southern boundary of its range. There is
evidence that the increased presence of lynx in the contiguous U.S. corresponds to cyclic dispersals from Canada.
At the turn of the century and especially in the Northeastern portion of the U.S., habitat loss due to human settlement
and forest clearing reduced the southern range of the lynx. Since the 1970's, this trend has reversed in some States.
Presently, Maine, Montana and Washington have resident lynx populations. In Montana prior to 1950, lynx were considered
to be extremely rare. Today, however, an estimated 700 to 1,050 lynx could occupy approximately 37,000 square miles
of montane forest habitat in Montana (Giddings 1994).



B. Overutilization for Commercial, Recreational, Scientific, or Educational Purposes



In the contiguous U.S., lynx inhabit fairly remote, isolated areas. Before 1977, pelt prices were low, approximately
$12.00 a piece and lynx were harvested incidental to other furbearers. In 1977, all felids, including lynx, were listed
in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). Appendix
II species may be internationally traded provided CITES export permits are issued. The issuance of permits provides
a means of monitoring trade and determining if it is having a significant impact on the species. In conjunction with
CITES, States are required to have a management program and a harvest season for the species. Presently only five States
have a trapping season for lynx_Alaska, Idaho, Minnesota, Montana, and Washington. In 1984, Minnesota closed its
lynx season and Washington followed suit in 1990. Presently only Idaho and Montana of the lower 48 States allow a limited
annual harvest of two and three animals, respectively. These quotas include the incidental take of lynx by bobcat
trappers. From 1982 to 1992, only three lynx were trapped in Idaho. From 1993 to 1994, only four animals were taken in
Montana. These low harvest levels are contributed to the low level of hunting and trapping occurring in the remote
areas inhabited by lynx. Hunting and trapping pressure on the lynx has been historically low in the U.S. and there is
little evidence that these activities pose a threat to the continued existence of this species in the wild.



C. Disease or Predation



The Canada lynx could be displaced or eliminated by expansion of competitors such as the bobcat (

Lynx rufus

) or coyote (

Canis latrans

) into their present range. However, lynx are more restricted to areas that receive deep snow cover where they are more
highly adapted than are bobcats. Neither disease nor predation is known to be a threat to the lynx.



D. The Inadequacy of Existing Regulatory Mechanism



The lynx is protected in each State where it occurs in the lower 48 contiguous States. Seven States classify it as threatened
or endangered or a species of concern. Idaho and Montana have a trapping season with annual Statewide harvest quotas
of two and three animals, respectively. Hunting and trapping with dogs and taking with firearms is illegal in every
State except one in which the lynx occurs. Few if any States ever had a bounty system for the species. In addition to State
protection, the lynx has been listed in Appendix II of CITES since 1977, and its status and harvest levels have been
monitored by the Service's Office of Scientific Authority.



E. Other Natural or Manmade Factors Affecting its Continued Existence



Lynx distribution has not significantly changed from historic ranges except for periodic peripheral shifts of distribution
with cyclical changes of its chief prey, the snowshoe or varying hare (

Lepus americanus

), and local losses due to loss of habitat in southern-most areas. Fire suppression in the contiguous 48 States has
had some effect on lynx numbers, since early successional habitats are important to lynx due to a greater abundance
of snowshoe hares in these areas. Although early regeneration stages of habitat are preferred by hares, lynx hunt
primarily in more open mature and later successional stages of forest.



Finding



The Act requires the Service to make determinations regarding listings solely on the basis of the best available scientific
and commercial data after conducting a review of the status of the species and after taking into account those efforts
being made by State and Federal agencies to protect the species. The Act also allows for the Service to list ``distinct
population segments'' of vertebrate fish and wildlife.

The Service was petitioned to list the Canada lynx in the 40 contiguous States as a vertebrate population pursuant
to the Endangered Species Act. The Service conducted a status review of the Canada lynx in the contiguous U.S. After
carefully evaluating the best available scientific and commercial information regarding the past, present and
future threats faced by this species, the Service finds that listing of the Canada lynx in the contiguous U.S. is not
warranted. The Service also finds that the petition did not present substantial information that the southern Rocky
Mountain population of the Canada lynx meets the definition of a ``species'' under section 3(15) of the Act.




