 

These concerns are not just relevant to office workers but also to maintenance and other nonindustrial workers that
work in indoor environments. For example, comment 3347 responded that ``[i]n our closed, indoor work environments,
air quality is a very real health and safety concern to professional painters. I have seen firsthand otherwise healthy
men and women pass out or get violently ill as a result of being exposed to indoor air contaminants.'' Comment 3412
responded ``[o]ur locals have encountered air-pollution problems ranging from ink mist and photocopier emissions
to asbestos and microbial disease. The level of toxic chemical contaminants is often alarmingly high in our darkrooms,
and carbon-monoxide emissions from trucks at newspaper loading docks frequently penetrate the ventilation system.
In 1985 microbial contamination from a water tower infected six New York Times employees with Legionnaires' Disease
and 34 others with less serious respiratory infections.''
Operation engineers are also affected by poor indoor air quality. Comment 3452 responded that ``[t]his is
particularly important for the operation engineers who appear healthy and then suffer from respiratory problems,
much like allergic reactions, after working in a building with poor ventilation.'' 


2. Environmental Tobacco Smoke 


Many case reports of severe material impairment of health due to occupational exposure to ETS have been reported to
OSHA through submission to the indoor air quality docket [H122]. Information contained in these comments
indicate that adverse health effects in workers due to environmental tobacco smoke exposure while at work range from
mucous membrane irritation (eye, nose, and throat effects) to more severe, life-threatening conditions, such as
status asthma, other chronic lung diseases and heart diseases. For example, comment 3309 responded [Regarding
ETS exposure in a cafeteria], ``By the time I have finished lunch my eyes are tearing, my nose is plugged, and I have a
headache'' as well as comment 3315, ``I had fewer headaches and fewer respiratory ailments; my chronic sore
throat disappeared [after a company-wide no smoking policy was implemented]''. Comment 322 responded ``[m]y
patients find it hard to obtain smoke free workplaces. I have seen patients who have suffered status asthma from workplace
smoking, patients who have had to quit their jobs because of ETS in the workplace. Recently, one of my never smoking
patients sustained vocal cord lesions seen almost entirely in smokers.'' Comment 3104 continued that ``[p]assive
tobacco smoke (PTS) is the principal indoor air contaminant in my office building in Rockefeller Center. While smoking
is limited to `private offices', the smoke flows freely from these private offices throughout the entire general
office areas since the smokers will not keep their doors closed, and even when they do, they have to come out sometime.
And, as soon as the door is opened, the dense smoke accumulation within the office is diffused to all adjacent work areas.
Because office buildings have closed ventilation systems, only a `smoke free' office policy can be effective. Half
measures only cause further stress, frustration and irritation to both smokers and nonsmokers.'' Comment 3289
responded that ``I have been exposed to asbestos culminating in my getting asbestosis (plural plaque) of the lungs.
The combination 
of asbestos exposure plus second-hand smoke from my smoking co-workers has posed and is currently posing a health
risk to 
me.'' 



