 

As noted above in the flooring material discussion, OSHA is requiring job by job evaluation of each Class II job, including
transite panel removal projects, by a competent person, as part of the requirements to perform an initial exposure
assessment. As detailed above, the data submitted to the record show that transite panel removal without cutting
usually results in very low exposure levels. Building and facility records of past removals of similar material will
alert on-site competent persons to the exposure potential of the panels in their facilities. For rare cases, when
the evaluation of material, condition, crew and past exposure data do not support a ``negative exposure assessment,''
(i.e., that excessive exposures may be expected), additional precautions are required by the standard, including
critical barriers, and respirator use. 
OSHA believes that these provisions will protect employees against significant exposures, are feasible, and are
supported by the record. In particular OSHA finds that quantity limitations on transite panel removal would not tend
to reduce risk, and in some cases may increase fiber levels. For example, Richard Olson of Dow Co. pointed out that if
transite panel removal were to be exempted from the negative pressure enclosure requirement and the cutoff remained
at 9 square feet as proposed, it would be necessary to cut nearly every piece of material removed or always use a negative-pressure
enclosure (Ex. 7103). 


Cementitious Asbestos-Containing Siding (CACS)
 


The removal of cementitious asbestos-containing siding is a Class II activity. OSHA is requiring the same work practices
for shingle removal as for transite panel removal. OSHA did not propose specific work practices for removal of CACS,
either to exempt this activity from the negative pressure enclosure requirement or to qualify as a SSSD activity.
However, many participants representing a wide spectrum of interests, including states, federal agencies, and
asbestos industry organizations, recommended that OSHA exempt CACS removal from the requirement to establish negative-pressure
enclosures; (See e.g. asbestos coordinator for Florida (Ex. 76); Navy Office of Chief of Operations (Ex. 752);
Asbestos Information Association/North America (Ex. 7120); New York City Department of Environmental Protection
(Ex. 126); and, The Army Corps of Engineers who also submitted the data from a study of fiber levels generated during
CACS removals Ex. 1307). 
In the Army Corps of Engineers' study cited above, three mechanical CACS asbestos removal methods and the manual method
were evaluated by monitoring during removal of the siding. The three methods were: 1) super wet: the siding was thoroughly
wetted with water on the outfacing and back side; 2) mist: a measured amount of water was applied to the outfacing side
of the siding only; and, 3) encapsulation: an EPA-approved commercially available encapsulant was applied at or
above the recommended application rate. These removals took place inside enclosures and the hand method was also
evaluated. Samples were measured using TEM and results of area samples indicated all were less than 0.005 or below
the limit of detection. Two personal samples taken ``while removing cement-asbestos siding shingles from Building
523'' yielded 8 hour time-weighted averages of 0.008 and 0.012 f/cc. 
Other data show low exposures during CACS removal. One where approximately 110,000 square feet, in total of CACS were
moved from 43 college campus dormitory buildings prior to demolition. The average bulk analysis of the CACS was 17%.
No outdoor area samples were higher than 0.01 f/cc by PCM for the duration of the project. The 80 personal samples collected
during the project had an arithmetic average of 0.049 f/cc with a standard deviation of 0.041. The geometric mean was
0.04 f/cc with not TEM data available (Ex. 7132A). The study authors concluded that ``CACS removal, even though
outside where dilution is assumed significant, should be done carefully, using as a minimum the abatement techniques
described in this paper.'' These included wetting, dropcloths, and a 20-foot wide regulated area. OSHA agrees and
believes that the methods required by the standard will reduce risk significantly for exposed workers. 
Results of this study and others show that CACS removal can be performed using work practices which minimize exposure
to workers and that containment in NPEs is neither necessary or appropriate in most cases to protect the workers performing
the removals or working nearby. However, it is clear that Class II work practices are necessary to keep exposures low.

OSHA has coupled CACS removal with transite panel removal in the regulatory provisions establishing mandatory work
practices for the removal of these materials. 


Roofing Operations


The final construction standard classifies removal of roofing material which contains asbestos as a Class II operation.
As such, specific exposure assessment and work practices must be performed. The record shows that these work practices
can be feasibly implemented and are necessary to effectively reduce airborne asbestos levels from roofing removal
projects. They consist of continual misting of cutting machines during use, keeping roofing materials intact during
removal, using wet methods, immediately lowering unwrapped or unbagged roofing material to a covered receptacle
using a dust-tight chute, or immediately wrapping roofing material in plastic sheeting, and lowering it to ground
by the end of the work shift. 



