 

49.3 

General Tribal Clean Air Act authority. 


Tribes meeting the eligibility criteria of 49.6 shall be treated in the same manner as States with respect to
all provisions of the Clean Air Act and implementing regulations, except for those provisions identified in 49.4
and the regulations that implement those provisions. 


49.4 

Clean Air Act provisions inapplicable to Tribes. 


The following provisions of the Clean Air Act and any implementing regulations are not applicable to Tribes: 
(a) Specific plan submittal and implementation deadlines for NAAQS-related requirements, including but not limited
to such deadlines in sections 110(a)(1), 172(a)(2), 182, 187, 189, 191 of the Act. 
(b) The specific deadlines associated with the review and revision of implementation plans related to major fuel
burning sources in section 124 of the Act. 
(c) The mandatory imposition of sanctions under section 179 of the Act because of a failure to submit an implementation
plan or required plan element by a specific deadline, or the submittal of an incomplete or disapproved plan or element.

(d) The ``within 2 years'' clause in section 110(c)(1) of the Act. The inapplicability of this specific clause does
not in any way curtail the general authority delegated to the Administrator under section 110(c)(1) to issue a Federal
implementation plan upon the failure of a Tribe to make a required submission, upon a finding that the plan or plan revision
submitted by a Tribe is incomplete or in response to EPA's disapproval of a Tribal implementation plan in whole or in
part. 
(e) Specific visibility implementation plan submittal deadlines established under section 169A of the Act. 
(f) Specific implementation plan submittal deadlines related to interstate commissions under sections 169B(e)(2),
184(b)(1)  (c)(5) of the Act. For eligible Tribes participating as members of such Commissions, the Administrator
shall establish those submittal deadlines that are determined to be practicable or, as with other non-participating
Tribes in an affected transport region, provide for Federal implementation of necessary measures. (g) Any provisions
of the Act requiring as a condition of program approval the demonstration of criminal enforcement authority or any
provisions of the Act providing for the delegation of such criminal enforcement authority. Tribes seeking approval
of a Clean Air Act program requiring such demonstration may receive program approval if they meet the requirements
for enforcement authority established under 49.8. 
(h) The specific deadline for the submittal of operating permit programs in section 502(d)(1) of the Act. 
(i) The mandatory imposition of sanctions under section 502(d)(2)(B) because of failure to submit an operating permit
program or EPA disapproval of an operating permit program submittal in whole or part. 
(j) The ``2 years after the date required for submission of such a program under paragraph (1)'' clause in section 502(d)(3)
of the Act. The inapplicability of this specific clause does not in any way curtail the general authority delegated
to the Administrator under section 502(d)(3) to promulgate, administer and enforce a Federal operating permit program
for a Tribe not having a program that has been approved in whole. 
(k) Section 502(g), which authorizes a limited interim approval of an operating permit program that substantially
meets the requirements of Title V, but is not fully approvable. 
(l) The provisions of section 503(c) that direct permitting authorities to establish a phased schedule assuring
that at least one-third of the permit applications submitted within the first full year after the effective date of
an operating permit program (or a partial or interim program) will be acted on by the permitting authority over a period
of not to exceed three years after the effective date. 
(m) The provisions of section 507(a) that specify a deadline for the submittal of plans for establishing a small business
stationary source technical and environmental compliance assistance program. 
(n) The provisions of section 507(e) that direct the establishment of a Compliance Advisory Panel. 



