 




Motor vehicle or mobile equipment assembly line coating facility 

means a facility where parts are manufactured or finished for eventual inclusion into finished motor vehicles or
mobile equipment ready for sale to motor vehicle or mobile equipment dealers. This definition does not include customizers,
body shops, and/or other auto refinishing facilities.


Motor vehicle or mobile equipment refinishing facility 

means a facility where all or any part of used motor vehicles or mobile equipment is refinished, or customized, by the
application of paint. This definition includes motor vehicles or mobile equipment dealerships who purchase new
motor vehicle or mobile equipment from Original Equipment Manufacturers. This definition does not include motor
vehicle or mobile equipment assembly line coating facilities.


Motorcycle 

means any motor vehicle other than a tractor having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on
not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and weighing less than 1,500 lbs, except that four wheels may be
in contact with the ground when two of the wheels are a functional part of a sidecar.


Offset 

means a blanket cylinder that is used to transfer ink from a plate cylinder to the substance to be printed.


Open-top vapor degreasing 

means the batch process of cleaning and removing soils from surfaces by condensing hot solvent vapor on the colder
metal parts.


Oven 

means a chamber within which heat is used for one or more of the following purposes: To dry, bake, cure, or polymerize
a coating or ink.


Packaging rotogravure printing 

means rotogravure printing upon paper, paper board, metal foil, plastic film, and other substrates which are, in
subsequent operations, formed into packaging products or labels for articles to be sold.


Packaging rotogravure printing press 

means a rotogravure printing press in which surface coatings are applied to paper, paperboard, metal foil, plastic
film, or other substrates which are to be used to produce containers, packaging products, or labels for articles.


Paper coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more paper coating unit(s).


Paper coating unit 

means a web coating unit where coating is applied to paper. Printing presses are not considered paper coating units.
Products produced on a paper coating unit include, but are not limited to, adhesive tapes and labels, book covers,
post cards, office copier paper, drafting paper, and pressure sensitive tapes. Paper coating units include, but
are not limited to, application by impregnation or saturation or by the use of roll, knife, or rotogravure coating.


Printing unit 

means an operation consisting of a series of one or more roll printers and any associated roll coaters, drying areas,
and/or ovens wherein one or more surface coatings are applied, dried, and/or cured. It is not necessary for an operation
to have an oven, or flashoff area, or drying area to be included in this definition.


Publication rotogravure printing unit 

means a rotogravure printing unit in which surface coatings are applied to paper which is subsequently formed into
books, magazines, catalogues, brochures, directories, newspaper supplements, or other types of printed material.


Refinish 

means to restore or replace coatings on Group I vehicles (large-sized trucks, buses, and mobile equipment) and Group
II vehicles (passenger cars, small-sized trucks and vans, medium-sized trucks and vans, and motorcycles) and equipment,
or their parts and components, except Original Equipment Manufacturer coatings applied at motor vehicle or mobile
equipment assembly line coating facilities.


Roll coater 

means an apparatus in which a uniform layer of coating material is applied by means of a roll or rolls across the entire
width of a moving substrate which is fed from an unwinding roll.


Roll printer 

means an apparatus in which a surface coating is applied by means of a roll or rolls with only partial coverage across
the width of a moving substrate which is fed from an unwinding roll. The partial coverage results in the formation of
words, designs, or pictures on the substrate.


Rotogravure printing 

means the application of words, designs, and pictures to a substrate using a gravure cylinder by means of a roll printing
technique in which the pattern to be applied is recessed relative to the nonimage area.


Rotogravure printing unit 

means a printing unit in which each roll printer uses a roll with recessed areas for applying an image to a substrate.


Screen printing unit 

means a printing unit in which the printing ink passes through a web or a fabric to which a refined form of stencil has
been applied. The stencil openings determine the form and dimensions of the imprint.


Solvent 

means a substance that is liquid at standard conditions that is used to dissolve or dilute another substance; this
term includes, but is not limited to, organic materials used as dissolvers, viscosity reducers, degreasing agents,
or cleaning agents.


Solvent cleaning 

means the process of cleaning soils from surfaces by cold cleaning, open-top vapor degreasing, or conveyorized degreasing.


Space vehicle 

means any vehicle designed to travel beyond the earth's atmosphere.


Street 

means a public road in a town or city.


Substrate 

means the surface to which a coating is applied on, saturated into, or impregnated into.


Vinyl coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more vinyl coating unit(s).


Vinyl coating unit 

means a web coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating or printing ink is applied onto
a continuous web of vinyl-coated fabric or vinyl sheets.


Web 

means an automatic system which supplies substrate from a continuous roll or an extrusion process.


Wood furniture 

means room furnishings including cabinets (kitchen, bath, and vanity), tables, chairs, beds, sofas, shutters,
art objects, wood paneling, wood flooring, and any other coated furnishings made of wood, wood composition, or fabricated
wood materials.


Wood furniture coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more wood furniture coating unit(s).


Wood furniture coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied onto wood furniture.
(ii) 

Applicability.
(A) The requirements of paragraphs (b)(1)(iii) (A) and (B), (iv)(A), (v)(A), and (vi)(A) of this section shall apply
to any owner or operator of any degreasing facility or any motor vehicle or mobile equipment refinishing facility
located in the control area as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
(B) The requirements of paragraphs (b)(1)(iii) (A) and (B), (iv)(A), (v)(A), and (vi)(A) of this section shall apply
to any owner or operator of an industrial or commercial solvent use facility located in the applicable area specified
in paragraph (b)(1)(ii)(A) of this section at which actual emissions of VOC are greater than or equal to 6.8 kg (15 lbs)
during any one day.


