 

I. Introduction 



The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region III announces its intent to delete a site from the National Priorities
List (NPL), Appendix B of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR part
300, as amended, and requests comments on this deletion. EPA identifies sites that present significant risks to human
health or the environment and maintains the NPL as the list of the worst of those sites. Sites on the NPL may be remediated
using the Hazardous Substances Superfund. As described in 300.425(e) of the NCP, any sites deleted from the
NPL remain eligible for Fund-financed remedial actions in the unlikely event that conditions at the site warrant
such action. 


EPA plans to delete the Suffolk City Landfill Site in Suffolk, Virginia from the NPL. 

EPA will accept comments on this Site for thirty days after publication of this document in the 

Federal Register

. 

Section II of this notice explains the criteria for deleting sites from the NPL. Section III discusses procedures
that the EPA is using for this action. Section IV discusses the Suffolk City Landfill and explains how the Site meets
the deletion criteria. 



II. NPL Deletion Criteria 



Section 300.425(e) of the NCP, 40 CFR 300.425(e), provides that releases may be deleted from or recategorized on the
NPL where no further response is appropriate. In making a determination to delete a release from the NPL, EPA shall
consider, in consultation with the state, whether any of the following criteria have been met: 

(i) Responsible parties or other persons have implemented all appropriate response actions required; 

(ii) All appropriate Fund-financed response under CERCLA has been implemented, and no further action by responsible
parties is appropriate; or 

(iii) The remedial investigation has shown that the release poses no significant threat to public health or the environment
and, therefore, taking of remedial measures is not appropriate. 

Releases may not be deleted from the NPL until the state in which the release was located has concurred on the proposed
deletion. EPA is required to provide the State 30 working days for review of the deletion notice prior to publication
in the 

Federal Register

. 






