 

In our previous discussions of an efficiency 
adjustment, we suggested that the adjustment should take 
into account two considerations. One is that capital 
inputs, unlike operating inputs, are generally fixed in the 
short run. The productivity target in the revised operating 
framework operates on a short-term, year-to-year basis. 
Targets for capital efficiency and cost-effectiveness, 
however, must operate on a longer term basis. The other 
consideration is that, prior to the adoption of the capital 
prospective payment system, Medicare payment policy for 
capital-related costs, as well as the policies of other 
payers, did not provide sufficient incentives for efficient 
and cost-effective capital spending. As a result, capital 
costs per case, and therefore base year prospective capital 
rates, may be higher than would have been consistent with 
capital acquisition policy in more efficiency-oriented 
markets. A guiding principle in devising an efficiency 
adjustment is therefore that Medicare capital prospective 
payment rates should not provide for maintenance of capital 
in excess of the level that would be produced in an 
efficiency-oriented competitive market. 

As a preliminary examination of this issue, we analyzed 
the change in actual Medicare capital cost per case for FYs 
19861991 in relation to the change in the capital input 
price index (which accounts for change in the input prices 
for capital-related costs), and the other adjustment factors 
that we were then proposing to include in the framework. 
(The other adjustment factors are the increase in real case 
mix and the increase in intensity due to quality-enhancing 
technological change and within-DRG complexity.) We found 
rates of increase in spending per case that exceeded the 
rate of increase attributable to inflation in capital input 
prices, quality-enhancing intensity increases, and real 
case-mix growth. 


Economic theory suggests that an industry with a 
guaranteed return on capital (such as the hospital industry 
prior to prospective payment for capital-related costs) 
would have a tendency to be overly capitalized relative to 
more competitive industries. This is because the incentive 
for firms in such an industry is to compete on the basis of 
more capital-intensive production processes than firms in 
other industries. As a result, capital costs per case, and 
therefore base year prospective capital rates, may be higher 
than would have been consistent with capital acquisition 
policy in more efficiency-oriented competitive markets. 


Our analysis was designed to examine whether hospitals 
had in fact responded to the incentives of the cost-based 
reimbursement system for capital by expanding beyond what 
was necessary for efficient and cost-effective delivery of 
services. The analysis confirmed that volume and intensity 
of capital acquisition far outpaced the increase in capital 
input prices during the years between the implementation of 
the prospective payment system for operating costs and the 
introduction of the capital prospective payment system. 
Even accounting for real CMI increases and increases in 
intensity attributable to cost-increasing but quality-enhancing new technologies, there remains a large excess
of 
capital-related spending. 


The following table shows the results of our most 
recent analysis, based on the most current data available 
and the most recent projections. Differences between this 
table and the tables in previous discussions in the 

Federal 
Register 

are due to revised figures for average capital cost 
per case increases, based on the most recent data and 
projections, and on our revised CIPI. We have also expanded 
the analysis incorporated in this table to include FY 1985 
and FY 1992, thus encompassing all but 1 year of the period 
from the implementation of the prospective payment system 
for operating costs to the implementation of the prospective 
payment system for capitals costs. (For FY 1984, sufficient 
data is not available to compute capital cost per case 
increases and intensity increases.) The results of the 
analysis in Table 4 are substantially similar to the results 
of previous analyses. In Table 4 real case-mix increase is 
assumed to be 1.0 percent annually. 






