 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
I. Background


Iron is an essential nutrient that, in certain 
circumstances, can be toxic. For some women of child-bearing age 
and for some young children, iron from dietary sources alone may 
be insufficient to meet their metabolic iron requirements. 
Access to products that provide iron is useful for these groups 
to ensure that their iron requirements are met. However, when 
consumed acutely in large quantities by young children, iron is 
toxic and can, in some cases, lead to death. 
Since the mid 1980's, an upsurge in reported accidental 
pediatric ingestion of iron-containing products has occurred 
(Ref.1). This fact, and the many resultant injuries and deaths 
of children, have created a dilemma with respect to how to ensure 
that iron sources are available while still minimizing the risks 
to children. In response, FDA is proposing regulations that 
require that a warning be placed on labeling about the adverse 
effects of acute, high dose iron ingestion by children and that 
unit-dose packaging be used for certain iron-containing products. 
These requirements, if adopted, will apply to iron-containing 
products in addition to the existing requirements of CPSC, which 
provide that child-resistant packaging must be used for most 
iron-containing products available (see section II.B. of this 
document). The agency tentatively finds that the effect of these 
new requirements, in conjunction with those of CPSC, will be to 
significantly reduce the risk of accidental pediatric iron 
poisoning. 
The types of iron-containing products that have been 
associated with poisonings of young children are those offered in 
solid oral dosage form (e.g., capsules and tablets) as: (1) 
Children's and adult's multi-vitamin/mineral supplements that 
contain iron or iron salts (these products typically provide less 
than 30 mg of iron per dosage unit), (2) products intended for 
use as iron supplements (these products typically contain 30 mg 
or more of iron per dosage unit), and (3) drug products that 
contain iron or iron salts (these products typically contain 30 
mg or more of iron per dosage unit). In this document, the term 
``iron-containing products'' refers to all of these types of 
products. 
The agency is not aware of incidents of poisoning being 
caused by iron-containing products in liquid or powder form. 
Therefore, these products are not subject to this proposal. The 
agency will consider what regulatory action is appropriate to 
take with regard to iron-containing products in liquid or powder 
form if it becomes aware of information indicating that these 
products have caused or can cause poisonings in children. 
This document also does not bear in any way on conventional 
foods containing naturally occurring or added iron. Pediatric 
iron poisoning from consumption of iron-containing foods in 
conventional food form is unlikely because of limitations 
inherent in the large quantity of food that would have to be 
ingested to cause an adverse effect in young children. For 
example, a serving of a highly fortified breakfast cereal that 
contains 100 percent of the recommended daily intake for iron of 
18 mg, would provide only 7 percent of the amount of iron that is 
considered necessary to produce symptoms of iron poisoning in a 
10 kilograms (kg) (22 pounds (lb)) child (i.e., 25 milligrams 
(mg) per (/) kg of iron, which equates to 250 mg total iron for a 
10 kg (22 lb) child. (See section I.B. of this document.) 
Moreover, the agency is not aware of any pediatric iron 
poisonings that have resulted from ingestion of iron-containing 
foods in conventional food form. 


A. The Iron Requirements of Children and Women of Childbearing Age 


Iron is an essential nutrient because it is a component of 
blood and muscle tissue and because of its role in metabolic 
reactions. Iron-containing compounds in the body may be grouped 
into two categories: (1) Those that serve metabolic functions, 
and (2) those associated with iron storage. The compounds in 
the first category include hemoglobin (a component of red blood 
cells), myoglobin (a muscle protein), and iron-containing 
enzymes. They account for approximately 80 percent of body iron. 
Compounds in the second category are involved in the maintenance 
of iron homeostasis and include the storage compounds ferritin 
and hemosiderin. 
When the supply of dietary iron becomes inadequate to meet 
the body's needs, iron is mobilized from iron stores to maintain 
the production of red blood cells and to perform other essential 
iron-dependent functions. When body iron stores are low or 
depleted, as often occurs in women of child-bearing age and in 
very young children, a person is vulnerable to adverse effects 
associated with iron deficiency anemia and with a reduction in 
metabolic and body functions. 
 




</SUPPLEM>
