 

Competitive Impact Statement


Pursuant to Section 2(b) of the Antitrust Procedures and Penalties Act (``APPA''), 15 U.S.C. 16(b)(h),
the United States files this Competitive Impact Statement relating to the proposed Final Judgment submitted for
entry with the consent of the Association of Retail Travel Agents in this antitrust proceeding.


I


Nature and Purpose of the Proceeding


On October 25, 1994, the United States filed a Complaint alleging that the Association of Retail Travel Agents (hereinafter
``ARTA'') had entered into a contract, combination or conspiracy in restraint of trade in violation of Section 1 of
the Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. 1). The Complaint alleges that ARTA, a trade association all of whose members are
travel agents, and its members agreed on commission levels and other terms of trade on which to transact business with
providers of travel services, and encouraged and participated in a group boycott with the intent to induce certain
providers of travel services to agree to certain commission levels and practices.
On October 25, 1994, the United States and ARTA filed a Stipulation by which they consented to the entry of a proposed
Final Judgment designed to prevent any recurrence of such activity in the future. Under the proposed Final Judgment,
ARTA will be enjoined from inviting or encouraging travel agents to deal with travel providers only on agreed terms.
This prohibition includes any agreements on specified commission levels. The proposed Final Judgment also prohibits
ARTA from adopting or disseminating any rules, policies, or statements that have the purpose or effect of advocating
or encouraging such a concerted refusal to deal.
The United States and ARTA have agreed that the proposed Final Judgment may be entered after compliance with the APPA.
Entry of the proposed Final Judgment will terminate the action, except that the Court will retain jurisdiction to
construe, modify, and enforce the Final Judgment, and to punish violations of the Final Judgment.


II


Events Giving Rise to the Alleged Violation


Airlines, hotels, rental car companies, cruise lines and other providers of transportation and accommodations
(hereinafter ``travel providers'') sell a significant proportion of their services to the public through travel
agents. Travel agents inform travellers about the price, availability and other details of various travel options
and make reservations and sell tickets to the travellers for the travel services they choose. Travel agents are agents
of the travel providers, receiving commissions from the travel providers for sales they make. These commissions
vary and are established between individual travel agents and travel providers. These commissions generally are
included in the price the consumer pays for airline tickets, hotel accommodations, rental cars, cruises and other
travel services. The lower the sales commissions established between individual travel agents and travel providers,
the lower the total cost of travel services to the consumer.
ARTA is an association of travel agents. Among its goals are achieving improved commission levels for travel agents
and persuading travel services providers to adopt commission policies and practices that are beneficial to travel
agents. ARTA members compete with each other and with other travel agents both to sell travel services to the public
and to act as selling agents for travel services providers.
On October 16, 1993, ARTA's Board of Directors adopted a document entitled ``ARTA Objectives for the Travel Agency
Community.'' Among its Objectives, ARTA stated that it sought a ``minimum'' ten percent commission on all hotel and
car rental sales by travel agents, the elimination of all distribution outlets for airline tickets other than travel
agents, and the payment of commissions based on full fares rather than the discounted prices actually paid by travellers.
A few days after adopting the ARTA Objectives, ARTA hosted a press conference attended by its president and two members
of its Board of Directors, in addition to members of the press. Several days after the press conference, one of ARTA's
board members announced that his travel agency would cease doing business with certain travel providers whose commission
and sales practices did not comport with the ARTA Objectives, and invited other travel agents to join his boycott in
support of the ARTA Objectives. Shortly thereafter, at least one other ARTA board member made a similar public announcement.
The Complaint alleges that through those activities, defendant and its members agreed on commission levels and other
terms of trade on which ARTA members and other travel agents should transact business with travel providers, and invited,
encouraged and participated in a group boycott designed to induce travel providers to agree to those commission levels
and terms of trade. The Complaint further alleges that those activities constitute a contract, combination or conspiracy
in unreasonable restraint of trade in violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. 1).


III


Explanation of the Proposed Final Judgment


The proposed Final Judgment is designed to prevent defendant and its officers, directors and agents from inviting,
encouraging or advocating concerted refusals to deal. In addition to enjoining defendant and its officers, directors
and agents from engaging in such activities (Section III), it requires defendant to provide an annual summary of the
Final Judgment to its members (Section IV), and requires that its officials provide an annual certification that
they have read and understand the Final Judgment (Section IV). The proposed Final Judgment also requires that defendant
provide an annual briefing on the requirements of the Final Judgment and on the antitrust laws to its officials (Section
V).
The United States is satisfied that the proposed Final Judgment sufficiently resolves the antitrust violations
alleged in the Complaint. Compliance with the proposed Final Judgment would prevent any recurrence of the violations
alleged in the Complaint, and thus provides complete relief.


