 

(b) The recipient shall obtain written approval by the Federal awarding agency for the use of real property in other
federally-sponsored projects when the recipient determines that the property is no longer needed for the purpose
of the original project. Use in other projects shall be limited to those under federally-sponsored projects (i.e.,
awards) or programs that have purposes consistent with those authorized for support by the Department of the Interior.

(c) When the real property is no longer needed as provided in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, the recipient shall
request disposition instructions from the Federal awarding agency or its successor. The Federal awarding agency
shall give one or more of the following disposition instructions.

(1) The recipient may be permitted to retain title without further obligation to the Federal Government after it compensates
the Federal Government for that percentage of the current fair market value of the property attributable to the Federal
participation in the project.

(2) The recipient may be directed to sell the property under guidelines provided by the Federal awarding agency and
pay the Federal Government for that percentage of the current fair market value of the property attributable to the
Federal participation in the project (after deducting actual and reasonable selling and fix-up expenses, if any,
from the sales proceeds). When the recipient is authorized or required to sell the property, proper sales procedures
shall be established that provide for competition to the extent practicable and result in the highest possible return.

(3) The recipient may be directed to transfer title to the property to the Federal Government or to an eligible third
party provided that, in such cases, the recipient shall be entitled to compensation for its attributable percentage
of the current fair market value of the property.



12.933 

Federally-owned and exempt property.



(a) 

Federally-owned property.

 (1) Title to federally-owned property remains vested in the Federal Government. Recipients shall submit annually
to the Federal awarding an inventory listing of federally-owned property in their custody. Upon completion of the
award, or when the property is no longer needed, the recipient shall report the property to the Federal awarding agency
for further Federal utilization.

(2) If the Federal awarding agency has no further need for the property, it shall be declared excess and reported to
the General Services Administration, unless the Federal awarding agency has statutory authority to dispose of the
property by alternative methods (e.g., the authority provided by the Federal Technology Transfer Act (15 U.S.C.
3710 (I)) to donate research equipment to educational and non-profit organizations in accordance with E.O. 12821,
``Improving Mathematics and Science Education in Support of the National Education Goals.'') Appropriate instructions
shall be issued to the recipient by the Federal awarding agency.

(b) 

Exempt property.

 When statutory authority exists, the Federal awarding agency has the option to vest title to property acquired with
Federal funds in the recipient without further obligation to the Federal Government and under conditions the Federal
awarding agency considers appropriate. Such property is ``exempt property.'' Should a Federal awarding agency
not establish conditions, title to exempt property upon acquisition shall vest in the recipient without further
obligation to the Federal Government.



12.934 

Equipment.



(a) Title to equipment acquired by a recipient with Federal funds shall vest in the recipient, subject to conditions
of this section.

(b) The recipient shall not use equipment acquired with Federal funds to provide services to non-Federal outside
organizations for a fee that is less than private companies charge for equivalent services, unless specifically
authorized by Federal statute, for as long as the Federal Government retains an interest in the equipment.

(c) The recipient shall use the equipment in the project or program for which it was acquired as long as needed, whether
or not the project or program continues to be supported by Federal funds and shall not encumber the property without
approval of the Federal awarding agency. When no longer needed for the original project or program, the recipient
shall use the equipment in connection with its other federally-sponsored activities, in the following order of priority:

(1) activities sponsored by the Federal awarding agency, then

(2) activities sponsored by other Federal agencies.

(d) During the time that equipment is used on the project or program for which it was acquired, the recipient shall make
it available for use on other projects or programs if such other use will not interfere with the work on the project or
program for which the equipment was originally acquired. First preference for such other use shall be given to other
projects or programs sponsored by the Federal awarding agency that financed the equipment; second preference shall
be given to projects or programs sponsored by other Federal agencies. If the equipment is owned by the Federal Government,
use on other activities not sponsored by the Federal Government shall be permissible if authorized by the Federal
awarding agency. User charges shall be treated as program income.

(e) When acquiring replacement equipment, the recipient may use the equipment to be replaced as trade-in or sell the
equipment and use the proceeds to offset the costs of the replacement equipment subject to the approval of the Federal
awarding agency.

(f) The recipient's property management standards for equipment acquired with Federal funds and federally-owned
equipment shall include all of the following.

(1) Equipment records shall be maintained accurately and shall include the following information.

(i) A description of the equipment.



