 

If the depainting operation has been in compliance for the annual period, then an annual report would be required stating
that the depainting operation has been in compliance with the applicable standards. An annual report would also be
required whenever the calculated annual average volume of organic HAP-containing strippers used per aircraft for
spot stripping and decal removal exceeded the applicable limits. The annual report would also report the number of
times the pressure drop across the particulate filters used for the control of inorganic HAP emissions from non-chemical
depainting operations exceeded the limits specified by the manufacturer. 

(4) 

Handling and storage of waste.

 As discussed earlier, since an exemption exists for RCRA-regulated wastes, it is important to know which wastes are
subject to RCRA and which are not. Since facilities undergo change over time, it is possible that these designations
may change. Further, new waste streams may be created. Therefore, semiannual reports are being proposed to track
changes in the RCRA status of existing wastes and new wastes. An annual report would be required if no changes occurred
in the RCRA status to the existing waste streams and if no new waste streams were generated. 

d. 

Other Reports.

 The only ``other reports'' in the proposed rule are those that are required under the General Provisions, subpart
A of 40 CFR part 63.

16

 Of particular note is the report required in response to periods of startup, shutdown, and malfunction. When the procedures
used during such periods are completely consistent with the plan, a report stating such is to be delivered or postmarked
by the thirtieth (30th) day following the end of each calendar half. If the procedures are not completely consistent
with the plan, an owner or operator is to report the actions taken within 2 working days after commencing actions inconsistent
with the plan, followed by a letter within 7 working days after the end of the event. The EPA is proposing that for non-chemical
depainting malfunctions only, that the owner or operator report any plan inconsistency for dealing with the malfunction
within 24 hours after the inconsistent depainting technique is actually utilized. This is different from ``after
the end of the event'' because owners or operators may be able to adjust their depainting schedule to accommodate the
time to repair a malfunction without the need to implement their malfunction plan. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


16

</FOOTNAME>
Ibid. 

</FOOTNOTE>


I. Selection of Compliance Deadlines 



The EPA proposes to allow affected sources the following time periods after promulgation for compliance, as provided
for in section 112(i) of the Act. All sources, whether uncontrolled or having in place control systems or measures
requiring upgrading to meet the new rule, would be required to reach full compliance within 3 years after promulgation
of the rule. In addition, all affected sources must comply with the compliance dates specified in 63.6 (b) and
(c) of the General Provisions, 40 CFR part 63, 
subpart A.

17

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


17

</FOOTNAME>
Ibid. 

</FOOTNOTE>


The EPA considered requiring earlier compliance to some parts of the proposed standards. However, comments received
from state agencies indicated that there would be far less burden enforcing the standards if there was a single compliance
date. Multiple compliance dates would make it difficult for agencies in states with numerous sources to keep track
of which standards applied to each facility and when compliance would have to begin. 

The EPA recognizes the need for the full three-year period for facilities to come into compliance due to the nature
of testing and qualification necessary for sources such as hand-wipe cleaning solvents, primers, topcoats, and
chemical milling maskants. For all these reasons, the EPA is proposing that all sources be allowed up to three years
after the date of promulgation of the rule to achieve compliance. 

The EPA is requesting comments, however, concerning alternative compliance dates for certain pollution prevention
and housekeeping measures. Specifically, the EPA is considering a compliance date of 90 days after the effective
date of the proposed standards for the cleaning operation housekeeping measures in 63.744(a) of the proposed
rule, the use of enclosed containers for flush cleaning solvents in 63.744(d), and the provisions for handling
and storage of waste in 63.748. The EPA is also considering a compliance date of 180 days after the effective
date of the proposed standards for the spray gun cleaning provisions in 63.744(c). 


