 

Critical Habitat 


Section 4(a)(3) of the Act, as amended, requires that, to the maximum extent prudent and determinable, the Secretary
propose any habitat of a species that is considered to be critical at the time the species is proposed to be endangered
or threatened. The Service's regulations [50 CFR 424.12(a)(1)] state that designation of critical habitat is not
prudent when one or both of the following situations exist: (1) The species is threatened by taking or other activity
and the identification of critical habitat can be expected to increase the degree of threat to the species or (2) such
designation of critical habitat would not be beneficial to the species. The Service finds that designation of critical
habitat is not prudent for this species. Such a determination would result in no known benefit to the spruce-fir moss
spider, and designation of critical habitat could further threaten the species. 
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act requires that Federal agencies insure that their actions are not likely to
jeopardize the continued existence of listed species, or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical
habitat. (See the ``Available Conservation Measures'' section for a further discussion of Section 7.) As part of
the development of this proposed rule, Federal and State agencies were notified of the spider's general distribution,
and they were requested to provide data on proposed Federal actions that might adversely affect the species. No specific
projects were identified. Should any future projects be proposed in areas inhabited by the spruce-fir moss spider,
the involved Federal agency will already have the general distribution data needed to determine if the species may
be impacted by their action. If needed, more specific distribution information would be provided. 
Three of the four surviving populations of the spruce fir moss spider are considered to be extremely small, and suitable
habitat at each of the four sites still supporting the species is very limited. The precarious status of the species
means that any Federal action with the potential to result in significant adverse modification or destruction of
the species' habitat would also likely jeopardize its continued existence. Under these conditions, no additional
protection for the spruce-fir moss spider would accrue from critical habitat designation that would not also accrue
from listing the species. Consequently, when listed, habitat protection for the spruce-fir moss spider will be accomplished
through the Section 7 jeopardy standard and Section 9 prohibitions against take. 
In addition, the spruce-fir moss spider is very rare and unique, and taking for scientific purposes and private collection
could pose a threat if specific site information was released. The publication of critical habitat maps in the 

Federal Register

, local newspapers, and other publicity accompanying critical habitat designation could increase the collection
threat. The locations of populations of these species have consequently been described only in general terms in this
proposed rule. Any existing precise locality data would be available to appropriate Federal, State, and local government
agencies from the Service office described in the ``

ADDRESSES

'' section; from the Service's Raleigh Field Office, P.O. Box 33726, Raleigh, North Carolina 276363726; the
Service's Cookeville Field Office, 446 Neal Street, Cookeville, Tennessee 38501; and from the North Carolina Wildlife
Resources Agency, North Carolina Natural Heritage Program, Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency, and Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation. 


Available Conservation Measures 


Conservation measures provided to species listed as endangered or threatened under the Act include recognition,
recovery actions, requirements for Federal protection, and prohibitions against certain practices. Recognition
through listing encourages and results in conservation actions by Federal, State, and private agencies, groups,
and individuals. The Act provides for possible land acquisition and cooperation with the States and requires that
recovery actions be carried out for all listed species. The protection required of Federal agencies and the prohibitions
against taking and harm are discussed, in part, below. 
Section 7(a) of the Act requires Federal agencies to evaluate their actions with respect to any species that is proposed
or listed as endangered or threatened and with respect to its critical habitat, if any is being designated. Regulations
implementing this interagency cooperation provision of the Act are codified at 50 CFR Part 402. Section 7(a)(4) requires
Federal agencies to confer informally with the Service on any action that is likely to jeopardize the continued existence
of a proposed species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of proposed critical habitat. If a species
is subsequently listed, Section 7(a)(2) of the Act requires Federal agencies to ensure that activities they authorize,
fund, or carry out are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of such a species or to destroy or adversely
modify its critical habitat. If a Federal action may affect a listed species or its critical habitat, the responsible
Federal agency must enter into consultation with the Service. The Service has notified Federal agencies that may
have programs which could affect the species. Federal activities that could occur and impact the species include,
but are not limited to, the carrying out or issuance of permits for construction, recreation or development actions
that could result in the loss or thinning of the high-elevation forest canopy, and pesticide or herbicide applications
for the control of noxious insects or weeds. It has been the experience of the Service, however, that nearly all Section
7 consultations have been resolved so that the species has been protected and the project objectives have been met.





