 

Subpart E_Hells Canyon National Recreation Area_Private Lands



292.20 

Purpose and scope.



(a) 

Purpose.

 The Act establishing the Hells Canyon National Recreation Area (hereafter referred to as HCNRA) (16 U.S.C. 460gg460gg13)
encourages the retention of traditional and valid uses of private land within the HCNRA, such as ranching, grazing,
farming, timber harvesting, and the occupation of homes and lands associated therewith, as they existed at the time
the HCNRA was established on December 31, 1975. To this end, the Act directs the Secretary of Agriculture to promulgate
regulations establishing standards for the use and development of private land within the HCNRA and grants the Secretary
limited condemnation authority to address situations where the standards are not met. The purpose of this subpart
is to establish standards that would guide the Secretary's consideration of the use of the limited condemnation authority
granted by the Act.

(b) 

Scope.

 The regulations in this subpart establish standards applicable to all private property within the boundaries of
the HCNRA, including that within the boundaries of the Rapid, Snake, and Imnaha Wild and Scenic Rivers and the Hells
Canyon Wilderness. The regulations in this subpart do not operate to restrict the use and development of private property;
rather, they serve to inform the landowner of those uses that are compatible with purposes for which the HCNRA was established.
Uses not compatible with these standards could result in the Secretary acquiring land or interests therein without
a landowner's consent.

The regulations in this subpart, in and of themselves, do not effect a taking of private property, including valid,
existing water rights, nor do the standards established in this subpart limit or restrict a private landowner's property
use that is compatible with the purposes of the Act. The Responsible Official may use the regulations in this subpart
solely to determine whether private land uses or developments are compatible with the purposes and direction of the
Act and, if not, to determine whether the Secretary should consider initiating condemnation proceedings to acquire
land or scenic easements.




292.21 

Definitions.


For the purposes of this subpart, the following terms are defined:


Act

 refers to the act of December 31, 1975, which established the Hells Canyon National Recreation Area (89 Stat. 1117;
16 U.S.C. 460gg460gg13).


Archaeological sites

 are those sites containing relics, artifacts, and other evidence of past human cultures including historic properties
as defined by the National Historic Preservation Act.


Commercial land

 is land within the HCNRA developed for commercial purposes as of June 13, 1994 and which is assigned to the commercial
land category (292.22).


Condemnation

 is the acquisition of lands or interests therein by the Secretary without the consent of the owner. In the case of the
Act, condemnation is a limited authority that may be exercised by the Secretary only in the event that a standard or
standards set forth herein are violated for all private land categories except mining lands. Where mining lands are
involved, the Secretary may exercise his or her condemnation authority notwithstanding the fact that the mining
land owner has complied with the relevant standards of this section.


Conservation easement

 or 

Scenic easement

 as defined in Section 9(d) of the Act ``means the right to control the use of land in order to protect aesthetic values
for the purposes of this Act, but shall not be acquired without the consent of the owner to preclude the continuation
of any farming or pastoral use exercised by the owner as of the date of enactment of this Act.''



Dude ranching

 is a business oriented primarily towards furnishing small groups with an outdoor recreational and educational experience
associated with ranching activities and perpetuates the purposes for which the HCNRA was established. Dude ranching
is subservient to the primarily recognized ranching operation.




Existing uses

 are those uses of or developments to private land as of the date of enactment of the Act on December 31, 1975.



Farm/Forest/Grazing lands

 are those lands used for farm, forest, and grazing purposes, for maintaining watersheds as fish and wildlife habitat,
or for providing outdoor recreational activities. All such lands are assigned to the Farm/Forest/Grazing land category
in 292.22.



Farm/Forest/Grazing Use

 is any traditional agricultural, silvicultural, or livestock management use or combination thereof on farm/forest/grazing
lands within the HCNRA. This includes, but is not limited to, truck farming, growing and harvesting of timber, grazing
of livestock, horticultural use, animal husbandry use, horse, cattle, and sheep ranching, and preparation and storage
of the products raised on farm/forest/grazing land for on-site use or for disposal by marketing or otherwise. Farm/forest/grazing
uses may also consist of uses related to and in furtherance of the protection of watersheds, maintenance of fish and
wildlife habitat, and the pursuit of recreational activities.


Hazardous substance

 includes any material so classified under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980, as amended (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.).


Mining lands

 are lands primarily used for mining purposes as of June 13, 1994 and which are assigned to the mining land category in
292.22.



Outdoor recreational activities

 are activities such as camping, picnicking, rafting, boating, hiking, rock climbing, fishing, hunting, horseback
riding, and the viewing of wildlife or scenery.


Parcel

 as used in this subpart refers to contiguous tax lots under one ownership. For the purposes of this subpart, rights-of-way
do not divide parcels into smaller units.


Partition

 is the division of land into lots, and which, under county planning ordinances, is identified by a map, drawing, or
writing which contains the descriptions, locations, specifications, and dedications for roads, utilities, etc.
and which has been properly filed with the County recorder.


Private land

 is land not in federal, state, or local government ownership.



