 

(I) Resilient flooring material including associated mastic and backing shall be assumed to be asbestos-containing
unless an industrial hygienist determines that it is asbestos-free using recognized analytical techniques.

(ii) For removing roofing material which contains ACM the employer shall ensure that the following work practices
are followed: 

(A) Roofing material shall be removed in an intact state to the extent feasible.

(B) Wet methods shall be used where feasible.

(C) Cutting machines shall be continuously misted during use, unless a competent person determines that misting
substantially decreases worker safety.

(D) All loose dust left by the sawing operation must be HEPA vacuumed immediately.

(E) Unwrapped or unbagged roofing material shall be immediately lowered to the ground via covered, dust-tight chute,
crane or hoist, or placed in an impermeable waste bag or wrapped in plastic sheeting and lowered to ground no later than
the end of the work shift.

(F) Upon being lowered, unwrapped material shall be transferred to a closed receptacle in such manner so as to preclude
the dispersion of dust.

(G) Roof level heating and ventilation air intake sources shall be isolated or the ventilation system shall be shut
down.

(iii) When removing cementitious asbestos-containing siding and shingles or transite panels containing ACM, the
employer shall ensure that the following work practices are followed: 

(A) Cutting, abrading or breaking siding, shingles, or transite panels, shall be prohibited unless the employer
can demonstrate that methods less likely to result in asbestos fiber release cannot be used.

(B) Each panel or shingle shall be sprayed with amended water prior to removal.

(C) Unwrapped or unbagged panels or shingles shall be immediately lowered to the ground via covered dust-tight chute,
crane or hoist, or placed in an impervious waste bag or wrapped in plastic sheeting and lowered to the ground no later
than the end of the work shift.

(D) Nails shall be cut with flat, sharp instruments.

(iv) When removing gaskets containing ACM, the employer shall ensure that the following work practices are followed:


(A) If a gasket is visibly deteriorated and unlikely to be removed intact, removal shall be undertaken within a glovebag
as described in paragraph (g)(5)(ii) of this section.

(B) The gasket shall be thoroughly wetted with amended water prior to its removal.

(C) The wet gasket shall be immediately placed in a disposal container.

(D) Any scraping to remove residue must be performed wet.

(v) When performing any other Class II removal of asbestos containing material for which specific controls have not
been listed in paragraph (g)(8)(iv) (A) through (D) of this section, the employer shall ensure that the following
work practices are complied with.

(A) The material shall be thoroughly wetted with amended water prior and during its removal.

(B) The material shall be removed in an intact state unless the employer demonstrates that intact removal is not possible.

(C) Cutting, abrading or breaking the material shall be prohibited unless the employer can demonstrate that methods
less likely to result in asbestos fiber release are not feasible.

(D) Asbestos-containing material removed, shall be immediately bagged or wrapped, or kept wetted until transferred
to a closed receptacle, no later than the end of the work shift.

(vi) Alternative Work Practices and Controls. Instead of the work practices and controls listed in paragraph (g)(8)
(i) through (v) of this section, the employer may use different or modified engineering and work practice controls
if the following provisions are complied with.

(A) The employer shall demonstrate by data representing employee exposure during the use of such method under conditions
which closely resemble the conditions under which the method is to be used, that employee exposure will not exceed
the PELs under any anticipated circumstances.

(B) A competent person shall evaluate the work area, the projected work practices and the engineering controls, and
shall certify in writing, that the different or modified controls are adequate to reduce direct and indirect employee
exposure to below the PELs under all expected conditions of use and that the method meets the requirements of this standard.
The evaluation shall include and be based on data representing employee exposure during the use of such method under
conditions which closely resemble the conditions under which the method is to be used for the current job, and by employees
whose training and experience are equivalent to employees who are to perform the current job.

(9) Work Practices and Engineering Controls for Class III asbestos work. Class III asbestos work shall be conducted
using engineering and work practice controls which minimize the exposure to employees performing the asbestos work
and to bystander employees.

(i) The work shall be performed using wet methods.

(ii) To the extent feasible, the work shall be performed using local exhaust ventilation.

(iii) Where the disturbance involves drilling, cutting, abrading, sanding, chipping, breaking, or sawing of thermal
system insulation or surfacing material, the employer shall use impermeable dropcloths, and shall isolate the operation
using mini-enclosures or glove bag systems pursuant to paragraph (g)(5) of this section.



