 

Upon approval of each plan submitted by a licensee, and subject to the availability of appropriated funds and the requirements
of the Anti-Deficiency Act (31 U.S.C. 1341), the Department will designate amounts deposited in the Fund at the United
States Department of Treasury, established pursuant to section 1801 of the Atomic Energy Act (42 U.S.C. 2297g), to
reimburse a licensee for estimated costs of remedial action in implementing a Department-approved plan for subsequent
remedial action. 


3. Section 765.32Reimbursement of Excess Funds 


Section 1001(b)(2)(E)(i) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 
2296a(b)(2)(B)(i)) authorizes the Department to determine, as of July 31, 2005, whether the aggregate amount authorized
to be appropriated by section 1003 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 2296a2) when considered with the $5.50 per dry short
ton limit on reimbursement, as adjusted for inflation, for active uranium processing site licensees, exceeds the
amount reimbursable to licensees under section 1001(b)(2) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 
2296a(b)(2)). If any active uranium processing site licensee incurs reimbursable costs in excess of $5.50 per dry
short ton limit on reimbursement, and the Department has determined that excess funds exist as of July 31, 2005, section
1001(b)(2)(E)(ii) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 2296a(b)(2)(E)(ii)) authorizes the Department to provide reimbursement
of those costs on a prorated basis to the extent funds are available. 
Section 765.32 outlines the procedures that would govern any additional reimbursement. 


IV. Review Under Executive Order 12866 


Today's regulatory action has been determined not to be a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive Order
12866, ``Regulatory Planning and Review,'' (58 FR 51735, October 4, 1993). Accordingly, today's action was not subject
to review under the Executive Order by the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. 


V. Review Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act 


This rule was reviewed under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq. 

The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires that a regulatory flexibility analysis be performed for all rules that are
likely to have ``significant impact on a substantial number of small entities.'' This rule involves reimbursement
for costs of remedial action at active uranium and thorium processing sites. The number of potentially eligible applicants
is very limited. Because this rule provides for reimbursement of funds authorized by Title X, it does not pose any adverse
effect on the private sector economy or small entities, and in fact may provide a benefit to small entities located
near active processing sites. The Department, therefore, certifies that this rule will not have a significant impact
on a substantial number of small entities. 


VI. Review Under the Paperwork Reduction Act 


The information collection requirements in this rule have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
under the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

) and have been assigned OMB control number 19101400. 


VII. Review Under the National Environmental Policy Act 


This rule establishes procedures for the reimbursement of eligible remedial action costs incurred by licensees
at active uranium or thorium processing sites. Implementation of this rule will result in cost reimbursement payments
to eligible licensees, but will not affect the legally required cleanup of the sites or result in any other environmental
impacts. The Department has therefore determined that this rule is covered under the Categorical Exclusion found
at paragraph A6. of Appendix A to subpart D, 10 CFR part 1021, which applies to the establishment of procedural rulemakings
such as procedures for the review and approval of applications for grants and cooperative agreements. Accordingly,
neither an environmental assessment nor an environmental impact statement is required. 


VIII. Review Under Executive Order 12612 


This rule does not have a substantial direct effect on the States, the relationship between the States and the Federal
Government, or the distribution of power and responsibilities among various levels of government. Therefore, no
federalism assessment under Executive Order 12612 is required. 


IX. Review Under Executive Order 12778 


Section 2 of Executive Order 12778 instructs agencies to adhere to certain requirements in promulgating new regulations
and reviewing existing regulations. These requirements, set forth in sections 2(a) and (b), include eliminating
drafting errors and needless ambiguity, drafting the regulations to minimize litigation, providing clear and certain
legal standards for affected conduct, and promoting simplification and burden reduction. Agencies are also instructed
to make every reasonable effort to ensure that the rule clearly specifies any preemptive effect, effect on existing
Federal law or regulation, and retroactive effect; describes any administrative proceedings available prior to
judicial review; any provisions for the exhaustion of administrative proceedings; and defines key terms. The Department
certifies that today's rule meets the requirements of sections 2(a) and (b) of Executive Order 12778. 



List of Subjects in 10 CFR Part 765 


Radioactive materials, Reclamation, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Uranium. 



Issued in Washington, DC, on this 10th day of May 1994. 

 


<SIGNER>
Thomas P. Grumbly,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Environmental 
Management.




</SIGNJOB>
