 

Findings, Explanations, and Conclusions 



The following findings, explanations, and conclusions on the material issues are based on evidence presented at
the hearing and the record thereof: 



Statutory Price Factors 



7 U.S.C. 608c(18) states: 

Whenever the Secretary finds, upon the basis of the evidence adduced at the hearing required by section 608b of this
title or this section, as the case may be, that the parity prices of such commodities are not reasonable in view of the
price of feeds, the available supplies of feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply and demand
for milk and its products in the marketing area to which the contemplated agreement, order, or amendment relates,
he shall fix such prices as he finds will reflect such factors, insure a sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk
to meet current needs and further to assure a level of farm income adequate to maintain productive capacity sufficient
to meet anticipated future needs, and be in the public interest. 




The statute mandates a two-step analysis for determining the appropriate level of prices under Federal milk market
orders. The first step involves ascertainment of parity prices. If the Secretary finds that the parity price levels
are not reasonable, then the second step requires investigation of appropriate price levels. Both pricing standards
require recognition of explicit statutory factors, namely the price of feeds, the available supplies of feeds, and
other economic conditions which affect market supply and demand. 

Parity prices are, and have been, at a level that is significantly higher than the prices applicable in competitive
milk markets. At the administrative hearing, official notice was requested and granted for a regular publication
of the United States Department of Agriculture titled ``Dairy Situation and Outlook Yearbook'', DS426, Economic
Research Service, August 1990. On page 10, Table 1._United States dairy situation at a glance, annual average numbers
are listed for prices received by farmers (all-milk price for milk sold to plants) and how this price level relates
to the parity price measure. The statistics reveal that over the 7-year period from 1983 through 1989, the simple average
all-milk price was approximately 55 percent of the value of the calculated parity price level. These statistics show
that the calculated parity price levels relative to the all-milk price would be excessively high because more than
ample supplies of milk were available for all uses at prices far below the parity price level, and thus, the parity price
is not reasonable. This finding was set forth in the final decision at 58 FR 12675. Accordingly, the second step of the
section 608c(18) analysis was undertaken. The second step of price determination requires a more in-depth analysis
of dairy market structure. The statute allows the Secretary to decide the price levels that will achieve articulated
market performance goals: the chosen prices must ensure a sufficient supply of pure and wholesome milk to meet current
and future market needs and be in the public interest. As outlined below, the Secretary conducted an extensive analysis
of each individual marketing order in light of the statutorily-required dairy market performance goals. 

As required by 7 U.S.C. 608c(18), any administratively recognized price level must reflect the price of feeds, the
available supplies of feeds, and other economic conditions that affect market supply and demand. The key economic
concept focuses on supply and demand. Milk markets consist of both buyers and sellers, the buyer representing a demand
for what the seller can supply. Each side could be studied independently. However, it is the simultaneous consideration
of all sides of the market that the Secretary must address when regulating dairy markets and in determining reasonable
price levels. 

To this end, federal order markets utilize an unregulated and competitive market equilibrium price that measures
all economic factors affecting the supply of and demand for milk and its products that captures all of the pricing criteria
established by section 608c(18). As discussed below, this price is embodied in the Minnesota-Wisconsin (MW)
price. This price indicates the price-quantity relationship that buyers and sellers arrive at in a market where transactions
are free of government intervention, the competition for milk is the most competitive, and milk products produced
compete in a national market. The MW price automatically adjusts to prevailing market supply and demand conditions.




The Minnesota-Wisconsin (MW) Price 



Prior to adoption of the MW price, federal milk orders relied upon various procedures to establish a basic milk
price. Using different measures, each of these procedures attempted to identify the competitive value of milk used
for manufacturing purposes. For example, certain orders variously based class prices on prices paid by specific
manufacturing plants, such as the Midwestern Condensary Series; on local plant averages; on a three-product U.S.
manufacturing price; or on product formulae, such as the butter/powder or butter/cheese formulae. 

One major problem with these pricing methods was the difficulty in keeping the pricing methods up-to-date with changes
taking place within the dairy industry. For example, varying local needs required that some milk be shipped from plants
to meet fluid demands and thus skewed plant-based formulae by affecting yields and prices of manufactured products
produced from reserve milk. Moreover, cost factors, which do not lend themselves to accurate evaluation or precise
and timely measurement, also complicated efforts to utilize efficiently these various formulae. Changes in labor
costs and technology similarly could not be reflected in these product price formulae in a timely fashion. 


