 

2. Load Requirements 



Standard No. 206 specifies three load requirements for hinged side doors: longitudinal load, transverse load, and
inertia load. The standard specifies differing load requirements for the fully latched and secondary latched positions.


a. Load Test One. 

SAE J839 indicates that the purpose of the longitudinal load test for side doors is to determine the ability of the vehicle
latch and striker to withstand a test load perpendicular to the face of the latch. The test procedure states that the
specified load (11,000 Newtons (2,500 pounds) when in the fully latched position and 4,450 Newtons (1,000 pounds)
when in the secondary latched position) is applied perpendicular to the face of the latch. NHTSA is proposing to apply
the same basic test requirement and procedure to back doors. For back doors, however, the agency is proposing to use
the term ``Load Test One'' for this requirement, instead of ``longitudinal load,'' since the latter term would be
inappropriate given the orientation of most back door latches. 

b. 

Load Test Two. 

SAE J839 indicates that the purpose of the transverse load test for side doors is to determine the ability of the vehicle
latch and striker to withstand the test load in the direction of door opening. The test procedure states that the specified
load (8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) when in the fully latched position and 4,450 Newtons (1,000 pounds) when in the
secondary latched position) is applied in the direction of the door opening. 

The agency is proposing to apply a corresponding test requirement/procedure to back doors. To ensure that this second
load test requirement is not redundant and that latches can meet load requirements in various directions (as may occur
in real world crashes), the agency is specifying that the load for this test is applied in the direction of the fork-bolt
opening and parallel to the plane of the latch face. A depiction of the fork-bolt and the loading direction is given
in Figure 1. For most latches, this will be in the same direction as the door opening. The agency is proposing to specify
the term ``Load Test Two'' for this test requirement. 

c. 

Load Test Three. 

As indicated above, given the nature of the loading that back door latches and hinges are likely to experience in the
event of a side impact to the rear quarter panel of a vehicle, NHTSA believes it is appropriate to require latches on
doors that open upward to meet load requirements in three rather than two directions, i.e., directions that correspond
to the longitudinal and transverse directions for side doors, and a third direction that is orthogonal to the other
two directions. The agency is therefore proposing a third load test requirement in which a load would be applied in
a direction orthogonal to the directions specified in Load Tests One and Two (i.e., perpendicular to both of those
directions). The test set-up for Load Tests Two and Three is identical. However, the latch in Load Test Three is mounted
in a position perpendicular to that in Load Tests One and Two. 

NHTSA notes that, as indicated above, Standard No. 206 specifies, for the fully latched position, an 11,000 Newton
(2,500 pound) load for the longitudinal load test and an 8,900 Newton (2,000 pound) load for the transverse load test.
In proposing to extend the requirements to back doors, the agency is proposing the same loads as for the corresponding
Load Tests One and Two. The agency is considering whether an 11,000 Newton (2,500 pound) load or an 8,900 Newton (2,000
pound) load should apply to Load Test Three and requests comments on this issue. 

d. 

Inertia Load. 

Standard No. 206 requires that a side door latch not disengage from the fully latched position when a longitudinal
or transverse inertia load of 30g is applied to the door latch system. While the standard's procedures for the other
load requirements specify actual loading of a door latch in a test, mathematical analysis is specified for the inertia
load requirement. The agency notes that while Standard No. 206 only specifies that the inertia load requirement must
be met for longitudinal and transverse loads, SAE 839b recommends that the 30g requirement be met ``in any direction.''
The agency believes that this requirement should be met by back doors in any direction, since many latch orientations
are possible for back doors. NHTSA believes that this would best ensure adequate latch performance in the many loading
conditions experienced during real world crashes. The agency specifically requests comments on the appropriateness
of requiring latches to meet the inertia load requirement in any direction, as opposed to a limited number of directions,
such as those specified for Load Tests One, Two and Three. 



C. Door Hinges 



Standard No. 206 specifies that door hinges must support the door and may not separate when a longitudinal load of 11,000
Newtons (2,500 pounds), or a transverse load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds), is applied. The same considerations
concerning longitudinal and transverse loads discussed above with respect to latches apply to rear door hinges.
Therefore, the agency is proposing to specify the following three load tests: Load Test One_load is applied in the
direction perpendicular to the hinge face plate; Load Test Two_load is applied in the direction perpendicular to
the axis of the hinge pin and parallel to the hinge face plate; Load Test Three_load is applied in the direction of the
axis of the hinge pin. The third test is proposed for hinges on doors that open upward. The agency is considering whether
an 11,000 Newton (2,500 pound) load or an 8,900 Newton (2,000 pound) load should be specified for these three tests
and requests comments on this issue. 




