 

At the outset, each of the securities in the Telecommunications Basket will have equal representation. Specifically,
each security included in the portfolio will be assigned a multiplier on the date of issuance so that the security represents
an equal percentage of the value of the entire portfolio on the date of issuance. The multiplier indicates the number
of shares (or fraction of one share) of a security, given its market price, to be included in the calculation of the portfolio.
Accordingly, each of the 24 companies included in the Telecommunications Basket will represent approximately 4.167%
of the total portfolio at the time of issuance.

The multiplier for each security in the Telecommunications Basket will generally remain unchanged except for limited
adjustments that may be necessary as a result of stock splits or stock dividends.
<FOOTCITE>15</FOOTCITE>
 There will be no adjustments to the multipliers to reflect cash dividends paid with respect to a portfolio security.
In addition, no adjustments of any multiplier of a portfolio security will be made unless such adjustment would require
a change of at least 1% in the multiplier then in effect.





<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
15

</FOOTNAME>
Lehman Brothers will adjust the multiplier of any Telecommunications Basket security if the security is subject
to a stock split or reverse split or similar adjustment in the case of an ADR, to equal the product of the number of shares
issued with respect to one share of the Telecommunications Basket security, or the number of receipts issued with
respect to an ADR, and the prior multiplier. In the case of a stock dividend, the multiplier will be adjusted so that
the new multiplier will equal the former multiplier plus the product of the number of shares of such portfolio security
issued with respect to one share of the portfolio security and the prior multiplier. In the case of a listing of ADRs
on a national securities exchange in the United States or on NASDAQ/NMS, the multiplier will be adjusted so that the
new multiplier will equal the conversion of ordinary shares to ADRs. The listed ADRs then will be used to calculate
the value of the Telecommunications Basket.



</FOOTNOTE>


If the issuer of a security included in the Telecommunications Basket no longer exists, whether for reason of a merger,
acquisition or similar type of corporate control transaction, then Lehman Brothers will assign to that security
a value equal to the security's final value for the purposes of calculating portfolio values. For example, if a company
included in the Telecommunications Basket is acquired by another company, Lehman Brothers shall thereafter assign
a value to the share of the acquired company's securities equal to the value per share at which time the acquisition
takes place. If the issuer of a portfolio security is in the process of liquidation or subject to a bankruptcy proceeding,
insolvency, or other similar adjudication, such security will continue to be included in the Telecommunications
Basket so long as a market price for such security is available. If a market price is no longer available for a portfolio
security, including, but not limited to, liquidation, bankruptcy, insolvency, or any other similar proceeding,
then the value of the portfolio security will be assigned a value of zero in connection with calculating the daily portfolio
value and the closing portfolio value of the Telecommunications Basket, for so long as no market price exists for that
security.
<FOOTCITE>16</FOOTCITE>





<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
16

</FOOTNAME>
Lehman Brothers will not attempt to find a replacement stock or to compensate for the extinction of a security due to
bankruptcy or a similar event.







</FOOTNOTE>

