 

The agency is proposing in 123.3(g) to define ``harvester'' 
as a person who commercially takes molluscan shellfish from their 
growing waters, by any means. Harvester is defined because, 
under this proposal, this person has responsibility for tagging 
the product as to where it was harvested and when. Harvesters 
are expected to have an identification number issued by a 
shellfish control authority. Harvesting is generally illegal 
without such a number. 

The agency is proposing to define the term ``importer'' in 
123.3(h) as the owner of the imported goods or his 
representative in the United States. This is the person who is 
responsible for ensuring goods being entered are in compliance 
with all laws affecting the importation. Importers may not 
always directly handle the imported food, but they are 
responsible for the safety and wholesomeness of products they 
offer for entry into the United States and therefore are subject 
to part 123. 

The agency recognizes that the term ``importer'' is often used 
to describe not only the owner of the goods or his representative 
in the United States (that is, the importer of record) but also 
includes freight forwarders, food brokers, food jobbers, 
carriers, and steamship representatives. These other agents 
often represent the importer for legal and financial purposes 
that are not necessarily related to the safety of the product. 
Therefore, the agency has tentatively concluded that it is 
inappropriate to focus the HACCP requirements that bear on 
imports on these persons if they do not have authority to make 
decisions affecting the product's safety or wholesomeness. 

FDA is proposing to define a ``lot of molluscan shellfish'' in 
123.3(i) as no more than one day's harvest from a single, 
defined growing area, by one or more harvesters. This definition 
establishes the quantity of shellfish that represents a single 
lot for tagging or labeling purposes. Lot distinctions are 
needed to differentiate shellfish harvested from different 
growing areas or at different times. The time limit of one day 
is imposed because the safety of a harvesting area can change 
daily as the result of rainfall, tides, winds, and other events 
that can bring contaminants into the area. The ultimate safety 
of raw molluscan shellfish is contingent on the water quality of 
the harvesting area. To ensure product safety, shellfish 
harvesting areas that are subject to appropriate state control 
are closed to harvesting within 24 hours of a finding of adverse 
conditions. The lot definition, coupled with the harvest date on 
the harvesting tag, provides evidence that the shellfish were 
harvested when the area was safe and open for harvesting. 

The agency is proposing in 123.3(j) that ``molluscan 
shellfish'' means any edible species, or edible portion of fresh 
or frozen oysters, clams, mussels, and scallops, except were the 
scallop product consists entirely of the shucked adductor mussel. 
The distinction between molluscan shellfish and crustacean 
shellfish, which include crabs, shrimp, and lobsters, is made 
because molluscan shellfish are commonly eaten whole and raw, 
while crustacean shellfish are not. The safety of molluscan 
shellfish therefore reflects the quality of the waters from which 
they are harvested and requires special public health controls. 
Furthermore, the agency is proposing to amend the definition of 
``shellfish'' in 1240.3(p) (21 CFR 1240.3(p)) to make it 
consistent with the proposed definition in 123.3(j). 
The agency is proposing to amend the term ``shellfish'' in 
1240.3(p) to read ``molluscan shellfish'' to make the terms 
consistent between parts 123 and 1240. Because the term 
shellfish in its common usage, i.e., an edible mollusk or 
crustacean, includes crabs and lobsters, the agency believes that 
it is necessary to be more specific and accurate in its 
definition and consequent application of the requirements in its 
regulations. The proposed requirements for tagging do not apply 
to crabs and lobsters or to scallops when the final product is 
the shucked adductor muscle only. The agency is proposing to 
expand the definition in 1240.3(p) to include scallops to make 
it consistent with the definitions in proposed part 123 and with 
requirements under NSSP. 

The agency is proposing to define ``potable water'' in 
123.3(k) as water that meets EPA's primary drinking water 
regulations as set forth in 40 CFR part 141. Those regulations 
provide limits for certain microbiological, chemical, physical, 
and radiological contaminants that can render water unsafe for 
human consumption. 

The proposed definition is slightly different from the 
definition of ``potable water'' in 1240.3(k) and 1250.3(j) (21 
CFR 1250.3(j). That definition also references the regulations 
of EPA in 40 CFR part 141 but further includes FDA sanitation 
requirements in 21 CFR parts 1240 and 1250. Those sanitation 
requirements apply to interstate travel conveyances that must 
take on water at watering points. Such requirements are not 
relevant to these proposed regulations and thus were not included 
in the proposed definition. 

FDA is proposing to define ``processing'' and ``processor'' in 
123.3(m) and (n) broadly to ensure the safety of seafood 
through the application of HACCP principles throughout the 
seafood industry. The definition of ``processor'' is intended to 
include all seafood processors that handle products in interstate 
commerce, such as shuckers and other processors of raw molluscan 
shellfish, factory ships, packers, repackers, wholesalers, and warehouses. Those who process low acid canned foods
are also 
included, even though they are subject to the HACCP controls of 
part 113. Those controls are targeted toward a limited number of 
safety hazards. These proposed regulations require that 
processors apply HACCP controls to all likely safety hazards. 




