 

3. Chemotherapy for Liver Cancer (Effective for Services Performed On or After 1/29/85)._The external chemotherapy
infusion pump is covered when used in the treatment of primary hepatocellular carcinoma or colorectal cancer where
this disease is unresectable or where the patient refuses surgical excision of the tumor.  
 
4. Morphine for Intractable Cancer Pain (Effective for Services Performed On or After 4/22/85)._Morphine infusion
via an external infusion pump is covered when used in the treatment of intractable pain caused by cancer (in either
an inpatient or outpatient setting, including a hospice).  
 
Other uses of external infusion pumps are covered if the contractor's medical staff verifies the appropriateness
of the therapy and of the prescribed pump for the individual patient.

 
 



Note: 

Payment may also be made for drugs necessary for the effective use of an external infusion pump as long as the drug being
used with the pump is itself reasonable and necessary for the patient's treatment.

 
 

B. Implantable Infusion Pumps._ 
 
1. Chemotherapy for Liver Cancer (Effective for Services Performed On or After 9/26/84)._The implantable infusion
pump is covered for intra-arterial infusion of 5FUdR for the treatment of liver cancer for patients with primary
hepatocellular carcinoma or Duke's Class D colorectal cancer, in whom the metastases are limited to the liver, and
where (1) the disease is unresectable or (2) where the patient refuses surgical excision of the tumor.  
 


2. Anti-Spasmodic Drugs for Severe Spasticity._An implantable infusion pump is covered when used to administer
anti-spasmodic drugs intrathecally (e.g., baclofen) to treat chronic intractable spasticity in patients who have
proven unresponsive to less invasive medical therapy as determined by the following criteria:  
 
&bull;As indicated by at least a 6-week trial, the patient cannot be maintained on noninvasive methods of spasm control,
such as oral anti-spasmodic drugs, either because these methods fail to control adequately the spasticity or produce
intolerable side effects, and  
 
&bull;Prior to pump implantation, the patient must have responded favorably to a trial intrathecal dose of the anti-spasmodic
drug.  
 
 
 


