 

B. Acquire any assets used or previously used (and still suitable for use) in the manufacture, distribution, or sale
of chemical shoe care products, except in the ordinary course of business, from any concern, corporate or non-corporate,
presently engaged in, or within the two years preceding such acquisition engaged in the manufacture, distribution,
or sale of chemical shoe care products in the United States.
Said notification shall be given on the Notification and Report Form set forth in the Appendix to Part 803 of Title 16
of the Code of Federal Regulations as amended (hereinafter referred to as ``the Notification''). Respondents shall
provide to the Commission at least thirty days prior to acquiring any such interest (hereinafter referred to as the
``first waiting period''), both the Notification and supplemental information either in Respondents' possession
or reasonably available to Respondents. Such supplemental information shall include a copy of the proposed acquisition
agreement; the names of the principal representatives of each Respondent and of the firm Respondents desire to acquire
who negotiated the acquisition agreement; and any management or strategic plans discussing the proposed acquisition.
If, within the first waiting period, representatives of the Commission make a written request for additional information,
Respondents shall not consummate the acquisition until twenty days after submitting such additional information.
Early termination of the waiting periods in this paragraph may be requested and, where appropriate, granted in the
same manner as is applicable under the requirements and provisions of the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements
Act of 1976, 15 U.S.C. 18a.


VII




It is further ordered

 that:
A. Within sixty (60) days after the date this order becomes final and every sixty (60) days thereafter until Respondents
have fully complied with the provisions of Paragraph II or III of this order, Respondents shall submit to the Commission
a verified written report setting forth in detail the manner and form in which they intend to comply, are complying,
and have complied with Paragraphs II and III of this order. Respondents shall include in their compliance reports,
among other things that are required from time to time, a full description of the efforts being made to comply with Paragraphs
II and III of the order, including a description of all substantive contacts or negotiations for the divestiture and
the identity of all parties contacted. Respondents shall include in their compliance reports copies of all written
communications to and from such parties, all internal memoranda, and all reports and recommendations concerning
divestiture. Provided, however, that if, prior to the date the first report required by this paragraph is due, Respondents
have consummated the acquisition described in Paragraph II (1) of this order, Respondents shall, in lieu of the report
or reports and documentary attachments required by this Paragraph, submit to the Commission, within thirty (30)
days of consummation of the acquisition, a verified statement that Respondents have complied with Paragraph II of
this order, including the date of consummation.
B. One (1) year from the date this order becomes final, annually for the next nine (9) years on the anniversary of the
date this order becomes final, and at such other times as the Commission may require, Respondents shall file a verified
written report with the Commission setting forth in detail the manner and form in which they have complied and are complying
with Paragraphs V and VI of this order.


VIII




It is further orderded

 that each of the Respondents shall notify the Commission at least thirty days prior to any proposed change in such Respondent,
such as dissolution, assignment or sale resulting in the emergency of a successor corporation, the creation or dissolution
of subsidiaries or any other change in such Respondent that may affect compliance obligations arising out of this
order.


IX




It is further ordered

 that, for the purpose of determining or securing compliance with this order, and subject to any legally recognized
privilege, upon written request, each of the Respondents shall permit any duly authorized representative of the
Commission:
A. Access, during office hours and in the presence of counsel, to inspect and copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence,
memoranda and other records and documents in the possession or under the control of such Respondent relating to any
matters contained in this order; and
B. Upon five (5) days notice to such Respondent and without restraint or interference from it, to interview officers,
directors, or employees of such Respondent, who may have counsel present, regarding such matters.


