 

In developing risk estimates for disease attributable to occupational exposure, reliance is placed on exposure
encountered in the workplace to the extent possible. However, in the absence of purely occupational data, information
derived in environments other than work sites is also considered. OSHA believes that there is no physiological difference
related to exposure (or its outcome) regardless of where it is experienced. This is true regardless of whether the
endpoint is lung cancer, heart disease, or indoor air related acute irritant effects. The only difference is that
the degree of exposure may be greater in one place than in the other. Available information which uses nicotine concentration
as an index of exposure suggests that the differences in exposure between office workplaces and residences lie well
within the uncertainties of the determinations and for some workplaces, such as restaurants and transportation
facilities, exposures are significantly higher than the average exposures found in residences. Thus, risk estimates
based on residential exposures are expected to accurately reflect occupational risks in most workplaces and possibly
underestimate the risk in some workplaces. 
In developing its risk assessment for lung cancer, the EPA reviewed 19 studies which investigated nicotine concentrations
in various environments [Ex. 4311]. EPA's analysis showed that the range of average nicotine concentrations
in office workplaces is very similar to that of homes. However, in some workplaces, such as restaurants and transportation
facilities, exposures are significantly higher. It is true that there are many complicating factors in such determinations
which could affect any final conclusions. For example, it is important to consider the duration of exposure, the intensity
of exposure, the distance from the sources and other factors as well. However, EPA's analysis suggests that risk assessments
based on home exposures are relevant to workplaces as well and, in comparison to some workplaces, may even result in
an underestimate of the true occupational risk. 
In addition, other studies substantiate the magnitude of workplace exposures. For example, Emmons et al. [Ex. 498]

found that the majority of ETS exposure occurred in the workplace. Study subjects were selected from workplace settings
with a wide range of ETS exposure. The work sites ranged from those with minimal restriction of smoking and high levels
of exposure to work sites with extensive smoking restrictions and low exposure. Ninety percent of the subjects worked
outside the home. Eighty-four percent of those who worked outside the home (75.6% of the total sample) reported being
regularly exposed to smoking in the workplace. While the most highly exposed individuals in the study were those who
had both home and work exposures, it is clear that workplace exposure constituted a significant component of overall
exposure. Subjects who did not live with smokers reported that the majority of their exposure was in the workplace
(mean=36.1 min/day), home (mean=1.4 min/day) or in other locations (mean=13.1 min/day). Subjects who lived with
smokers reported receiving slightly more exposure at home than the workplace, however the difference between home
exposure and workplace exposure was not substantial (work: mean=29.4 min/day, home: mean=31.2 min/day, other:
mean=27.1 min/day). These results are shown in Table IV5. The importance of the findings from this study is
twofold. First, it indicates that the workplace is the primary source of ETS exposure for nonsmokers, who do not live
with smokers. Secondly, it shows that for nonsmokers living with smokers, even though their household environment
becomes their primary source of exposure, the workplace still contributes a substantial amount of exposure, comparable
to that experienced by the nonsmoker living with nonsmokers (29.4 min/day v. 36.1 min/day). 






<TABLE>



Table IV

5._

Exposure to ETS by Location1

1Subject Category 

1Exposure (min/day) 

195 percent confidence interval 





Living with a smoker:


Workplace 
29.4 
(7.0151.80) 
Home 
31.2 
(21.6040.80) 
Other 
27.1 
(15.1039.10) 



Living without a smoker:


Workplace 
36.1 
(22.7049.50) 
Home 
1.4 
(0.052.75) 
Other 
13.1 
(8.7517.40) 

1Source: Emmons et al. [Ex. 498] 


</TABLE>


Cummings et al. [Exs. 467], Hudgafvel-Pursiainen et al. [Ex. 4152], and Marcus et al. [Ex. 4205]
also present results to show significant workplace exposures to ETS. A re-analysis of the CAPS data (a detailed description
of this study is found in the EXPOSURE section) shows that the workplace contributes on the average 46 percent to the
total ETS exposure experienced by a nonsmoking worker. 


C. Data Sources 


As mentioned previously, only diseases that have been reported to be significantly associated with ETS exposure
and for which OSHA has access to data will be used in calculating health risk due to occupational exposure to ETS. These
will be referred to as the ``diseases of interest'' and include coronary heart disease (excluding strokes) as defined
in the Framingham study and lung cancer. 




