 

The Agency believes the burden of responsibility for determining whether use of a 
substitute will be small should reside at the same level as the notification requirement. That 
is, it should be the responsibility of the introducing agent to determine whether use of a 
particular substitute in a given sector is likely to remain below 10,000 pounds per year. The 
Agency continues to believe that focusing the listing decisions on the substitutes sold in the 
largest volumes will allow the Agency to target its regulatory efforts to those applications that 
offer the maximum risk reduction potential. 
Many commenters generally supported EPA's exemption for small industrial sectors, 
arguing that the administrative burden imposed by a SNAP review of all possible substitutions 
is unjustified by the likely risks posed by these uses. For this final rule, the Agency will 
continue to exempt small sectors and small volume uses within major industrial sectors from 
reporting responsibilities under SNAP. 
e. 

Designation of submitters/reporting responsibilities. 


Many of the public comments on the NPRM expressed general support for the 
flexibility of the reporting requirements, noting it is sensible to require notification from the 
person most suited to have the relevant information. However, some confusion has arisen as 
to the implementation and enforcement of these requirements. 
The Agency agrees with public comment that the designation of submitters or 
reporting responsibility needed clarification in this final rule. For this final rule then, 
reporting responsibility rests with the person who introduced the substitute into interstate 
commerce in its final form. As such, the producer could potentially be a manufacturer, 
formulator, or an end-user. Identification of designated submitters is further detailed in 
section IV.B. 
f. 

Exemption for second-generation substitutes. 


Many commenters supported EPA's exemption for second-generation substitutes. 
However, several asked for clarification of regulatory language setting out this exemption. 
They note that the definition left plenty of room for advances in the science to calculate 
increasingly small contributions to ozone depletion added by hitherto unsuspected compounds, 
thereby constantly broadening the scope of SNAP as new concerns develop. They ask that 
EPA clarify that SNAP should only apply to substitutes for class I or class II compounds. 
EPA agrees with these comments and has clarified in section IV.A.2.f. that the 
definition of second-generation applies only to substitutes for class I or class II compounds in 
this final rule. 


2. SNAP Determination and Listing Process 


a. 

Allowing for assured minimum periods of use. 


Numerous commenters expressed a need for a minimum assured time period of use for 
acceptable substitutes in order to facilitate the fastest possible transition away from class I 
substances. Some commenters suggested that this assured minimum period should be 
established based on some economic measure, such as the lifetime of equipment in which the 
compound is to be used, or the overall payback period for investment in modifications to 
allow the use of a transitional compound. One commenter suggested the use of risk analysis 
to define the assured minimum period. Other commenters suggested 10 years as the 
appropriate period. 
The Agency believes Congress enacted provisions under section 612 which make a 
minimum assured time period for use of a substitute neither authorized nor necessary under 
SNAP. As described in section VIII of this final rule, a petition under section 612(d) to 
change a listing from acceptable to unacceptable or vice versa must include adequate data. In 
addition, any change will be formally promulgated as a rulemaking, which requires EPA to 
propose, take public comment, and complete final action for any decision. If the decision is 
made to change a listing for a substitute from acceptable to unacceptable, the grandfathering 
provisions of this final rule provide the Agency with the flexibility in appropriate cases to 
provide time after a substitute is removed from the list of acceptable substitutes to allow 
persons who are then using the substance, or who have expended considerable efforts in good 
faith toward its use, to find a different substitute and recover their investment in prior 
substitutes. 


3. SNAP Information Form 


a. 

Use of global warming potential. 


Some commenters argue that EPA has no legal authority under section 612 to regulate 
substitutes based on global warming. One commenter noted that during the development of 
title VI, Congress deliberately excised global warming from the statute, and that legislative 
history of title VI thus argues against reliance on global warming as a regulatory criterion 
under SNAP. Finally, a commenter asserted that not only the Congress, but the President also 
believes that ozone depletion and global warming should be treated separately. 




