 

Rats are obligatory nose-breathers, and the anatomy and physiology of the respiratory tract and the biochemistry
of the lung differ between rodents and humans. Because of these distinctions, laboratory animals and humans are likely
to have different deposition and exposure patterns for the various cigarette smoke components in the respiratory
system. For example, rodents have extensive and complex nasal turbinates where significant particle deposition
could occur, decreasing exposure to the lung. These anatomical and physiological differences, aside from the subchronic
exposure, may partially account for absence of any lung tumors in the study by Coggins et al. 


The application of cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) to mouse skin is a widely employed assay for the evaluation of
carcinogenic potential. CSC assays may not, however, reveal all of the carcinogenic activity of actual cigarette
smoke, because these condensates lack most of the volatile and semi-volatile components of whole smoke. Benign skin
tumors and carcinomas were seen in Swiss-ICR mice exposed to cigarette tar from the sidestream smoke of nonfilter
cigarettes suspended in acetone and applied to skin for 15 months [Ex. 4327]. In lifetime rat studies, intrapulmonary
implants of mainstream smoke condensate in a lipid vehicle caused a dose-dependent increase in the incidence of lung
carcinomas [Exs. 475, 4289]. 


The polyamines contained in tobacco smoke, spermidine, spermine, and their diamine precursor, putrescine, are
believed to have an essential role in cellular proliferation and differentiation. Formation of putrescine from
ornithine is catalyzed by ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), the rate-limiting enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis.
A significant increase in lung and trachea ornithine decarboxylase activity was observed by Olsen [Ex. 4245]
after an eight week exposure of male Sprague-Dawley rats to MS smoke. All dilutions of SS smoke exposure caused significant
increase in trachea ODC activity but did not influence the lung ODC activity. 


Environmental tobacco smoke induced carcinogenicity is also supported by a case-control study of lung cancer in
pet dogs [Ex. 4259]. The study compared the incidence of lung cancer in pet dogs exposed to their owners' smoking
versus dogs whose owners did not smoke. Dogs have a very low natural incidence of lung cancer. There was an elevated
risk of lung cancer (Relative Risk = 1.6) observed in pets with smoking owners. However, the analysis was statistically
insignificant, perhaps in part due to small sample size. 




7. Genotoxicity 




Short-term mutagenicity tests have gained widespread acceptance as an initial step in the identification of potential
carcinogens. Extensive use of these tests has come about because they are easy to perform and are inexpensive and also
because of the reported high positive correlations between short-term mutagenicity tests and carcinogenicity.
It has been reported that 90 percent of the carcinogens tested are mutagens and 90 percent of the noncarcinogens are
nonmutagens. 


Several short-term bioassays have been performed to evaluate the genotoxicity of cigarette smoke. While most of
them have evaluated the effect of cigarette smoke condensate, some have attempted to evaluate either the gas phase
or the whole smoke. 


The most commonly employed assay for mutagenic activity employs various strains of 

Salmonella typhimurium

. Whole smoke as well as cigarette smoke condensate of tobacco have been shown to be mutagenic in 

Salmonella typhimurium

 strain TA 1538 [Ex. 421]. Sidestream smoke was also found to be mutagenic in a system where the smoke was tested
directly on the bacterial plates [Ex. 4246]. Sidestream smoke and extracts of ETS collected from indoor air
[Exs. 4202, 45, 4198, 4201, 4203] also exhibited mutagenic activity in this bacterial
strain. Claxton et al. [Ex. 455] found that sidestream smoke accounted for approximately 60% of the total 

S. typhimurium

 mutagenicity per cigarette, 40% from the sidestream smoke particulates and 20% from the semi-volatiles. The highly
volatile fraction, from either mainstream or sidestream smoke was not mutagenic. 


Condensates from both mainstream [Exs. 489, 4193] and sidestream smoke [Ex. 490] have also been
reported to have mutagenic activity. Doolittle et al. [Ex. 489] demonstrated the genotoxicity of the sidestream
smoke from the Kentucky Reference cigarette (1R4F) by employing several different assays. In their study, sidestream
smoke produced positive results in 

Salmonella typhimurium 

strains TA98, TA100, TA1537, and TA1538 in the presence of S9 mix from aroclor-induced rat liver but produced negative
results in strain TA1535. They also showed that sidestream smoke produced positive results in the Chinese hamster
ovary cells chromosomal aberration assay and in the Chinese hamster ovary cell sister-chromatid exchange assay
both with and without metabolic activation. They demonstrated that the sidestream smoke was weakly positive in inducing
DNA repair in cultured rat hepatocytes. However, sidestream smoke was nonmutagenic in the Chinese hamster ovary
cell-HGPRT assay both with and without metabolic activation but it was found to be cytotoxic in this system. 

In their further studies, Doolittle et al. [Ex. 490] observed similar responses when they measured the genotoxic
activity of mainstream cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) from Kentucky reference research cigarette (1R4F). As
seen with sidestream smoke, CSC in this study was mutagenic in 

Salmonella typhimurium 

strain TA98, TA100, TA1537, and TA1538 in the presence of S9 mix but was negative in strain TA1535. CSC was also positive
in the Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells-chromosomal aberration assay and in the CHO-sister-chromatid exchange
assay both with and without metabolic activation. CSC was weakly positive in inducing DNA repair in cultured rat hepatocytes.
However, again as seen with sidestream smoke, CSC was nonmutagenic in the CHOHGPRT assay, with or without metabolic
activation but was found to be cytotoxic in this system. The results from these two studies appear to indicate that
sidestream smoke behaves very much like mainstream smoke in these assays. 

Mohtashamipur et al. [Ex. 4227] demonstrated significant mutagenic activity in the urine of rats exposed
to sidestream smoke. In this study, cigarettes were machine smoked under standardized laboratory conditions and
the sidestream smoke of two cigarettes was directed through metabolism cages containing rats. The urine of these
rats was collected 24 hours prior to the SS exposure and 24 hours after the onset of the exposure. The individual urine
samples of all (10) rats after exposure showed significantly higher activity for direct-acting mutagens (in strain
TA1538) than the urine samples of the same rats before the exposure. 




