 

C. Exposure Studies 


1. Low-level Contaminants 


Experimental studies have demonstrated that exposure of susceptible people to low level mixtures of VOCs have induced
mucous membrane irritation and pulmonary effects. Some of these studies are discussed below. 

The potential of indoor air contamination to produce adverse effects in humans was demonstrated by Molhave et al.
in Denmark [Ex. 420]. These researchers studied 62 subjects suffering from ``indoor climate symptoms''.
These subjects reported primarily eye and upper respiratory tract irritation, but were otherwise healthy individuals
that did not suffer from asthma, allergy, or bronchitis. The subjects were exposed to a mixture of VOCs in concentrations
of 0, 5, or 25 mg/m

3

. These concentrations respectively represented ``clean'' air, average polluted air, and the maximum polluted
air in Danish households. After exposure, a Digit Span test was administered. The study found significant declines
in performance on this test; demonstrating that low-level exposures to volatile organic compounds had an adverse
effect on the ability to concentrate [Ex. 420]. 

Otto et al. [Ex. 4248], repeating the Molhave et al. (1984) experiment, studied 66 healthy subjects with no
history of eye and upper respiratory tract irritation. These subjects were exposed at 0 and 25 mg/m

3

 VOC-contaminated air. Otto et al. reported that while subjects found the odor of chemicals unpleasant, to degrade
indoor air quality, to increase headache, and produce general discomfort, VOC exposure for 2.75 hours duration did
not affect performance on any behavioral tests. These results imply that persons who experience symptoms of SBS may
have a lower threshold for certain health effects compared to nonreactive people. This suggests that those with compromised
immune response (e.g. allergy sufferers) may be at elevated risk of SBS. 

Ahlstrom, et al. [Ex. 42] found that synergistic effects may occur when one strong indoor irritant interacts
with other indoor contaminants present at low-level concentrations. Ahlstrom et al. found that there was almost
a 4-fold increase in the perceived odor strength of formaldehyde at low concentration (0.08 ppm) when mixed with 100%
indoor air from a building where SBS was reported, relative to 10% indoor air from the same building. 

The Report of the Canadian Interministerial Committee on Indoor Air Quality [Ex. 4264] adopts the World Health
Organization's definition of health: ``Health refers to a state of complete physical, mental, and social well being,
and not just the absence of disease or infirmity.'' This definition was adopted to allow the setting of indoor air quality
guidelines based on ``comfort'' as well as ``health''. The report observes that the symptoms of SBS are sufficiently
general or subjective that they may be indicative of several other medical conditions. Therefore, perhaps the best
indicator that workplace exposure may play a role in the symptoms reported by an individual is the observation that
symptoms worsen during the work day, and disappear shortly after leaving work. They state that because there is a wide
variation in individual susceptibility, based on genetics, age, medication, previous exposure to pollutants,
gender, and state of health, especially those with allergies, that certain individuals may be more sensitive to SBS
than others. 



2. Bioaerosols 



The levels of bioaerosols in the indoor environment should reflect those found in the outdoor environment. A rank
order assessment, comparing the abundance of microorganisms in the outdoor versus indoor environment is one way
of assessing this relationship [Exs. 361, 4229]. If indoor and outdoor sampling results are not comparable,
then it is possible that a reservoir of a particular microbe may be amplifying in the indoor environment; especially
if moisture and a nutrient-rich substrate are available [Ex. 4229]. An example of this would be 

Legionella.

 Commonly found in the outdoor environment, the bacteria are as expected, commonly found in untreated potable and
nonpotable water. Situations can occur that allow these reservoirs to amplify not only in potable water and hot water
service systems but also water used in cooling towers and evaporative condensers [Ex. 4229]. Infection occurs
if the bacteria are disseminated, either through the HVAC system or potable water system (e.g., showers) to the breathing
zone of a susceptible person. A healthy individual may develop the less severe Pontiac Fever. An individual that smokes
or is older may develop the more serious pneumonia [Exs. 433, 4229]. 



3. Environmental Tobacco Smoke 



The burning of tobacco in enclosed workplaces releases an aerosol containing a large variety of solid, liquid, and
gas phase chemical compounds. Generation of tobacco smoke is governed by the source emission characteristics of
smokers and their tobacco products, whereas removal is primarily determined by the rate of replacement of building
air by outside air, with re-emission of surface-sorbed compounds playing a minor role. Natural and mechanical ventilation
systems are designed primarily to limit the accumulation of the products of human respiratory metabolism, and secondarily
to limit odor; not to control the byproducts of biomass combustion. Thus, smoking indoors creates air pollution which
is not adequately abated by customary ventilation systems.
 
Exposure to tobacco smoke primarily occurs through the inhalation route. Such an exposure can be measured by the determination
of the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion of tobacco smoke constituents and/or their metabolites.
However, relatively few of these individual constituents have been identified and characterized. Also, measurement
of all components in tobacco smoke is not feasible. Therefore, it becomes necessary to identify a marker which, when
measured, will accurately represent the frequency, duration and magnitude of the exposure to environmental tobacco
smoke. 

This discussion reviews available data for the purposes of assessing exposure to ETS in the workplace. Nonsmokers
are exposed to mainstream smoke after it has been exhaled by smokers, and to diluted sidestream smoke. Issues covered
include activity patterns affecting the duration of nonsmokers' exposures, the concentrations of ETS in buildings,
the comparison of ETS components in indoor workplaces, levels of biomarkers in workers, and the inadequacy of general
dilution ventilation to address ETS exposure control. This discussion will indicate not only that exposure occurs,
but that nonsmokers absorb ETS components. 



(a) Chemistry.

 Pipe, cigar, and cigarette smoke all contribute to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) but cigarette smoke is of principal
interest because it is by far the most common. Tables III6 and III7 list some of the known constituents
of tobacco smoke. 

The combustion of tobacco leads to the formation of mainstream smoke (MS) and sidestream smoke (SS). MS is generated
during puff-drawing in the burning cone and hot zones; it travels through the tobacco column and is inhaled by the smoker.
The smoke which is exhaled by the smoker, while different from the inhaled smoke, is also considered ``mainstream.''
SS is formed in between puff-drawing and is emitted directly from the smoldering tobacco product into the ambient
air. 



