 

On April 9, 1990, the FAA amended the TCAS rule by revising the schedule for the installation of TCAS II equipment in
airplanes having more than 30 passenger seats (55 FR 13242). Operators of airplanes having more than 30 passenger
seats and operated under part 121 are required to install TCAS II equipment in accordance with a phased-in schedule
so that 100% of an operator's covered airplanes will have TCAS II equipment by December 30, 1993. Operations conducted
under parts 125 or 129 with airplanes having more than 30 passenger seats are also required to install TCAS II equipment
by December 30, 1993.



The Proposal



The FAA believes that most TCAS RA's will involve changes in the rate of descent or climb in order to mitigate potential
collision hazards. Such TCAS RA's routinely will not necessitate a pilot deviating from an ATC clearance or instruction.
The issue of advising ATC of the receipt of or compliance with a TCAS RA that does not involve a deviation from a clearance
or instruction is a matter of pilot judgment and discretion.

The FAA also has determined that the majority of deviations from ATC clearances or instructions in response to TCAS
RA's will be appropriate and necessary to resolve potential collision hazards with other transponder-equipped
aircraft. In such cases, pilots executing the appropriate maneuvers are expected to advise ATC of the deviations
as soon as possible.

The current language of 91.123(c) provides that a pilot who deviates from an ATC clearance or instruction,
in an emergency, shall notify ATC as soon as possible. If a pilot deviates from an assigned altitude in response to a
TCAS RA, but does not believe that an emergency exists, that pilot may determine, based on current 91.123(c),
that an advisory to ATC is not required. The proposal would specifically state that a report to ATC is required.

Air traffic controllers base their control and traffic management decisions on the expectation that pilots will
comply with ATC-assigned routes, altitudes, and other clearances and instructions. If a pilot must deviate from
an ATC clearance or instruction, the controller mut be given timely notification of that deviation so that appropriate
instructions and/or advisories can be issued to ensure a safe, orderly, and expeditious flow of traffic. By advising
ATC as soon as possible after a deviation, the controller can evaluate the situation, determine the most appropriate
and safe course of action, and issue alternate instructions if necessary.

The FAA has concluded that this proposed rule is necessary to codify existing policy for pilots to notify ATC as soon
as possible after any deviation from an ATC clearance or instruction in response to a TCAS RA, whether that deviation
was emergency-related or not. Further, the FAA has determined that this proposed rule will not add or change any notification
or reporting requirements for deviations that are necessary to resolve potential or imminent collision hazards.
The FAA has always intended that notification to ATC of a deviation from a clearance or instruction is necessary and
required, whether that deviation is emergency-related or not. This action serves only to reinforce and codify that
intention.

Accordingly, the FAA proposes to amend 91.123 of the FAR to authorize deviations from an ATC clearance or instruction
when responding to a TCAS RA. In addition, pilots would be required to advise ATC of the TCAS RA deviation from an ATC
clearance or instruction whether emergency-related or not.



Economic Evaluation



The FAA has determined that this NPRM is not a ``significant regulatory action'', as defined by Executive Order 12866
(Regulatory Planning and Review). The anticipated benefits and costs associated with this NPRM are summarized below.
(A detailed discussion of costs and benefits is contained in the full evaluation in the docket for this NPRM). The agency
has determined that this proposed rule would be cost-beneficial because it imposes no costs and would promote air
safety. There would not be any changes in notification or reporting requirements for deviations from ATC clearances
that are necessary to avoid potential collision hazards. The proposal would clarify and codify existing policy and
guidance requirements that pilots who deviate from their assigned altitudes in response to a TCAS resolution advisory
provide timely notice of that deviation to air traffic control in both non-emergency situations and emergency situations.
Such notification would give controllers an opportunity to resolve any conflicts resulting from a TCAS II- equipped
aircraft being at other than the assigned altitude.



