 

Where an applicant's business plan does not adequately address how transaction proceeds will help meet the credit
and lending needs of its community, the OTS may deny the application or impose appropriate conditions of approval
designed to ensure that the applicant will address these concerns. The OTS generally will not view commitments included
in a savings association's business plan as remedying pre-existing CRA-related deficiencies. However, commitments
may be appropriate in addressing CRA performance in the context of the conversion of a troubled savings associations.
The OTS intends to give substantial weight to an applicant's previous CRA record, consistent with long-standing
policy of the OTS.

38

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


38

</FOOTNAME>


See

 54 FR 13742 (April 5, 1989) (joint CRA policy statement of the federal financial supervisory agencies). 

</FOOTNOTE>


As stated above, applicants must submit business plans to OTS staff for their review prior to filing a formal application.




L. Other Issues 



1. Subscription Rights 



The conversion regulations require that prior to the completion of a conversion, no person may transfer, or enter
into any agreement or understanding to transfer, the legal or beneficial ownership of conversion subscription rights,
or the underlying securities to the account of another.

39

 The OTS did not propose any change to the prohibition in the OTS conversion regulations on the transfer or sale of subscription
rights or similar ``free distribution'' schemes, but did request comment on whether subscription rights should
continue to be nontransferable, or if transferability is recommended, the reasons for, and the manner in which to
allow for, such transfer. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


39

</FOOTNAME>
12 CFR 563b.3(i)(1). 

</FOOTNOTE>


Almost all of the commenters who commented on this issue stated that subscription rights should continue to be nontransferable.
The commenters that opposed transferability asserted that transferability would place undue pressure on mutuals
to convert; would place emphasis on ownership by depositors, a concept that is theoretical; would make the conversion
process overly complex; would be dangerous to the long-term health of the industry; would be unworkable and not in
the public interest; would increase the chances of fraud and abuse; would be difficult and costly in allocation of
rights; would enable sophisticated and professional investors to take advantage of members; and would create a destabilizing
effect on mutuals. One commenter suggested an alternative that would allow members to cause associations to redeem
rights for a certain period of time, for payment of a special dividend, provided there is adequate capital. 

Three commenters endorsed transferability of subscription rights, although one of the three stated that account
holders should be allowed to transfer rights to another individual, but not a group of investors or another institution.


The OTS notes that the FDIC and others have suggested that it may be appropriate for depositors to be able to receive
a gift of cash or stock or to transfer and sell their subscription rights so that any ``windfall'' value can be distributed
directly to the depositors. The current OTS regulatory regimen specifically rejects any type of free distribution
schemes as unsafe and unsound practice.

40

 The OTS continues to believe that this type of change to the current conversion regulations would raise a number of
complex legal and policy issues, many of which were taken into account previously by the FHLBB in determining to prohibit
transferability.

41

 These issues, as noted in the preamble to the interim final rule, include the possibility of adverse federal tax consequences
to depositors receiving such rights, undue pressure on mutual associations to convert that may evolve from significant
shifts of savings funds by depositors into such associations, difficulties in equitably allocating such subscription
rights among depositors, potential manipulation of the process by sophisticated third parties to the detriment
of the depositors, incentives for manipulation by insiders, the continued need for establishment and maintenance
of a liquidation account and significantly increased conversion costs due to compliance with securities law requirements
for registering subscription rights for public distribution. For these reasons, the OTS conversion regulations
continue in effect without any change relative to free distribution of stock or transfer of subscription rights.




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


40

</FOOTNAME>


See

 39 FR 9142 (March 7, 1974). 


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


41

</FOOTNAME>


See

 footnote 17 above. 

</FOOTNOTE>


2. Availability of Conversion Documents 



OTS rules now permit the public to have ready access to all relevant non-confidential materials regarding proposed
conversion transactions. 

Of five commenters addressing the issue of whether OTS should permit access to non-confidential preliminary conversion
materials, three supported the revision allowing access, one opposed, claiming access to such materials would confuse
members whose focus should be on the accuracy and adequacy of the final information disclosed to the public, and one
stated that the prospectus and plan of conversion, as approved by the board of directors, provide adequate disclosure.


The OTS continues to believe that even though this information is preliminary in nature, it may be useful for account
holders and the public to access it earlier in the conversion process, and therefore, the provision in the interim
final rule will continue in effect without change. As noted above, business plans filed with, or in contemplation
of, a conversion will continue to be treated confidentially so long as the applicant follows the procedures set forth
in 12 CFR 563b.4(c). 



3. Conforming Changes to Mutual Holding Company Regulations 



The mutual holding company regulations, 12 CFR part 575, generally incorporate the substantive and procedural standards
for conversion contained in the conversion regulation. To the extent the final rule addresses conversion standards,
those same standards apply to mutual holding company reorganizations and minority stock issuances. The OTS is also
revising 12 CFR part 575 to make clarifying and conforming changes to the mutual-to-stock conversion regulations.





