 

2. Heavy-Duty NMHC Standards 





Summary of the proposal: 

In setting NMHC standards for natural 
gas-fueled heavy-duty engines (HDE), the Agency intends to 
establish standards which would provide the same level of NMHC 
control as the THC standards in effect for petroleum diesel and 
gasoline HDEs. In the absence of speciated exhaust HC data on HDEs 
(i.e., data on the level of the individual HC components in the 
exhaust), EPA applied the results of an analysis done on light-duty 
vehicles and light-duty trucks to arrive at NMHC standards which 
were 82.5 percent of the level of the corresponding THC standards. 
The resultant standards were very close to those adopted by the 
California Air Resources Board (CARB), and in the NPRM the Agency 
requested comment on whether it should adopt CARB's standards 
instead. 



Summary of the comments: 

Every commenter who expressed an opinion 
on this issue urged EPA to adopt the CARB standards in order that 
the California and federal standards be harmonized. 



EPA response to the comments: 

The Agency believes that the 
differences between its proposed NMHC standards and CARB's are so 
small as not to be an air quality issue. Further, EPA has learned 
since the NPRM that the CARB standards were based on speciated data 
from HDEs. Thus, as EPA believes that the speciated data provides 
a sounder basis than EPA's, the Agency is adopting CARB's NMHC 
standards for HDEs. 



3. Evaporative Emission Standards 





Summary of the proposal: 

In the NPRM it was noted that, due to the 
sealed nature of gaseous-fueled vehicle fuel systems, their 
``evaporative'' emissions (i.e., emissions of unburned fuel from the 
fuel storage system) are expected to be near-zero. Nonetheless, 
the Agency proposed evaporative emission controls for gaseous- 
fueled vehicles in order to assure that the fuel systems are not 
leaking. EPA proposed that the evaporative provisions for gasoline 
and methanol-fueled vehicles, which were in the process of being 
revised at the time of the proposal for this rule, be applicable to 
gaseous-fueled vehicles as well, with modifications to the test 
procedures as necessary to accommodate gaseous fuels. The Agency 
also proposed that certification testing waivers be available for 
evaporative testing in order to reduce the testing burden as much 
as possible, given the likelihood of near-zero emissions. 



Summary of the comments: 

Although one commenter supported the 
proposed evaporative requirements for gaseous-fueled vehicles, 
citing potential fuel leaks from the vehicle refueling receptacle, 
most of the comments received expressed opposition. In general, 
most commenters said that, for safety reasons, as well as to simply 
prevent the complete escape of fuel from the vehicle for economic 
reasons, the fuel systems must be sealed. Since sealed systems are 
a practical requirement of gaseous-fueled vehicles, they argued, 
there is no need for EPA to regulate evaporative emissions. As a 
result, any certification testing required would be unnecessary. 
Some commenters felt that if EPA were to require some form of 
evaporative emissions showing that it should be in the form of an 
engineering evaluation of the system, or simply a one hour diurnal 
test. 



EPA response to comments: 

The Agency agrees with the general 
comment that there are practical considerations other than 
emissions concerns which force the use of sealed fuel systems on 
gaseous-fueled vehicles. As a result, EPA would expect their 
evaporative emissions to be near-zero. However, the Agency 
believes that it is prudent to have some kind of evaporative 
emission standard which can be enforced, in order to assure that 
fuel system leaks do not become a problem. Thus, the same new 
evaporative provisions applicable to other vehicles beginning with 
the 1996 model year will also be applied to gaseous-fueled vehicles 
at that time, recognizing that compliance with these standards is 
optional prior to the 1997 model year. The Agency does recognize, 
however, that it is likely that, by virtue of their design, 
gaseous-fueled vehicles will emit well below the applicable 
standards. Therefore, certification testing waivers will be 
available for all gaseous-fueled vehicle evaporative provisions if 
the manufacturer can show that, by virtue of the vehicle's design, 
it will always meet the applicable standards. 





