 

The AMA Report recommends, for all three classes, a change of the standard to specify, ``No acute or chronic disease
of the middle or internal ear that will cause acute paroxysms or unpredictable attacks of vertigo.'' Also, the AMA
Report recommends an additional standard that specifies, ``No disease or malformation of the oral cavity, pharynx,
or larynx that would interfere with clear and effective speech communication.'' All other standards in the current
rule would be deleted. 
For the most part, the proposed rule at 67.105(b), 67.205(b), and 67.305(b) follows the AMA Report recommendations.
It requires that there be no ``disease or condition of the middle or internal ear, nose, oral cavity, pharynx, or larynx''
that will interfere with or be aggravated by flying or that will interfere with clear and effective speech communication.
In addition, in the proposed rule at 67.105(c), 67.205(c), and 67.305(c) there may be no disease or condition
that may involve vertigo or a disturbance of equilibrium. 
Current standards reflect specific concerns about infections of the ear and mastoid and the damage caused by such
infections to the ear drum and middle ear. The proposed standards more generally and properly address diseases, or
conditions of the ear, nose, or throat that may interfere with speech communication or equilibrium, factors that
are important for safety. 


Mental 


Mental disorders may adversely affect judgment and behavior in ways that create potential hazards in aviation. The
current standards for all three classes of airman medical certification, therefore, list certain psychiatric disorders
for which medical certification would be denied. The list was derived from the recommendations made by the Flight
Safety Foundation in 1959. These disorders are considered to constitute a definite hazard to safety in flight when
determined to be present in an airman by established medical history or by clinical diagnosis. As listed in the current
regulations, any of the following disorders is a cause for denial: (1) a personality disorder that manifests itself
in overt acts; (2) a psychosis; (3) alcoholism; and (4) drug dependence. In addition, the current standards provide
for denial of medical certification in the presence of any ``other personality disorder, neurosis, or mental condition
that the Federal Air Surgeon finds makes the applicant unable to safely perform the duties or exercise the privileges
of the airman certificate that he holds or for which he is applying; or may reasonably be expected, within two years
after the finding, to make him unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.'' 
The mental standards have been well accepted by the public and by the medical community as practical and effective.
However, with publication of the authoritative reference, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Third Edition (DSM III), changes in the diagnostic terminology and classification of mental disorders have caused
some confusion. Major illnesses, previously included in the category of ``psychosis,'' are separately described
in the DSM III and are, therefore, no longer considered by some others as covered under the term ``psychosis'' in the
FAR. Since these conditions are of concern in the context of airman medical certification and flight safety, the agency
must amend the mental standards to clarify the position of the FAA. 
The AMA Report recommends amendment of the regulations to include a more extensive and specific list of disqualifying
mental disorders: substance abuse or dependence; schizophrenic disorders; paranoid disorders; psychotic disorders;
major affective disorders (including bipolar disorders and depression); anxiety disorders; dissociative disorders;
impulse disorders; disorders first evident in infancy, childhood, and adolescence; and organic brain syndrome.

The proposed rule at 67.107 (a) through (c), 67.207 (a) through (c), and 67.307 (a) through (c) would
include all of these disorders but would not specifically list them. The current and proposed mental standard lists
a psychosis as a disqualifying disorder. The proposed standard states that ``psychosis'' refers to ``a mental disorder
in which the individual has manifested psychotic symptoms or to a mental disorder in which an individual may reasonably
be expected to manifest psychotic symptoms.'' In this way, two types of persons would be disqualified under this standard:
those who have manifested psychotic symptoms; and those who have not had psychotic symptoms but whose mental condition
is one in which psychotic symptoms may reasonably be expected to develop. Psychotic symptoms are characterized by
a failure to maintain adequate contact with reality. The failure to maintain adequate contact with reality results
in or may reasonably be expected to result in the impairment of judgment, including bizarre, grossly disorganized
behavior; out of control behavior; delusions; or hallucinations. ``Psychosis'' would include schizophrenic disorders,
paranoid disorders, and other disorders such as mood disorders, that sometimes manifest psychotic symptoms. Also
included would be such conditions as schizotypal and borderline personality disorders. Other disqualifying disorders
listed in the AMA Report that are not specifically listed in the proposed rule, such as anxiety disorders and impulse
disorders, may be disqualifying under the general mental provisions of the regulations as they are now, depending
on the severity of the disorders. The particular circumstances of each individual history and medical condition
are considered by the FAA in determining whether such history or condition is disqualifying. 






