 

B. Selection of Source Category 


The MWC guidelines adopted on February 11, 1991 provided the rationale for the selection of MWC's as a source category
to be regulated (56 FR 5514). Moreover, section 129 of the Act directs the EPA to issue guidelines for this source category,
and thereby confirms the EPA's earlier decision.
Today's proposed emission guidelines (subpart Cb) would apply to existing MWC's, defined as those MWC's for which
construction, modification, or reconstruction commenced on or before September 20, 1994. Municipal waste combustors
for which construction, modification, or reconstruction commenced after September 20, 1994 would be covered by
the subpart Eb NSPS proposed in a separate notice in today's 

Federal Register

. 
Also, as required by section 129 of the Act, today's proposed guidelines would establish opacity limits for certain
existing air curtain incinerators, for which construction, modification, or reconstruction commenced on or before
September 20, 1994. Under the proposed guidelines, air curtain incinerators that burn only yard wastes, tree trimmings,
and clean untreated lumber would be required to meet an opacity limit, and no other requirements would apply. The proposed
guidelines for these air curtain incinerators are presented in section VI of this preamble. 


C. Modification or Reconstruction of Existing MWC's 


The subpart Ea NSPS proposal published in the 

Federal Register

 on December 20, 1989 (54 FR 52251) provided a discussion of the terms and conditions associated with construction,
modification, and reconstruction for MWC's. One change is being proposed. Previously, the terms ``modification''
and ``reconstruction'' were defined under sections 60.14 and 60.15 of subpart A of part 60. Section 129 of the Act has
specified a new definition of ``modified solid waste incineration unit'' that combines and revises the previous
definitions of ``modification'' and ``reconstruction.'' Specifically, ``modified solid waste incineration
unit'' refers to: (1) Modifications for which the



*** cumulative costs of the modifications, over the life of the unit, exceed 50 per centum of the original
cost of the construction and installation of the unit (not including the cost of any land purchased in connection with
such construction or installation) updated to current costs. ***



or (2) modifications involving



*** a physical change in or change in the method of operation of the unit which increases the amount
of any air pollutant emitted by the unit for which standards have been established under [section 129] or section 111
***.


D. Selection of Designated Pollutants 


A complete discussion of the rationale for selecting ``MWC emissions'' as the designated pollutants under sections
111(b) and 111(d) of the Act is provided in the December 20, 1989 proposal preamble for the 1991 emission guidelines
(54 FR 52209). Additionally, section 129 of the Act specifies that emission guidelines be developed for PM, opacity,
SO

2

, HCl, NO

X

, CO, Cd, Pb, Hg, and dioxins/furans. Emission guidelines for all but four of these pollutants (Cd, Pb, Hg, and NO

X

) were established in the February 11, 1991 emission guidelines (56 FR 5514). Section 129 specifies that emission
limits be set for each of the metals (Cd, Pb, and Hg). 
Emission guidelines for fugitive MWC fly ash/bottom ash emissions are proposed today because these emissions also
contain PM, Cd, Pb, Hg, and dioxins/furans. 


E. Selection of Designated Facilities 


For the proposed emission guidelines, the designated facility, an MWC unit, is defined as any setting or equipment
chamber or pit used to burn MSW (including RDF) and extends to and includes MWC fly ash/bottom ash emission points,
including ash storage areas, conveyor transfer points, and ash loading areas for hauling trucks at the MWC site. This
does not extend to ash handling outside of the MWC property boundary or at ash fill sites.
Municipal waste combustion includes the burning (or pyrolysis) of MSW in any type of equipment, chamber, or pit including
equipment with and without heat recovery. Municipal solid waste is defined as either a mixture or a single-item stream
of household, commercial, and/or institutional discards. This would include discards such as paper, wood, yard
wastes, tree trimmings, plastics, leather, rubber, glass, metals, and other combustible and noncombustible materials.
The MSW definition includes household discards as well as discards from institutional and commercial sources, but
does not include industrial process or manufacturing discards. The MSW definition also includes RDF, which is a type
of MSW that is shredded (or pelletized) and classified by size before combustion. Municipal solid waste does not include
wastes that are solely segregated medical wastes. However, any mixtures of medical waste with nonmedical hospital
waste or with household, commercial, or institutional waste is considered to be MSW. Minor editing has been done to
the definition of MSW to clarify this point. 
Cofired combustors are those that fire MSW with non-MSW fuel such as coal. Cofired combustors that combust a fuel feed
stream comprised, in aggregate, of equal to or less than 30 percent MSW or RDF (by weight, based on a 24-hour average),
would not be subject to the emission guidelines and would be required only to submit reports of the amount of MSW and
other fuels combusted. The exclusion of cofired combustors from the guidelines is consistent with the Act of 1990.
This exclusion is unchanged from the February 11, 1991 guidelines. 
Waste-fuel power generation facilities that combust a single-item waste stream of tires, fuel derived solely from
tires, or used oil would be subject only to an initial report and to no other provisions in today's proposal or to the
emission guidelines that were promulgated on February 11, 1991 (56 FR 5514). This exclusion is unchanged from the
February 11, 1991 guidelines. 
Air curtain incinerators with unit capacities to combust greater than 35 Mg/day of MSW are subject to the proposal;
however, air curtain incinerators that combust only tree trimmings, yard wastes, and clean untreated lumber (these
are a subset of MSW) would be subject to an opacity standard and its associated testing, recordkeeping, and reporting
included in today's proposal, but would not be subject to other parts of today's proposal. This exclusion does not
apply to air curtain incinerators that combust other MSW materials.


