 

Determination of what, if any, cross-examination is necessary is within the sound judicial discretion of the Presiding
Judge, the prevailing standard being whether the person requesting cross-examination has persuasively demonstrated
that written evidence is ineffectual to develop proof. If cross-examination is necessary, the Presiding Judge will
specify a date for the appearance of all witnesses. In addition, if the designation order points out an area where additional
underlying data is needed, the Presiding Judge will have the authority to permit the limited use of discovery procedures.
Finally, the Presiding Judge may find that certain additional testimony or cross-examination is needed to provide
a complete record for the FCC. If so, the Presiding Judge may schedule a further session.

(3) After the hearing record is closed, the Presiding Judge may request Proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusions
of Law to be filed no later than 30 days after the final hearing session. Replies are not permitted except in unusual
cases and then only with respect to the specific issues named by the Presiding Judge.

(4) The Presiding Judge will then issue an Initial Decision, preferably within 60 days of receipt of the last pleadings.
If mutually exclusive applications are before the Presiding Judge, the Presiding Judge will determine which applicant
is best qualified. The Presiding Judge may also rank the applicants in order of merit if there are more than two.

(5) Parties will have 30 days in which to file exceptions to the Initial Decision. The Common Carrier Bureau has authority
to determine, at the time of designation for hearing, that such exceptions will be taken directly to the FCC rather
than to the Review Board.



22.936 

Dismissal of applications in cellular renewal proceedings.



Any applicant that has filed an application in the Cellular Radiotelephone Service that is mutually exclusive with
an application for renewal of a cellular authorization (competing application), and seeks to resolve the mutual
exclusivity by requesting dismissal of its application, must obtain the approval of the FCC.

(a) If a competing applicant seeks to dismiss its application prior to the Initial Decision stage of the hearing on
its application, it must submit to the FCC a request for approval of the dismissal of its application, a copy of any written
agreement related to the withdrawal or dismissal, and an affidavit setting forth:

(1) A certification that neither the petitioner nor its principals has received or will receive any money or other
consideration in excess of legitimate and prudent expenses in exchange for the withdrawal or dismissal of the application,
except that this provision does not apply to dismissal or withdrawal of applications pursuant to 

bona fide

 merger agreements;

(2) The exact nature and amount of any consideration received or promised;

(3) An itemized accounting of the expenses for which it seeks reimbursement; and

(4) The terms of any oral agreement related to the withdrawal or dismissal of the application.

(b) In addition, within 5 days of the filing date of the applicant or petitioner's request for approval, each remaining
party to any written or oral agreement must submit an affidavit setting forth:

(1) A certification that neither the applicant nor its principals has paid or will pay money or other consideration
in excess of the legitimate and prudent expenses of the petitioner in exchange for withdrawing or dismissing the application;
and

(2) The terms of any oral agreement relating to the withdrawal or dismissal of the application.

(c) For the purposes of this section:

(1) Affidavits filed pursuant to this section must be executed by the filing party, if an individual, a partner having
personal knowledge of the facts, if a partnership, or an officer having personal knowledge of the facts, if a corporation
or association.

(2) Applications are deemed to be pending before the FCC from the time the application is filed with the FCC until such
time as an order of the FCC granting, denying or dismissing the application is no longer subject to reconsideration
by the FCC or to review by any court.

(3) ``Legitimate and prudent expenses'' are those expenses reasonably incurred by a party in preparing to file, filing,
prosecuting and/or settling its application for which reimbursement is sought.

(4) ``Other consideration'' consists of financial concessions, including, but not limited to, the transfer of assets
or the provision of tangible pecuniary benefit, as well as non-financial concessions that confer any type of benefit
on the recipient.



22.937 

Demonstration of financial qualifications.



Except as provided in paragraphs (g) and (h) of this section, each applicant for a new cellular system must demonstrate
that it has, at the time the application is filed, either a separate market-specific firm financial commitment or
available financial resources sufficient to construct and operate for one year the proposed cellular system. Each
application of reassignment of license or consent to transfer of control must demonstrate the financial ability
of the proposed assignee or transferee to acquire and operate the facilities.

(a) 

Estimated costs.

 The demonstration required by this section must include a realistic and prudent estimate of the costs of construction,
operating and other initial expenses for one year.

(b) 

Source of financing.

 The firm financial commitment must be obtained from a state or federally chartered bank or savings and loan association,
another recognized financial institution, or the financial arm of a capital equipment supplier. The firm financial
commitment may be contingent upon the applicant's obtaining an authorization.

(c) 

Lender's statement.

 The firm financial commitment must contain a statement that:


