 

Gulf Power Company (708397)



Gulf Power Company (``Gulf''), 500 Bayfront Parkway, Pensacola, Florida 32501, a subsidiary of The Southern Company,
a registered holding company, has filed an application-declaration under sections 6(a), 6(b), 7 and 12(d) of the
Act and rules 44 and 50(a)(5) thereunder.

Gulf proposes to issue and sell from time to time, prior to January 1, 1997, short-term and/or term-loan notes to lenders,
commercial paper to dealers and/or non-negotiable promissory notes to public entities in exchange for the proceeds
of their revenue anticipation notes in an aggregate principal amount at any one time outstanding of up to $150,000,000.

Gulf states that any borrowings proposed herein may be, and any such borrowings in excess of its charter limits on short-term
unsecured debt would be, secured by a subordinated lien on certain assets of Gulf. In no circumstances will Gulf have
unsecured borrowings outstanding at any one time that exceed applicable charter limitations.

Gulf proposes to borrow from certain banks or other lending institutions. Such institutional borrowings will be
evidenced by notes to be dated as of the date of such borrowings and to mature in not more than four years after the date
of issue, or by ``grid'' notes evidencing all outstanding borrowings from each lender to be dated as of the date of the
initial borrowing and to mature not more than four years after the date of issue. Gulf proposes that any note evidencing
such borrowings may not be prepayable, or that it may be prepaid with payment of a premium that is not in excess of the
stated interest rate on the borrowing to be prepaid, which premium in the case of a note having a maturity of more than
one year, may thereafter decline to the date of the note's final maturity.

Borrowings will be at the lender's prevailing rate offered to corporate borrowers of similar quality. Such rates
will not exceed the prime rate or (i) LIBOR plus up to 3/4 of 1%, (ii) the lender's certificate of deposit rate plus up
to 1%, or (iii) a rate not to exceed the prime rate to be established by bids obtained from the lenders prior to a proposed
borrowing; provided, however, that with respect to borrowings with a maturity in excess of one year, the rate will
not exceed the yield for a comparable maturity Treasury note plus one percent. Compensation for the credit facilities
may be provided by balances of up to 10% of the available facility or by fees of up to 1/2 of 1% per annum of the amount of
the facility.

Gulf also proposes to issue and sell commercial paper to dealers from time to time prior to January 1, 1997. Such commercial
paper to dealers will be in the form of promissory notes with varying maturities not to exceed nine months. The commercial
paper notes will be issued in denominations of not less than $50,000 and will not by their terms be prepayable prior
to maturity.

Gulf also may effect short-term borrowings in connection with the financing of certain pollution control facilities
through the issuance by public entities of their revenue bond anticipation notes. Under an agreement with each such
public entity, the entity would effectively loan to Gulf the proceeds of the sale of such revenue bond anticipation
notes, having a maturity of not more than one year after date of issue, and Gulf may issue its non-negotiable promissory
note therefore. Such note would provide for payments thereon to be made at times and in amounts which shall correspond
to the payments with respect to the principal of, premium, if any, and interest, which shall not exceed the prime rate,
on such revenue bond anticipation notes, whenever and in whatever manner the same shall become due, whether it stated
maturity, upon redemption or declaration or otherwise.

By prior Commission orders in File No. 707937 dated March 31, 1992, November 30, 1993 and February 16, 1994 (HCAR
Nos. 25507, 25932 and 25989, respectively), Gulf may effect short-term borrowings prior to April 1, 1996. Gulf proposes
that the authorization sought herein will supersede and replace, with respect to Gulf, authorizations in File No.
707937 effective immediately upon the date of the Commission's order herein.

The proceeds from the proposed borrowings will be used by Gulf for working capital purposes, including the financing
in part of its construction program. None of the proceeds from any borrowing or from the sale of the notes proposed herein
will be used by Gulf, directly or indirectly, for the acquisition of any interest in an ``exempt wholesale generator''
or a ``foreign utility company.''




For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, pursuant to delegated authority.



<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 949017 Filed 41394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>



