 

(1) 

Description of test system and test methods. 

(i) A description of the general design of the experiment 
shall be provided. This shall include a short justification 
explaining any decisions where professional judgment is involved 
such as fixation technique and choice of stains; and 
 
(ii) Positive control data from the laboratory performing 
the test that demonstrate the sensitivity of the procedures being 
used. Historical data may be used if all essential aspects of 
the experimental protocol are the same. 
 
(2) 

Results. 

All observations shall be recorded and 
arranged by test groups. This data may be presented in the 
following recommended format: 
 
(i) 

Description of signs and lesions for each animal. 

For 
each animal, data must be submitted showing its identification 
(animal number, treatment, dose, duration), neurologic signs, 
location(s) nature of, frequency, and severity of lesion(s). A 
commonly-used scale such as 1+, 2+, 3+, and 4+ for degree of 
severity ranging from very slight to extensive may be used. Any 
diagnoses derived from neurologic signs and lesions including 
naturally occurring diseases or conditions, shall also be 
recorded; 
 
(ii) 

Counts and incidence of lesions, by test group. 

Data 
shall be tabulated to show: 
(A) The number of animals used in each group, the number of 
animals displaying specific neurologic signs, and the number of 
animals in which any lesion was found; and 
 
(B) The number of animals affected by each different type 
of lesion, the average grade of each type of lesion, and the 
frequency of each different type and/or location of lesion. 
 
(iii) 

Evaluation of data. 

(A) An evaluation of the data based on gross necropsy 
findings and microscopic pathology observations shall be made and 
supplied. The evaluation shall include the relationship, if any, 
between the animal's exposure to the test atmosphere and the 
frequency and severity of any lesions observed; and 
 
(B) The evaluation of dose-response, if existent, for 
various groups shall be given, and a description of statistical 
method must be presented. The evaluation of neuropathology data 
shall include, where applicable, an assessment in conjunction 
with any other neurotoxicity studies, electrophysiological, 
behavioral, or neurochemical, which may be relevant to this 
study. 
 
(g) 

References. 

For additional background information on 
this test guideline, the following references should be consulted.

 
 

(1) 40 CFR 798.6400, Neuropathology. 
(2) AFIP Manual of Histologic Staining Methods. (New York: 
McGraw-Hill (1968). 
 
(3) Chang, L.W. A Color Atlas and Manual for Applied 
Histochemistry. (Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1979). 
 
(4) Dunnick, J.K., et.al. Thirteen-week Toxicity Study of 
N-Hexane in B6C3F1 Mice After Inhalation Exposure (1989) 
Toxicology, 57, 163172. 
 
(5) Hayat, M.A. ``Vol. 1. Biological applications,'' 
Principles and techniques of electron microscopy. (New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1970). 
 
(6) Palay S.L., Chan-Palay, V. Cerebellar Cortex: Cytology 
and Organization. (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1974). 
 
(7) Ralis, H.M., Beesley, R.A., Ralis, Z.A. Techniques in 
Neurohistology. (London: Butterworths, 1973). 
 
(8) Sette, W. ``Pesticide Assessment Guidelines, Subdivision 
F, Neurotoxicity Test Guidelines.'' Report No. 540/0991123 U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency 1991 (NTIS 

#

PB91154617). 
 
(9) Spencer, P.S., Schaumburg, H.H. (eds). Experimental and 
Clinical Neurotoxicology. (Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 
1980). 
 




