 

The CDFG is conducting an extensive ongoing program to assess the abundance of predators in the forebay, remove predators
by means of gill nets and other fishing gear, and investigate and evaluate all factors that are thought to contribute
to pre-screening losses of juvenile salmonids. The February 1993 opinion on long-term operation of the CVP indirectly
address predation in the forebay by limiting the combined incidental take of juvenile winter-run chinook salmon
at the State and Federal facilities to 1 percent of the annual estimated juvenile production. In addition, implementation
of specific measures contained in the opinion's reasonable and prudent alternative, such as closure of the Delta
Cross Channel and reverse flow criteria in the western Delta, is expected to limit the diversion of juvenile winter-run
chinook salmon from the Sacramento River and their subsequent exposure to predation in the Delta and possibly Clifton
Court Forebay. 
The CDFG began a large-scale program of stocking hatchery-reared striped bass in 1981 through the Striped Bass Stamp
Program authorized that year. Approximately 60,000 yearling bass were stocked that year, and the program increased
substantially in subsequent years. Beginning in 1984, the program expanded to include several private hatcheries
and two state facilities. Between 1982 and 1990, the program raised and planted nearly 3.0 million juvenile striped
bass. Additionally, privately reared yearling bass have purchased and stocked by the State's Department of Water
Resources and the Pacific Gas and Electric Company as mitigation for fish losses at their facilities in the Delta.
Since 1984, the company has purchased and stocked over 2.5 million juvenile bass, and the State has stocked almost
5.0 million juvenile bass since 1988. 
Several groups raised concerns in 1992 about the possible effects of CDFG's striped bass enhancement and management
program on winter-run chinook salmon. NMFS reviewed CDFG's proposed enhancement program for 1992 and recommended
several changes, as well as the implementation of studies designed to assess the magnitude of striped bass predation
on winter-run chinook salmon. As a result of these and other concerns, CDFG eventually decided to suspend the planting
of hatchery-reared striped bass in Delta waters in 1992. In June 1993, NMFS requested that CDFG delay further release
of hatchery fish as part of its striped bass management program, and apply for an ESA section 10 incidental take permit.



4. The Inadequacy of Existing Regulatory Mechanisms



In the final rule listing winter-run chinook salmon as threatened (55 FR 46515, November 5, 1990), NMFS concluded
that the existing regulatory mechanisms at that time were not adequate to recover the Sacramento River winter-run
chinook salmon. In the proposed rule reclassifying the species as endangered (57 FR 27416, June 19, 1992), NMFS concluded
that regulatory mechanisms might not have been sufficient or applied effectively. NMFS believes that measures currently
being taken by Federal agencies pursuant to their ESA section 7 obligations will reduce adverse impacts on the species.
However, these measures do not necessarily provide for the recovery of the species, but that the continued existence
of the species is not likely to be jeopardized. Further, the adequacy or inadequacy of these measures cannot be determined
until at least the 1996 return of adult salmon. 
In addition, NMFS believes that Title XXXIV of Public Law 102575_Central Valley Project Improvement Act_which
was enacted by Congress in late 1992 will also contribute to the restoration and recovery of the winter-run chinook
salmon. Although that Act is intended to protect, restore, and enhance all fishery resources and habitats in the Central
Valley and Trinity River basins of California, the implementation of several provisions will directly benefit winter-run
chinook salmon and aid in its recovery. Several of the provisions are also expected to help implement actions that
NMFS has identified as necessary to avoid jeopardizing the continued existence of winter-run chinook salmon and
ensure its eventual recovery. 
Provisions of the Act that have the most direct beneficial effect on winter-run chinook salmon are those requiring:
(1) Dedication of 800,000 acre-feet of CVP water for fish, wildlife, and habitat restoration purposes annually,

(2) Installation and operation of a temperature control device at Shasta Dam and modifications of CVP operations
to control water temperatures in the upper Sacramento River, 
(3) Development and implementation of measures at the Red Bluff Diversion Dam to minimize fish passage problems,

(4) Expansion of the FWS's existing hatchery facility, 
(5) Modification of the Keswick Dam fish trap and spillway to prevent trapping of fish, 
(6) Development and implementation of a continuing program to restore and replenish lost spawning gravel in the upper
Sacramento River, 
(7) Development and implementation of a program that provides for modified operations or new and improved control
structures at the Delta Cross Channel and Georgiana Slough, 
(8) Development and implementation of a program to resolve fish passage and stranding problems associated with operation
of the ACID dam, 
(9) Maintenance of minimum carryover storage in Sacramento and Trinity River reservoirs, 
(10) Design and construction, in conjunction with the State of California and other Federal agencies, of a new fish
protection structure at the GCID pumping facility near Hamilton City, and 
(11) Development and implementation, with the State of California, of measures to avoid losses of juvenile fish resulting
from unscreened or poorly screened diversions. 





