 

The requirement that the labeling of a product not include nutrition information creates an anomalous result. FDA
is aware that a number of small businesses market low-volume food products whose labeling bears nutrition information
in accord with the pre-1990 amendment nutrition labeling requirements of the agency's regulations. Because such
products bear nutrition information, they would not be eligible for the exemption in section 403(q)(5)(E). Such
a result makes little sense under the 1993 amendments, however; small firms with low-volume products, to which Congress
was attempting to provide some relief, would be penalized for having provided nutrition information, exactly what
Congress was trying to encourage, in the past. Such firms would be presented with the choice of either removing the
nutrition information from the labeling of eligible products, which would impose costs that Congress was trying
to protect these firms from having to expend, or marketing misbranded products. 
FDA is considering providing relief in such cases under 
101.9(g)(9). Under this section of its regulations, FDA may 
permit alternative means of compliance or additional exemptions to deal with a situation when it is not technologically
feasible, or some other circumstance that makes it impracticable, for firms to comply with the requirements for nutritional
labeling in 101.9(c). FDA is currently limiting the permission that it grants for alternative means of compliance
or additional exemptions in response to requests under 101.9(g)(9) to those cases that involve technological
problems. However, based upon the comments that it receives in response to this proposal, FDA will consider whether
the cost to a small business of changing the labeling of a low-volume food product in response to the 1993 amendments
represents a circumstance that makes it impracticable for the firm to comply with the requirements of 101.9(c)
and for which FDA may permit alternative means of compliance or provide an exemption. FDA will consider modifying
101.9(g)(9) in such a manner as it finds appropriate based on consideration of comments, to accommodate this
situation. 
To ensure that the regulations implementing the 1993 amendments are in place as close as possible to May 8, 1994, the
date of applicability for the nutrition labeling regulations, FDA is proposing that any final rule that may issue
in response to this proposal become effective upon its publication in the 

Federal Register

. The agency believes that it is in the public interest to have a final rule in place as quickly as possible so that people
will know exactly what they must do to claim the exemption and to minimize the possibility that eligible firms will
fail to file their claims for exemption in a timely manner. Therefore, FDA tentatively concludes that there is good
cause to dispense with the normal 30-day period between publication of a final rule and its effective date. Given the
small amount of time before May 8, 1994, however, FDA recommends that persons that want to file notices with FDA to claim
the small business exemption follow the procedures proposed below. 





