 

FSIS also agrees with FDA that health claims for children less than 2 years of age should be established by specific
regulations providing for their use. Health claims that concern dietary recommendations for the U.S. adult population
are not meant to apply to children less than 2 years of age. For example, the Dietary Guidelines for Americans states
that the guidelines are ``advice for healthy Americans ages 2 years and over_not for younger children and infants
whose dietary needs differ.'' Accordingly, FSIS is proposing to prohibit only those claims on foods for this age group
that are not specifically provided for by regulation. FSIS will consider health claims on these products and, where
appropriate, will establish specific regulations for their use.


Labeling Applications


FSIS is proposing to establish a labeling application process whereby interested parties may submit a labeling application
to FSIS for approval of the use of a particular health claim in the labeling of a meat or poultry product. The labeling
application would include: (1) An explanation of how the substance qualifies for a health claim under the requirements
in proposed 9 CFR 317.314 and 381.414; (2) a summary of scientific data providing the basis upon which authorizing
a health claim can be justified as providing a health benefit; (3) analytical data showing the amount of the substance
that is present in the meat or poultry product that would be a candidate to bear the claim; (4) a model health claim that
represents label statements for use on a label or in labeling for a meat or poultry product to characterize the relationship
between the substance to a disease or health-related condition; (5) documentation supporting the summary of scientific
data, including copies of any literature searches done by the applicant and of articles cited in the literature and
other information, such as copies of publications cited in review articles and used to perform the analyses; and (6)
a statement signed by the person responsible for preparing the labeling application that, to the best of his or her
knowledge, it is a representative and balanced submission that includes unfavorable, as well as favorable, information
known to him or her to be pertinent to the evaluation of the proposed health claim. The labeling application would be
required to be signed by the applicant or by the applicant's responsible officer or agent.
Upon receipt and review of the labeling application, FSIS would notify the applicant, in writing, that the labeling
application is either being considered for further review or that it has been denied by the Administrator. If the Administrator
summarily denies the labeling application, he or she would notify the applicant, in writing, as to the reason(s) for
the denial, including why the proposed health claim in the labeling was determined by FSIS to be false or misleading,
and would afford the applicant an opportunity to submit a written statement by way of answer to the notification, and
a right to request a hearing with respect to the merits or validity of the Administrator's decision to deny the use of
the proposed health claim. If the applicant fails to accept the determination of the Administrator and files an answer
and requests a hearing, and the Administrator, after review of the answer, determines the initial determination
to be correct, the Administrator would file with the Hearing Clerk of the Department the notification, answer, and
the request for hearing, which would constitute the complaint and answer in the proceeding, which would thereafter
be conducted in accordance with the Department's Uniform Rules of Practice. The hearing would be conducted before
an administrative law judge with the opportunity for appeal to the Department's Judicial Officer, who is delegated
the authority to make the final determination for the Secretary. Any such determination by the Secretary would be
conclusive unless, within thirty days after receipt of notice of such final determination, the applicant appealed
to the United States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which the applicant has its principal place of business or to
the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
If the Administrator does not summarily deny the labeling application, he or she would publish in the 

Federal Register

 a proposed rule to amend the regulations to authorize the use of the health claim. The proposal would also summarize
the labeling application, including where the supporting documentation could be reviewed. The Administrator's
proposed rule would seek comment from consumers, the industry, consumer and industry groups, medical and scientific
professionals, and other interested persons on the labeling application and the use of the proposed health claim.
FSIS believes that the use of health claims has great overall significance to consumer health. Because of the highly
sensitive nature of such claims and the vast amount of medical and scientific studies which are being conducted in
this area, FSIS believes that the solicitation of comments by the Administrator from the public on whether to approve
the use of a particular health claim would foster an open environment and lead to the most informed and well-supported
decision. After public comment has been received and reviewed by FSIS, the Administrator will make a determination
on whether the proposed health claim will be approved for use on the labeling.


