 

The Commission further stated that coordination issues involved in allowing all interested parties to use the 28
GHz band are highly technical, and their solutions depend upon the specific system design of various proposals to
use the 28 GHz band. Moreover, these system designs and the supporting technologies are still in the developmental
stage and the course of their development could be influenced by our decisions in this proceeding. The Commission
believes that the best way to resolve the issues discussed here would be to establish an advisory committee to negotiate
proposed regulations to govern this band. Issued concurrently with this Second Notice of Proposed Rulemaking is
a Public Notice requesting comments on the use of a Negotiated Rulemaking Process in accordance with the Federal Advisory
Committee Act, 5 U.S.C. App. 2, and the Negotiated Rulemaking Act of 1990, Public Law 101648, November 28, 1990.

In spite of parties' best efforts, sharing may not be possible for all proposed uses. The technology required to permit
sharing may not yet be developed, sharing efforts may result in unacceptable degradation of service to consumers,
or sharing techniques may be prohibitively expensive, thus making an otherwise competitive service unaffordable
to customers. 
The prospect that only some of the proposed services can be accommodated within the 28 GHz band leaves the Commission
with the duty to choose which non-shareable services should be licensed. In order to make these choices, the Commission
requires a record based on issues pertaining to the overall public interest in enabling only certain of the non-shareable
services. Options for choosing among services include, but are not limited to, enforcing a particular modulation
scheme for some or all users; segmenting the band to include as many services as possible with less spectrum than parties
requested; assigning all spectrum to satellite uses; or assigning all spectrum to terrestrial uses. 
In the event the Negotiated Rulemaking is unsuccessful in reaching a consensus regarding proposed technical rules
that would accommodate the proposals before the Commission, the Commission stated that it would require a record
to enable it to select the best choices among services proposed. Assuming the Commission ultimately must select among
service proposals for the 28 GHz band, the factors it will employ to do this will include: 
(a) Economic growth potential: Which solution holds the greatest potential for stimulating lower prices and higher
demand for services, and in what product markets and geographic markets? Which solution offers competition in existing
markets, and which markets? Which solution best promotes increased efficiencies in spectrum usage, and permits
the greatest number of service providers to operate commercially viable systems? Which solution best promotes the
offering of new, high-quality and innovative services? Which solution promises to create the greatest number of
high-paying jobs, and how? Which solution offers the greatest potential for maximizing interconnection of U.S.
telecommunications services and facilities?
(b) Other public interest concerns that may not be readily calculable in economic terms: Which proposed plan appears
most likely to make the most services, of the most valuable services, available to the broadest segment of the national
community? What are the services, and to whom would they be available? Do any of the proposals promise needed services
for unserved or underserved areas, and if so, what services, and to which communities would they be made available?
Are particular services more likely to be valuable for educational, job training and employment applications, health
care, environmental or public safety uses? Do any of the proposals serve our goal of facilitating the development
of a National Information Infrastructure, and if so, how? 
(c) Timing: When are the services likely to become available and when are the benefits they promise likely to materialize?
If different benefits are likely to be realized at different times, what are the relative advantages of the short-term
and long-term benefits of the various services proposed? For example, should the Commission license a service that
is likely to become available in one or two years, but outlive its usefulness in five to eight years, if doing so would
preclude licensing a service that is likely to produce tangible benefits only after five years, but which benefits
may be expected to have long-lasting impact on economic growth and other public interest concerns? What are the likely
opportunity costs of not licensing the particular service for operation in this band? Are there any contingencies
that would affect the likely offering of the proposed services in a timely manner, such as market entry barriers? The
relative efficiency of spectrum use and reuse capability among service providers may also be a factor entering into
any final decision. 


