 

(2) On an annual basis after reaching the 40th birthday, unless within the preceding 9 months an electrocardiogram
(ECG) has been provided as part of an application for medical certification. 

(e) An ECG will satisfy a requirement of paragraph (d) of this section if it is dated no earlier than 60 days before the
date of the application it is to accompany, and was performed and transmitted according to acceptable standards and
techniques. 

(f) At the first examination after reaching the 50th birthday and annually thereafter, the level of total blood cholesterol
must be determined. If the person's total blood cholesterol is determined to be 300 milligrams per deciliter or more,
the Federal Air Surgeon may require the person to submit reports of additional examinations to determine if disease
exists. However, if otherwise eligible, the person is issued a medical certificate pending the results of those additional
examinations. 



 67.113 

General medical condition. 



The general medical standards for a first-class airman medical certificate are: 

(a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of diabetes mellitus that requires insulin or any other
hypoglycemic drug for control. 

(b) No other organic, functional, or structural disease, defect, or limitation that the Federal Air Surgeon, based
on the case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the condition involved, finds_

(1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied
for or held or 

(2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the airman medical certificate applied for or held, to
make the person unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges. 



67.115 

Discretionary issuance. 



A person who does not meet the provisions of 67.103 through 67.113 of this subpart may apply for the discretionary
issuance of a certificate under 67.401. 



Subpart C_Second-Class Airman Medical Certificate 



67.201 

Eligibility. 



To be eligible for a second-class airman medical certificate, and to remain eligible for a second-class airman medical
certificate, a person must meet the requirements of this subpart. 



67.203 

Eye. 



Eye standards for a second-class airman medical certificate include, but are not limited to: 

(a) Distant visual acuity of 20/20 or better in each eye separately with or without corrective lenses. If corrective
lenses (spectacles or contact lenses) are necessary for 20/20 vision, the person may be eligible only on the condition
that corrective lenses are worn while exercising the privileges of an airman certificate. 

(b) Near vision of 20/40, Snellen equivalent, at 16 inches in each eye separately, with or without corrective lenses.
If age 50 or older, near vision of 20/40, Snellen equivalent, at both 16 inches and 32 inches in each eye separately,
with or without corrective lenses. 

(c) Ability to perceive those colors necessary for the safe performance of airman duties. 

(d) Normal fields of vision. 

(e) No acute or chronic pathological condition of either eye or adnexa that interferes with the proper function of
an eye, that may reasonably be expected to progress to that degree, or that may reasonably be expected to be aggravated
by flying. 

(f) Bifoveal fixation and vergence-phoria relationship sufficient to prevent a break in fusion under conditions
that may reasonably be expected to occur in performing airman duties. Tests for the factors named in this paragraph
are not required except for persons found to have more than 1 prism diopter of hyperphoria, 6 prism diopters of esophoria,
or 6 prism diopters of exophoria. If any of these values are exceeded, the Federal Air Surgeon may require the person
to be examined by a qualified eye specialist to determine if there is bifoveal fixation and an adequate vergence-phoria
relationship. However, if otherwise eligible, the person is issued a medical certificate pending the results of
the examination. 



67.205 

Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium. 



Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium standards for a second-class airman medical certificate include, but are not
limited to: 

(a) The person shall_

(1) Demonstrate an ability to hear an average conversational voice in a quiet room, using both ears, at a distance of
6 feet from the examiner, with the back turned to the examiner; 

(2) Demonstrate an acceptable understanding of speech as determined by audiometric speech discrimination testing
to a score of at least 70 percent obtained in one ear or in a sound field environment; or 

(3) Provide acceptable results of pure tone audiometric testing of unaided hearing acuity according to the following
table of worst acceptable thresholds, using the calibration standards of the American National Standards Institute,
1969: 



<TABLE>





1Frequency (Hz) 
1 500 Hz 
11000 Hz 
12000 Hz 
13000 Hz 




Better ear (Db) 
35 
30 
30 
40 

Poorer ear (Db) 
35 
50 
30 
60 


</TABLE>




