 




<USBUREAU>Drug Enforcement Administration</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 9325]</RINDOCK>



Charles A. Buscema, M.D.; Continuance of Registration



On December 21, 1992, the Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of Diversion Control, Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA), issued an Order to Show Cause to Charles A. Buscema, M.D. (Respondent), of Albany, New York, proposing to revoke
his DEA Certificate of Registration, BB0636021, and deny any pending applications for registration on grounds that
he had been convicted of a felony related to controlled substances, was not currently licensed to handle controlled
substances in the state in which he practices, and that his continued registration would be inconsistent with the
public interest, as set forth in 21 U.S.C. 824(a)(2), (3), and (4) and 823(f). The Order to Show Cause alleged that:
(1) On January 13, 1989, before the Albany County Court of the State of New York, Respondent was convicted of one felony
count of a violation of falsifying business records in the first degree, which falsification referred to the dispensation
of controlled substances, and Respondent was sentenced to five years probation which included a provision that he
not dispense any controlled substances from his office; (2) on November 12, 1990, Respondent voluntarily surrendered
his DEA Certificate of Registration, AB7544314, for cause; (3) on May 29, 1991, the New York State Board of Health entered
a stipulation and order which found that during the period February 1983 through November 1987, Respondent dispensed
9,850 dosage units of Schedule II controlled substances without preparing a prescription, failed to make records
of dispensing 5,060 dosage units of controlled substances, and made 32 false entries regarding controlled substances
in patient records, and as a result Respondent was assessed a civil penalty and his ability to use official New York
State prescription forms was revoked for two years; (4) on January 22, 1992, the Commissioner, New York Education
Department, Board of Regents, granted Respondent's application for a consent order with the State Board for Professional
Medical Conduct, which consent order suspended his medical license for a period of six years, stayed execution for
five years and placed his license on five years probation. As a result, Respondent was not licensed to practice medicine
in the State of New York for a period of one year beginning January 27, 1992.

Respondent, through counsel, filed a request for a hearing on the issues raised by the Order to Show Cause, and the matter
was docketed before Administrative Law Judge Paul A. Tenney. Following prehearing procedures, a hearing was held
in Albany, New York on January 13, 1994. On April 18, 1994, in his findings of fact, conclusions of law and recommended
ruling, the administrative law judge recommended that Respondent's DEA Certificate of Registration not be revoked
and that his application for renewal be granted. The Government filed exceptions to Judge Tenney's opinion. On May
23, 1994, the administrative law judge transmitted the record to the Deputy Administrator.

The Deputy Administrator has carefully considered the entire record in this matter and, pursuant to 21 CFR 1316.67,
hereby issues his final order in this matter based upon findings of fact and conclusions of law as hereinafter set forth.

The administrative law judge found that Respondent received a medical degree from Albany Medical College in 1967.
After a surgical internship in Connecticut, he entered a psychiatric residency at Albany Medical Center Hospital
and was subsequently made chief of psychiatry at Saint Peter's Hospital in Albany.

The administrative law judge found that in 1986, a review of controlled substance order forms by New York State officials
indicated that Respondent was receiving large quantities of the Schedule II controlled substance, amphetamine.
In response to a request for medical records, Respondent provided the state with order forms indicating his purchases
and a tabulation to account for his disposal of these drugs. Under New York State law, a practitioner is required to
complete a triplicate prescription form whenever he dispenses any Schedule II controlled substance, and to maintain
a patient record with evidence of examination, complaint, illness, and therapy. Respondent executed no such prescriptions
to account for his disposition of controlled substances. In response to a state request for more documentation, Respondent
claimed that his records were on computer. Respondent subsequently presented an extract of records for 17 patients.
State investigators were unable to locate nine of these patients, four others claimed they had received no such medication,
and one was a relative of Respondent's spouse. Investigators subsequently interviewed 40 other patients, of which
only five patients, all relatives of Respondent, verified that they had received the controlled substances that
Respondent attributed to them.



