 

Breysse [Ex. 432] reported on symptoms associated with new carpeting in a state office building, in order of
prevalence: headache, eye and throat irritation, nausea, dizziness, eye tearing, chest tightness, diarrhea, cough,
muscle aches, burning nose, fatigue, dark urine, and rashes. Twenty out of 35 persons were affected. Air sampling
was conducted before and after carpet removal; a similar range of aliphatic hydrocarbons was found after removal,
but in much lower concentrations. Many individuals who believe the building they work in is implicated in SBS, have
described similar effects. Symptoms usually include one or more of the following: mucous membrane (eye, nose, or
throat) irritation, dry skin, headache, nausea, fatigue, and lethargy [Ex. 4293]. These symptoms are generally
believed to result from indoor air pollution. There is no secondary spread of symptoms to others outside the building
who are exposed to the occupants (unlike the situation faced by many chemical and asbestos workers). Anderson [Ex.
410] suggested the possible causes for SBS as related to psychosocial, chemical, physical, or biological
factors. 


 Anderson [Ex. 410] distinguished SBS symptoms as different from mass psychogenic illness; although in general
the causes of SBS are unknown, he suggested that most SBS symptoms could be explained by stimulation of sensory nerve
fibers in the upper airways and the face (referred to as common chemical sense). Because these fibers can respond in
only one way, SBS cases largely have the same symptoms irrespective of the cause [Ex. 410]. 


 It is now known that there is a variety of important health effects from indoor air pollution. In addition to the indoor
environmental disease caused by infectious agents, carcinogens or toxins; the indoor environment may create conditions
that can produce skin and mucosal allergy and hyperactivity reactions, sensory effects (odors and irritations),
airways effects (from both acute and chronic exposures), neuropsychological effects, and psychosocial effects,
especially due to the lack of social support [Ex. 4200]. 


 Indoor air pollution may be caused by physical, chemical, or microbiological agents, and is aggravated by poor ventilation.
The causation of SBS by indoor air pollution was first objectively demonstrated in 1984 in a study of 62 Danish subjects
suffering from ``indoor climate symptoms'' [Ex. 420]. These subjects reported primarily eye and upper respiratory
irritation, but were otherwise healthy individuals, and did not suffer from asthma, allergy, or bronchitis. The
subjects were exposed to a mixture of 22 volatile organic chemicals commonly found in the indoor environment at concentrations
of 0, 5, and 25 mg/m

3

. These concentrations corresponded respectively to ``clean'' air, average polluted air in Danish houses, and maximum
polluted air in Danish houses. After exposure, the Digit Span test was administered. The Digit Span test consists
of the subject being allowed to view a series of random digits for a short period of time; the numbers are then covered
up and the subject asked to repeat the sequence backwards. This test is reported to be sensitive to situational anxiety
and alertness, and therefore a measure of stress and ability to concentrate. Bach et al. found significant declines
in performance on the digit span test following exposure to these low levels of volatile organic chemicals, demonstrating
objectively the existence of SBS [Ex. 420]. 


 Molhave et al. [Ex. 4228], in reporting on the same 62 subjects, found that subjects exposed for 23/4 hrs did
not adapt, and that the subjects reacted to irritation of the mucous membranes and not to odor intensity. The exposure
was doubled-blind, and neither the subjects nor the testers knew the exposure. 


 Although these problems have been demonstrated to be real, they may affect only a small percentage of building occupants.
Also, there are various degrees of problems which may occur. Some individuals who experience relatively mild and
treatable symptoms such as headache, may be able to cope with the sick building environment for extended periods,
although suffering from increased stress. Other individuals, more seriously affected, may find symptoms so severe
that they may be unable to be in the building for extended periods, or at all. Still others may become temporarily or
permanently disabled. 


 It has been suggested that SBS may not be one syndrome but a number of sub-syndromes [Ex. 4170]. This hypothesis
suggests that the symptoms particularly associated with chemical exposure include fatigue; headache; dry and irritated
eyes, nose, and throat; and sometimes include nausea and dizziness. Those symptoms most related to microbial exposures
would result in itchy, congested, or runny nose; itchy watery eyes; and sometimes include wheezing, tight chest,
or flu-like symptoms. The overlapping symptoms in each case are eye, nose, and throat irritation, perhaps making
the two sub-syndromes, chemical and microbial, difficult to distinguish. Jones concludes that there is a need for
a treatment protocol as well as a diagnostic protocol, which, in addition to describing corrective actions available
in response to different diagnostic findings, would also provide guidelines for the design and implementation of
follow-up studies of buildings and individuals in order to assess treatment effectiveness [Ex. 3170]. 


 Randolph and Moss [Ex. 4258] have written about a number of problems ascribed to indoor air pollution in the
chemically sensitive patient. These problems include irritability from natural gas fumes, allergy to dust from
forced air ventilation systems, intoxication and even hallucination from paint fumes. Randolph describes chemical
sensitivity to dry cleaning chemicals, and rug shampoo, and implicates moldy carpets in producing allergenic substances.
He also describes joint pain, malaise, and fatigue due to pesticide exposure; and skin rashes from exposure to plasticizers.
Randolph further describes intolerance to highly scented products such as deodorant soaps, toilet deodorants,
and disinfectants, especially pine-scented ones. Other patients have reported reacting to strong perfumes and
other cosmetics. So-called air fresheners often prove to be particularly troublesome. He also describes that some
patients are sensitive to the odors from hot plastic-coated wires in electronic equipment. 


 There is little data on the perceptions of victims of SBS. Shapiro [Ex. 4282] has complied a summary of 16 case-histories
of SBS in the victims' own words. It is useful to review these for insight into the problems from the victims' point of
view. 


 One episode that Shapiro [Ex. 4282] reported on was in a building occupied by a government agency. As a result
of problems related to carpeting and other suspected causes, five workers were reported to have left the agency, 11
were relocated to alternative workspace or worked at home, and 100 reported to the agency's medical officer that they
had SBS related problems. The range of self-reported symptoms included a variety of moderate and acute respiratory
problems; headache; sore throat; burning of the eyes, lungs, and skin; rashes; fatigue; laryngitis; clumsiness;
disorientation; loss of balance; nausea; numbness in extremities and face; and difficulty with mental tasks. 


 The patient's reported that the diagnoses of the occupational health physicians they visited included upper and
lower respiratory irritation, intoxication-type syndrome, occupational asthma, and chronic hypersensitivity
pneumonitis. 



