 


b. Other Technical and Operational Rules



The Order concludes that no fundamental changes should be made to existing rules regulating co-channel interference,
adjacent channel interference, or antenna height and transmitter power.

The Order concludes that all CMRS and PMRS mobiles and portables shall be subject to the 1992 ANSI/IEEE Radio Frequency
(RF) exposure guidelines. The Order further concludes that this decision will be implemented in the proceeding in
which the Commission is conducting a complete review of RF exposure guidelines, ET Docket No. 9362.

The Order concludes that new interoperability requirements will not be adopted for CMRS equipment at this time, but
the Commission will be retaining the existing interoperability rule applicable with regard to cellular service.
The Commission intends to explore the question of interoperability requirements for CMRS equipment in a future inquiry.

The Order adopts a uniform 12-month construction requirement for all CMRS licensees, except in instances in which
the rules specify a longer period for systems of greater size or complexity. The Order eliminates loading requirements
for CMRS, except that incumbent 900 MHz SMR licensees must meet current requirements for retaining channels at renewal.
In addition, the Order adopts rules allowing a multi-station CMRS system to use a single call sign for station identification
purposes.

The Order eliminates existing user eligibility restrictions that prevent SMR, private carrier paging, Business
Radio, and commercial 2209 MHz licensees from providing service to foreign governments and their representatives.
The Commission also eliminates eligibility restrictions that prevent Business Radio licensees from providing
service to individuals. The Order also eliminates the part 90 restriction on common carrier communications for reclassified
CMRS services. Finally, the Order applies existing Equal Employment Opportunity requirements to all CMRS licensees.




3. Spectrum Aggregation Limit



This Order addresses the issue of imposing a cap on the amount of CMRS spectrum a licensee may aggregate in a given geographic
area as a means of preventing potentially anticompetitive aggregation of CMRS spectrum. The Commission concludes
that to preserve competitive opportunities in the CMRS marketplace, it is unnecessary to establish, in addition
to existing CMRS spectrum aggregations limitations, the broad CMRS spectrum cap proposed in the Further Notice.
Rather, the Order concludes that the Commission's goals will be achieved by capping at 45 MHz the total amount of PCS,
cellular, and SMR spectrum in which an entity may have an attributable interest in any geographic area. The Order adopts
this cap as a minimally intrusive means of ensuring that the mobile communications marketplace remains competitive
and retains incentives for efficiency and innovation.

The Order also reaches the following determinations with regard to implementation of the spectrum cap. First, the
Order concludes that various encumbrances on SMR spectrum 

vis-&agrave;-vis

 cellular or broadband PCS should be accounted for when measuring SMR spectrum for purposes of the cap. Therefore,
the Commission will attribute to an entity a maximum of 10 MHz of SMR spectrum, including both 800 and 900 MHz spectrum
for purposes of determining compliance.


Second, the Order adopts a 20 percent cross ownership attribution rules for licensees other than designated entities.
Thus, when an entity other than a designated entity has a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in an SMR, cellular,
or PCS license in a particular geographic area, the entire amount of spectrum associated with that license will be
attributed to that entity for spectrum cap purposes. For designated entities, the attribution level will be a 40 percent
or greater ownership interest.

Third, to compute an SMR spectrum total in a given market, the licensee must identify all attributable 800 MHs and 900
MHz SMR base stations located inside the MTA or BTA. All 800 MHz and 900 MHz channels located on at least one of those base
stations count as 50 kHz and 25 kHz, respectively. This total can be reduced using a 10 percent population overlap test
similar to that used for the current cellular-PCS spectrum cap.




4. Licensing Rules and Procedures




Section 332 of the Act, as amended by the Budget Act, provides that CMRS providers are to be ``treated as common carriers
for purposes of (the) Act.'' The Order concludes that this means, among other things, that all CMRS applications must
comply with common carrier licensing procedures enumerated in Title III of the Act. Thus, the Order adopts rules that
implement those procedures with regard to existing licensees and future applicants on SMR, Business Radio, 220 MHz,
and Part 90 paging frequencies who provide or propose to provide service that meets the CMRS definition.


