 



Long-term exposures to building occupants. 

Data from the asbestos exposure literature reveal that ambient outdoor exposures to asbestos are quite low, averaging
roughly 0.00007 f/cc. Regarding indoor exposures, the Health Effects Institute_Asbestos Research reports that
for 1,377 air samples from 198 different buildings with asbestos-containing materials (ACM), mean exposures were
on the order of 0.00027 f/cc, with 90th and 95th percentiles of 0.0007 f/cc and 0.0014 f/cc [HEIAR, 1991]. 
The HEIAR report indicates that improper handling of asbestos fibers can contribute significantly to higher
exposure levels to building occupants, even after completion of all asbestos removal jobs at a building. Of 18 building
projects where interior perimeter samples were taken, asbestos levels increased in 12 buildings after abatement.
The higher exposures were attributed to leakages in glove bags and improper work practices. While the effect of these
removal efforts on exposures varied widely, some exposures increased by a factor of 750 [HEIAR, 1991, p. 530].
In at least one case, a building with previously non-detectable asbestos levels later was found to have detectable
levels of airborne asbestos. 
OSHA believes that the controls mandated by the standard_such as negative pressure enclosures, wet methods, critical
barriers, and HEPA vacuums, to name a few of the more protective controls_not only should help lower exposures to employees
working in and around them, but should also be nearly 100 percent effective in preventing migration of stray asbestos.
Controls required by the revised standard are therefore expected to enhance protection of service workers and building
occupants. While any building owner can choose to have ACM removed from a property, owners of buildings with higher
concentrations of asbestos, and therefore greater exposure potential for building employees and occupants, are
relatively more likely to opt for removal. 
Low-level asbestos concentrations can become elevated and remain elevated for long periods of time, as residual
asbestos is disturbed. Recent long-term data suggest that after a year's time, exposure levels cease to fall and may
actually rise [Wall Street Journal, 1993]. If new asbestos fibers are continually introduced to the general building
environment, background asbestos levels could remain elevated and potentially increase. 
Based on the Environmental Protection Agency's 1984 survey of buildings [EPA, 1984], OSHA estimates that approximately
156 million maintenance and custodial projects occur annually in 648,000 commercial and residential buildings
in which friable asbestos may be disturbed [OSHA, 1994]. Buildings containing friable asbestos constitute less
than 20 percent of all buildings with asbestos-containing materials and are believed to have the highest exposure
levels. Applying data from the Energy department and Census bureau, OSHA estimates that an average of 18 employees
per building are at risk annually from stray asbestos exposures in commercial buildings with friable asbestos, yielding
an estimated total population of 11.7 million employees (648,000 buildings &times; 18 employees per building) [Dept.
of Energy, 1986; Dept. of Commerce, 1993]. In this analysis OSHA assumed, based on data from HEIAR on the distribution
of asbestos exposures in public buildings, that higher-risk buildings have a mean current baseline exposure of 0.0014
f/cc (95th percentile of HEIAR data), in the absence of OSHA-mandated controls. OSHA further assumed that
the use of OSHA controls would lower mean background asbestos exposures to levels (0.00035 f/cc) projected by OSHA
for custodial workers. Applying these exposure levels to the asbestos risk model, OSHA estimated that 14.2 cancers
would be prevented annually among building occupants. It should be noted that this estimate is based solely on exposures
to 

employees 

working in commercial and residential buildings and does not include exposures to 

residents 

and 

other non-employees, 

such as students, who may also be exposed while in these buildings. 


Other Health Benefits




Asbestosis. 

Applying pre- and post-regulation exposures to the asbestosis risk model detailed in the 1986 RIA, OSHA estimates
that compliance with the revised final rule will prevent approximately 14 cases of disabling asbestosis annually,
among workers directly exposed to asbestos in general industry, shipyards, and construction. In addition, non-quantified
benefits of avoided cases of asbestosis are anticipated for building occupants and others secondarily exposed.
As these cases represent disabilities and not deaths, they are not included in the total estimated benefits. Asbestosis
cases often lead to tremendous societal costs in terms of health care, worker productivity, and in the quality of life
to the affected individual. Their prevention, therefore, would have a positive economic effect. 


Reduction of solvent exposures. 

Presently, approximately 25 percent of auto service establishments rely upon solvent sprays to control asbestos
exposure. The most commonly used solvent has been 111 trichloroethane, a neurotoxin. OSHA attempted
to establish a short-term exposure limit for this substance in the 1989 Air Contaminants rulemaking [54 FR 2333],
but that rulemaking was stayed by the courts for technical reasons. The revision to the final asbestos rule, by discouraging
the use of solvent spray as a control method, will prevent peak trichloroethane exposures to over 150,000 workers.
Moreover, 111 trichloroethane, a chlorofluorocarbon, has been linked with depletion of the ozone
layer, thereby possibly contributing to development of skin cancers. Partly as a result of this, some automotive
service establishments have switched to a spray based on perchloroethylene, a flammable carcinogen. OSHA believes
that as these establishments select control technologies that are feasible alternatives to solvent spray, there
will be reduced risks of cancer and fires (from rags contaminated with solvent) as a consequence of the revision to
the standard. 


Economic Benefits




Building reoccupation. 

Significant economic benefits may be derived from lowering asbestos exposures to long-term building occupants.
The more rapidly that building owners, whether private or public, can put their asbestos-contaminated building
areas back into use, the sooner they can derive explicit or implicit ``rental'' value. For example, the HEIAR
report discusses an asbestos abatement job at a college building with pre-abatement exposure levels of 0.0002 f/cc
[HEIAR, 1991, p. 537]. Shortly after abatement, exposure levels of 0.065 f/cc were measured. After
26 weeks, exposure levels were measured at 0.0008 f/cc. Reoccupation occurred after 35 weeks, when exposures had
decreased to 0.0004 f/cc. In this example, the building was not deemed usable for eight months, until exposures began
to approach pre-abatement levels. 


