 

Meat products derived by advanced meat/bone separation are characterized by identifiable muscle fiber structure,
visible differentiation of lean and fat, and components normally associated with and expected in meat obtained by
hand-deboning. The advanced recovery systems produce distinct whole pieces of skeletal muscle tissue with a well-defined
particulate size similar in consistency to (species) trimmings derived by hand-deboning and used to formulate processed
meat products. The color of the meat derived from these systems is similar to that of (species) trimmings.
<FOOTCITE>4</FOOTCITE>
 As such, the meat derived from the advanced recovery systems conforms to the definition of ``meat'' because it has
the functional and chemical characteristics of meat; there are no powdered bone or constituents of bone, e.g., bone
marrow, that are not in conformance with the definition and expectation of meat or that which would render the product
adulterated or misbranded under the regulations. It is FSIS's belief that, unlike MS(S), consumer expectations
of ``meat'' are met with regard to the product obtained from the advances in meat/bone separation machinery and recovery
systems, because the product's characteristics, in terms of appearance and texture, and its composition are similar
to those of ``meat,'' as currently defined in 9 CFR 301.2(rr).



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
4

</FOOTNAME>
Data provided to the Agency by Millbank Processing Machinery Inc., Englewood, Colorado, are available for public
inspection in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.

</FOOTNOTE>


In contrast, MS(S) differs from hand-deboned meat and the meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation due to
its highly comminuted, spread-like consistency and its content of varying amounts of bone, including bone marrow,
and certain minerals, as well as muscle tissue. MS(S) is amorphous and lacks the characteristic components seen in
meat, e.g., muscle fiber, the presence of connective tissue fibers in the way they occur naturally, and distinct lean
and fat components. These characteristics render the product materially different than meat.



The Proposal



FSIS is proposing to amend the definition of meat in the Federal meat inspection regulations (9 CFR 301.2(rr)) to include
as meat product resulting from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems, establish criteria
for meat from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems, and establish requirements for the
handling of meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems, as well as the material
from which it is derived. FSIS is proposing these amendments to the Federal meat inspection regulations to update
the definition of meat to include as meat product produced from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery
systems. It is FSIS's intent to recognize that (1) substantial advances have occurred with regard to the machinery
for separating skeletal muscle of livestock carcasses and parts of carcasses from livestock bones, since the promulgation
of rules on the production, use, and labeling of MS(S) and the products in which it is used as an ingredient, and that
(2) the characteristics and composition of the meat from these advances are comparable to the product traditionally
defined as ``meat.'' In proposing the amendments, FSIS continues to fulfill its statutory responsibility to prevent
the preparation and distribution in commerce of meat and meat food products which are adulterated or misbranded or
not properly marked, labeled, or packaged.



1. Definition of Meat



The proposal would amend the definition of ``meat'' set forth in 9 CFR 301.2(rr) of the Federal meat inspection regulations
to include as meat product, meeting certain criteria, that is derived from the mechanical separation of skeletal
muscle tissue from the bones of livestock by using advanced mechanical meat/bone separation machinery and meat recovery
systems that do not crush, grind, or pulverize bones, and from which the bones emerge comparable to those resulting
from hand-deboning, i.e., essentially intact and in natural physical conformation such that they are recognizable
as loin bones, rib bones, etc., when they emerge from the machinery.

As previously stated, FSIS believes that meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery
systems has the functional and chemical characteristics of ``meat.'' This product is also comparable to meat derived
by hand-deboning techniques, including mechanical high-speed knives. FSIS further believes that consumer expectations
of ``meat'' are met with regard to the identity of the product, because the product's characteristics, in terms of
appearance and texture, and its composition are similar to those of ``meat,'' as currently defined in 9 CFR 301.2(rr).
Therefore, FSIS is proposing to amend the definition of ``meat'' to include meat derived from advanced meat/bone
separation machinery and recovery systems.



2. Criteria for Meat Derived From Advanced Meat/Bone Separation Machinery and Recovery Systems



The proposal would establish protein quality and calcium content criteria for meat derived from advanced meat/bone
separation machinery and meat recovery systems and assure its compliance with such criteria through a quality control
program in order to assure conformance with consumer expectations of ``meat'' and production of ``meat'' comparable
to that obtained by hand-deboning techniques. A maximum calcium content (as a measure of bone solids) of not more than
0.15 percent or 150 mg/100 gm of product (within a tolerance of 0.03 percent or 30 mg) and a minimum protein quality requirement
of a protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score of not less than 40 expressed as a percent, or an alternative
measure of at least 33 percent essential amino acids of the total amino acids present, would be established for the
product.

