 







<USDEPT>LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION</USDEPT>



<CFRNO>45 CFR Part 1607 </CFRNO>


Governing Bodies 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Legal Services Corporation.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This rule amends part 1607 of the Legal Services Corporation's (``LSC'' or ``Corporation'') regulations relating
to governing bodies of recipients of LSC funds. Many of the revisions are simply intended to clarify current Corporation
policy or to interrelate this part to other LSC regulations. However, a number of the revisions represent changes
in Corporation policy or interpretations with respect to issues that arise under the regulation. The final rule also
includes a number of technical revisions to make the rule easier to understand and apply. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 January 18, 1995.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Victor M. Fortuno, General Counsel, (202) 3368810.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The Operations and Regulations Committee (``Committee'') of the LSC Board of Directors (``Board'') held public
hearings on April 15, 1994, in Washington, DC, and on May 13, 1994, in Atlanta, Georgia, to consider drafts of proposed
revisions to 45 CFR part 1607, LSC's regulation on recipient governing bodies. At the meeting in Atlanta, the Committee
approved a draft, which was published as a proposed rule for public comment at 59 FR 30885 (June 16, 1994). 


Twenty-two written comments were received and reviewed by the Corporation. The comments generally applauded the
proposed revisions, but there were some areas of disagreement and several suggestions for changes. On September
16 and 30, 1994, the Committee held public meetings to consider the written and oral comments on the proposed rule.
Based on those comments, the Committee made several revisions. The Committee met again on October 27, 1994, and voted
to recommend a final rule for adoption by the full Board. On November 5, 1994, the Board voted to adopt the rule as recommended
by the Committee for publication as a final rule in the 

Federal Register

. 
The Corporation recognizes that legislation to amend the Legal Services Corporation Act and reauthorize appropriations
for the Corporation may be considered by Congress. If such legislation does become law, the Corporation's regulations
will be revisited and revised accordingly. 
In addition to amending 45 CFR part 1607, this rule is also intended to supersede part 1607's interpretive guideline
published at 48 FR 36820 (August 15, 1983). 
The entire rule, as revised, is published for clarity and ease of use. 


Section Analysis 


Section 1607.2Definitions


Most of the changes in this section are technical and clarifying in nature. The section has been reordered to put the
definitions in alphabetical order. Also, definitions found in other parts of the regulations but applicable to this
part are included here for easier reference. In addition, language found in other sections of this part that, in fact,
constitute definitions of terms are included here both for easier reference and to treat similar terms similarly.
A new definition was added and some of the language has been clarified to make it consistent with past and current LSC
interpretations. 


Section 1607.2(a)


Although the definition of ``attorney member'' applies to attorneys who serve on any recipient board subject to this
part, it was added primarily to make it clear that board members of a national support center do not have to be admitted
to practice in a state where the center actually provides legal assistance. Because the ``service area'' of national
support centers is the entire nation, an attorney board member need be admitted to practice in only one of the 50 states.

One comment suggested that law professors who teach within a recipient's service area, but who are not members of the
bar in the recipient's service area, should be allowed to serve as an ``attorney member'' on the recipient's board.
Statutory requirements for recipient boards do not allow this option. However, such law professors may serve pursuant
to 1607.3(d). 


Section 1607.2(c)


The definition of ``eligible client member'' has been revised from the current definition. First, the language has
been changed to make it clear that client board members must be eligible at the time of their appointment to each term
of office. Thus, a client member who is financially eligible for services when first appointed to a recipient's board
may not be reappointed to a second or subsequent term if, at the time of reappointment, the client board member is no
longer financially eligible for LSC-funded services. However, nothing in the rule would require a client board member
to resign during the course of a term if the client became ineligible subsequent to appointment. 
Some comments suggested a further change to the definition to clarify that eligibility is based on financial eligibility,
so that individuals who would be financially eligible to receive legal assistance, but who could not be served by the
recipient because of some other restriction on types of legal assistance or program priorities, could serve on recipient
boards. The Board agreed and revised the language to clarify that a member need only be financially eligible pursuant
to the requirements of LSC's financial eligibility guidelines, set out in 45 CFR part 1611, to qualify for board membership.

Language has also been adopted for this definition to clarify, in response to concerns raised in comments, that it
is the national rather than the local financial eligibility standard that is applicable. As long as a person would
qualify for services under Part 1611, the person would qualify for board membership, regardless of whether the recipient
has a lower financial eligibility threshold or regardless of whether the person would also qualify for other services
provided by the recipient. 
Some comments suggested that the definition should be expanded to include individuals who are eligible for non-LSC-funded
but not LSC-funded services provided by the recipient. One such comment suggested the adoption of a proportionality
requirement, so that clients who are eligible for non-LSC-funded services, but not LSC-funded services, could serve
in proportion to the amount of overall funding from the non-LSC source. Several comments argued that it is more important
that client representatives be effective advocates for clients than that they be financially eligible for LSC-funded
services. Two comments suggested substantially different and more expansive definitions of eligibility for client
board membership. After consideration of these proposals, the Board decided not to expand the definition because
it wished to insure that the focus of the legal services program remains on the indigent population. The Board believes
that eligible client members are supposed to bring to the recipient a perspective of the community's needs, and that
can best be done by someone who is financially eligible for the recipient's LSC-funded services. 
The last major change to the definition is intended to clarify that it is the recipient that should decide how client
board member eligibility is determined, i.e., the recipient should decide whether it or a particular group should
make the determination. Thus, the recipient could decide that, for some groups, the recipient will make the determination
and for others it will leave the determination up to the appointing group. Two comments opposed the language that permits
client eligibility determinations to be made by the appointing groups, rather than the recipient, arguing that the
determination should not be delegated. No changes were made to the proposal, however, because it does not require
that the recipient delegate the decision; it merely gives the recipient the choice. 


Section 1607.2(d)


The proposed rule defined ``governing body'' so that it would have applied both to the governing bodies of recipients
who have as a primary purpose the provision of legal assistance to eligible clients and to the policy boards or bodies
established pursuant to the waiver provision in 1607.6(d). However, in response to comments on the proposed
definition, the Board narrowed the definition so that it does not apply to the policy boards or bodies referred to in
1607.6(d). 
There was a concern expressed in a comment as to whether a body that does not have full authority to make all ``governing''
policy and administrative decisions for the LSC-funded project would fall within the rule's definition of ``governing
body.'' For example, one LSC recipient that receives very little of its funding from LSC has set up a ``policy board''
to oversee the LSC grant separate from its Board of Directors, which oversees all of its other activities. However,
the policy board does not have all the authority envisioned by this rule in the definition of ``governing body'' and
in 1607.4, which deals with the functions of governing bodies. 
In response, the Board decided to define ``governing body'' so that it does not apply to the policy boards or bodies
referred to in 1607.6(d) and to make it clear that a governing body should have full authority over LSC grants
as envisioned in this rule. However, in certain special circumstances that are discussed at length in this commentary
on 1607.6 on waivers, the President has the authority to grant waivers on board composition requirements.
As a condition of granting such a waiver, a recipient would be required to establish a special policy board or body,
rather than a governing board or body, to oversee the grant. 


Section 1607.2(e)


A definition of ``policy body'' is added to this section to distinguish such a body from a governing body. As discussed
above under the definition of ``governing body,'' a policy body would be established pursuant to the waiver provision
in 1607.6(d) for grantees seeking a waiver of any of the requirements imposed upon governing bodies by 1607.3.
However, a policy body would be required to conform to the membership and appointment requirements of 1607.3,
as well as the meeting requirements and compensation restriction in 1607.4 and 1607.5, respectively,
and would be required to have full authority to set policy for the services and activities funded under the LSC grant.


Section 1607.2(f)


This definition of ``recipient'' appears in 45 CFR part 1600, but is repeated here as an aid in interpreting this part.



Section 1607.3Composition 


Section 1607.3(a)


This section is revised to require in paragraph (a) that all board members must be supportive of the purposes of the
LSC Act, and must be interested in and knowledgeable about the delivery of quality legal services to the poor. The current
regulation does not include any similar requirement for client board members, but does include similar, although
not identical, requirements for attorney and other board members. The rule removes the reference to the board's reflecting
``the characteristics'' of the client community, in part because it is not clear what that language means and in part
because it could be construed to be inconsistent with diversity requirements that are included in this section for
each category of board membership. 



</SUPPLEM>
