 



Discussion:

 The Secretary notes that, with the removal of the provisions eliminating LLR services, the school's appeal process
is no longer applicable. Therefore, the Secretary has deleted this provision from the regulations. 


Changes:

 Section 682.401(c)(8) has been deleted. 


Section 682.405Loan Rehabilitation 




Comments:

 Several commenters suggested that a defaulted borrower be afforded only one opportunity to benefit from an agency's
loan rehabilitation program. The commenters believe that a borrower who defaults again subsequent to rehabilitation
is not likely to be a good candidate for loan rehabilitation. 


Discussion:

 The Secretary points out that pursuant to section 428F(a)(1)(A) of the HEA, a borrower may request to have a defaulted
loan rehabilitated and after the borrower has made 12 consecutive monthly payments, the guaranty agency must, if
practicable, sell the loan to an eligible lender. Once a borrower's loan is rehabilitated, the borrower is no longer
considered to be in default on the loan and regains eligibility for all program benefits. Section 428F(b) of the HEA
allows a borrower with one or more defaulted loans to regain eligibility for Title IV student financial assistance
after the borrower has made six consecutive monthly payments. The Secretary notes that section 428F(b) was amended
by the 1993 Technical Amendments to specifically permit borrowers to receive this benefit only once. However, no
such limitation was placed on the benefits of rehabilitation. In determining whether rehabilitation is practicable,
a guaranty agency should determine whether a borrower who has made 12 consecutive monthly payments is a good candidate
for loan rehabilitation. A borrower's previous experience in the loan rehabilitation program may be a factor considered
by the guaranty agency in making this assessment. 


Changes:

 None. 


Section 682.405(a)(1) 




Comments:

 Some commenters suggested the regulations should be revised to allow guaranty agencies to consider whether the borrower
is a good candidate for loan rehabilitation. The commenters noted that the Dear Colleague Letter (GEN 9291
dated October 1992) provides that ``In determining whether a sale is practicable, a guaranty agency should determine
whether a borrower *** is a good candidate for loan rehabilitation.'' The commenters believed that
the guaranty agency should have the discretion to deny borrowers access to its rehabilitation program if it believes
existing circumstances so warrant. The commenters suggested, for example, if there is a judgment against a borrower,
the original terms of the promissory note may have been altered, and the original note may be nonexistent. The commenters
believed that it is overly burdensome, if not illegal, to rehabilitate a loan if a judgment has been issued against
the borrower. 


Discussion:

 The Secretary interprets section 428F of the HEA to require that the rehabilitation program must be available to all
defaulted borrowers even if a guaranty agency has previously been able to secure payment from the borrower only through
involuntary means (e.g., through a court-ordered judgment, Internal Revenue Service tax offset, or wage garnishment).
The Secretary expects guaranty agencies to provide, on an unsolicited basis, information on the loan rehabilitation
program to all defaulted borrowers. However, the Secretary does not expect that payments made on the loan through
involuntary means be counted toward the borrower's required 12 consecutive payments for rehabilitation. The Secretary
believes that the defaulted borrower must initiate a voluntary series of payments for this purpose. The Secretary
understands, however, that even after the required voluntary series of monthly reasonable and affordable payments,
the rehabilitation of the loan through its purchase by a lender may not be possible in all cases. The Department expects
guaranty agencies to work diligently to identify lenders willing to purchase these loans, thereby rehabilitating
them. However, section 428F(a)(2) of the HEA states that the guaranty agency shall sell the loan, 

if practicable

 [emphasis added]. The Secretary believes that the agency has the authority in working with its repurchasing lenders
to determine if some borrowers are not good candidates for loan rehabilitation because they continue to represent
a high risk of default once the loan is purchased. In those instances, the borrower's loan would remain with the guaranty
agency and the borrower would continue to make payments on the loan to the agency. 




