 

Several aviculturists, some importers, and a raptor breeders' organization commented that species should be listed
on the approved list of captive-bred species, on a country-by-country basis, if they are reliably bred in captivity
in a specific country only. For example, Saker falcons from Great Britain would be listed on the approved list of captive-bred
species because they are reliably captive-bred in Great Britain. The Service disagrees and is making no changes based
on these comments. The statute does not provide for species listings in such a country-by-country manner. However,
the qualifying overseas breeding facilities can be listed by the country from which the species is to be imported.

The representative of the pet industry and a national avicultural organization objected to Section 15.31 (a) stating
that it is inappropriate for the Service to require that all specimens of the species known to be in trade (legal or illegal)
be captive-bred. They consider trade to be legal trade only and that illegal trade should not be considered to be trade.
They recommend that the Service not take illegal trade into consideration. The Service strongly disagrees and recognizes
that it was Congress' intent to prevent the illegal trade in birds, which is detrimental to species' survival, and
the laundering of wild-caught birds as captive-bred specimens. The Service notes that, for any species, trade includes
both legal and illegal trade. Article I of the CITES Convention defines trade as ``export, re-export, import and introduction
from the sea'' and does not differentiate legal from illegal. For the purposes of implementing this law, the Service
agrees with the authors of the CITES Convention, as well as the reality of international trade, that trade has both
legal and illegal components.

The Service originally proposed that Section 15.31 (b) read ``no specimens of the species can be known to be removed
from the wild for the pet bird market.'' In its review of the comments, the Service noted that several commenters were
confused by this wording and the Service has changed Section 15.31 (b) to read ``no specimens of the species can be known
to be removed from the wild for commercial purposes.'' If in the future wild-caught specimens are imported to the U.S.
for the exemptions allowed under the WBCA for scientific research, zoological breeding or display, personal pets,
or approved cooperative breeding programs, such importations would not preclude listing the species in the approved
list of captive-bred species when the species is reliably bred in captivity and all specimens imported for commercial
purposes are captive-bred. Commercial purposes includes but is not limited to the pet market (it also includes travelling
animal acts, circuses, and other uses which result in financial benefit).

The representative of the pet industry and a national avicultural organization objected to Section 15.31 (c) stating
that ``inasmuch as the listing process requires that no wild-caught specimens are in trade, there is no necessity
even to address the non-detriment issue'' and that such a requirement is beyond the scope of the WBCA. The Service disagrees.
One of the stated purposes of the WBCA is to ensure that all trade in species of exotic birds involving the U.S. is biologically
sustainable and is not detrimental to the species. The WBCA requires the Service to make such a finding before listing
species on the approved list of captive-bred species. The Service was also advised to adopt such standards by the House
of Representatives Committee Report for the WBCA. In this Committee Report, the Secretary was advised ``to use the
standards adopted by the State of New York with respect to importation of captive-bred species, and include such species
on the approved list under this section, as long as the Secretary believes that trade based on these standards will
not result in harm to species in the wild'' [House Report No. 102749 (I) pages 16021603].

Furthermore, the Service believes that if the inclusion of any species on an approved list could be detrimental to
the survival of the species in the wild, the intent of Congress, the purposes of the WBCA and the ``non-detriment''
requirements of CITES for Appendix II species are such that the species should not be included in the approved list.
The Service cannot list a species in the approved list if such listing could undermine the conservation of wild bird
species in the wild. Therefore, the Service is making no changes based on these comments.



