 

The Department received 221 comments, most of which were general reactions to the labeling issues raised in the notice,
and health, safety, or economic concerns. Of the 187 commenters that expressed a general opinion on the adequacy of
the regulations concerning mechanically deboned poultry products, 175 were supportive. Some commenter stated
that the regulations have effectively controlled the use of product produced by mechanically deboning over many
years with a wide base of consumer acceptance, that such product is not significantly different from product produced
by hand deboning, that these regulations provide truthful labeling, and/or that the report and scientific literature
support the adequacy of current regulations. Other commenters indicated that mechanically deboned poultry should
be regulated the same as mechanically separated (species) (MS(S)) (then named mechanically processed (species)
product).



GAO Report on Mechanically Separated Products



In 1983, the General Accounting Office (GAO) issued a report recommending that the Secretary of Agriculture direct
the Administrator of FSIS to establish specific standards on poultry products produced by mechanical deboning and
labeling requirements on products made with such poultry products as had been done for MS(S) and products made with
MS(S). MS(S) is a finely comminuted product resulting from the mechanical separation and removal of most of the bone
from attached skeletal muscle of livestock carcasses and parts of carcasses that meets the provisions of 9 CFR 319.5.



Improvements in Machinery for the Poultry Products Produced by Mechanical Deboning



The Agency has monitored the advances in the technology for mechanically deboning poultry products over the last
decade. There have been improvements in the efficiency of the mechanical separation and removal of most of the bone
from attached skeletal muscle and tissue of poultry carcasses and parts of poultry carcasses. Today, it has been estimated
that roughly 700 million pounds of raw poultry materials are used to manufacture mechanically deboned poultry which
is used, in turn, to formulate approximately 400 million pounds of poultry sausages (including franks, bologna,
and salami), and 300 million pounds of poultry nuggets and poultry patties.
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 There have been major advances in mechanical deboning machinery in terms of the effectiveness of bone removal from
skeletal muscle and other tissues of poultry carcasses and parts of carcasses. This has been accomplished through
enhancements and modifications of the bone-removal devices that are part of the traditional mechanical deboning
machines. There have been continued refinements of certain operational parameters of the machinery, e.g., the ability
for operators to adjust the pressure needed to force ground poultry bones with adhering muscle and other tissues through
screens to separate muscle and other tissues from bone, and the size of the apertures (i.e., holes) in the screens and
sieves through which the ground bones, muscle, and other tissues are pushed. These improvements have resulted in
the ability to decrease the bone solids that are a result of the mechanical deboning process for poultry to less than
the one percent reflected in the current poultry products regulations (9 CFR 381.117(d)).



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Information provided by industry available for public inspection at the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.

</FOOTNOTE>

