 

This rule in no way restricts the ability of small entities to enter the LCV segment of the motor carrier industry. The
LCV segment of the industry can expand as rapidly as it finds customers. Neither the rule nor any State affected by the
rule limits the number of LCV's that may be placed in service, or the number of motor carriers that may operate them.
The rule does not reduce the highway network on which carriers may run LCV's; it simply lists the routes where the States
have decided very large vehicles can operate without seriously damaging pavements and bridges. In Wyoming, that
amounts to every NN route in the State. 



The WTA seems to be demanding, not better regulatory analyses, but something like a full-scale econometric model
of the transportation segment of the economy. The WTA apparently believes that such a model, when run, would demonstrate
that the ISTEA freeze is likely to change the competitive balance between railroad and highway transportation, retard
the technological development of trucks, reduce employment in the motor carrier industry, and raise freight costs.



Because the LCV freeze includes all State routes currently in use, and because we are not aware that any State wishes
to expand its LCV network, we expect that the freeze will have none of the effects predicted by the WTA, at least in the
short term. The FHWA believes that the ``frozen'' LCV Network offers ample opportunity for reasonable growth. Insufficient
data exist to evaluate the possible longer-term effects of this rulemaking, and any conclusions presented here would
be speculative in nature. 




Environmental Issues 





In considering this rulemaking action from the perspective of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C.
4321 

et seq

.) (NEPA), the FHWA has twice found that it would have no effect on the quality of the environment. The WTA disagreed:
``A rule which dictates increased use of fuels, a scarce natural resource, affects the quality of the environment
in a negative fashion.'' The rule does not dictate increased use of fuels. If LCV's move freight at a lower fuel or emission
cost per ton/mile than other motor vehicles, as the WTA appears to believe, the rule would not prevent LCV's from displacing
less efficient vehicles. The FHWA sees no reason to change its conclusion. 




Changes to Part 658_National Network 




As discussed earlier, this final rule makes two technical amendments to appendix A, 23 CFR part 658, which lists federally-designated
routes on the NN. These changes would amend the listings for California, to reflect the inclusion of the I580
Richmond-San Rafael Bridge in the NN, and also for Virginia, to reflect that State's new milepost-based exit numbering
system. For the reasons set forth earlier in this document, the FHWA has determined that prior notice and opportunity
for comment are not required for either amendment under the U.S. Department of Transportation's Regulatory Policies
and Procedures, as it is not anticipated that such action will result in the receipt of useful information. 





Executive Order 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review) and DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures 





The FHWA has determined that this action is not a significant regulatory action within the meaning of Executive Order
12866 or significant within the meaning of U.S. Department of Transportation Regulatory Policies and Procedures.
It is anticipated that the economic impact of this rulemaking will be minimal; therefore, a regulatory evaluation
is not required. 



Regulatory Flexibility Act 




In compliance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the FHWA has evaluated the effects of this rule on small entities.
Based on the evaluation, the FHWA hereby certifies that this action will not have a significant economic impact on
a substantial number of small entities. This action merely lists applicable limitations by specific vehicle configuration,
by State, in effect on June 1, 1991, and will not further restrict the operation of any vehicle in lawful operation on
or before June 1, 1991, which is subject to those limitations. 





Executive Order 12612 (Federalism Assessment) 



