 

Paragraph (f)(5)(ii) of the final rule requires that each machine cab have a second means of egress. This provision
has been adopted from the proposed rule. The 1978 ANSI logging standard also contained this requirement. According
to one commenter, nearly all logging machines currently in use have a second means of egress (Ex. 529). Therefore,
OSHA does not believe compliance with this provision will be burdensome. 

Paragraphs (f)(5) (iii) and (iv) of the final rule require that walking and working surfaces of each machine have slip
resistant surfaces and be kept free of waste, debris and other material which might result in slipping, falling or
fire. These requirements parallel provisions contained in the proposed rule. 

OSHA received three comments opposing these provisions (Ex. 57, 522, 555). These commenters
stated that the debris must be hazardous (Ex. 57) and that the requirement should be changed to indicate that
the walkways of machines should be ``substantially free'' of debris (Ex. 555). As discussed above, slips,
trips and falls account for a significant number of injuries in the logging industry. The Agency's primary intent
in this provision is to minimize the potential for employees to slip, trip or fall when mounting or dismounting a machine.
OSHA believes these provisions will reduce the hazards that result in those types of injuries. OSHA does not agree
with the characterization implied by the commenters that this provision requires employers to keep every machine
walking and working surface ``spotless'' at all times. OSHA is aware that in outdoors environments material may accumulate
on machine surfaces. OSHA is only requiring that when such accumulated material might result in a fire or in an employee
slipping or falling that it must be removed. 



Exhaust Systems 



Paragraph (f)(6) of the final rule contains various requirements regarding exhaust pipes and mufflers. Paragraphs
(f)(6) (i) and (ii) of the final rule require that exhaust pipes on each machine be so located that exhaust is directed
away from the operator, and be mounted or guarded to protect the employee from accidental contact. These provisions
have been adopted from the proposed rule. The 1978 ANSI logging standard also contained a similar requirement. OSHA
did not receive any comments opposing these provisions. 


Paragraph (f)(6) (iii) of the final rule requires that exhaust pipes be equipped with spark arresters. This provision
also provides that when an engine is equipped with a turbocharger, spark arresters are not required. The proposed
rule also required a spark arrester for each machine, but did not make an exception for machines equipped with turbochargers.



Several commenters said that spark arresters were not needed when engines are turbocharged (Ex. 510, 516,
517, 522, 525, 527, 555, 574 through 592). These commenters said
that the flow of exhaust gases through the turbocharger requires sufficient time for any sparks to be extinguished
and unburned fuel and particulate matter to be burned. One commenter said that functional turbocharged engines do
not produce exhaust sparks like normally aspirated engines (Ex. 527). For this reason, these commenters said
turbochargers were an acceptable substitute for spark arresters (Ex. 516). In addition, the U.S. Forest Service
allows turbochargers in lieu of spark arresters (Ex. 516). Based on this evidence, OSHA has incorporated an
exception to the use of spark arresters when the machine engine is turbocharged. 

Paragraph (f)(6)(iv) of the final rule requires that the muffler provided by the manufacturer, or the equivalent,
be in place at all times the machine is in operation. This provision is the same as the corresponding provisions of the
proposal and the pulpwood logging standard. OSHA did not receive any comments opposing this requirement. 






