 

The rate or fee structure shall include all outside firm ``overhead'' and ``profit,'' and, therefore, any additional
overhead or profit charged by the outside firm shall be considered unreasonable. Similarly, any markups by the outside
firm for supplies or services procured from third parties would be unreasonable. For instance, only the actual costs
of messenger services shall be allowed, whether the service was performed by the outside firm or a third party. Additionally,
any interest the contractor incurred on any outstanding (unpaid) bills from outside firms is not reimbursable under
the DEAR. 




4. Travel and Related Expenses 



Charges for air travel shall be the actual cost, not to exceed the coach class fare. Charges for local ground travel
shall be the actual cost of the taxi service, or the existing Internal Revenue Service's mileage deduction allowance
if the person drives his or her own automobile. Charges billed for meals, lodging and rental cars must be moderate.
The rates set forth in the Federal Travel Regulations will be deemed presumptively reasonable. 

See 

41 CFR ch. 301. Charges for luxury hotels, cars, or services such as movies and fitness facilities are neither necessary
nor reasonable. 


Travel by more than one person from an outside law or consulting firm to attend a deposition, court hearing, interview,
or meeting outside the person's home office shall not be considered reasonable except when authorized by contractor
counsel in accordance with procedures agreed upon with Department counsel. 


Any travel time may be reimbursed at a full rate for the portion of time during which the outside firm performs work for
the contractor. For air travel, any remaining travel time during normal working hours shall be reimbursed at 50 percent.
In no event is travel time for time during which work was performed for other clients reimbursable. 




5. Copying 



Copying charges shall not exceed ten cents a page, unless supported by a cost study and approved in advance by the Contracting
Officer. Copying projects where volume would generate substantial savings should be sent to outside vendors when
practicable and cheaper. As with costs for all supplies and services, the Contracting Officer should look to local
commercial rates as a benchmark. 



6. Telephone Charges and Faxes 



Charges billed for toll or long distance calls, including facsimile/telecopier transmissions, shall not exceed
the actual charge for each call, with no overhead or surcharge adjustment. 



7. Computer Time 



Charges for computer-assisted research shall not exceed the actual cost, with no overhead or surcharge adjustments.





8. Overtime and Certain Temporary Employees 



Secretarial and clerical overtime or costs of temporary support personnel billed by the outside firm shall not be
charged, unless the Contracting Officer approves such overtime or temporary support personnel or the cost is caused
or required by an emergency situation not of the contractor or the outside attorney's making. Time charged by summer
associates should be scrutinized for its efficiency and consistency with the Staffing and Resource Plan. 




9. Experts Employed by DOE Contractors 



If the contractor or outside counsel wishes to retain as a consultant in a matter an employee of another contractor
of the Department of Energy, the requesting contractor must receive prior approval from the Department of Energy,
which will attempt to furnish the expert directly through the contractor that currently employs the potential consultant.
This policy does not alter any applicable provisions of the prime contract with either the requesting or the employing
contractor. 




10. Specific Non-reimbursable Costs 




The contracting officer shall not consider for reimbursement any proposed costs by the contractor for any direct
costs incurred by outside firms for the following items: entertainment; alcoholic beverages; secretarial or clerical
support time (except as provided under paragraph 8, above); word processing; computers or general application software;
client development and related activities; trade publications, books, treatises, background materials, and other
similar documents; professional/educational seminars and conferences; preparation of bills; parking fines or
any other fines or penalties for illegal conduct; and food, beverages and the like when the attorney or consultant
is not on travel status and away from the home office. An exception may be made, however, for reasonable expenses for
working meals during an in-house meeting not in excess of $10 per person. No outside firm's bills are to contain any
items representing disbursements made for the benefit of the contractor's employees, such as meals or lodging for
contractor's current personnel (other than conference meals at which contractor personnel are present under this
paragraph). 



IV. Effective Dates



These policies are effective with respect to determinations of reasonableness and allowability of costs for services
rendered and expenses incurred: 


1. on or after October 1, 1994, for all class actions; 


2. on or after November 1, 1994, for all non-class actions commenced on or after October 1, 1994; and 


3. on or after February 1, 1995, for all non-class-action litigation commenced before October 1, 1994. 



V. Expiration Date



The Department is seeking public comment on these policies. This AL will remain in effect on an interim basis until
the Department takes further action after reviewing any public comments on these policies. 



