 

(a) 

Carryover allocations. 

A carryover allocation is an allocation that meets the requirements of section 42(h)(1) (E) or (F). If the requirements
of section 42(h)(1) (E) or (F) that are required to be satisfied by the close of the calendar year are not satisfied,
the allocation is treated as if it had not been made. For example, if the taxpayer's basis in the project as of the close
of the calendar year of allocation is not more than 10 percent of the taxpayer's reasonably expected basis in the project
as of the close of the second calendar year following the year of allocation, the carryover allocation is not valid
and is treated as if it had not been made.

(b) 

Carryover-allocation basis

_(1) 

In general

. Subject to the limitations of paragraph (b)(2) of this section, a taxpayer's basis in a project for purposes of section
42(h)(1) (E)(ii) or (F) (carryover-allocation basis) is the taxpayer's adjusted basis in land or depreciable property
that is reasonably expected to be part of the project, whether or not these amounts are includible in eligible basis
under section 42(d). Thus, for example, if the project is to include property that is not residential rental property,
such as commercial space, the basis attributable to the commercial space, although not includible in eligible basis,
is includible in carryover-allocation basis. The adjusted basis of land and depreciable property is determined
under sections 1012 and 1016, and generally includes the direct and indirect costs of acquiring, constructing, and
rehabilitating the property. Costs otherwise includible in carryover-allocation basis are not excluded by reason
of having been incurred prior to the calendar year in which the carryover allocation is made.

(2) 

Limitations

_For purposes of determining carryover-allocation basis under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the following
limitations apply.

(i) 

Taxpayer must have basis in land or depreciable property related to the project. 

A taxpayer has carryover-allocation basis to the extent that it has basis in land or depreciable property and the land
or depreciable property is reasonably expected to be part of the project for which the carryover allocation is made.
This basis includes all items that are properly capitalizable with respect to the land or depreciable property. For
example, a nonrefundable downpayment for, or an amount paid to acquire an option to purchase, land or depreciable
property may be included in carryover-allocation basis if properly capitalizable into the basis of land or depreciable
property that is reasonably expected to be part of a project.

(ii) 

High cost areas

. Any increase in eligible basis that may result under section 42(d)(5)(C) from a building's location in a qualified
census tract or difficult development area is not taken into account in determining carryover-allocation basis
or reasonably expected basis.




