 

Program Components_Work-Based Learning Component 





Comment:

 One commenter recommended that the reference to ``instruction in a variety of elements of an industry'' in the work-based
learning section of program components, be revised to read: ``instruction in all aspects of an industry.'' The commenter
further recommended that the revised terminology be added to the requirement for school-based learning. 



Discussion:

 The Secretaries agree with the commenter that the reference to instruction in a variety of elements of an industry
should not be a reference that is limited to the work-based component of the program. Further, as previously discussed,
there has been a change from use of the term ``Elements of the industry'' in the October 14, 1993 notice, to use of the
term ``All aspects of the industry.'' 



Change:

 The reference to ``Broad instruction in a variety of elements of an industry'' has been deleted from the work-based
learning component of the ``General Program Requirements'' section. Paragraph (a)(1) of the basic components section
has been revised to provide that one of the bases of a School-to-Work Opportunities system is the integration of work-based
learning and school-based learning ``that provides participating students, to the extent practicable, with broad
instruction in all aspects of the industry the students are preparing to enter.'' 



Comment:

 Several commenters felt that businesses may experience difficulty in providing students with paid work experience,
particularly special needs students. One commenter stated that the proposed requirements for work-based learning
ignore the basic reality that only a small minority of firms now provide significant training to their own line workers
below the management level_let alone to ``marginal'' high school youth. This commenter believed that the requirements
for work-based learning should be expanded to include school-based work placements such as student-run enterprises
and school-sponsored community service programs, provided they are of sufficient quality and intensity to otherwise
meet the quality requirements of the initiative. 



Discussion:

 The Secretaries believe that paid work experience is an important component of work-based learning in school-to-work
programs. Experts consulted in the development of this priority and in the development of the proposed School-to-Work
Opportunities legislation strongly believe that jobs with pay increase employment experience for youth, as well
as increasing the value and importance of the youth to the employer. Studies confirm these beliefs. Employers have
continually pointed out that paying wages is not the primary consideration in their decision of whether or not to participate
in school-to-work programs. Small and medium sized businesses have a special incentive since these have been found
to be the most significant sources of employment for youth. At the same time, however, the Secretaries agree that it
is important for partnerships to have as much flexibility as possible in developing school-to-work programs, including
having input on how the paid work experience is constructed. For that reason, the priority provides substantial flexibility.
The priority does not require a minimum amount of paid work experience nor does it specify at which point in a program
the paid work experience must occur. School-based enterprises can provide the contexts in which the paid work experience
requirement could be met. In addition, other non-paid work experience, such as job shadowing or on-the-job training
for academic credit, are not precluded by this priority, as complements to the paid work experience component. 



Changes:

 None. 



Comment:

 One commenter believed that the October 14, 1993 notice provides no real incentive for employers, particularly small
businesses, to spend their limited funds on hiring students. This commenter would have the Secretaries include at
least a sentence describing the potential use of Targeted Jobs Tax Credits, to remind grantees that they can make use
of an existing incentive in their implementation of their School-to-Work programs. 






