 

2. Subcategory E 

H. Benefits of Pollution Prevention 

1. Savings From Reduced Water Use and Water Discharge 

2. Savings From Recovery and Reuse of PAIs 

3. Savings From Reduced Costs of Permits and Fees 

4. Savings From Reduced Insurance Premiums 

5. Savings From Reduced Cost of Capital 

I. Labor Requirements and Possible Employment Benefits of Regulatory Compliance 

1. Direct Labor Requirements of Complying With the PFPR Rule 

2. Indirect and Induced Labor Requirements of Complying With the PFPR Rule 

J. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of PSES Options 

K. Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 

1. Subcategory C Facilities 

2. Subcategory E Facilities 

L. Assessment of Economic Impacts Including Additional PAIs not on the Original List of 272 PAIs Studied for Regulation


1. Facilities Using Both Original 272 PAIs and Additional PAIs 

2. Facilities Using Only the Additional PAIs 

3. Aggregate Impacts for All Facilities Using Both Original 272 and Additional PAIs 

4. Cost-Effectiveness of Option 3/S.1 

M. Executive Order 12866 

N. Paperwork Reduction Act 



XV. Water Quality Analyses 

XVI. Non-Water Quality Environmental Impacts 



A. Air Pollution 

B. Solid Waste 

C. Energy Requirements 



XVII. Regulatory Implementation 



A. Upset and Bypass Provisions 

B. Variances and Modifications 

C. Relationship to NPDES Permits and Monitoring Requirements 

D. Best Management Practice 

E. Analytical Methods 



XVIII. Solicitation of Data and Comments 

Appendix A to the Preamble_Abbreviation, Acronyms, and Other Terms Used in This Document 



I. Legal Authority 



This regulation is being proposed under the authorities of sections 301, 304, 306, 307, and 501 of the Clean Water Act
(the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1251 

et seq., 

as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, Pub. L. 95217, and the Water Quality Act of 1987, Pub. L. 1004),
also referred to as ``the Act.'' 



II. Background 



A. Clean Water Act 



The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 established a comprehensive program to ``restore and
maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation's waters,'' (section 101(a)). To implement
the Act, EPA is to issue effluent limitations guidelines, pretreatment standards and new source performance standards
for industrial dischargers. 

These guidelines and standards are summarized briefly below: 



1. Best Practicable Control Technology Currently Available (BPT) (Section 304(b)(1) of the Act)



BPT effluent limitations guidelines are generally based on the average of the best existing performance by plants
of various sizes, ages, and unit processes within the category or subcategory for control of pollutants. 

In establishing BPT effluent limitations guidelines, EPA considers the total cost of achieving effluent reductions
in relation to the effluent reduction benefits, the age of equipment and facilities involved, the processes employed,
process changes required, engineering aspects of the control technologies, non-water quality environmental impacts
(including energy requirements) and other factors as the EPA Administrator deems appropriate (Section 304(b)(1)(B)
of the Act). The Agency considers the category or subcategory-wide cost of applying the technology in relation to
the effluent reduction benefits. Where existing performance is uniformly inadequate, BPT may be transferred from
a different subcategory or category. 



2. Best Available Technology Economically Achievable (BAT) (Sections 304(b)(2)(B) and 307(a)(2) of the Act) 


In general, BAT effluent limitations represent the best existing economically achievable performance of plants
in the industrial subcategory or category. The Act establishes BAT as the principal national means of controlling
the direct discharge of priority pollutants and nonconventional pollutants to navigable waters. The factors considered
in assessing BAT include the age of equipment and facilities involved, the process employed, potential process changes,
and non-water quality environmental impacts (including energy requirements) (Section 304(b)(2)(B)). The Agency
retains considerable discretion in assigning the weight to be accorded these factors. As with BPT, where existing
performance is uniformly inadequate, BAT may be transferred from a different subcategory or category. BAT may include
process changes or internal controls, even when these technologies are not common industry practice. 



3. Best Conventional Pollutant Control Technology (BCT) (Section 304(a)(4) of the Act) 


