 

(1) 

Strike or lockout subsequent to certification of labor condition application. 

In order to remain in compliance with the no strike or lockout labor condition statement, if a strike or lockout of workers
in the same occupational classification as the H1B nonimmigrant occurs at the place of employment during the
validity of the labor condition application, the employer, within three days of the occurrence of the strike or lockout,
shall submit to ETA, by U.S. mail, facsimile (FAX), or private carrier, written notice of the strike or lockout. Further,
the employer shall not place, assign, lease, or otherwise contract out an H1B nonimmigrant, during the entire
period of the labor condition application's validity, to any place of employment where there is a strike or lockout
in the course of a labor dispute in the same occupational classification as the H1B nonimmigrant. Finally,
the employer shall not use the labor condition application in support of any petition filings for H1B nonimmigrants
to work in such occupational classification at such place of employment until ETA determines that the strike or lockout
has ended.

(2) 

ETA notice to INS.

 Upon receiving from an employer a notice described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, ETA shall examine the documentation,
and may consult with the union at the employer's place of business or other appropriate entities. If ETA determines
that the strike or lockout is covered under INS's 

``Effect of strike''

 regulation for ``H'' visa holders, ETA shall certify to INS, in the manner set forth in that regulation, that a strike
or other labor dispute involving a work stoppage of workers in the same occupational classification as the H1B
nonimmigrant is in progress at the place of employment. See 8 CFR 214.2(h)(17).

(b) 

Documentation of the third labor condition statement. 

The employer need not develop nor maintain documentation to substantiate the statement referenced in paragraph
(a) of this section. In the case of an investigation, however, the employer has the burden of proof to show that there
was no strike or lockout in the course of a labor dispute for the occupational classification in which an H1B
nonimmigrant is employed, either at the time the application was filed or during the validity period of the LCA.

