 




<USBUREAU>National Institutes of Health</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Meetings of Panel/Request for Public Comment</DOCTITLE>



Notice is hereby given of the future meeting dates of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Human Embryo Research
Panel, a panel of special consultants to the Advisory Committee to the Director (ACD), NIH, established to recommend
guidelines for Federal funding of human embryo research. Panel meetings will be held March 14, April 11, May 4, and,
tentatively, June 21. The March meeting will be held from 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. at the Bethesda Marriott Hotel, 5151 Pooks
Hill Road, Bethesda, Maryland. Logistical information about subsequent Panel meetings will be available from the
contact office listed below.

Until June 1993, Federal regulations governing research on human subjects (45 CFR part 46) required research involving


in vitro

 fertilization (IVF) to be reviewed by an Ethics Advisory Board (EAB). Because of the absence of an EAB since 1980, Federal
funding of IVF protocols was not possible. With the enactment of the NIH Revitalization Act of 1993 (Pub. L. 10343),
the regulatory provision requiring EAB review of IVF proposals was nullified. As a result, IVF proposals, as well
as research involving human embryos that result from IVF or other sources, may now be considered for Federal funding.

The NIH has received a number of applications for support in this area and in the related field of parthenogenesis.
However, before proceeding with the consideration of specific human embryo research proposals for funding, the
NIH must address the profound moral and ethical issues raised by the use of human embryos in research and develop guidelines
to govern the review and conduct of Federally-funded research. Panel members will be asked to consider various areas
of research involving the human embryo and provide advice as to those areas they view to be acceptable for Federal funding,
areas that warrant additional review, and areas that are unacceptable for Federal support. For those areas of research
considered acceptable for Federal funding, the Panel will be asked to recommend specific guidelines for the review
and conduct of this research. Issues related to human germ-line gene modification are not within the Panel's purview.
The Panel's final report will be presented to the ACD for review.

A critical part of the process of considering these issues is to gain an understanding of the diversity of beliefs and
opinions held about the moral status of the human embryo and about Federal funding of research involving the human
embryo. The NIH is seeking public comment on Federal funding of human embryo research for consideration by the Panel
and encourages interested individuals and organizations to share with the Panel their views and perspectives on
this important topic. Those who wish to submit written comments of any length should forward these to Steven Muller,
Ph.D., Chair, NIH Human Embryo Research Panel, c/o National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Building


#

1, room 218, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. To ensure that public input is available to the Panel during its deliberations,
written comments should be received in advance of the Panel's fourth scheduled meeting, May 4, 1994.

Each meeting of the Panel will also provide an opportunity for interested individuals and organizations to make brief
oral presentations to the Panel. During the first Panel meeting, public commentary was heard in a two-hour session.
To register to make an oral statement before the Panel, individuals and organizations should contact Ms. Peggy Schnoor
at the NIH by telephoning 3014961454 or by sending a facsimile message to 3014020280 or
3014021759. Oral statements must not exceed five minutes in length, and a copy of the remarks should
be forwarded to the above address one week in advance of the scheduled presentation date. Opportunities to present
statements will be determined by the order in which requests are received.

The NIH will endeavor to provide seating for all members of the public who wish to attend the meetings. Individuals
are, however, asked to notify the NIH of their interest in attending by using the telephone or facsimile numbers listed
above. Individuals who require special accommodations are also asked to contact Ms. Schnoor at the above number.
General questions about the Panel or future meetings should also be directed to Ms. Schnoor.




<SIGNER>
Ruth L. Kirschstein,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Director, NIH.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 944176 Filed 22394; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 414001M
</BILLING>


