FT  13 MAY 91 / Criticism mounts over NHS reforms
PRESSURE on the government over its health service reforms increased
yesterday when the Institute of Economic Affairs, a leading free market
think tank, joined mounting criticism of the way the changes are working.
The institute contributed ideas to the government review which led to the
introduction of the reforms and it does not question the need for
reorganising the National Health Service.
However, Dr David Green, director of the institute's health and welfare
unit, said yesterday that last month's changes in the hospital service and
forthcoming reforms of long-term care 'suffer from the same structural
flaw'. By rationing health care within cash limits 'arbitrarily set by
government' both reforms reduced consumer choice.
He said that the viability of London teaching hospitals such as Guy's -
which started the political uproar over the reforms by announcing about 600
job cuts last month - depended on attracting patients from outside the
capital.
While many patients would prefer to be treated in London teaching hospitals,
the reforms did not give them the choice. Allocation of money under the
reforms did not follow patients' wishes but went to 'where patients have
been assigned'.
The institute publishes a pamphlet today on the next stage of the reforms
contained in the National Health Service and Community Care Act  - changes
in provision for the long-term sick and elderly. Dr Green said these
reforms, coming into effect over the next few years, were retrograde and
would reduce elderly people's existing choice of care provision.
The institute would like individuals to be able to augment state spending on
the NHS through personal insurance arrangements - unlike the British Medical
Association, which is calling for increased public expenditure. While
proposed solutions vary, the current controversy over the health reforms has
made the adequacy of Britain's health care expenditure, which is low by
international standards, into a live political issue again.
The government is trying to shift the argument away from funding to the
outcome of health care. Later this month Mr William Waldegrave, health
secretary, will publish targets for monitoring and improving the nation's
health.
If the controversy over the reforms continues, however, there is a danger
for the government that the health targets exercise will become embroiled in
the heated argument over the adequacy of NHS funding.
The Association of Community Health Councils, which represents consumer
interests in the service, today joins criticism of the new general
practitioner fund-holding arrangements, under which some family doctors have
budgets and purchase hospital care for their patients.
For the first time, says the association, GPs will be subject to 'financial
risks' which may sometimes prevent them from providing the best care. In
other circumstances, fund holders might increase discrepancies in standards
by being able to negotiate favourable services for their patients.
