FT  04 MAY 91 / Gardening: Seed-time mysteries laid bare - Now is the the
time to lay the foundations for a cheap summer in the garden - with or
without expert help PR
IN THE next fortnight, you can lay the foundation for a cheap summer in the
garden. The weather has turned in your favour and has remembered how to
rain; the effort is minimal and the skill is not much greater. You need some
seed-packets, a rake, and a will to experiment. If you need somebody to talk
you through it, we have a new dialogue of experts to help us.
The dialogue is conducted by Christopher Lloyd and Graham Rice, and is
published as Garden Flowers from Seed (Pounds 17.99, Viking). They do not
hold a dialogue as Socrates seems to have understood one, a sort of bullying
match in which the senior expert, Christopher Lloyd, is allowed to tie a
younger questioner into knots.
Instead, both partners exchange views without too many disagreements, but in
a chatty tone which may not suit all readers. The result is a double-edged
insight into some of gardening's great mysteries. Over them all hangs the
really big puzzle: why will some seeds grow so easily, while others sit and
sulk? There are lesser mysteries on the way through: why do petunia
seedlings sometimes fizzle out? Why should you never sow mallows in the same
place, year after year? Why do some verbenas germinate, and others come to
nothing? What are the ground rules for Bizzy Lizzie if you do not wish to
buy it in June at more than Pounds 1 a plant?
Fortunately, both partners in the dialogue seem to agree with my favourites.
They merely disagree about one of the methods. This weekend, I will be
sowing seeds directly into open ground, the simplest of all procedures.
Loosen up a bare patch of earth; rake it over; press it with the back of the
rake to make a series of straight seed-drills about half an inch deep.
Arrange these straight drills at various angles so that you do not end up
with nothing but a straight, long line. Sow the seeds directly and press the
soil back over them with gentle pressure from the rake's head, holding the
rake itself upright. Follow Rice and disagree with Lloyd, who prefers to
broadcast the seed irregularly. I find this habit extravagant and harder to
control as its results progress.
Most varieties no longer need a greenhouse in May and certainly do not need
daily attention. You can sow them on a Saturday afternoon, water them again
on a Sunday evening, if the weather is hot, and forget the entire escapade
until the next weekend but one or two. By then, seedlings ought to be
showing.
My first instinct is to make a beeline for the blues: Love in a Mist (the
Miss Jekyll variety) and dark blue Phacelia. The experts agree on my
experience, that both of these transplant badly, like poppies or mignonette.
You need to leave a few plants in each seed-drill without disturbance,
having thinned out their unwanted neighbours a week or so after germination.
I am also fond of the easy Echium Blue Bedder, although Lloyd complains that
it only lasts for two or three weeks. I find that it will pull itself
together for a second season if you cut it very hard after the first
flowering.
Among tall varieties, we all agree on Malope, the big mallow, but it is not
often stocked in shops' seed-racks. I also like rose-lilac Agrostemma, which
Lloyd shrewdly suggests as a good pot-plant: you have to stake it when young
in order to agree with him. It is not clear what the experts think about the
bright white Lavatera Mont Blanc.
Lloyd complains about it, but the book gives it a glamorous full-colour
plate. Rice is good on the purple-flowered Swan River Daisy, which he wisely
recommends for hanging baskets because it will put up with drought. It needs
heat, however, in order to germinate.
What, finally, about seed-boxes and composts? I use old Flora Margarine
boxes or the small plastic pots in which plants come nowadays from
nurseries. The experts agree, surely rightly, that pots are more convenient,
as you can sow many more varieties in a small space. Do not bother with big
plastic trays. The days have also passed in which we had to use wooden
seed-boxes, fresh from fishmongers and smelling of kippers.
On composts, the two of them are still stuck with peat, but mostly as part
of a general compost. Personally, I have never used peat at all. I have
preferred good top-soil from the garden, which is carefully sieved, like
flour, and mixed with leaf-mould and sharp sand. I have also used
vermiculite and perlite, both of which help seeds to germinate: however,
both of them persist in the soil afterwards, and seedlings anyway need
something stronger very soon. A very few, very difficult seeds perhaps need
peat to hold water and keep the surrounding soil open, but I must insist
that my peat-free successes have included seed of gentians, hardy cyclamen
and various lilies.
Some while ago, I also gave up buying bags of special seed-compost because
it becomes lumpy when it is watered and it is too fine to handle easily. As
an amateur, my reasoning is much simpler. When nature sows seeds, she drops
them in all manner of rough, uneven earth; when I sow outdoors, I make seeds
put up with whatever the flower bed already offers.
Why go mad on peat because you happen to be sowing the same bedding-plants
in a pot or margarine box? I win some, lose some, but so (I suspect) do the
peat-fanciers. The one cloud on the horizon is that my traditional laziness
is now ecologically pure. But that is a prejudice for another time.
