FT  14 MAY 91 / Technology: The icon gathers a loyal following - As
Microsoft's Windows 3.0 approaches its first birthday, Della Bradshaw
reflects on the software program that took the computer world by storm
Until a year ago, London-based chartered accountants Touche Ross had just
two choices when it wanted to computerise the process of auditing its 1,500
clients.
First Touche could write its own software from scratch - or employ a
contractor to do it - which could prove costly and time-consuming.
Alternatively, Touche could buy a standard software package and try to
adjust the way the firm operated in order to make the auditors' practices
fit the format of the software.
Neither option proved attractive: there was a dearth of readily available
audit support software and the firm was cautious about embarking on a big
software applications drive. Because the bulk of audits are carried out
between November and April - for companies which report their year-ends in
December or March - Touche had to be sure that the software could be
implemented in the slack summer period.
'If we missed that window we were another year away,' relates Mark Stephens,
partner for information technology at Touche. 'Something that took 13 months
to develop was really a two-year programme for us.'
Advised of its imminent arrival, Stephens decided instead to wait for the
Windows 3.0 software program, launched a year ago this month by Microsoft,
the leading US personal computer software company.
The initial success of Windows 3.0 - nearly 3m copies of the program have
been sold worldwide - has been generated because it radically alters how
IBM-compatible personal computers can be used, giving them the look and feel
of an Apple Macintosh.
But more sophisticated users of Windows 3.0, such as Touche, believe its
long-term popularity will be rooted in the ability it gives software
developers to customise their own packages more quickly. 'It takes a third
to a quarter of the time to produce sophisticated software than before,'
says Stephens.
Windows 3.0 is a 'graphical user interface', a program that generates menu
bars, icons and overlapping windows, which can be used with various
applications programs such as word processing or spreadsheets. The interface
enables users to point at symbols and click an electronic 'mouse' to select
functions, instead of typing commands on a keyboard.
What makes Windows 3.0 useful to software developers is that it provides a
'programming environment' which sits on top of the applications package and
enables the procedures within the standard package to be adapted to the
needs of the user organisation. Certain procedures can be ordered in a
different way or eliminated if they are irrelevant.
'In the past we developed word processing packages on the basis of what we
thought users wanted, but you couldn't change them to fit in with the work
pattern that you had in the office,' says David Smith, systems marketing
manager for Microsoft. 'In trying to be general, and develop a package for
every single user in the world, you had to compromise along the way.'
Stephens and his team decided to use Microsoft's Word word-processing
package running under Windows 3.0 as the basis for their development
programme. 'Auditing is a lot about writing but I didn't want to develop a
new word processor. However we couldn't use a standard word processing
package - we needed to tailor it to our specific application,' recalls
Stephens.
So they adapted the Word software, using Windows, to make it look like an
auditing tool. 'From an underlying software standpoint about 95 per cent of
the software is Microsoft. We've done about 5 per cent,' says Stephens. But
he reports that from a user point of view about 80 per cent of software
appears to be a specifically designed for auditing.
The Touche software developers have achieved this by taking all the
word-processing features available in the Word package and linking them
differently. On top of that they have created headings and formats
specifically for their auditors' needs. The progression on standard forms
and layout, for example, mirrors the procedures an auditor would follow in
the course of his job - whether auditing banks or grocery stores.
Although the first software package, launched on 600 machines in August
1990, concentrated on the presentation of the software, this summer
Stephens's department will be adding to the basic features and contributing
to the content of the application. One thing the development team will be
looking at is making the existing software easy to translate - Touche's
Paris office has already shown an interest in going down the same
development route.
Because the development cycles are so short, Touche has even been able to
create several prototype applications and, once appropriate software has
been selected, the rest have been thrown away.
Stephens points out that in spite of the moves towards these programmable
applications packages, the basic applications tools are not completely
ready. Of the five common applications that can be used by most
organisations - word processing, spreadsheet, database, communications and
graphics - Microsoft has developed only two to run under Windows 3.0 -
Excel, the spreadsheet package, and Word. It has also adapted Project, for
project management.
But the success of Windows has persuaded all the large applications software
houses to adapt their most popular packages which run under Dos - the widely
used PC operating system - so that they can take full advantage of Windows.
Lotus, for example, is in the final stages of developing a version of its
popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet package which will fully exploit Windows 3.0, and
is planning to have business graphics for the operating program later this
year, says Robert Ingram, spreadsheet sales and marketing manager for the
company. Borland International has three programming tools which work with
Windows 3.0, and is also adapting its Paradox relational database package
and its Quattro Pro spreadsheet program.
Microsoft estimates that there are now more than 700 software developers
writing new Windows-based applications, all hoping to take a bite of an
ever-growing cherry. The Software Publishers Association in the US estimates
that worldwide sales of Windows 3.0 applications are now second only to
those of Dos applications packages. Market research consultant Dataquest
underlines this optimism: it estimates that by 1992 systems sales of Windows
will have overtaken those of Dos.
The growth in the number of packages to run with Windows 3.0 has changed the
buying patterns of Windows users, says Smith. 'For the first six or seven
months there was an enormous growth in the sales of Windows operating
software. But for the last five months we have seen applications sales shoot
up - sales have quadrupled. Now 85 per cent of Windows users have a Windows
application,' he says.
Initially Windows 3.0 customers were running their existing Dos programs
with the operating system - giving them the advantage of the icon-type
presentation but without the power to move in and out of the applications
provided by Windows 3.0. With Dos programs the user is forced to follow a
series of commands in order to move through the program - like boring a
hole, which you have to climb back out of before you can begin boring
another hole.
The Windows icons enable users to jump between different applications. So
one advantage of combining a Windows application with the Windows 3.0
program, says Smith, is that the user can take text, graphics or numbers
from one applications package and transfer them into another - figures from
a spreadsheet program can be copied into a report being prepared in a word
processing package, say.
Perhaps the biggest advantage is that the two application packages need not
even be provided by the same software companies.
