FT  04 MAY 91 / On course for collision over car pricing: The row between
the motor industry and the monopolies body
BATTLE lines are being drawn between car makers operating in the UK market
and the Monopolies and Mergers Commission over the vexed issue of new car
prices.
Discussions to be held soon between the MMC and the industry may soften the
commission's final report, which is due to be published by early August, but
the tenor of the MMC's provisional conclusions - sent in a preliminary
report to the industry - suggests that the car makers' powers of persuasion
will be sorely tested.
As the MMC's 12-month inquiry into the distribution and pricing of new cars
in Britain enters its final stage, the motor industry has been made
uncomfortably aware that a tide of evidence is mounting to suggest that
motorists are paying significantly higher prices for new cars in Britain
than in other key European markets.
The industry has claimed that previous studies, such as those made by
European consumer organisations, have failed to take account fully of key
factors that distort prices across Europe such as varying car taxation
rates, differing model specifications, exchange-rate movements, discount
levels, and price controls.
The latest evidence of excessive UK car prices has now been assembled in a
study commissioned by the MMC and prepared by Ludvigsen Associates, the
UK-based automotive consultancy.
The MMC and Ludvigsen Associates have sought in advance to head off the
normal industry criticism by trying to develop a methodology that would take
account of the most obvious distorting factors.
The industry remains sceptical, however. Some car makers' independent
studies, also carried out in the past 12 months, have come to less worrying
conclusions.
The alternative reports will also be presented to the MMC and the commission
will then face a crucial task to sift the evidence - with the risk that the
credibility of its core findings will be called into question.
The Ludvigsen study has sought to arrive at what it calls comparable 'on the
road' transaction prices - both including and excluding tax - for a series
of 20 different models in four segments of the market: small (Ford Fiesta
size), lower medium (Ford Escort size), upper medium (Vauxhall Cavalier
size) and large (Mercedes-Benz 190 size), and in six European Community
countries: the UK, Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and the Irish
Republic.
The methodology it used to arrive at the transaction prices was to telephone
at least 50 dealers for each of the models in the six different countries.
It was supposed to be a standard approach 'designed to elicit a cash price
for a private buyer with no trade-in'.
The charts show some of the findings with the pre-tax price, adjusted for
varying levels of specification.
It shows, for instance, that the price of a 1.4 litre Ford Escort LX
five-door in the UK (on October 15 1990) was Pounds 6,527 compared with (at
the then prevailing exchange rates) Pounds 6,385 in Germany, Pounds 5,848 in
Belgium, Pounds 5,729 in the Neth-erlands and Pounds 5,453 in France.
The British price was 19.7 per cent higher than the French price.
On the same basis, the British price of a 1.6-litre Volkswagen Golf CL at
Pounds 7,592 was 24.5 per cent higher than the Belgian price of Pounds
6,098. The price of a 1.6-litre Nissan Sunny GSX at Pounds 8,436 was 37.7
per cent higher than the Dutch price of Pounds 6,125.
Some car makers claim that they have already found holes in the Ludvigsen
methodology.
Mr Paul Tosch, chairman and managing director of Vauxhall, says: 'We do not
agree with the Ludvigsen figures. We have not finished our discussions with
the MMC, but on a broad basis we are very competitive in the UK. In some
cases, prices in the UK are in the lower range compared with the rest of
Europe.'
Vauxhall said that its own independent study had been based on invoices of
actual deals across Europe, rather than telephone calls about non-deals.
Mr Tosch claimed that General Motors (Vauxhall is GM's UK subsidiary), with
the exception of a couple of 'rogue' models, had largely stayed within the
allowable 12 per cent price band laid down by the European Commission for
car price differences between national markets in Europe.
The evidence has been collected. Now the credibility battle may commence.
