FT  15 APR 91 / Somalia: a human disaster in the making - In the first of
two articles, Julian Ozanne reports on the civil war tearing the nation
apart
TORN by tribal slaughter, revenge killings, and a looted capital city which
has degenerated into armed anarchy, Somalia has been deserted to its hapless
fate by the outside world.
Like the decomposed corpses which still litter Villa Somalia, the wrecked
former presidential palace of Mohammed Siad Barre, the life of a nation is
disintegrating.
Under the burning sun what was once human flesh has dried tight across the
skeletons into a hard translucent yellow leather. The smell of decomposition
has passed, replaced now with the reek of hundreds of pellets of rat faeces
which surround each body from head to toe.
The legacy of Barre's reign of terror carried out by his hated Red Beret
bodyguards lies not far away. Inside the Villa one of the president's
offices is knee-deep with thousands of unopened letters from human rights
activists across the world dating back to 1986, a testament of the contempt
in which the regime held those who questioned the way in which it held on to
power.
Perhaps not surprisingly no one has thought to give the reviled bodyguards a
dignified burial. There is neither the time nor the desire to do so in the
chaotic mayhem which has possessed a city marked by the constant clatter of
machine gun fire and warriors, many high on miraa, the local narcotic,
riding shotgun on cannibalised vehicles through a wasteland of pock-marked
buildings and streets strewn with debris.
As usual the victims are the civilians trapped without food, clean water or
basic medical supplies. In a Mogadishu hospital a young teenager lies in a
pool of blood on a concrete floor. His left arm and part of his face have
been blown away by a grenade he was playing with. His mother sits beside him
trying to put back the drip into his right arm which he keeps knocking out
as his body jerks with spasms of pain. 'He will die,' said one of the nuns
working in the SOS hospital, the only hospital which stayed functioning
during the worst of the war. Later that afternoon he died.
In what was once an SOS school, classrooms are flooded with babies born with
tetanus, emaciated infants with severe kwashiorkoor and marasmus, victims of
accidents and the wounded from the battle front. Without drugs, fuel, food
and foreign aid workers, the situation is deteriorating every day. A human
disaster is in the making.
Nearly three months after Mr Barre fled south from the capital with remnants
of his army, the civil war continues with unremitting intensity. Last week
forces allied to Mr Barre fought to within 20 miles of Mogadishu before
being beaten back.
But in the offices of the capital, the politicians still talk about peace.
'We are negotiating every day and we hope to fix a meeting between the two
warring parties soon,' said Mr Ali Mahdi Mohammed, the president of the
provisional United Somali Congress government. As he spoke the crackle of
machine gun fire erupted outside on the street.
For 21 years Mr Barre ruled Somalia favouring his own Marehan clan, a
sub-clan of the Darod, ruthlessly oppressing dissent. The Hawiye, the
overwhelming majority in Mogadishu, suffered most from Barre's myriad
security forces. Ninety-two were killed in three days after Christmas last
year, prompting an ethnic based uprising as Hawiye hunted down Darod and
Darod killed Hawiye.
'What begun as a power struggle turned into a tribal vendetta,' said Mr
Ahmed Haile, a supporter of the USC, under which the Hawiye are grouped.
'There is still a witch-hunt on both sides. Nobody can deny that. We are
ashamed about it.'
Most of the Darods fled south. The few remaining in the city had to take
shelter. In a stone-walled compound on the north of Mogadishu 3,200 of them
are camped in the home of Sheikh Abucar Omar Adan, a religious Hawiye leader
who has protected and fed the people his own clan were hunting down.
The provisional government is beginning to grapple with the problem, first
by acknowledging it. 'Clan is a reality in Africa and in all primitive
societies,' said President Ali Mahdi.' But I am sure we can overcome it.'
Among middle class Hawiye a consensus is emerging that a federal democratic
solution will be the only escape from clan rivalry, which has traditionally
been based on competition for land, waterholes and livestock.
'Clanism and tribalism cannot be buried. We must build a pluralist political
system where clan can be freely and fairly reflected as the political unit,'
said Mr Haile.
Whether deep inter-clan bitterness and revenge bloodlust can be diminished
remains questionable. Already 6,000-8,000 have died.
The seemingly abundant supply of weapons and ammunition provides the means.
In the gun market a Chinese made AK47 or German G3 rifle can be bought for
Dollars 110. Twenty bullets cost Dollars 1.20. Bazookas, rocket-propelled
grenades, machine guns, even tanks, are also available on special request.
The government says it is trying to police the city and buy back the guns at
market rates. But with an estimated 20,000 criminals on the loose and the
demands of fighting a civil war, the task is Herculean.
By day nobody dares drive around the city without gunmen pointing their guns
out of the back windows or riding on the roofs. At night the streets are
empty as intermittent gunfire breaks out and the sky is illuminated with red
tracer bullets.
So far there seems little prospect for an end to the killing.
Tomorrow: How the west failed Somalia
