FT  04 MAY 91 / Finance &amp; The Family: Unit trusts code
UNIT TRUST investors are often only interested in the prices of their
holdings. The financial statements they receive every half year may simply
be given a cursory glance before being thrown in the bin.
But this week the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO)
published a Statement of Recommended Practice (SORP) on the way financial
statements must be presented to unitholders.
What should the unitholder look for in the accounts? Peter Jeffreys of Fund
Research, the analytical group, says that while each fund is different,
there are some rules of thumb.
'Looking at the portfolio' he says, 'the rule is the fewer the holdings the
greater the volatility. The average is probably around 60 to 80 holdings.'
However, Jeffreys has found as few as 30 holdings in one fund, and as many
as 200 in another.
Another clue is the percentage of the fund invested in the largest ten
holdings. 'The higher the percentage invested in the top ten, the greater
the volatility' says Jeffreys. The average is around 20 to 30 per cent but
Jeffreys has found some funds with as little as 15 per cent in top ten and
others with four or five holdings, each equivalent to 5 or 6 per cent of the
portfolio.
Jeffreys also advises investors to look at the balance of the portfolio to
see whether it has a heavy concentration in one sector. Portfolio activity -
the rate at which a manager turns over the fund - is also important. If the
manager is trading frequently, that could mean that the fund's growth will
be swallowed up by costs, but Jeffreys stresses that good fund managers can
sometimes generate heavy turnover.
To measure turnover, Jeffreys suggests that investors first discover whether
the fund is expanding or contracting.
For an expanding fund, divide the value of securities sold by the average
size of the fund over the year. For a contracting fund, divide the value of
securities bought by the average value of the fund.
The extreme values, according to Jeffreys, are a low of 15 to 20 per cent
and a high of 300 per cent, with an average of 40 to 60 per cent.
