FT  22 APR 91 / The Queen's Awards For Export and Technology 1991: Firm
success with software - Synon and Systematica
THE skills of Synon of north London and Systematica of Bournemouth have won
them a Royal accolade for technology and a place among the world's software
elite.
Both have recently been named IBM 'business partners' in applications
software development, the only UK companies to be so honoured. IBM, the
world's largest software manufacturer, has appointed only five business
partners in this area; the other three are US companies. Indeed, IBM's
sponsorship of this fairly esoteric computing field gives it both legitimacy
and significance.
The Queen's Award is timely recognition of the UK industry's expertise in
this special and sophisticated software. Their products are called
computer-aided software engineering (Case) tools - in other words, computer
software which writes computer software.
The world computer industry, contrary to its high technology image, has been
backward at applying engineering disciplines to the business of software
production; computer programs are still developed in ways which owe more to
craft skills than to science, and as a result the software industry has a
woeful reputation for software which is delivered late, fails to work or
does not meet the customer's specification.
Synon and Systematica have developed software tools - special computer
programs - which help programmers to write applications programs more
quickly, more accurately and at less cost. Their approaches to the problem,
however, and the kind of case tools they have developed, are quite
different.
Synon (the name is derived from the 'please sign on' request which greets a
user when he or she turns the computer on) has developed a case tool called
Synon II specifically for IBM's most important current mid-range machine,
the AS/400. Synon II accelerates the development of software for the AS/400;
programs which typically take a day to produce can be written in an hour or
less using the tool.
The company was formed in 1983 by three people, Mr Simon Williams, now group
chairman, Ms Melinda Horton and Mr Nicholas Knowles. All three had been
working for a small software house developing bespoke applications for IBM
mid-range machines.
They were inspired by the idea of developing a application generator for
IBM's System/38 mid-range computer, an innovative machine so far ahead of
its time that it had not proved a huge commercial success. The Synon team
reasoned, however, that there was great potential in the design and that
there would be powerful demand for a good applications generator to match
it. Their faith was justified when IBM used the System/38 design as the
basis of the AS/400, a computer which is proving outstandingly successful,
generating an estimated Dollars 14bn in sales last year.
The level of funding necessary to develop Synon II was modest; the founders
of the company funded development out of income from providing computing
services and a capital injection of Pounds 50,000 from a satisfied customer,
the French Connection clothing group. French Connection sold out at the end
of 1989.
A key ingredient in the success of Synon was the opening of its US
operation; sales soared from Pounds 700,000 in 1986 to more than Pounds 2m
in 1987 and Pounds 7.2m in 1988, as US owners of AS/400 machines realised
that Synon II was the only software generator both available and tuned
specifically for their hardware. The company now has some 2,500 customers
around the world ranging from the Salvation Army to major banking groups.
Mr Williams says he believed that Synon was about 12 months ahead of the
opposition in the early days. He now thinks the margin is very much wider.
Only now are competitive products appearing and they seem to be much
narrower in scope than Synon II.
Synon's future seems relatively secure; IBM has just launched a new, more
powerful version of the AS/400 while Synon is moving into applications
software development using its own case tool. Its first target is an
accounting package.
A close relationship with IBM (and Digital Equipment and Hewlett Packard)
was part of Systematica's business plan when it was formed in 1986; that
wish was fulfilled in September 1990 when the US giant took a 20 per cent
stake in the company and announced it was appointing it a business partner.
Systematica is unusual even among case tool makers. It makes a case tool
called VSF, which is used to build other case tools. To use a manufacturing
analogy, Systematica makes the tools to make machine tools.
The company grew out of the frustration of the founders, Dr Andrew Wells, Mr
John Pocock and Mr John Nicholls, who discovered as engineers and managers
working for Plessey that the case tools they needed were not on the market.
Plessey decided not to invest in software tools development, so the three
secured Pounds 1.45m venture capital funding from Venture Link and a Pounds
350,000 Department of Trade and Industry grant and went into business for
themselves.
Dr Wells explains that world class case tools typically take Pounds 20m to
develop and have to be created to very exact specification for each industry
 -says telecommunications, submarine operations or commercial data
processing.
The Systematica team, with Mr John Pocock providing the theoretical
underpinning, reckoned they could use knowledge engineering - artificial
intelligence - to cut the cost of building the tools by up to 95 per cent
and making them available to the two million software engineers world wide
who could make use of such sophisticated aids.
Now Systematica's VSF has been licensed to IBM, Digital equipment, Informix,
Cognos and Information Builders, among others.
Customers include British Telecom, the European Space Agency and Barclays
Bank. The product has generated some Pounds 7m in revenues in three years.
VSF is a considerable piece of mathematical inventiveness, but its principal
virtue is high speed at low cost. Case tools exist which will do all that
VSF does - but at a price. They run chiefly on mainframe computers. Dr Wells
points out: 'No one else has managed to develop a case tool that runs fast
enough on a cheap work station'.
