FT  19 APR 91 / Arts: The Two Gentlemen of Verona - Swan Theatre,
Stratford-upon-Avon
The reconciliation of love with friendship presents Shakespeare with no
small problems in this ramshackle early comedy: having sent the young
Proteus off in hot and dishonest pursuit of Valentine's sweetheart, he
somehow has to ensure that harmony is restored. Yet he signally fails to
give Proteus a chance to redeem himself, which in turn creates no small
problems of characterisation.
David Thacker sets the play among a salon society, circa 1930, interspersing
the scenes with snatches of popular song from a chanteuse at the back of the
stage. There is a logic to this idiom which emerges early on through the
horseplay of the two suitors. They are public school types whose
relationship, if not overtly sexual, has a competitive closeness. Schoolboy
rough-and-tumble lingers on the brink of adult eroticism; a boy's own
complicity is almost confusable with declarations of love.
Richard Bonneville's bumptious Valentine describes his friend's infatuation
with a sneer of distaste that throws the masculinity of his imagery into
focus. It is clear that these are two romantic adventurers who are amused to
let love 'master' them. It is not, therefore, surprising, that Proteus - in
Barry Lynch's account the more naive and impressionable of the two - should
find himself duplicating his friend's affections.
The difficulty is believing that this puppy-dog of a man could have the
drive or the egotism to follow his infatuation through - or that the
slighted Julia (a gutsy Clare Holman) should so doggedly pursue him in spite
of a deviousness that involves breaking all the rules of class and
comradeship. With the same spaniel-eyed innocence, Lynch hunts out the lofty
Silvia (an icily remote Saskia Reeves) and sneaks to her father (Terence
Wilton), a Floyd-like batchelor chef who rips the claws off a lobster as he
rages at his daughter's disobedience and would - one rather imagines - do
much the same to such petty tale-tellers as Proteus. The ducal choice of
son-in-law is a stuffed shirt of overbreeding, played on a gloriously effete
monotone by Guy Henry.
Granted that class plays such a part in this milieu, there is a streak of
perversity in Thacker's decision to make servants the equals of their
employers: to wit Josette Bushell-Mingo's bottom-wiggling Lucetta, who
lounges around in easy familiarity with her mistress, Julia, making the
delivery of a love letter into a game of pert one-upwomanship.
If Thacker fails to vindicate the play as coherently motivated drama, he
makes the most of it as entertainment. Hilary Cromie's singing strikes
mellifluous counterpoints with the scenes it punctuates, and Richard Moore's
bowlerhatted Launce, intransigent hound in tow, makes more of the clowning
interludes than one could reasonably expect, finding such sense in the sole
of a shoe as is signally lacking in the two gentlemen.
