FT  27 APR 91 / Gardening: Time to take out the tubers - Why Arthur Hellyer
has been ferreting about in his loft
IF YOU dug up dahlia tubers last autumn and stored them for the winter in a
dry, frost-proof place you should be thinking now about starting them into
growth again.
My own went into the loft, which is well boarded. The loft gets sufficient
warmth from the hot water system to keep out frost but not so much as to
shrivel the tubers and that is ideal.
Most of the tubers will go straight back into the garden where they are to
flower this summer. This is not ideal because it is such a big change of
environment and there are hungry slugs and snails waiting to eat the dahlia
shoots. However, as a rule a good sprinkling of slug pellets in each
planting hole and also on the surface when planting is completed will look
after these enemies, and a covering of at least two inches of mixed soil and
either peat or compost will give adequate protection from the short-duration
frosts that are all we are likely to get now.
Nevertheless, it is safer to start dahlia tubers in soil-filled boxes or
large pots in a greenhouse or shelter of some kind where they can be
watched, watered and protected until early June, by which time they should
be growing strongly and no further danger from frost should remain.
If the old roots are large they can, with advantage, be split into several
pieces provided each piece has one or more tubers and also one or more
pieces of last year's stems, since the new growth buds are around the base
of these.
One of the advantages of starting tubers under cover is that these growth
buds can be kept under observation and, if a lot start to grow, just the
best four or five per plant kept and the rest rubbed out. As these shoots
lengthen they will branch and by the time flowers begin to appear in July
each plant will be sufficiently bushy to make a fine display which will
continue until stopped by frost. Yet these are niceties which can be
dispensed with, for dahlias are among the easiest of plants to grow given
sunshine and plenty of moisture to sustain their ample stems and flowers.
There is no limit to the number of years that dahlias can be grown on in
this way and I can think of no other sub-tropical plant that can be grown
with so little trouble and expense. I must have had some of my dahlia tubers
for at least 20 years and yet they show no signs of decline and I scarcely
have to spray them except, maybe, against greenflies for which there is an
aphicide named Rapid (it contains perimicarb) which has the merit of being
specific to members of the aphis family (greenflies, blackflies, etc) and so
extremely unlikely to affect anything else in the garden.
There are three possible ways of starting with dahlias: with seed, cuttings
or small tubers. Most of the seed that is sold is of bedding varieties bred
for their modest 2 to 2 1/2 ft height and single, semi-double or double
flowers of moderate size. They are so easily and cheaply raised from seed
and their tubers are often so unreliable about surviving the winter in store
that it is usual to re-sew them each spring and discard them at the end of
the flowering season.
Cuttings are now used mainly for the best varieties, those grown by dahlia
specialists many of whom exhibit them at flower shows. A few old tubers are
stored during the winter and are started growing in pots or beds of soil in
a greenhouse in March in a minimum temperature of 16`C (61`F).
The young shoots are then cut off with a sharp knife when 2 to 3 in long,
inserted as cuttings in small flower pots and rooted in a propagating frame
within the greenhouse. When rooted, the cuttings can be potted singly in 3
or 4 in diameter pots and gradually acclimatised for planting outdoors early
in June. Many varieties can be purchased in this way as young plants ready
to go straight into the garden.
This is the way favoured by many dahlia lovers because so many varieties are
available from specialist dahlia nurseries. However, garden centres usually
prefer to sell what are known as pot tubers, which are quite small tubers
grown from late cuttings and then packed dry in polythene bags.
These pot tubers can be sold dry in their bags at any time in the spring
and, according to precise time and convenience, can either be potted singly
in pots and started in a frost-proof greenhouse or on a sunny window-sill or
be planted direct outdoors where they are to flower.
You should wait until May to do this and even then you should put a couple
of inches of soil over them as protection from late frosts.
Dahlia tubers vary greatly in size and shape. Those that are long and thin
are easily broken off. The best for long life are those that are thick and
short-necked and packed into a compact cluster. They then give each other
protection and hang together for years. When deciding which dahlia varieties
to keep at the end of the season I always give this aspect of tuber shape
and character considerable thought.
