FT  02 MAY 91 / Parliament and Politics: Labour claims Tories planned '14
bands' - Council Taxation
LABOUR CLAIMED yesterday that a leaked document giving details of a
valuation exercise proved that the government had originally intended to
make the council tax more progressive by spreading it over 14 bands.
The party said that the paper also undermined the government figures
published last week for bills under the new property-based tax, by exposing
the flaws in the basis of the calculations.
Mr Bryan Gould, the shadow environment secretary, said that the Valuation
Office circular showed that in February the government had been considering
a council tax system in which the top band would have been over Pounds
500,000 instead of the Pounds 160,000-plus it was announced as last week.
'We now know they took a conscious decision to abandon the earlier scheme. .
.which would have made the wealthy pay a fairer contribution,' he said.
Its unfairness was demonstrated, he said, by the fact that people in the
lowest band of property in four out of five English councils would face
higher bills than that to be paid by Mr Michael Heseltine, the environment
secretary, in Westminster.
Mr David Blunkett, the opposition local government spokesman, said that not
only did the valuation cover 14 bands instead of seven, but that the limits
on the two sets of bands did not coincide.
Valuers had been asked merely to 'estimate' the percentage of housing stock
falling into each band, instead of using statistical sampling techniques.
The government's calculations were 'inventions based on guesstimates'.
Downing Street said that a number of options had been looked at during the
poll tax review. A 14-band system would have been very complex and there
would have been only a small number of houses in upper bands above that on
which the government had decided.
The department of the environment also emphasised the amount higher-rate
taxpayers contributed through income tax to the costs of local government.
It added that the 14-band property valuation had been used to find averages
and work outwards from them, rather than as the basis for making assumptions
about how properties would be spread within different ranges.
