FT  20 APR 91 / The main attraction: Birmingham's new convention centre
This week the UK's second city felt that, for once, it was first. The
plaudits for the purity of sound at the inaugural concert in Birmingham's
new Symphony Hall, part of the brand new and publicly-owned Pounds 160m
International Convention Centre, engendered the feeling that here is a city
on the move, that possibly it might be the international metropolis claimed
by the publicity hype.
The glitter of celebration may turn to gold in the shape of a virile
services sector shaped around such grand civic projects, as the city council
intends. But the transformation will take a long time.
Decades of development have not permitted the escape from what JB Priestley
nearly 60 years ago called 'the sad dingy muddle of factories and
dormitories that have been allowed to pass for cities in this island'. The
city centre, wounded during the Second World War, was torn apart afterwards
and re-built. The result was, as an official history gently puts it, 'for
many people an efficiently functional city centre in which design and
environmental aspects took a lower priority'. The time of obvious city
wealth when Birmingham workers enjoyed earnings higher than the national
average slipped away a generation ago. The 'city of a thousand trades' found
that traditional skills were not enough.
Hence the desire to widen the city economy, to make it less vulnerable to
the erratic swings of manufacturing fortune. This has been local and
regional policy for 20 years, pursued with varying degrees of energy. But
the future has never been left to the private sector alone. To a degree
unusual among British local authorities, the Birmingham City Council has
been aggressive, interventionist.
The Convention Centre and the adjacent Pounds 51m National Indoor Arena,
still under construction, are monuments to such energy. The
Labour-controlled council, led by Sir Richard Knowles, a wily cigar-smoking
veteran of the party's pragmatic, non-ideological tradition, has managed to
uphold a tradition of independence in the face of central government attacks
on the structure of local government.
The council is just behaving as Birmingham councils have for the last 130
years. There is a resolve to fend off control from London while accepting
any benefits London may provide. There has been since Joseph Chamberlain, a
Liberal, was mayor in the 1860s and swung the council, by means of an
efficient political machine, to a policy of economic intervention. Sir
Richard wears Chamberlain's mantle.
The Conservatives grasped the need for a more diversified local economy.
They took the first steps towards the building of both the National
Exhibition Centre when they controlled the council in the 1970s, and the
International Convention Centre in the early 1980s. Labour, which has been
in power now for seven years, followed through. Both share the culture of
municipal independence, a bi-partisan approach to the big development issues
that gives priority to civic loyalty over politics.
This is not to suggest there is no party political bickering in the run-up
to the May 2 local elections. Sir Richard dismisses Reg Hales, the
Conservative leader, as 'a small town politician from Sutton Coldfield'. For
his part, Mr Hales talks of Labour as having 'the priorities of the
madhouse' with a 137 per cent increase in council spending over the last
seven years and a low rate, as revealed in a local poll, of customer
satisfaction.
But Birmingham's independent tradition, and the common ground between its
politicians, did help it to fend off Whitehall during the Thatcher years -
to keep, for example, its full planning powers by refusing a government plan
to establish an urban development corporation.
'We did it by using our brains and not our mouths as is so common in the
Labour party,' says Sir Richard. 'We took a decision in our own pragmatic
way not to defy the government, like some London boroughs and Liverpool, but
to attract industry back to Birmingham, to build on the back of the National
Exhibition Centre'. He cites the building of the International Convention
Centre, the arrival of the Birmingham Royal Ballet and the D'Oyly Carte
Opera.
The National Exhibition Centre, to the south of the city, is the biggest
facility for trade fairs in the UK, and has consistently been in profit
since the early 1980s. In 1989-90, after meeting all its debt charges, it
contributed Pounds 7.5m to the city council's general rate fund.
There are no such hopes for the International Convention Centre: while
eventually it may make an operating profit the city council will be left
with about Pounds 120m of debt to service. Its economic rationale is that it
will attract business to the city. Investment is taking place.
Private-sector proposals would add 2,600 extra beds to the city's hotels -
there are about 30,000 at the moment. And in the wider context of
Birmingham's development, the city council claims that more than Pounds 2bn
of investment is either planned or being spent on offices and other
commercial development.
Privately, Mr Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, has told
Birmingham leaders that the city council is not a government target for
wing-clipping. Despite the rise in spending and petty scandal, the council
has not been community charge-capped. It is evidently deemed a responsible
body. One reason for this is that it represents the practical rather than
the ideological side of the Labour party; it has the self-confidence, like
Glasgow, to deal with the private sector as a partner in development.
Now the days of the grand civic project are over. There will be no more
developments on the scale of the International Convention Centre. Not, at
any rate, until local government financing rules are changed. Gradually,
central government constraints on local authority borrowing have tightened
to the point that the financial flexibility enjoyed by a succession of
Birmingham leaders has been eliminated. Local politics will be more humdrum
in the future.
This will be welcome to those who have had reservations about the financial
demands of the International Convention Centre. Some Labour councillors
resigned on the issue, believing that the spending priorities in a city of
manifold social problems were misplaced. Community groups have contrasted
the Centre investment with their diminished funding.
In Small Heath, one of Birmingham's most deprived wards, Mrs Janet Titchen,
centre development officer for the Birmingham Community Association, accepts
that the Centre would be 'nice for Birmingham' but observes 'it will never
benefit the people I'm working for'.
'Money is going into building the inner city, but it is not aimed at the
people in it,' she says.
This is the underside of the glitter. The city which in 1885 could blazon
above its new art gallery 'by the gains of industry we promote art' and
which in 1991 triumphantly presents Mr Simon Rattle and the City of
Birmingham Symphony Orchestra with a new home is still hard, uncompromising.
Especially in a recession.
