FT  19 APR 91 / Mining ban splits Antarctica's guardians: Treaty nations
differ on how long to protect white continent
THE 39 signatories of the Antarctic Treaty System are set to lock horns
again over the contentious issue of mining in the white continent when they
meet for an environmental conference in Madrid on Monday.
The guardians of the Antarctic have so far failed to draw up a new set of
environmental safeguards for the last great wilderness on earth because they
cannot agree on whether to ban mining forever or to allow the exploitation
of Antarctica's hidden oil and mineral riches sometime in the future.
The debate has been sharpened by the legacy of the Gulf War - 800 oil wells
on fire or gushing out of control in Kuwait. Supporters of regulated mining
in the Antarctic believe the struggle for control over the world's oil
resources will intensify. They argue that the Antarctic Treaty would be
planting the seeds of an international crisis if it were to deny the world
access to its estimated 45m barrels of oil.
Environmentalists argue with equal conviction that disasters will only be
averted from the white continent if mineral exploration is never allowed to
take place.
The question has split the Antarctic Treaty nations into two. But after the
deadlock that frustrated all progress at a three-week meeting in Chile last
November, there are signs that hardliners on both sides are shifting ground.
Britain last month dropped its defence of a defunct minerals convention that
sought to regulate mining in Antarctica. Its isolation had become clear at
the Chile conference and, in March, Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, the UK foreign
office minister, said Britain would propose a mining moratorium in an
attempt to forge a consensus at the Madrid meeting.
At the other side of the spectrum, a group led by Australia, France, Belgium
and Italy are still - officially, at least - campaigning for an outright
prohibition.
'Australia will not support a moratorium because it implies that mining will
almost inevitably take place after the prescribed period of time has
elapsed,' an Australian official said in Canberra this month.
Australia's position appears to leave little room for manoeuvre, let alone
negotiations. However, some delegations believe the group led by Australia
may agree to discuss a moratorium of 50 years or more.
The quarrelling parties know that failure to reach a compromise solution
would strike at the very heart of the Antarctic Treaty System, which has
been held as a model of international co-operation since its inception in
1961.
The treaty established the world's first international peace zone and froze
all territorial claims. Military installations, nuclear tests and the
dumping of radioactive wastes are forbidden. Scientific research promoted by
the treaty has helped unravel some of the secrets of the world's climate.
The ozone hole was first detected over the Antarctic, and now key work is
being done on the 'greenhouse effect' of global warming.
Mr Curtis Bohlen, who will be heading the US delegation to Madrid, recently
told Congress that 'although the parties remain far apart on the minerals
issue, there appears to be a universal determination to find a workable
compromise in Madrid'.
There was broad agreement, he said, on stricter environmental safeguards for
scientific work, on the need to regulate tourism and limit the proliferation
of research bases on the continent. These number more than 40, and
Greenpeace, the environmental pressure group, frequently denounces their lax
environmental standards.
If some form of mining moratorium is agreed at the Madrid meeting, the
debate will almost inevitably shift to what happens after the ban expires.
Countries such as Australia and New Zealand are expected to campaign
strongly for an open-ended moratorium which could only be terminated if all
contracting parties agreed. This would establish a de facto permanent ban as
any one nation would have the power to veto a mining regime.
Chile, whose position is close to Britain's, will seek to reverse the tables
by arguing that an extension to the moratorium should require the approval
of all parties.
