FT  22 APR 91 / Baker denies putting pressure on Israel
MR JAMES BAKER, the US secretary of state, yesterday sought to counter
reports that he was becoming impatient with Israel and was about to exert
stronger pressure to secure its co-operation in his Middle East peace
efforts.
Speaking after talks with President Hosni Mubarak in Cairo, Mr Baker went
out of his way to deny that he was pressing Israel for an immediate answer
to his peace proposals. 'We do not intend to press or obviously to pressure
for an answer. We understand that it takes some time to consider the
suggestions that we made,' he told reporters.
But as the US official continued his tour of Middle East capitals, his third
visit to the region in six weeks, there was little to indicate progress in
his efforts to find common ground between Israel and the Arabs.
In Jerusalem, officials also played down reports of differences with the US,
and Mr David Levy, the foreign minister, said Mr Baker would return to
Israel this week for further talks.
Mr Ehud Olmert, the health minister, said suggestions that the US and Israel
were on the brink of a confrontation were 'inaccurate and harsh'.
Mr Baker last week pressed the Israeli government to accept terms for a
proposed regional peace conference that go beyond those Israel was
originally prepared to accept.
Israeli newspapers reported that the government would reject at least some
of Mr Baker's suggestions. But Israel is loath to bring Mr Baker's mission
to a halt.
It fears losing US backing at the United Nations if the Arab-Israel dispute
was referred back to the Security Council. It is also afraid of jeopardising
much-needed extra aid to help absorb a wave of Soviet Jewish immigrants.
Mr Yitzhak Shamir, Israel's premier, is said to be unhappy with suggestions
that the UN and EC should play some role in the proposed regional conference
and that the gathering itself should have a function beyond acting as a
symbolic 'opening' for negotiations between Israel and the Arabs.
Mr Shamir torpedoed a previous attempt by Mr Baker a year ago to advance
peace efforts, by saying 'no' to talks with representative Palestinians in
Cairo. Israel's refusal to sanction the US-sponsored meeting caused serious
friction with Washington.
Palestinian representation remains a big stumbling block to attempts to
revitalise the peace process. Israel refuses to deal with the 'terrorist'
Palestine Liberation Organisation.
Mr Baker met Jordan's King Hussein in Aqaba on Saturday - the highest-level
meeting between the administration and Jordan since the king swung his
support behind Iraq early in the Gulf war.
Clearly delighted that the US was proposing to engage him in renewed peace
efforts, the king told reporters: 'I believe this is a milestone in
relations between our two countries.'
The US hopes Jordan can help provide 'cover' for the presence of a
Palestinian delegation at any peace conference involving Israel.
On Saturday, Mr Baker confirmed reports that Saudi Arabia and other Gulf
states would not attend a regional peace conference.
Syria, meanwhile, issued a hard-line statement on the eve of Mr Baker's
return to Damascus for further talks. The official newspaper Tishreen said
any efforts that were not based on UN resolutions calling for Israeli
withdrawal from Arab lands and recognition of Palestinian rights would fail.
