FT  26 APR 91 / David Thomas: a much respected specialist writer - Obituary
of a reporter for the Financial Times
DAVID THOMAS, who died on Wednesday with Alan Harper, a photographer
colleague, in a car accident while on assignment for the FT in Kuwait, was
one of those writers who give journalism a good name. The FT's Natural
Resources Editor, he delighted in uncovering folly and inconsistencies, but
he achieved that with such intellectual rigour that he was respected as much
by the people he wrote about as by his colleagues and competitors.
David, who was 37, was a scholarship boy from Cwmbran, Gwent, who took a
first-class degree in social and political sciences at Cambridge university
before completing a PhD, published as Naturalism and Social Science.
Throughout his later career, which moved from the research department of
British Coal and the TUC to New Society magazine and the FT, David retained
a speculative interest in the clash of ideas and the larger truths of modern
society. However, he was also driven by an intense curiosity and appetite
for detail in his chosen fields.
At the TUC, he was thought to be one of the most brilliant researchers taken
on by the economic department in 20 years. He gained that reputation partly
because of his prodigious output, but mainly through incisiveness in
challenging the orthodox ideas of the Labour movement in the mid 1970s, for
example about introducing private capital into nationalised industries.
He brought the same spirit of iconoclasm and thoughtfulness to the FT when
he joined the labour staff in 1985. His initial anxieties that he might not
make the grade as a news reporter were quickly proved wide of the mark.
In a succession of important specialisms, he showed a predatory delight in
the chase, an ability to prise information from the tightest sources and a
sure judgment as to its true importance. Sometimes when a government
department was being difficult he would harangue an official until he got
what he needed. He was, in short, a superb reporter who saw each story as a
piece in the mosaic of policy and industrial strategy.
While covering the electronics sector, he became fascinated by the rise of
Alan Sugar's computer company, Amstrad. The result was a book, Alan Sugar,
The Amstrad Story, which won wide critical acclaim and also made the
best-seller list.
Colleagues attest that although he did not suffer foolish ideas gladly, his
demolition of opposing points of view was always done with a good-humoured
relish that kept his existing friends and made him more. Behind a rather
shy, donnish exterior, he was a witty and companionable man.
Colleagues in his department will miss him for his enthusiasm and
extraordinary capacity to collect and assemble snippets of information into
an important story.
The trade of journalism will miss a man whose abilities would have brought
distinction as an academic, a civil servant or a political activist, but
which he chose to devote to understanding industry and society, reporting
the truth and analysing why it mattered.
David lived with his partner, Jenny Rossiter.
