FT  10 MAY 91 / Survey of Hong Kong (4): Government feels strain - The
build-up to legislative council elections
HONG KONG'S stretched government machine, which is already having trouble
coping with the complexities of the run-up to 1997, will come under
considerably increased strains this autumn when the first-ever
directly-elected candidates take their seats in the Legislative Council.
Party politics are emerging for the first time, polarised around attitudes
to China, in readiness for the elections which take place in September. In
addition, the 18 people who are to be directly elected to the 60-person
council will constantly be performing for their constituences, electorates
and pressure groups.
These developments will break down some of the consensus traditions on which
the authority of Hong Kong's non-democratic colonial administration has been
based, and will lead to more confrontations in the council.
'It will become more difficult and time-consuming to get decisions through
Legco - and we must discover how to make that work,' says Mr Hamish MacLeod
who takes over as Financial Secretary in August. 'For me, there will be
pressures about what budgets are attainable and how to cope with possibly
unpopular issues, for example like a sales tax, which may be sensible long
term but difficult to sell in the short term'.
The September elections follow recent district board and regional council
elections, during which party politics have started to emerge.
Liberal-leaning groups that favour a faster development of democracy and are
prepared to confront Peking did better on the district boards than business
groupings and pro-Peking trade unions which want closer relations with
China. But a rough 50-50 split is expected in the legislative council
elections.
The process of democratisation was agreed last year during the final
drafting in Peking of the Basic Law that will govern the territory after
1997. China's views predominated and the council's 18 directly seats will go
up to only 20 in 1995, 24 in 1999 and 30 (50 per cent) in 2003.
The 18 this September will be elected from nine constituencies on a
first-past-the-post basis.
The rest of the 60 seats will be filled by: an appointed vice president, who
will deputise for the governor as council chairman; the government's top
three officials (the chief secretary, financial secretary and attorney
general); 17 lay government appointees; and 21 indirectly elected people
(more than half of whom are expected to be pro-government) from functional
constituencies based on business areas and occupations such as financial
services, construction and lawyers.
The proceedings will therefore still be government-dominated, despite the
expected breakdown of a governing consensus.
A currently close and almost clubbish relationship between senior
departmental secretaries and council members will be reduced because seven
secretaries will lose their existing seats and will only be present when
summoned to present policies or to account for themselves.
No governing party is envisaged in the democratisation plans because no
single party can achieve an overall majority of the seats. This is in line
with the wishes of China which dislikes the emergence of pro-democracy
parties and wants Legco merely to be an adjucnt to a powerful executive
machine which will be headed by a Peking-approved chief executive from 1997.
'We aim to exert public moral pressure so that we can stop the government
winning arguments simply by stating that it is right,' says Mr Martin Lee,
Hong Kong's most prominent politician and leader of the main pro-democracy
party.
'But the government will probably be terrified of being seen to be making
concession to us over the heads of the indirectly elected members - so there
is likely to be more confrontation when there could be consensus'.
