FT  02 MAY 91 / Survey of Poland (6): Surviving those slings and arrows -
Profile: Bank Handlowy
in 1870, to be precise - Bank Handlowy was established as the first
joint-stock bank in Poland.
Since then it has undergone the same vicissitudes as the rest of Poland:
wars, depression, post-war nationalisation and now adjustment to the return
of a market economy.
But under its young US-trained president, Mr Cezary Stypulkowski, who was
catapulted into office only two months ago, Bank Handlowy seems to have a
good chance of being one of the survivors in what is now a decidedly shaky
domestic banking industry.
Before the First World War Bank Handlowy was recognised as a significant
European bank. It managed to survive the two wars and the chaos in between,
only to succumb to the embrace of the Polish communist state.
In its new guise as a state-owned joint stock company it received, in 1964,
a monopoly over all foreign banking operations connected with the export and
import of all goods and services. This function it discharged, profitably,
thereafter.
Now it is all change again. In 1988 the responsibilities of the National
Bank of Poland were divided up among new commercial banks. By the middle of
last year licences had been granted for the establishment of more than 50
commercial banks. Fifteen banks have been granted foreign exchange licences
and a new Export Development Bank has been set up. The Bank PKO SA (SA being
the Polish equivalent of plc), which is a foreign currency savings bank, is
also a competitor to Bank Handlowy. What these changes mean to the bank is
that its monopoly has been broken, but that it is also in quite a strong
position to exploit the many new opportunities.
Notwithstanding the competition, Bank Handlowy still retains an
overwhelmingly strong base in foreign trade. In 1990, by then a full member
of the SWIFT network, the Bank financed 90 per cent of Poland's exports and
more than 70 per cent of imports in 1990. Mr Stypulkowski recognises that
this share must fall, even though it would become a smaller share of what
should be a far larger market. Nevertheless, the bank's significance to
Poland is likely to endure for many years. As the president drily remarks,
'a bank through which almost 90 per cent of the balance of payments passes
has a certain importance to the government'.
In meeting the challenge to its old line of business, the bank has two
important advantages: experience and contacts. It has a relatively highly
trained staff of 2,500, 1,700 of whom are located in a vast modern tower
block in Warsaw; a branch in London; a number of representative offices and
affiliates abroad; and a network of 289 correspondent relationships. But the
business has already changed dramatically as the number of clients, Polish
firms engaged in foreign trade, has grown from 200 to 2,000. It will grow
further. Largely for this reason, the Bank has launched a substantial
expansion of its domestic branch network, increasing their number from seven
to 20.
The bank also sees opportunities in new areas, including private banking for
the new Polish rich, advisory services; and participation in other financial
institutions, either domestic ones or joint ventures with foreign capital.
Its exceptionally good foreign contacts give it a head start in joint
ventures.
What the bank lacks is a deposit base, something that could be remedied by a
merger with one of the domestic commercial banks. Mr Stypulkowski finds the
idea attractive, but is biding his time. Bank Handlowy has the advantage of
a lucrative banking niche and no exposure to the huge quantities of poor
domestic assets that weigh on the other state commercial banks. The trick
may not be finding a bank with which to merge, but picking the right deal
and the right time, to ensure that any merged bank does not fall over the
precipice into bankruptcy.
