FT  24 APR 91 / Survey of China (6): Time bomb ticks - Concern rises over
state of economy
CHINA could face economic disaster in a year or two, even though, in
contrast with the tired old economies of the former Soviet bloc, it is
superficially prospering.
Wang Bingqian, the finance minister, speaking at the National People's
Congress in March, for the third year running called the financial situation
'extremely grim'.
Unless Peking can work a near-miracle, inflation will take off, workers will
demonstrate on the streets and the house of cards built on subsidies that is
China's current economic structure will collapse. Since even Peking's
conservatives recognise the dangers, the leadership is moving with
reluctance towards cautious reform.
Small experimental reforms are springing up all over China on a strictly
local basis, such as the introduction of stock exchanges in Shanghai and
Shenzhen. Officials such as vice-governor Ma Lin of Sichuan province enthuse
about the 'ideal way' a stock exchange raises investment funds. Secondary
markets for state bonds, previously confined to Shanghai and Chongqing, have
been successfully launched elsewhere.
Deregulation of grain prices, as in Guanghan near Chengdu, capital of
Sichuan, is happening on a trial basis. This follows price rises last year
in previously tightly controlled items such as cooking oil and cotton cloth.
The yuan was devalued on April 10 for the third time in 16 months, bringing
it to yuan 5.26 to the dollar from the late-1989 figure of yuan 3.72.
Foreign bankers in Peking were expecting a further cut of about 10 per cent.
A kind of convertibility increasingly functions through the Foreign Exchange
Adjustment Centres, where joint ventures can trade foreign exchange freely
at a market rate. Some housing reform, which either encourages tenants to
buy their apartments or permits enterprises, the main providers, to set up
separate self-financing corporations, is already under way, though this is
proving easier with new housing than apartment blocks inhabited through
several generations at peppercorn rent.
Insurance-based pensions, health services and social security payments are
also on the agenda as devices to lessen the load of the over-burdened state
enterprises which currently provide them. This would allow enterprises to
sack workers and focus on the profitability of their core activities.
But there is no sign yet that Peking will bite the bullet of abolishing
subsidies which featherbed the industrial worker and cripple state finances.
Nor will it adopt a true price reform, adopting a market system which would
help to allocate resources correctly and cut waste.
Yet an apocalyptic scenario is hard to believe when the streets are orderly,
markets appear to be booming, new office blocks and hotels adorn Peking and
provincial capitals and the shops are full of the latest electronic goodies.
Last year, China turned in a creditable economic performance with a record
harvest of 435m tonnes and a respectable GNP and industrial growth rates (5
and 6 per cent respectively). Foreign trade was up, with exports performing
well.
But, said one westerner in Peking, 'China is still living on the impetus of
the mid-1980s. While major reforms have not been rolled back, the
innovations are minor. Two years of good harvests have given economists a
chance to push for small reforms, but this year's weather is less
promising.'
When Li Peng, the hard-line premier, took over economic management from Zhao
Ziyang, the now-disgraced former party leader, in late 1988, fundamental
reform was effectively shelved. But the policies then applied (mainly an
administrative price freeze and credit controls) did nothing to solve
China's huge underlying problems of suppressed demand and inefficiency.
Potential inflation is still ticking away under the surface, fuelled by
China's growing deficit financing and subsidy policy. In 1990, Wang Bingqian
told the recent Congress that the budget deficit was, according to Chinese
accounting (which reckons government borrowing as revenue), yuan 15bn. This
was bad enough by Chinese standards, but when adjusted to reflect normal
practice was much worse at yuan 48bn.
On top of that, nearly a third of the yuan 340bn budget expenditure went on
subsidies. The central government forked out nearly yuan 58bn to the
loss-making state sector plus another yuan 38bn in individual subsidies to
compensate for price rises.
Peking is short of money anyway because of its revenue sharing system. Under
the existing semi-reformed fiscal structure, a fixed tax amount is paid by
enterprises to local authorities who then hand only a percentage to Peking.
Not only is Peking's slice relatively small (a source of serious dispute
with provincial leaders) but the fall in state enterprise profits last year
(58 per cent) meant less for everyone. This is likely to get worse since
more inflation is on the cards for this year. In 1990, credit estimated at
yuan 250-290bn was pumped into the economy to fuel industry after Li Peng's
inexpert 1988-89 freeze caused near-collapse. This enabled the government to
meet its industrial growth target for the year, but bodes ill for the
future.
Meanwhile, subsidies paid to workers continue to rise. This is seen as
essential by the unpopular leadership, which is deeply concerned to keep the
urban workforce happy and loss-making factories open. Wages are also rising
 -up by over 18 per cent in the last quarter of 1990 compared with the same
period of 1989.
Protected by Peking's reluctance to implement its bankruptcy laws, state-run
industry is growing more inefficient by the hour. Mostly old and badly run,
it is responsible for what Li Peng, in his report to the NPC, called the
'high consumption in production, low product quality, enormous waste in
construction, slow capital turnover, low labour productivity and serious
losses'.
Attempts at change are hampered by the post-Tiananmen commitment to
ideology. At the top are leaders determined to avoid the fate of the
Ceausescus by exerting party dominance. Li Peng made a special point of
stressing Marxist-Leninism in his report, though he had to signal for
applause during his three-hour speech by shouting his words to the dozing
delegates.
Still, a kind of compromise has been reached between the hard-liners and
reformists which is evident in China's new plans. Five-year programmes
(1991-95) and ten-year plans to cover the years to the end of the century
set out Peking's intentions in traditionally imprecise style. The main focus
is to be a move to give state managers more powers to deal with
inefficiencies, the improvement of infrastructure and some expenditure on
new special economic zones such as Pudong in Shanghai.
But the unhappy history of Chinese five year plans (most have been overtaken
by political upheavals before completion), inspires little confidence. If
this one avoids that fate (unlikely, in view of the extreme age of Peking's
key leaders), inflation may destroy it.
