FT  03 MAY 91 / Arms to Iraq: A fatal attraction - Under the nose of the
White House, kickbacks and illegal deals funded Saddam
A joint investigation by the Financial Times and ABC News/Nightline has
uncovered fresh evidence that the Bush administration's indulgent attitude
towards Iraq made it easy for Baghdad to fund its illegal arms network
virtually unhindered in the run-up to the invasion of Kuwait. Lionel Barber
and Alan Friedman report from Washington
SIX WEEKS ago a Jordanian middleman received an order from Baghdad for a
sophisticated type of hot rolled steel. According to copies of the order,
the purchaser specified dimensions of 115mm x 115mm, the kind used in the
manufacture of heavy industrial equipment. It is also the kind used in the
manufacture of long-barrelled artillery guns.
The order, placed in March 1991, came from Chaled Makhzoumi, working through
the Iraqi commercial centre in Amman, Jordan.
Traffic along the dusty road from Amman to Baghdad, one of the main conduits
in the past for the transhipment of arms to Iraq, is beginning to build up
again.
To defence intelligence officials in Washington this suggests one thing:
President Saddam Hussein is still in the business of building up his
considerable arsenal.
According to US intelligence sources and Iraqi opposition leaders the Iraqi
leader dispatched agents across the border into Jordan - under the direction
from Baghdad of his son Uday - in search of spare parts for his remaining
tanks, machine guns and artillery, just weeks after his costly expulsion
from Kuwait by the US-led coalition.
The revival of the Jordan connection, in violation of the United Nations
embargo against Iraq, is a reminder of how resourceful and determined
President Saddam had been in building up hundreds of millions of dollars of
western technology and weaponry, his aggressive use of which led the US to
send more than 500,000 troops to deal with the consequences.
A retired senior US diplomat with extensive experience in the Middle East
says the world 'has never seen anything as sophisticated as the Iraqi
procurement network' - a web of front companies, purchasing agents and money
laundering specialists who operated through more than 50 undercover outlets
in Europe and the US.
Their collective mission throughout the 1980s, as Iraq exploited the west's
(and in particular Washington's) fear of Islamic fundamentalism in Iran, was
this: to help Saddam Hussein build the weapons of mass destruction needed to
attain his goal of military supremacy in the Gulf.
Starved of commercial credit by the middle of 1989 because of Baghdad's huge
and growing volume of unserviceable debt, the Iraqi agents' chief source of
finance was an obscure Italian-owned bank branch in Atlanta, Georgia.
The parent bank's name was Banca Nazionale del Lavoro. BNL may be Italy's
biggest bank with Dollars 100bn (Pounds 59bn) of assets but the Atlanta
branch from which this extraordinary supply effort was largely funded had
just 16 employees and authorisation to lend no more than Dollars 500,000
without approval from its head office in Rome.
Between 1987 and 1989, BNL Atlanta - now the subject of criminal proceedings
and congressional investigations - made Dollars 3bn of Iraqi loan
commitments.
These loans were kept off the official books and were used to supply not
only legitimate exporters to Iraq but also some of the Iraqi front companies
and procurement agents that were covertly channelling equipment ordered by
Baghdad for Mr Saddam's nuclear, chemical and ballistic missile projects.
A joint investigation by the Financial Times and ABC News/Nightline, has
uncovered fresh evidence showing that the Bush administration's indulgent
attitude towards Iraq in effect allowed the arms network to operated
virtually unhindered.
The FT/ABC investigation has also discovered that, on the financial front,
the Bush administration treated Iraq with remarkable leniency, brushing
aside evidence of abuse by US companies and by Baghdad of
government-guaranteed Iraqi farm credits.
Among the abuses were 'kickbacks' or 'extras' such as the supply of armoured
vehicles to Iraqi officials supplementing the legitimate grain shipments.
The first warnings about the Iraqi loan programme appeared in 1987 when US
grain companies complained to the US Agriculture Department (USDA) about
Iraqi demands for tyres, air-conditioning equipment, spare parts, trucks and
even cash - so-called 'after-sales services'.
Yet in November 1989, the White House pressed successfully for approval of
Dollars 1bn of fresh guaranteed loans requested by the Department of
Agriculture's Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC).
Then, in January 1990, President Bush declared it to be in the national
interest to allow the US Export-Import Bank to guarantee further loans,
despite government studies showing that Iraq was no longer creditworthy.
There were also widespread concerns at the time among US Customs officials
and Treasury, Federal Reserve and Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
officials that some of the US government loans ostensibly for agricultural
commodities were, in fact, diverted by Iraq's Ministry of Industry and
Military Industrialisation for the purchase of military goods.
In the light of Mr Saddam's increasingly brutal and unpredictable behaviour
and the subsequent invasion of Kuwait the administration's actions raise
questions about its judgment and the advice it was receiving.
Some of the answers to these questions may lie in a key White House meeting
held on November 8 1989 under the aegis of the National Advisory Council
(NAC), a sub-cabinet-level group that reviews government-guaranteed foreign
loans that raise political issues.
The meeting was called to resolve an inter-agency dispute over an
Agriculture Department proposal to offer Dollars 1bn of fresh CCC Iraqi loan
guarantees. As one senior official admitted this week, there were 'enough
yellow flags (signals of foul play) to make us worry about BNL'.
Several features of the meeting were unusual:
A number of agencies were represented at a high level. It was also attended
by a White House representative, which underscored the high political stakes
involved.
The meeting's minutes were deemed sensitive enough to be classified, the
first time this has occurred since the late 1970s, according to a US
government lawyer.
A month earlier, a Federal Reserve official had told a previous NAC meeting
that Iraq's use of the CCC programme amounted to a 'Ponzi scheme' - an
American term which means that Iraq would default on its CCC loans unless it
continued to receive ever-larger CCC allocations. The Fed official also said
that Iraq was 'probably not creditworthy'.
One participant at the White House meeting recalled that the BNL Atlanta
scam was uppermost in the minds of several officials. 'We had a lot on BNL.
We knew the thing was stinking. I think we all understood this was not a
happy situation,' he said.
Another participant said he tabled numerous concerns about the abuse of the
CCC programme, Iraq's creditworthiness and the BNL affair.
According to a number of documents, including reports from the meeting, and
interviews with a number of officials, the meeting was told by Mr John
Robson, deputy Treasury secretary, that it was important to ensure that the
final decision on the Dollars 1bn guarantee would 'pass the sniff test for
hostile congressional committees and press'.
Mr Robert Kimmitt, under-secretary of state, followed up by declaring that
Iraq was 'very important to US interests in the Middle East'; it was
'influential in the peace process' and was 'a key to maintaining stability
in the region, offering great trade opportunities for US companies'.
Mr Kimmitt added that abruptly terminating the Dollars 1bn in guarantees for
Iraq was 'contrary to the president's intentions' and would most likely
further damage US-Iraqi relations.
This assessment seemed all the more curious since just a few weeks before
that meeting, the State Department had told the Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta, the regulatory bank probing the BNL affair, that, far from being a
'rogue operation', BNL-Atlanta was in effect part of official Iraqi policy.
According to a September 1989 Italian intelligence report to Prime Minister
Giulio Andreotti, and the findings of US investigators, unauthorised BNL
funds were being used to finance Iraq's Condor II missile project - despite
efforts by the US, Britain and five other countries to halt the spread of
missile technology in the developing world.
All this was serious enough to warrant Mr James Baker, US secretary of
state, raising the matter with a senior Iraqi official, believed to be Mr
Tariq Aziz, Iraq's foreign minister, at their meeting in Washington on
October 6 1989 - the Bush administration's first high-level meeting with
Iraq.
At the NAC meeting a month later, Mr Kimmitt nevertheless came out in favour
of continuing the CCC programme as a political tool for influencing Iraqi
behaviour - and he had the backing of the Department of Agriculture, which
appeared to be pursuing its own, narrower interests.
Seven days before the meeting, a senior Agriculture Department official
wrote a letter to the Treasury in which he dismissed allegations about the
BNL affair and said the charges 'lead us to conclude that there is not
sufficient reason to delay a program for Iraq any longer'.
Mr Kimmitt's intervention appeared decisive, since Mr Robson summed up that
foreign policy and trade considerations overrode 'concerns raised by the BNL
scandal'.
There were other disturbing signs about the extent of knowledge in the
administration and the banking system about BNL's activities:
BNL Atlanta regularly had Dollars 700m to Dollars 1bn outstanding in
short-term credits at JP Morgan, a large amount for a small bank even
considering the fact that its parent in Rome was a triple-A rated bank. Most
of BNL's funds after 1987 were channelled through Morgan Guaranty Trust in
New York.
The New York Federal Reserve was later to raise questions with JP Morgan
about the ease with which the funds transfer took place. In August 1989 Mr
Gerald Corrigan, president of the New York Fed, told Mr Lewis Preston,
chairman of Morgan Guaranty, that the operation involved amounts of money
which started at 'fairly modest levels' and over a fairly lengthy period
built up to 'a pretty goddamn good size'.
Mr Corrigan noted that the unusual flow of funds through BNL Atlanta
stretched back for more than two years and expressed surprise that the flow
had occurred with such ease - given the sums involved and the single
destination.
Both Morgan and the New York Fed declined to be interviewed about the Morgan
link. Morgan has maintained that the sheer volume of funds in its clearing
system in the US makes it difficult to detect anything suspicious about
BNL-type transfers. Morgan clears Dollars 250bn a day.
The FBI-led raid on BNL's Atlanta branch took place on August 4 1989 - but
the Federal Reserve inspectors had already compiled a detailed picture of
hundreds of millions of dollars of hidden off-book money market transactions
in which BNL Atlanta used brokers to borrow interbank funds from big Wall
Street and international banks.
These included National Westminster, Mitsui Trust and Banque Nationale de
Paris (BNP). Records show that these were some of the funds BNL Atlanta then
passed to Baghdad by way of Morgan in New York. Between 1987 and 1989,
several thousand telexes criss-crossed between Atlanta and the Iraqi central
bank, the state-owned Rafidain Bank, Iraq's Ministry of Industry and
Military Industrialisation and other official Iraqi agencies.
Congressional investigators and US officials maintain that the National
Security Agency (NSA), the US code-breaking and surveillance service which
can track telex traffic and money flows, ought to have picked up the
tell-tale sums of money.
Mr Norm Bailey, a White House aide at the time who started a
follow-the-money computer programme that used NSA intercepts, says it is
inconceivable that the BNL Atlanta-Baghdad telex traffic was not made
available to the administration.
'The only explanation I can think of is that the authorities knew all about
it and approved it,' he claimed in an interview. 'They were using this as a
channel for the financing of certain activities.'
This is a serious allegation that raises questions about whether the
administration sanctioned the bank transfers in pursuit of a foreign policy
goal. However, both federal regulatory authorities and US officials deny
knowledge of what was going on in Atlanta.
Whatever the case, the funds proved crucial to President Saddam's war effort
for a while.
'BNL,' says Mr Achmed Chalabi, a prominent Jordanian banker and Iraqi
opposition adviser, 'became Iraq's surrogate lender of last resort.'
Many BNL-backed US companies were supplying equipment such as electronics,
special metals, chemicals and machinery which could be defended as destined
for civil rather than military projects. The same was true of BNL-funded
British, French, and German companies, all of which were crowding into the
Iraqi market.
It is true that the Soviet Union was by far the largest supplier to
gnificant about the western shipments was that they involved high technology
and other materials which Baghdad required to accelerate its unconventional
weapons and missile programmes.
In the UK, the best-known member of the Iraqi network was Matrix Churchill,
a loss-making Coventry machine tools maker whose fortunes were revived
through BNL finance. Matrix (which was later bought by Automation
Investments) regularly shipped equipment to Iraq; its Ohio sister, Matrix
Churchill Inc, was recently seized by US Customs and held up as an example
of an Iraqi front company engaged in illicit military procurement
activities.
It was only after the end of the Gulf war last February that Mr Richard
Thornburgh, US attorney-general, announced the indictments of BNL Atlanta
employees and four top Iraqi government officials on charges of money
laundering, fraud and conspiracy.
Two lone Democratic congressmen - Mr Henry Gonzalez, a stubborn,
unpredictable Texan who heads the House banking committee, and Mr Charlie
Rose, a North Carolina specialist in peanuts, tobacco and Tibetan human
rights - have grappled with its complexities.
They alone have challenged the Bush administration's adamant claim that it
was unaware of what was going on inside the BNL's Atlanta branch.
Yet even if one assumes that BNL's activities were carried out without the
knowledge of the US government, questions remain about the White House's
persistent flirtation with Mr Saddam at the time.
'Iraq was a natural ally of moderate Arab states; it was allied with Egypt;
it was being constructive in the Middle East peace process,' says Mr Peter
Rodman, who served in the Reagan and Bush administrations as a senior
National Security Council official. 'The fact that Saddam was a murderous
thug did not change this.'
The Iran-Contra scandal, which paralysed the Reagan administration for most
of 1987, had two big results: official overtures to Iran, whether public or
private, became taboo; this pushed Washington further toward favouring
Baghdad.
Even after the unauthorised BNL credit pipeline was exposed and shut off, Mr
Bush signed the January 1990 order allowing Eximbank to offer fresh
guarantees to Iraqi loans. Intended or not, the Eximbank decision helped to
plug part of the gap left by the absence of BNL money.
It all appeared to make little impression on Mr Saddam, however. Mr Bush was
rewarded with a searing burst of anti-Americanism by the Iraqi leader in
front of the Arab Co-operation Council on February 22.
At that same meeting, Mr Saddam issued an ominous warning in front of
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, King Hussein of Jordan and President Ali
Abdullah Saleh of Yemen. The Iraqi leader wanted Dollars 30bn he had been
lent by Saudi Arabia and Kuwait during the war with Iran to be written off
and a further Dollars 30bn put on the table. According to officials present,
the Iraqi leader astonished his colleagues by saying he would 'know how to
go and get the money' if it was not forthcoming.
On March 28 a 'sting' operation by British customs ended with the seizure of
a number of US-made electronic 'Krytrons' which could have been used as
detonators for nuclear weapons. Again, a BNL-funded company - Euromac -
played a role in the nuclear trigger case. Days later - on April 2 -
President Saddam threatened to ' scorch' Israel with chemical weapons.
Yet the US administration's accommodation of Iraq continued into the
following months. In April, May and June 1990, three high-level inter-agency
group meetings at the White House rejected the idea of introducing economic
sanctions against Baghdad.
As late as last July, just one week before the invasion, US officials both
in Washington and in Baghdad were still seeking to find ways of persuading
him to play the moderate role he had long since discarded.
This culminated in the now infamous meeting between Ms April Glaspie, then
US ambassador to Baghdad, and Mr Saddam in which the American diplomat
failed, according to congressional critics, to warn the Iraqi leader in
sufficiently strong terms to keep his hands off Kuwait.
Ms Glaspie has served as a convenient scapegoat for the Bush administration.
But a fairer interpretation of events would place that meeting in the
broader context of US dealings with Iraq - a pattern which suggests either
misguided indulgence or a calculated effort to bolster Mr Saddam.
Additional reporting by Richard Donkin and Jimmy Burns in London and Eric
Reguly in Washington
