FT  15 APR 91 / Government backs Liverpool council
LIVERPOOL City Council's moderate Labour leadership has won government
support to fight the unions, which plan a series of strikes from Wednesday
against 1,000 scheduled redundancies among the city's 29,247 employees.
After secret talks, the government is understood to have tacitly approved a
strategy of increasing the city's debt if it becomes necessary, on the
ground that if the Labour moderates cannot make Liverpool more governable,
no one else can.
The councillors' stand has been publicly endorsed by Mr Michael Heseltine,
environment secretary.
'The more Liverpool people are seen to be taking proper steps and running
their authority correctly and with proper financial management, the greater
confidence there will be in the city,' he said on a visit to Liverpool last
week. 'The council is absolutely right to be determined to be seen as one
which runs its budget properly and sets an appropriate lead.'
The unions have called a three-day all-out strike from Wednesday. Council
leaders believe the unions will later impose a levy on the majority to pay
for long-term strikes by workers in sensitive areas such as revenue
collection.
The city's capital debts, already at Pounds 780m, are 48 per cent higher
than the average for metropolitan boroughs. Borrowing to bridge revenue
shortfalls caused by striking accounts clerks is likely to create a
current-account budget deficit and precipitate more sackings.
Labour has 67 seats on the 99-seat council, and a recent purge of
left-wingers by the party's national executive is expected to lead to an
increase in the moderates' representation from 33 to about 40 in the local
government elections on May 2.
Even so, council leaders and senior officers are concerned that the chaos
some union leaders want to bring about, coupled with Liverpool council's
reputation, may deter financial institutions from lending more money when Mr
Phil Kelly, the treasurer, turns to the City to negotiate.
They are therefore emphasising that the fight is vital if Liverpool is ever
to be run efficiently or fairly.
Mrs Vicki Roberts, who chairs the council's finance and strategy committee,
said the council was operating below government recommended staffing levels
in social and welfare services because manual unions were forcing
overstaffing in building and maintenance departments.
A survey by the Liverpool Daily Post showed that Liverpool had 65.6 council
workers per 1,000 population, compared with 58.6 in Manchester, a city of
comparable size, 40.1 in Birmingham and 39.6 in Leeds.
Management of the city was severely criticised this year by the district
auditor, the government's watchdog on town hall spending. A letter to all
the councillors said that the prevailing culture was to provide jobs rather
than services and that overstaffing had to be reduced.
Ron Todd, transport workers' general secretary, yesterday offered the
council a 'partnership' to deal with 'the downward spiral in Liverpool of
recurring financial crisis and poor service delivery'. He was speaking in
Dundee, where the Scottish TUC begins its annual conference today.
After Labour's purge of Militant Tendency activists in the mid 1980s, the
organisation's power base shifted into town hall trade unions, from which
supporters cannot be expelled.
Employment, Page 9
