FT  11 MAY 91 / Finance &amp; The Family: A very seductive idea - A look at the
growing trend towards 'chartism'
READERS of Investors' Chronicle were confronted with an appalling dilemma
during February. 'The Trader,' poring over his graphs, detected signs of the
approach of 'a golden cross' where the FT-SE and short-term moving averages
rise through the long-term trend-line, suggesting a 'major bull market in
coming months.'
Turn the page, however, and veteran fundamentalist, '"Bearbull,' with a
nine-year record of success, announced that he was feeling distinctly queasy
at the rate of advance of the market, and - most unusually - decided not to
deal that week.
So where did that leave the would-be investor? Should he put his trust in
gut-feeling and commonsense - notoriously uncommon - or in the 'scientific'
signals coming from the charts?
Certainly in recent years that once derided American eccentricity - chartism
 -has become all-pervasive. Investors listen to the gnomic utterances of its
proliferating practitioners. How often do we try to suppress a shudder at
some bold announcement that the FT-SE, or some share price, is about to
cross its 'support level'?
The graph lines are statistical abstractions, but as the late Ely Devons, an
economist, shrewdly observed: 'Statistical magic is a mystery to the general
public, and can never be proved wrong. A mistake merely reinforces belief in
the magic.'
The basic idea of chartism has the seductive simplicity of ideas that sweep
the world. Maybe the market is not quite all-knowing, but it knows so much
more than you or I can ever hope to, and much that is currently hidden or
indeed hardly yet thought of. It is the insider of all insiders.
Given all this, it becomes entirely logical that a pioneer American
chartist, John Magee, should have boarded the windows of his small room in
Springfield, Illinois in order not to be distracted from his study of price
patterns by mere events such as food riots or Presidential assassinations.
True, some later practitioners have weakened, sometimes describing their
science as an art - which is as well considering the radically different
interpretations an identical chart may receive.
If Chartism is an art, it still speaks with the authority and precision of a
science. It is the white coats that get us - and the crisp graph formations,
those fascinating trend channels, double tops, heads and shoulders, saucer
bottoms, flags, wedges and boxes.
One picture, they say, is worth 10,000 words; and repeated patterns
undeniably exist, as they do in the weather charts. Equally undeniably, the
clear picture is of the past, not the future. A steady rising trend on a
graph will not last forever.
Do the charts predict when the breakthrough - up or down - will come? Or
like the weather forecasts do they tell us it is going to rain when it is so
damp as to be virtually raining already? The words 'may' and 'could' are
very popular with chartists.
There is also a certain gift for validation by hindsight. A
'head-and-shoulders pattern' is said to be one of the most reliable - in
predicting a fall roughly as far below 'the neckline' as the first shoulder
rose above it. But if the unruly line instead turns up, this area, I see, is
labelled a 'bear trap.' Either way, the chartist can say he was right.
Chartists are undoubtedly eloquent. It is at the point where they descend
from their rarefied world of clean curves, persuasive parabolas, and fragile
fibrillations, in order to translate their findings that the greatest danger
lurks. One finding said that Boots shares had reached a 'very exciting
level' not, perish the thought, because it was selling some new drug, but
because the price-curve was pressing against a long-term barrier, hinting at
a breakthrough into new territory.
The investor might inquire what 'barrier', what 'new territory' - otherwise
we could all end in a fantasy world where pseudo-events such as statistical
breakthroughs not only outnumber real events but eclipse them.
Two months on from the Investors' Chronicle clash of fundamentalist and
chartist, the chartist appeared a clear winner on points: the FT-SE index
having risen from 2298 to 2490. But very many more experts seemed to be
feeling 'distinctly queasy', about the level of the market.
Chartism should surely extend a welcome to empirical testing and proof.
Take, say, 50 leading chartists, let them select 25 suitable shares - an
identical list - and then let them issue predictions for six- and 12-month
periods to be recorded in writing. Revisions will be strictly limited.
A near success rate of less than 50 per cent might dull the 'magic'
discerned by Devons although I very much doubt it. The chart patterns will
continue to fascinate.
