FT  16 APR 91 / Government Bonds: US bonds mixed after Fed signals no rate
change
US GOVERNMENT bond prices eased at the short end but held their gains at the
long end yesterday after the Federal Reserve signalled no change in monetary
policy.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year Treasury issue was up  13/32 at 97
5/16 , to yield 8.108 per cent, while the two-year note was down 1/32 at 100
7/16 , yielding 6.863 per cent.
Prices at both ends of the market had opened firmer in anticipation of a
move from the Fed to lower interest rates.
Speculation had intensified over the weekend that rates would be cut, either
in the form of cheaper Fed funds or a reduction in the discount rate from 6
per cent, after last week's positive inflation news.
However, when the Fed arranged overnight matched sale-purchase agreements
around 10.45am, while Fed funds were trading at 5 1/2 per cent, prices fell
back immediately. The Fed's move to drain reserves from the system indicated
that it wished to see Fed funds trading at a higher rate than 5 1/2 per
cent.
The fact that the operations were executed an hour before the traditional
intervention-time of 11.30am to 11.45am suggested that the Fed wanted to
send the clearest signal possible to the markets that monetary policy had
not been eased, said analysts.
After the intervention Fed funds firmed to 6 1/4 per cent, above the target
last set of 6 per cent. Analysts said that the long end remained firm as the
market believed the delay in cutting interest rates indicated the Fed is
taking the inflation threat seriously.
In London, the gilts market opened a little higher, but prices were held
back by the prospect of further supply. An auction of short-dated stock
totalling Pounds 1bn to Pounds 2bn will be announced today, for sale next
week. Meanwhile the week's Pounds 800m tender of long-dated gilts remains
largely unsold. In addition, the recent surge of activity in the sterling
sector of the Eurobond market, including a further Pounds 350m of fixed-rate
supply yesterday, is further squeezing demand.
Some dealers said that there had been a little selling by foreign investors
who can take profits on the currency now that the pound is close to DM3.
The June long gilt contract on the London International Financial Futures
Exchange ended at 92 1/16 , down from Friday's close of 92 9/32 .
The rally in the German market appears to have stalled with prices slipping
after an initial rise. Matched sales by the US Federal Reserve, read as a
sign that further US rate cuts will be at least delayed, put pressure on the
short end of the market. Long Bunds outperformed the short end, causing the
yield curve to flatten.
The market has failed several times to breach resistance on the Bunds
futures contract at 86.20. The Bund contract on Liffe ended at 85.78, down
from Friday's closing level of 65.90.
The French bond market also continues to be led by the US market, but again
outperformed Germany yesterday, partly because it is better underpinned by
domestic demand, analysts said.
The margin between French and German 10-year government bonds has tightened
about five basis points more during the past week to reach the historically
narrow level of 57 basis points.
