FT  14 MAY 91 / Survey of Computers in Manufacturing (6): Fuzzy logic and
robots spell technological advantage - Japan, modifying production
philosophies as emphasis shifts back to the human workforce
IT seemed laughable at the time: a couple years ago a Japanese manufacturer
replaced some factory line workers with automation machinery, then set up
full-sized cardboard human dummies to keep the remaining workers from
getting lonely.
The completely workerless factory is a decade away, but there are a few
showcase examples including Fanuc, the machine tool manufacturer's factory
near Mount Fuji, where robots make robots. But until no-human factories are
realised on a broad scale, factory automation system makers will focus their
research on bridging the awkward interaction between humans and the ever
increasing number of machines working by their side.
In past years manufacturers put the emphasis on installing labour-saving
machines to raise production. They focused on maximising the use of people,
money, time and materials, and humans had to find a way to fit in with the
complex machinery beginning to surround them.
'Until now humans have had to adapt to use machines, so the man-machine
interface was not well matched,' says Mr Hiroshi Matsuyama, a manager at
Omron the programmable controller maker in Tokyo.
'Japanese industry is now modifying its philosophy. The centre of production
has shifted to human workers, and computers should be matched with humans,'
he says. That means designing new software that allows production machinery
to be more easily used and changed quickly for different jobs. For example,
welding or insertion and using artificial intelligence techniques such as
fuzzy logic to help robots and computers make better decisions, such as
finding an operational failure, through inferences, as humans do.
The escalating skilled labour shortage, brought about by a declining birth
rate and a more affluent and highly educated society, makes robots an
important component of factory automation, a do-or-die decision for some
companies.
Strong competition in industries such as shipping has resulted in waves of
investment in labour-saving technology such as steel and aluminium cutting
tools, processing machines and welding robots. The rise in the labour force
is expected to be 0.8 per cent a year until 1993, then it is likely to fall
off by half to 0.4 per cent until 2000, according to Japanese government
statistics. During that time Japan expects to keep about a 4 per cent annual
economic growth rate.
'To achieve this it is necessary to introduce automation technology,' says
Mr Kanji Yonemoto, vice-chairman of the Japan Industrial Robot Association
(Jira) in Tokyo. An even more remarkable shift in Japan's economy is the
switch from a manufacturing to a service economy.
Jobs in services pay better. Mr Yonemoto says there will be 1.5m fewer
blue-collar workers in manufacturing by 2000 than in 1989, when there was a
shortage of 715,800 people. Today's young people are a different breed of
worker from those who laboured long hours for little pay to build Japan's
industrial miracle.
They want to avoid so-called '3K' work: 'kiken' (dangerous), 'kitanai'
(dirty) and 'kitsui' (hard). 'Older men were very patient and had the
Bushido (warrior) morale, but it is hard to find these people today,' says
Mr Matsuyama.
Replacing them with machinery takes time and money. Omron, which produces
programmable controllers and other electronics products, sees the
improvements that can be made in factory automation as almost limitless and
including diagnosing system failures and other management tasks.
The improvements span a broad factory automation market valued at almost
Y2,000bn and covering every aspect of making a product from design through
production and inspection. The important components of automating a factory
are numerical controllers, the largest chunk of the market, as well as
computer-aided design and manufacturing software and equipment, industrial
robots, programmable controllers, automated warehouses, computers and
automatic guided vehicles that transport products throughout a plant site.
Japan leads the world in both producing and using these production
components. It has replaced Germany as the biggest exporter of machine
tools, an important indicator of industrial development and economic power.
Japan has an estimated 23 per cent of the world market compared to the 16
per cent held by Germany.
Five Japanese companies are making machine tools in Europe. Mazak Yamazaki,
for example, has a Dollars 50m factory in Worcester, in the UK which
produces some 100 computer-controlled machines a month, according to
industry estimates. Japan's worldwide share of the fast-growing robot market
is even more impressive: it has 57.5 per cent of the robot installations
worldwide, with western Europe having 14.5 per cent and the US 9.5 per cent.
Japan's main advantages are that workers in automotive, electronics and
other factories are accustomed to and readily accept automation technology,
product demand is still strong in the home market, and Japanese
manufacturers make most of the machines they use for automation, so there is
little competition from imports.
The electronics industry is the biggest user of automation technology. At
its Ome design and manufacturing works west of Tokyo, Toshiba uses its own
laptop computers for design, development and assembly of new Toshiba
laptops.
The laptops are used to compute how easily a new computer model can be
assembled by a line of 12 workers, who can slap together one notebook-size
Dynabook computer in a few minutes. That's important, because the company is
making about 1m laptops a year at Ome, and the life span of each new product
is getting increasingly shorter amid hot competition.
'Often it's the case with some products that the effective life span is
already over by the time it goes to the market place,' says Mr Masao Suga,
who heads the personal computer research and development department at Ome.
However, the shortening product life spans, which run from six months for a
Japanese word processor to about three years for laptops, made it
increasingly difficult for Toshiba to continue using robots. Toshiba
replicates about 70 per cent of design work from current models in new ones.
While it took Toshiba three years to develop the T3100 and J3100 laptops
from scratch, it took only nine months to design the smaller-size Dynabook.
Though its factory is about 70-80 per cent automated, visitors to the
company often comment about the number of people still present on the
manufacturing lines, but Mr Suga says that with the fast-paced product life
cycles, humans are needed. 'There are problems with automated systems. They
can't catch up with new technology, so humans are acting as universal super
robots,' he adds.
Fuzzy logic may help close the gap. Mr Yonemoto of Jira says fuzzy logic,
software that can help make a decision from unclear information, will help
increase the versatility of robots in the future by affording better control
of their movements. Omron, a leader in using fuzzy technology, has developed
a test robot that can grasp soft or fragile items, such as tofu (bean curd).
In a New Year's address to employees, Mr Yoshio Tateisi, company president,
identified fuzzy logic as an important research area for the 1990s. By 1994,
more than 20 per cent of Omron's product line will include some type of
fuzzy logic. According to Mr Matsuyama, fuzzy logic has many benefits. As
part of a computer-integrated manufacturing (Cim) system it can be used in
production and in managing the company.
'Another merit of fuzzy technology is to replace a person where computers
are hard to use, for example, controlling a nuclear power generation plant's
circulation control system to clean water and to make decisions. Perhaps the
Chernobyl or Mihama plant accidents could have been avoided with these
systems,' he says.
Fuzzy logic, along with more flexible robots and other components, spell
another technological advantage for Japan in the future: being able to
change small-scale production quickly, so that multiple products can be
produced on the same factory line in one day. Mr Matsuyama predicts Japanese
manufacturers will become very good at this small-scale production, which is
a difficult technology demanding ultimate flexibility.
Computerisation would be all the more necessary in production in the sense
that market information should be more effectively connected with the
production process or with the factory itself. But large-scale flexible
production without man will take 8-10 years says Matsushita Electric in
Osaka.
The company believes fuzzy logic, along with neurocomputing technology which
more closely mimics the human brain, will be the main technologies once they
are refined.
