FT  27 APR 91 / Arts: Sting harks back
STING'S RESIDENCY at Hammersmith Odeon this week is the latest stop on a
tour across two continents to promote his new album, The Soul Cages (A &amp; M
396 405-2). That in itself is a bit of a surprise, for so much of his
travelling recently has been concerned with much more universal issues.
Sting deep in the Amazon basin befriending the Amerindians might have been a
publicity stunt, but the images from the Amnesty tour, of Sting singing
'They dance alone' in the Santiago football stadium with the mothers of the
disappeared, were much harder to dismiss as self-promotion.
Yet as the album suggests and the concert on Thursday confirmed, his
concerns are currently much closer to home - not a mention of human rights
or saving the rainforests, and instead a distinct emphasis upon the
brand-new songs which evoke his Tyneside childhood, right alongside material
dating back to his Police beginnings.
No Sting appearance would be complete, I suppose, without 'Roxanne' and
'Message in a Bottle', but even so it was curious to find a singer who has
developed and so intricately expanded his song writing harking back with
such insistence - he also included 'King of Pain', and the wonderfully
obsessive 'Every Breath you Take' from the early 1980s - while making only
token selections from each of his first two solo albums, one of those,
'Fragile', as a beautifully poised encore. And just what were we to make of
his moderately wild version of 'Purple Haze', complete with convincing
ersatz Hendrix guitar from Dominic Millar, or of Bill Withers' 'Ain't no
Sunshine'? The roots he's after at the moment seem to be as much musical as
nostalgic.
It matters only because Sting is one of the most prodigiously talented of
current rock musicians, a vocalist of significant range and technical skill
and a songwriter of increasing sophistication, whose previous albums worried
away at the edges of jazz and rock and several kinds of fusion. The band for
the current tour still includes the jazz saxophonist Branford Marsalis, but
his limpid playing is now buried much more deeply in the arrangements. There
is none of the duetting of voice and sax that carried so much charge in the
last two albums and instead the keyboards of David Sancious (of
Springsteen's E-Street Band) are more prominent, and the looser moments now
hard-edged rather than poetic.
The tracks from The Soul Cages are all concerned with going back, with
recovering childhood memories, especially of the sea, and repaying familial
debts. They're more intricately structured than before, less instantly
accessible, though the modulations are as telling as ever, the melodic lines
insidiously memorable. Yet Sting appears to be torn between the need to
indulge the adulation of his fans and the compulsion to explore the limits
of his own music; somebody who can write songs as fine as 'Mad about You'
and 'The Wild Wild Sea' in the new collection really does not need to
manipulate an audience like he does simply to convince himself that they
still love him so much.
