FT  26 APR 91 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (30): First clarify
your aims - Choosing an Investment Trust / Then remember that, while the
past can be a useful guide, with so much specialisation, investment fashions
count at least as much - Investment Trusts
WITH ALMOST 250 investment trusts on the market, investors face a
bewildering choice. Trusts vary according to their size, marketability,
geographical spread, the industries which they target, and crucially of
course their investment performance.
No one can accurately predict which will do best over the next few years.
The past can certainly be a useful guide to the future but with so much
specialisation these days investment fashions count for at least as much. It
is obviously advisable to try to identify trusts or management companies
with a consistent record - but it is worth remembering that the individuals
who run them are also human beings: they can make mistakes, lose their
touch, or suddenly embark on a huge and expensive gamble.
The first thing to be clear about when selecting a trust is the nature of
your aims. Are you, for example, primarily interested in income or in
capital growth? Trusts have tended to become more growth-orientated of late,
but there are nine UK funds whose policy is to accentuate income growth, and
four which aim to achieve the same result with a more international spread
of assets.
The AITC's monthly information service shows the up-to-date distribution of
these assets. At the end of January, for example, the giant British Assets
trust had 79 per cent of its portfolio in the UK, with 18 per cent in North
America and 2 per cent in Japan. Murray International,on the other hand, had
54 per cent in the UK, 22 per cent in North America, 11 per cent in the Far
East, and 12 per cent in continental Europe.
UK General Trusts generally try to achieve a balanced return. The nine
trusts in this category were typically quoting gross yields of between 4 and
6 per cent at the end of January, roughly equivalent to the stock market as
a whole. Split-capital trusts have two classes of shares: income
shares,which receive all the income from the trust's portfolio, and capital
shares which receive no income but get all the capital gains. The latter are
obviously attractive vehicles for those investors anxious to avoid liability
to income tax.
The bulk of trusts tend to be orientated towards capital growth, in part
because the long years of inflation followed by rising stock markets formed
the impression that this was the more attractive option. The increasing
trend towards specialisation in individual overseas markets, where yields
tend to be low, has also led management groups to concentrate less of their
energies on providing a generous income flow.
The categories established by the AITC indicate fairly precisely to the
investor what he or she is buying: everything from the Far East, including
or excluding Japan, to technology, smaller companies, commodity and energy,
Europe and Australasia. The requirement for inclusion in most of the
categories is that a trust should keep at least 80 per cent of its assets in
the country, region, or sector in question.
Those who want a broad spread of international investments, and do not wish
to be confined to a specific market or region, will find plenty of choice
among the international general and international growth trusts. The
advantage of this is that market exposure, as well as individual stock
selection, can be left in the hands of the investment managers.
In essence, the key to choosing an investment lies in identifying the
appropriate degree of risk. For a first-time buyer with limited funds, a UK
trust offering a reasonable yield is probably the best bet: the income flow
provides some protection in falling markets, and the danger of adverse
currency movements can be ruled out.
Higher risk - but potentially greater rewards  - can be confronted in the
form of more specialised vehicles,notably those which have high gearing (ie,
borrowed money to buy additional shares in the hope that the rise in their
value will exceed the borrowing costs). Depending on the market's
perception, the level of gearing can contribute to swings in the
investment-trust discount - the difference between a trust's assets value
and share price, and thus an important influence on the investor's return.
An interesting variant in recent years has been the zero-coupon preference
shares issued by investment trusts. These first appeared when Scottish
National Investment Trust reorganised in 1987, and there are now 14 such
issues. The trick is that they offer a fixed growth in capital over a set
period.
As with the capital shares of ordinary split-capital trusts, investors
receive no income but are entitled to complete repayment before all other
classes of equity when the trust reaches its winding up date - provided,
that is, the assets are there in the first place. The lives of the 12
existing issues vary from four to 10 years. Olliff and Partners, a
stockbroking firm which specialises in investment trusts, recommends using
the zero-coupon preferences as a means of planning for school fees.
