FT  07 MAY 91 / Management: In brief
More than 100 businesses in north-east London have joined a new business
forum called Inside Track intended to provide advice to fast growing
companies with sales of between Pounds 100,000 and Pounds 5m. Evening and
weekend seminars will be held on issues such as people management, finance
and marketing.
The forum, a joint initiative of Hackney Business Venture, an enterprise
agency and the London Business School, is open to businesses in Hackney,
Tower Hamlets, the City, Islington and Waltham Forest. It has been sponsored
by accountants Touche Ross and the London City Action Team.
Contact Inside Track, 277 Mare Street, London E8 1HB. Tel 081-533 4599.
Membership fee from Pounds 20.
*****
Employment agencies are likely to prove the most promising growth market for
factoring, according to a worldwide survey carried out by Factors Chain
International, an alliance of factoring companies in 35 countries.
Factors provide a range of services, advancing money against their clients'
invoices, taking over the management of their sales ledger and advising on
credit risks. The survey canvassed the views of 81 factors around the world.
The employment agency sector topped the ranking for both domestic and export
factoring. It was followed by home electronics suppliers, wholesalers and
toys/sporting goods businesses in the area of domestic factoring and by
electronic parts, office equipment and agricultural produce for export
factoring.
Contact Burson-Marsteller, 24-28 Bloomsbury Way, London WC1A 2PX.
*****
A training programme for advisers and counsellors working in the small
business sector has been launched by Durham University Business School
(DUBs). The sessions are intended for staff of local authorities,
development agencies, chambers of commerce and training and enterprise
councils.
The subjects covered include assessing client needs; problem solving and
analytical skills and communication skills. Programmes are planned for June
23-26 and November 24-27.
Contact Ruth Ratcliffe, DUBS, Mill Hill Lane, Durham City, DH1 3LB. Tel
091-374 2227.
