FT  27 APR 91 / Books: Life and loves of a political philosopher
BENJAMIN CONSTANT AND THE POST-REVOLUTIONARY MIND by Biancamaria Fontana
Yale Pounds 20, 165 pages
BENJAMIN Constant was 22 in 1789 when the mob stormed the Bastille. After a
whirlwind, scapegrace youth he had come to rest in Brunswick where he was
employed at the Duke's court in the sinecure of gentleman-in-ordinary. In
1794 he met Germaine de Stael, then aged 27, the daughter of Louis XVI's
finance minister, Necker. She had a mind as penetrating as Constant's, and
as great a sexual charisma in spite of not being beautiful. Her personal
dominance over eminent men and women was legendary; the influence of her
salon was unrivalled.
Some writers on Constant have suggested that the effect of his literary
collaboration, turning eventually into a stormy love-affair, with Mme de
Stael, was to transform his outlook from that of an 18th century rationalist
 -he was educated at the University of Edinburgh in the days of Adam Smith -
into that of a 19th century romantic. Geoffrey Scott's The Portrait of
Zelide (1925), still a most readable piece of Strachey-like writing,
dramatised their encounter in this light. The later biography of De Stael,
JC Herold's Mistress to an Age (1953), also highly readable, corrected that
view to some extent and is indispensable for a full understanding of their
careers.
Zelide (as she called herself in a self-portrait) was Constant's first
female mentor. Known after her marriage as Belle de Charriere, older than
Constant by 27 years, she was a lively, striking, high-minded Dutch
aristocrat who had isolated herself in the country at Colombier in
Switzerland with her mediocre Swiss husband.
Whether or not she and Constant - a Swiss of French Protestant origin - were
lovers has never been established. Sainte-Beuve thought they were; the
editor of her papers thought they were not. At any rate, Zelide became in
her maturity a quietist who practised restraint and and control over the
passions; Germaine de Stael was a political activist who never feared
enthusiasm and involvement. Apart from her writings and her attacks on
Napoleon, she was a courageous 'scarlet pimpernel' during the Terror.
'He (Constant) could not serve two goddesses,' wrote Scott, 'he had chosen
the false mysticism of Germany (de Stael): the doors of the temple of reason
were shut and the altar of Colombier would never be rekindled.' This
excellent new book, Benjamin Constant and the Post-Revolutionary Mind, shows
that Constant never really abandoned reason for false mysticism. By applying
reason to the main problems confronting French society in the
post-revolutionary period, he identified many issues that are still
unresolved today. He entered the debate, begun by the Philosophes of the
Enlightenment, about the general will; he approved of Godwin's Enquiry
Concerning Political Justice and tried to bring it to the attention of the
French public; he took issue with Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in
France. 'There are as many absurdities as lines in this famous book,' he
told Zelide.
Biancamaria Fontana, formerly a fellow of King's College, Cambridge, has
previously edited an edition of Constant's political writings, and is an
admirable elucidator of his political thought in his numerous letters, books
and pamphlets during the period after the fall of Robespierre and throughout
the Napoleonic period. Constant had the insight to see the new force that
had now come into French politics - the classe intermediaire. These middling
rank people were (he said) 'the strength of the nation' and they
participated 'with full rights into the maintenance of national interests;
they are no longer the object of an insolent condescension on the part of a
proud caste. There is no longer privilege, no longer political monopoly.'
In his search for a new model for society Constant addressed such problems
as the composition of elected assemblies, the extension of the right to vote
based on ownership of property, the need for limits on the power of the
administration. He identified the emergence of public opinion as a salutary
check on the despotism of the state. This activity as a political
philosopher was combined with his pet project, a history of religion. It was
still incomplete when he died at the age of 63 even though several volumes
had been published. Fontana combs this work for Constant's further
perceptions about the nature of society.
In her chapter on the one book by Constant still read and universally
enjoyed, the novel Adolphe (the paperback Penguin English translation of it
by Leonard Tancock is first-rate), Fontana relates it to the themes she has
extracted from these political writings. On the surface the novel appears to
be one of the most a-political of all fictional works. Its confessional hero
(based closely on Constant himself in his wild oats phase) and the heroine
(a composite portrait with traits taken from many of his loves) are
completely self-absorbed in an internal landscape of the heart. Yet even two
such narcissists as Adolphe and Ellenore are subject to the surrounding
social pressures.
Fontana has done us all a valuable service in reconstructing the argument
from unfamiliar material scattered inaccessibly among Constant's fugitive
writings. If only her proof-reader had been rigorous. There are too many
misprints in the text for a book of this calibre.
