FT  30 APR 91 / IMF/World Bank Washington 1991: Gradualism 'no answer for E
Europe'
GRADUALISM is no answer to the problems of central and eastern European
countries, where structural reforms should proceed as rapidly as possible on
a broad front, the Group of 10 finance ministers and central bank governors
agreed yesterday.
The G10 leading industrial nations, meeting in Washington during the
IMF/World Bank gathering, broadly endorsed the thrust of a report (Issues
Raised by the Transition in Central and Eastern Europe) prepared by Mr
Lamberto Dini, director-general of the Bank of Italy, and chairman of the
group's deputies.
'Gradualism is no good because it is likely to require too many resources,
which are scarce,' Mr Dini said yesterday. But differences remain about the
scale of financial contributions by industrial countries, and about how such
assistance should be co-ordinated.
The report stresses that primary responsibility for helping these economies
with formulating macro-economic stabilisation policies should remain with
the IMF, and for structural reforms rest with the World Bank.
At present, much of the co-ordination of assistance beyond conditional loans
provided by the IMF and Bank is handled by the G24 industrial countries and
the EC.
The ministers concluded yesterday that the structure and composition of the
G10 made it especially qualified to monitor the degree of official financing
in the transition process, assess adequacy of economic strategies and make
policy recommendations on issues relevant for the activity of banks and
financial markets. But the G10 does not intend to play a direct role in aid
co-ordination.
Some European countries fear they may have to bear too much of the burden of
this help. Mr Pierre Beregovoy, French finance minister, said yesterday that
EC members of the G7 believed there should be proper burden-sharing with the
12 EC members accounting for 50 per cent of the overall support for these
countries.
Other European countries not in the EC should contribute 15 per cent, with
35 per cent coming from the rest of the world, notably the US, Japan, Canada
and Australia. The issue has arisen in part because the US said it will give
just Dollars 15m (Pounds 8.8m) to a Dollars 1bn balance of payments
stabilisation fund for Czechoslovakia.
The G10 report, which does not cover the Soviet Union, stresses the
importance of establishing full private property rights and introducing a
market-based price system in central and eastern European countries.
These countries needed to expose themselves to international competition,
and industrial countries needed to open their markets to imports from
eastern Europe.
