FT  20 APR 91 / Sport: The dinosaur is not extinct - yet / English soccer's
bid for the World Cup
THE ARCHAIC English soccer administration is like a brontosaurus. Now, the
pea-sized brain in the head has decided to make an evolutionary lunge toward
the 21st century. The pea-sized brain in the tail, however, is quite happy
staying in the 19th century.
The Football Association is the oldest soccer federation in the world. It
has overall responsibility for almost all soccer in England from the
lowliest park league up. At the apex sits the Football League, the oldest
professional league, made up of 92 clubs. Between them they run soccer as
they have for more than 100 years. The financial demands and opportunities
of the modern game have almost ripped the League apart twice in the last
five years. Now the two bodies are fighting for control of the top
professional division.
The FA runs the England team which revived dreams of national glory during
the World Cup in Italy last summer The World Cup inspired the FA and the
League in other ways. The competition was played in a collection of
glamorous modern stadiums, built or rebuilt with Italian government money.
It attracted corporate sponsors in swarms, drew a worldwide television
audience of billions and made a profit of Pounds 70m. The two English
organisations agreed to make a bid to host the 1998 competition and they are
still struggling to keep in step in spite of their recent falling-out.
There are six other would-be hosts for the '98 competition: France,
Switzerland, Brazil, India, Portugal and Morocco. Fifa, world soccer's
governing body, demands that the host country has at least eight and
preferably 12 stadiums with a seating capacity of 30,000 each, plus suitable
infrastructure.
The hosts to a modern World Cup need to be able to accommodate, transport
and police a huge influx of players, officials, media and fans. They need a
television system which can broadcast all games. The host also needs a
government which will underwrite the competition and a large population of
domestic fans who will pay to see the games.
Portugal and Switzerland are too small. Morocco and India might command the
support of African and Asian nations, but will probably fail Fifa's tests.
The Brazilians are bidding out of turn: two consecutive World Cup's in the
Americas would be against custom. That leaves England and France as the two
front-runners. They are closely matched.
England, however, will struggle to meet some of the conditions. Apart from
Wembley stadium there are no soccer grounds in England with 30,000 seats. In
theory, all league grounds will have to be all-seater by 1994 in line with
the Taylor report on safety in soccer grounds.
In practice, little seems to be happening. Kirton says that clubs are
conducting feasibility studies and waiting for the first instalment of the
Pounds 100m over five years that the government has promised.
Applying the FA's rule of thumb that two standing spots converts into one
seat, only six or seven grounds would be able to seat 30,000 and four of
them are tightly bunched in Liverpool and Manchester.
If the English bid is to offer the necessary geographical spread of
stadiums, someone is going to have to find a lot of cash. Clubs such as
debt-ridden Newcastle United, in the north east, cannot afford the work
themselves.
In Italy government money built the stadiums. But in England local
government rarely regards football clubs as a source of pride and, until
last autumn, the central government had shown a marked hostility to both
public funding and to soccer. The arrival of a self-confessed Chelsea fan in
Number 10 Downing Street has helped change that.
The transformation of English soccer's image during the three weeks of the
World Cup last summer also helped. At the start England was the nation of
soccer hooligans; by the end it was the winner of the fair play trophy.
Kirton and the FA dismiss the question of hooliganism. He says: 'Hooliganism
is no worse here than in any other European country. When Fifa is looking
for expert advice on hooliganism it comes to us.'
Since last summer the relationship between the FA and the League has grown
strained. Just when the FA wanted to build on the England team's success the
League voted to increase the size of its first division by two teams. This
would mean four more matches a year; more revenue for the clubs but more
work for the overstretched players.
The FA's has responded with a piece of bureaucratic jujitsu, turning the
greed of the League's members against it. Clubs in an independent premier
division would no longer have to share revenue with clubs in the lower
divisions. They could exploit unified marketing and a monopoly supply of top
quality soccer for television and the type of sponsors which would dovetail
handily with the FA's World Cup plans.
Clubs would have money to invest in players and stadiums. In return the FA
would gain power over the top teams and force them to put the needs of the
England team first.
The League argues that the large number of professional clubs is a source of
English soccer's popular support and of many of its best players. Of the 13
players who appeared in England's international against Ireland only one,
Tony Adams, started his league career with one of the big five.
English soccer must change and if the FA can reign in the greed of biggest
clubs its 'Superleague' might well be the base for a thriving England team
and a realistic World Cup bid. But its readiness to sacrifice the smaller
teams to the carnivorous tendencies of the big clubs is a bad start. The FA
could be next on the menu.
