FT  10 MAY 91 / Management: Company car policy goes in for a rethink - A
still popular perk
The calls started flowing into accountancy firms within an hour of Norman
Lamont finishing his maiden Budget speech.
Had the time come, clients wanted to know, to ditch the company car schemes
most had been blithely operating since the mid-1970s, when trying to
circumvent Labour's pay freeze and high taxes first brought the perk of the
company car into being.
The answer which seems to be emerging, appears to be 'yes' - at least for
many, perhaps most, categories of employees.
Lamont's Budget did not just raise the tax scale charge on company cars by
20 per cent, but, most traumatic of all, imposed a National Insurance charge
on employers for the benefit employees enjoy from their company cars.
The Treasury will raise Pounds 1.5bn from the tax on company cars this year,
and that is just from taxing individuals who receive them. When National
Insurance on companies supplying cars and free petrol to employees of Pounds
610m is paid in 1992/93, the total amount raised by the Exchequer from
individuals and companies will rise to more than Pounds 2.3bn.
Although the personal tax on cars, which has been increased by 280 per cent
since the 1988 budget, seems high, the company car still amounts to a
considerable benefit for employees. On the Treasury's figures, the benefit
to employees of a car (and free petrol) amounts to Pounds 5.9bn this year.
The tax currently paid by employees - many of whom are higher rate
tax-payers - is equal to just 25 per cent of that benefit.
For the vast majority of companies, the evaluation process is still under
way. But detailed analysis of the subject by accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand
Deloitte provides a firm indicator that many companies could make the switch
at no financial cost to employees and potentially large savings to the
company itself.
The issue is more complicated than money, however.
'The choices can be very, very complex,' stresses Andrew Evans, a partner
with Price Waterhouse's executive and benefits services practice. 'It's not
just a question of the tax position; it is tied in with employee motivation
and a host of other factors such as the ability to attract staff.'
Despite an initial post-Budget furore, analysis shows that Lamont would have
to tighten the taxation screw even more tightly on employees before the
company car loses its allure.
The cost/benefit equation for the companies providing cars, however, is much
more complex and involves many variables. Also, any change by a company in
its cars policy, particularly involving offers of cash to 'buy out' company
cars, has VAT and other pitfalls which could result in an increase of
taxation burdens for the unwary.
Yet the Coopers calculations show that the cumulative effect of the
increases in scale charges of the past three years, coupled with the
imposition of National Insurance for the first time from next year, have in
many cases created a clear financial advantage to the company to 'buy out'
the company car.
In the most extreme cases, such as that of a director running a 4 litre
Jaguar Sovereign, the company could provide him with the funds to buy and
operate the car at no financial net loss or gain to the individual, yet save
more than Pounds 3,000 per year.
In the table, column A represents the costs that might be incurred by a
company in providing a car for an employee's private and business use,
together with the resulting tax liability for the employee.
Column B analyses the same costs of motoring from the company's and
employee's positions, as if the employee had been reimbursed with the
running costs in column B.
Column C indicates the amount of any salary increase - and in some cases
deduction - necessary for the employee to be left neither better nor worse
off by being paid cash. The deduction can arise because the employee may
actually have a lower tax bill from using his own car at the company's
expense than from having a company car.
As Russell Thoms of Coopers points out: 'There would be some unusual winners
and losers.' The figures show that there are marginal savings for the high
mileage business user from a straightforward change to cash.
But, as Thoms points out: 'In the middle ground, the cost and tax position
for the typical manager's car cannot yet be improved by a cash alternative.'
The biggest savings, however, are clearly on the highly-paid executive's
Jaguar or similarly expensive car.
He says that savings can be increased further by 'fine tuning', such as
using company accounts at garages rather than reimbursing employees for
bills incurred, because the latter would otherwise attract employers' NIC
charges.
Yet whether the figures by themselves provide sufficient incentive for a
large-scale exodus from the company car is much more problematical.
'The car gives an employer a benefit out of all proportion to salary,' says
Paul Ives, human resources controller Legal and General, the insurance
company.
'If we could just offer salary then it would not have the same (positive)
effect when recruiting or retaining staff. A car is a very attractive
benefit and I would be loathe to scrap the thing if I thought, as I do, that
it would wrong-foot us in the recruitment market.'
Abbey National, which runs a mixed fleet of several thousand cars, is more
adamant: 'We have no intention of changing our company car structure because
of the Budget,' the company says.
Yet the imposition of National Insurance has given some companies pause for
thought. For Boots, the UK pharmaceuticals and retailing group, National
Insurance will cost it about Pounds 400,000 on its fleet of 2,200 cars. Says
John Muncie, director of development, group personnel: 'It's a figure at the
margin, but it is an additional cost.'
Clearly the Budget has focused minds; consultants predict there will be:
greater selectivity in terms of who, in future, will be entitled to cars; an
end to free fuel for employees' private motoring; imposing restrictions on
the price or engine size of vehicles allocated to even the most senior
executives; and, contracting out the management of company car fleets
through competitive tender as a way of cutting costs.
The savings in National Insurance charges alone can be considerable by
keeping below the Pounds 19,250 price band for executives, and the Pounds
29,000 band for the chairman or chief executive.
'There is a lot of looking at cars over Pounds 19,250 and at ones under 2
litres, and a lot of down-sizing is going on,' says Muncie of the
Nottingham-based Boots. 'People will also make sure that they do at least
2,500 miles. If there's any doubt about it they'll drive to London by car
rather than take the train. And that will only add to the congestion.'
Companies seeking to offer a generous settlement to 'buy out' company cars
risk running foul of a judgment, Heaton v Bell. According to this judgment,
a company's valuation of the cash benefit of a car takes precedence over the
official scale charges and would apply to all other cars in the company's
fleet.
Thus even employees opting to keep their company cars could find themselves
paying a larger tax bill than the scale charge. Of greater concern, however,
is the stance being taken by Customs and Excise on VAT in relation to 'car
or cash' options.
Customs and Excise is taking the view that, if employees are offered a cash
option, but only a few take it up, those who choose to retain their company
cars have opted to accept a supply from the company which is liable to VAT.
'What Customs is arguing', says Evans, 'is that if there is a company with
1,000 cars and if it offers everyone Pounds 5,000 a year cash substitute,
then even if only one of the 1,000 takes up the offer, there would be a VAT
liability in respect of the other 999.' In this example, the VAT payable
would total nearly Pounds 885,000.
So far, the Customs and Excise view has yet to be formally contested.
However, a number of companies has written seeking formal clarification, and
it appears now to be only a matter of time before the issue winds up in
court.
