FT  11 MAY 91 / Finance &amp; The Family: Play your cards right for economy
travel - Advice for travellers who want to know whether they should take
their plastic abroad
SHOULD YOU leave home without your credit card?
The answer depends on where you are thinking of going. Your chances of
getting much use out of a credit card vary widely from nation to nation.
Apart from paying for purchases, which all the well-known cards can now do
in a diverse range of countries, credit and other plastic cards can also top
up your travel insurance and provide you with a useful ready source of cash.
If you do not wander too far from the beaten track, they can be more
convenient than travellers' cheques and in some cases no more expensive.
Additions to the service, including card insurance, have been aimed at
providing a similar level of security.
However, the ease of availability differs starkly from country to country.
The Visa, Mastercard and American Express logos are the same the world over,
but the terms on which you use the cards will depend both on the issuer, and
on the prevailing practice in the country that you are visiting.
You should also be on your guard against another catch - if something goes
wrong while you are on holiday, very little of the information you most need
to know will be instantly available. The odds are that a lot of information
which could be vital if something goes wrong, has been packed around a
credit card bill and then thrown into a bin at some time.
It is worth getting in touch with the organisation which issued your card
before you leave to check exactly what facilities are available. The country
you visit will also make a difference.
For example, Visa cards allow you to withdraw cash from 72,000 automated
teller machines worldwide. But, even in Europe, that does not guarantee easy
access while you stay on the beaten track. Spain accounts for 10,685 of the
global total of Visa ATMs, compared with 3,420 in France, and only 295 in
Germany.
History accounts for these differences. The Spanish economy, developing
slightly later than the other two, made the transition from a cash-oriented
economy straight to charge cards. West Germany, on the other hand, was the
birthplace of the Eurocheque, and German retailers will not find accepting
Visa cards to be so strongly in their interests as it is in other countries.
Around 1.5m Germans hold Visa cards, compared to 8m French.
The charges and limits depend on your choice of UK issuer. Town &amp; Country
building society's Visa card allows you to take up to Pounds 100 a day in
local currency from banks showing the Visa sign, with a handling charge of
1.5 per cent added to your next bill.
Barclays also charges 1.5 per cent for handling, and interest is charged
from your statement date if you do not repay when you return. The annual
percentage rate (APR) is 28.1 per cent. The bank will allow you to withdraw
up to Pounds 500 per day over the counter, and up to Pounds 200 from
machines.
There is a similar pattern for American Express cards. Amex at present has
more than 40,000 ATMs worldwide, with 13,500 in Europe. Most of these use
the facilities of local banks. Thus your American Express card can retrieve
money from 1,282 Credit Lyonnais machines in France, 183 Banca Populare di
Milano machines in Italy, and 2,816 Sistema 4B network machines in Spain,
but from only 30 holes in the wall in Germany, where Amex has an agreement
with Deutsche Verkehrs-Kredit Bank.
American Express will charge a straight two per cent fee for the amount of
each withdrawal. Note that the money withdrawn this way does not come from a
credit card account, but is debited directly from the current account you
nominate to pay your American Express bills. It therefore makes sense to
check your current account balance before you leave, if you are going to use
this method of obtaining cash. However, if you have an interest-bearing
current account, it means you can keep earning interest up to the day you
make your withdrawal, making the transaction more economical than buying
travellers' cheques.
American Express limits British holders of Sterling-denominated cards to
withdraw Pounds 200, calculated at the exchange rate in force on the day of
each withdrawal, within a seven day period. Gold card holders can withdraw
up to Pounds 300 within a week.
Diners Card is usable in 35,000 ATMs worldwide, but is limited to the United
States, Canada, Puerto Rico, Japan and Germany. There is a 4 per cent charge
for each withdrawal. The service is restricted to Dollars 1,000 every 14
days.
Link, known abroad as Plus, is the system used by a number of institutions
in this country, most of them building societies. If you are leaving Europe
you may be surprised by the flexibility it offers you, as it has 46,000 ATMs
in North America, Puerto Rico, Mexico, Ecuador, Guam, the Caribbean,
Australia, New Zealand and Asia. The equivalent of Pounds 250 can be
withdrawn each day. If any extra charges are to be levied on you by a Link
machine, a warning should flash across the screen.
Credit cards also allow a degree of extra insurance, although all the
issuers stress that this should not be regarded as in any way an alternative
to a full travel insurance. Also beware that you will only be covered, in
most instances, for travel that you paid for directly with the card. If the
name of the relevant airline does not appear on the credit card bill, you
may not be covered.
However, the cover you receive for everything that does appear on your bill
could be useful. American Express cover purchase insurance. If you buy
something it is automatically insured against loss, theft, or damage, up to
a limit of Pounds 20,000 for the first 90 days after you bought it.
This is the kind of subtle problem that is worth checking. Barclays offer
purchase insurance for goods valued between Pounds 50 (cheap children's
novelties which break on the flight home are not covered) and Pounds 15,000,
within the first 100 days of purchase.
Credit cards score on travel 'inconvenience' insurance. If you are
impervious to the charms of the Costa Del Heathrow, the chance of
compensation for delay might be appealing. Remember, however, that it will
only apply to scheduled flights paid for using the credit card.
American Express' policy comes into effect once you have been held up for
four hours, either because you have been denied a seat thanks to overbooking
or because of a delay in take-off. After this time has elapsed, restaurant
meals, refreshments and hotel rooms bought using the card will all be free.
Cover is also usually available to pay for necessary goods if your luggage
goes astray.
Travel accident insurance again only applies to travel bought with the card
 -if you are run down by a passing rickshaw, tough - but cover is extensive.
American Express will cover certain injuries up to Pounds 75,000, and
Barclays' Visa up to Pounds 50,000 (Pounds 250,000 for Premier card
holders).
An option for which you will probably have to pay more is insurance against
loss of the card itself. American Express undertakes to give you a
replacement 'within 24 hours', wherever you are, and schemes which
automatically notify all the companies which have issued you with plastic
seem more attractive if you are going overseas.
These will usually, however, cost you more. However, losing cards,
particularly those few pieces of plastic in your wallet which cannot be used
abroad, presents nightmarish vistas. If you do not insure the cards, perhaps
you should leave home without them.
