FT  10 MAY 91 / Survey of The Food Industry (5): Battle of the bacteria -
Safety Standards
WHAT is the air temperature inside your domestic refrigerator? How long is
it safe to use cooked meats after the 'use by' date? And how should you cook
frozen food in your microwave oven?
Such are the questions the food manufacturers and retailers throw back at
consumers accused of being responsible for outbreaks of salmonella and
listeria. But although many believe that food scares are frequently the
result of consumer misuse, it is the food industry that is being forced to
clean up its act.
Strict new regulations introduced this year put the onus on food producers
to ensure that when the consumer takes the goods off the supermarket shelf,
or orders them in a restaurant, they are wholesome.
Following the introduction Britain in January, food companies - from the
largest biscuit -maker or supermarket chain to the humblest take-away cafe -
now have to demonstrate that they have taken all reasonable precautions and
shown 'due diligence' in manufacture, transportation, storage and
preparation of foodstuffs. And last month () strict regulations governing
the temperature at which foods such as cheeses and cooked meats can be
stored also came into effect.
In spite of the new regulations, many question whether the consumer will be
better off. The regulations will only be effective if they can be adequately
policed - the job of local health officials.
For the environmental health inspectors there are two problems to overcome,
says Steve Bassam, leader of Brighton council and an assistant secretary for
food and environmental health at the Association of Metropolitan
Authorities. To begin with, he says, there is not enough money allocated to
the appropriate departments of local authorities to police the system
thoroughly.
Although the government allocated Pounds 30m from central coffers to smooth
the introduction of the new legislation, those responsible for implementing
the regulations believe Pounds 40m-45m would have been more appropriate.
Secondly, there are too few qualified environmental health officers and
technical assistants to do the job - a shortfall of 1,000 to 1,500 - and
local councils are having problems in recruiting the appropriate staff.
Despite the increase in regulations, many detractors argue the government
has given the food industry a loophole through which it can avoid
prosecution. Previously, if a fly was found in a can of baked beans then the
company was at fault: now, showing they have taken precautions to prevent
such an eventuality - shown 'due diligence' - could mean they are let off
the hook.
The manufacturers, however, take a very different view, says David Edwards,
operations director of the food Hygiene Bureau, a commercial test house and
training organisation. 'They see the new law as an extra commitment, not an
extra defence,' he says.
One difficulty is that what due diligence means has still to be determined
in court, making it difficult for manufacturers and retailers to gauge what
precautions are necessary.
Previously, for example, a large supermarket chain which sold branded
biscuits relied on a guarantee from the biscuit-makers that their products
were wholesome.
If a problem arose the consumer was referred back to the manufacturer. Now,
supermarkets cannot rely on this guarantee, but need to check suppliers'
working practices themselves. Just how far back into the manufacturing chain
they will have to check is unclear. As David Thurston, senior legal officer
with the Sainsbury's chain, puts it, 'Nobody knows if we have to vet Kellogs
before we can sell their cornflakes.'
For the smaller retailer, or the smaller restaurant, such a task would be
economically impossible.
To ensure protection under the law many large manufacturers are putting
quality control procedures into place. Many are turning to the British
Standards Institution's BS 5750 certification, which has been adapted for
food processing companies to enable the monitoring of processes, machinery
and training. So far, however, fewer than 100 companies out of the thousands
of UK food producers have been certified under the scheme.
Smaller companies are investigating more specific testing procedures such as
HACCP - hazard analysis and critical control point tests.
These focus on the most critical element of a food process and ensure that
it is carried out correctly. In a canning process, for example, heating the
produce to the right temperature might by the critical element of the
process.
Technology is also playing its part with a variety of tests and procedures
under development or available to help demonstrate due diligence, both in
processing and temperature control. These include:
Tagging systems designed to reassure the consumer that the food has been
stored at the right temperature, such as the Fresh-Check indicators already
widely-used in the US. The indicator is a circle in the centre of which is a
polymer dot, which darkens when exposed to heat. If the central dot is
lighter than the outer circle the contents are fresh: if darker then the
packet has been 'thermally abused'.
Many supermarket chains are investigating this sort of labelling system for
use in distribution. If one label was put on the top of a dispatch of cooked
ham, for example, it could indicate if the whole consignment had been stored
at the correct temperature.
Edible inks which could be used to print the 'use by' dates, on to the food
itself, rather than on the wrapper. This would prevent unscrupulous food
retailers from unwrapping products that had passed their 'use by' date -
pork pies, for example - and selling them on the delicatessen counter.
Rapid biological tests, to determine whether bacteria are present in the
food manufacturing chain. Today, most tests involve sending away samples or
growing them in a laboratory, which can take days. By the time a problem is
discovered the food could be on the consumers' plate. Within three years
tests could be available to spot bacterial problems before the food leaves
the factory.
Computer systems to help maintain appropriate records. Pace, of Moira,
Northern Ireland, for example, has developed a software package which
handles product specification, auditing of suppliers, calibration of
machinery and training.
All should help manufacturers and retailers ensure their products are
wholesome. It is then the consumer's job to ensure they are properly cooked.
