FT  07 MAY 91 / Arts: Nureyev - Wembley
It is being billed as 'Nureyev: The Farewell Tour', though the star denies
that it is a farewell and various doom-laden reports have been published
concerning Nureyev's dancing. On the evidence of Friday night's performance
at the unappealing Wembley Conference Centre, the gloom should concern the
nature of the presentation. This is basic to a point of insolence, and
unworthy of Nureyev and of at least some of the other artists who appear in
his concert programme. The lower, arena area of the hall is not raked, and
an intriguing view of events could be obtained by the audience as they
peered between the intervening rows of heads in order to see something below
the performers' knees. The stage is of good size, and, with the spendthrift
extravagance of several drunken sailors, the management provided black
curtains as setting. The accompaniment was recorded, and it was distressing
to see artists as distinguished as Evelyne Desutter (lately of the Monte
Carlo ballet) and the Bolshoy's Andrey Fedotov trying to cope with crippling
tempi in pas de deux from Don Quixote and Sleeping Beauty. But we know both
dancers are capable of very fine things, and Desutter's delicate grace,
Fedotov's elegance were, with Nureyev's performance in The Lesson, real
pleasures.
Nureyev wisely restricts himself to two works, Flemming Flindt's
Ionesco-inspired The Lesson and Jose Limon's The Moor's Pavane. Neither
makes the technical demands that Nureyev can no longer meet - I wish he had
not embellished The Lesson with a few laboured bravura steps - and he brings
a fine air of madness to the lunatic dance-teacher in this latter piece. It
is a genuinely chilling interpretation, and one finely supported by Desutter
as his pupil-victim and by Vivi Flindt as the accompanist-wardress.
About The Moor's Pavane I have many reservations. Limon's reduction of
Othello to the play's quartet of principals is a sacred text of Modern
Dance. With Limon it had a certain power; done now as a walk for
ballet-dancers who can indulge in a good deal of spurious emoting, it is nul
and void. And neither Nureyev, nor Flindt, nor Fedotov, nor Desutter, gifted
as they are, can redeem it from looking like Much Ado about Nothing.
The rest of the evening brought predictable sweetmeats. Some of Nureyev's
colleagues are from the Bolshoy, Staniskavsky and Odessa ballets, and they
offered unidiomatic Bournonville, a cabaret turn brightly calling itself a
'Bolero' by Petipa, and Dolin's Pas de quatre in which the dancer
impersonating Cerrito (whom the programme, a mine of non-information, does
not identify) was enchanting. I believe her to be Margarita Levina, a
ballerina from the Stanislavsky Ballet. A Franco-Russian dancer, Maria
Brissonskaya, gave a dry, dull account of The Dying Swan, and was no more
convincing in the ludicrous acrobatics of Oscar Araiz' Adagietto, where
Mahler is an excuse for reeling, writhing and fainting in coils. She and her
partner ( Alexander Bogatyrov of the Bolshoy, who deserves better) wore the
uneasy expressions of people who sense that the oysters weren't as fresh as
they ought to have been.
