FT  10 MAY 91 / Major to meet BMA on health reforms
THE prime minister yesterday agreed to meet leaders of Britain's doctors as
the government faced political uproar over the effects of its health
reforms.
Last month Mr John Major refused to meet British Medical Association leaders
and rejected their claims that the National Health Service needed more
money. The announcement that he will now see the doctors came as Mr William
Waldegrave, the health secretary, failed to calm the BMA's fears about the
direction the reforms are taking.
Dr Jeremy Lee-Potter, chairman of the BMA council, left a meeting with Mr
Waldegrave yesterday saying he was 'not reassured'. Mr Waldegrave, he said,
appeared to be 'ideologically wedded' to central aspects of last month's
reforms which were already damaging the NHS. When the doctors' leaders meet
Mr Major, they will express concern about the reforms and call for health
funding to be increased to the generally higher levels of other western
nations.
'I think that the prime minister has to listen in the end,' Dr Lee-Potter
said. 'I do not believe our health care system can carry on being funded at
three-quarters of the level of our neighbours in Europe.'
The NHS reforms - introduced only five weeks ago - have already confronted
the government with three potentially damaging controversies.
Two of the new self-governing hospital trusts have ann-ounced up to 1,000
job losses because of financial problems; the Universities Funding Council
and Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals has expressed fears that
the reforms may damage medical education; and concern is mounting that
patients of some general practitioners will receive preferential treatment
in a two-tier hospital system.
Mr Waldegrave last night told the Royal College of General Practitioners the
government was ready to modify the GP fund-holding scheme, under which
participating family doctors have budgets and purchase hospital treatment on
behalf of their patients, in the light of experience this year.
'I fully understand that there are legitimate anxieties about the operation
of the scheme among GPs and consultants alike,' said the health secretary.
There might, he said, need to be 'some ground rules agreed' about what a
fund-holder could ask a hospital to provide.
During his meeting with the BMA, however, Mr Waldegrave failed to dispel
concern that hospitals were offering fund-holding GPs preferential treatment
for their patients in order to win contracts.
Mr Waldegrave accepted after the meeting that in non-urgent cases, GP
fund-holders might be able negotiate favourable arrangements for their
patients, provided these did not put a hospital's other contracts at risk.
He believed the solution was to enlarge the fund-holding scheme and give all
patients the advantages of such arrangements.
The health secretary's meeting was followed last night by an announcement by
Riverside Health Authority, which runs London's Charing Cross and
Westminster teaching hospitals, that it had approved 435 job losses.
Claims that fund-holding was producing a two-tier system of health care also
surfaced at prime minister's question time in the Commons with Mr Neil
Kinnock, opposition leader, saying that the clinical needs of patients were
coming second to commercial considerations. Earlier yesterday, Labour
launched a campaign to oppose plans for 120 more hospitals and other
services to become self-governing trusts next year.
Parliament, Page 10
Tories cool, Page 16
