FT  15 APR 91 / Arts: Ann Murray - Wigmore Hall
There are few songs as difficult to sing as Schubert's deceptively simple
'Nacht und Traume'.
The technical difficulty of keeping the piece in tune, let alone sustaining
the proper feeling of rapturous calm, means that it is one of the least
frequently heard of the composer's favourite songs, not often encountered in
live recitals and certainly not at the beginning of the evening.
Yet that is where Ann Murray placed it to start her recital on Friday.
She opened the evening with a quite exemplary piece of singing. This voice,
which is pushing up into the reaches of the soprano territory, can sometimes
sound uncomfortably stretched if it is asked to provide large-scale singing
beyond what nature may have intended for it; but the basic quality of its
simple and pure mezzo beauty has never been lost.
The Schubert group, sung without undue artfulness or exaggeration, made a
promising start. 'Der Zwerg', of which Miss Murray gives such a telling
performance in her contribution to Hyperion's complete Schubert song series
on disc, also showed that she is well able to use music to create an
atmosphere, with a palpable sense of impending danger at the start.
By and large, though, it is not the dramatic or intense songs that she does
best. Berlioz's 'Elegie en prose' sounded not so much exalted at its climax
as stressful, the voice hard pressed and losing something of its quality.
'Der Soldat' and 'Der Spielmann', two of an attractive group of Schumann's
Hans Christian Andersen settings, were thoughtfully narrated, but without
the ability to get the crux of the story to hit home.
Simple is best with this singer. Strauss's three Ophelia songs, so often
since Schwarzkopf the occasion for neurotic over-emoting, were twice as
effective in Murray's restrained performances, the half-crazed
eccentricities of the music delightfully touched in both by the singer and
Graham Johnson, as imaginative as ever at the piano. The final song, Samuel
Barber's 'Nuvoletta', was a marvel of wistful understatement.
What a good idea, too, to give us first Berlioz's songs from Irlande and
then Barber's settings of James Joyce: an ideal programme for the most
successful of today's Irish singers.
