FT  11 MAY 91 / International Disaster Relief: Remoteness hinders Kurdish
and Bangladeshi operations
OVERCOMING 'aid fatigue' in donor countries may be a demanding task for
western charity officials but an even greater challenge is ensuring the
urgent delivery of life-saving supplies under atrocious working conditions
to remote areas.
The experiences of aid workers in northern Iraq and Bangladesh illustrate
the range of immense problems faced, including, in the case of the Kurds,
the political sensitivities of the Turkish government.
From the start, the international relief effort in Iraq was hampered by
Ankara's insistence on keeping the Kurds close to the border. The sites in
the remote south east corner of Turkey where some 400,000 Iraqi refugees
fled in early April were often inaccessible by road and suffered from water
shortages as well as severe night temperatures.
Within a week wood around the camp sites had been stripped. In early April,
the death count was rising. Children were dying of gastroenteritis, the old
from hypothermia. 'This is the worst mission I think we've ever had,' said
Patrick Baudry logistics expert with Medecins sans Frontieres (MSF), the
French agency.
Notwithstanding the international publicity given to the Kurds' plight, the
relief operation is underfunded. Before the crisis, donors were asked for
Dollars 175m (Pounds 103.5m) for all UN agencies. 'We got Dollars 38m.' says
Dr Claudio Sepulveda, of the UN Children's Fund.
Fortunately the relief operation has been able to call on massive air
support. At the height of the crisis, officials at Incirlik, the joint US
Turkish base 300 miles from the Iraqi border, said a C-130 was leaving every
30 minutes. To date the US has made more than 3,000 helicopter relief drops.
The Bangladeshi cyclone disaster area is equally inaccessible but there has
been no comparable level of air support. This problem has been compounded by
the slowness of Dhaka to react to the crisis.
It took about three days for the authorities to appreciate the magnitude of
the disaster and relief arrangements were seriously delayed. With a new,
inexperienced government under Prime Minister Mrs Khaleda Zia - she has been
in power just 45 days - and a notoriously inefficient bureaucracy, further
delays occurred as the authorities debated what needed to be done.
It took five days before it was decided that the government should start
sending 'dry' food and bottled drinking water. Then the government realised
it had only six serviceable helicopters to drop the supplies.
This meant that only an insignificant percentage of the 10m survivors could
get relief supplies and even that belatedly.
A full week after the disaster the civilian government realised it could not
cope and the relief operations were handed over to the army, which has ruled
Bangladesh for most of its 20-year history.
Work was also been hampered by lack of co-ordination among the various
agencies involved.
The aid issue has also been politicised. Leaders are busy making capital
from what they call the 'failure' of the government to handle the situation,
deflecting attention from the relief work.
Meanwhile outside aid has been slow to arrive. The total in the first few
days came to roughly Dollars 20m or about Dollars 2 for each victim.
Total aid committed has now reached Dollars 450m, and more is being pledged
but little of this has yet reached Bangladesh. What the country needed was
immediate help on a gigantic scale for a disaster in which half a million
are thought to have died and 10m to have been made homeless.
The food and medicine urgently needed is also taking a long time to arrive.
Even then Bangladesh lacks the infrastructure and the capacity to deliver
the aid to the victims. Skilled teams need to be flown in on a large scale
to help the local authorities. These are nowhere in evidence.
