FT  07 MAY 91 / NCR agrees Dollars 7.4bn bid from AT&amp;T
NCR, the Ohio-based computer company, has finally agreed to an all-paper bid
valued at around Dollars 7.4bn (Pounds 4.4bn) from American Telephone &amp;
Telegraph, the US telecommunications group.
This ends a struggle which began last December, when AT&amp;T offered Dollars
90-a-share in cash, but encountered strong opposition from NCR. More
recently, there have been signs that NCR had come to view a deal as
inevitable, and the two sides have been edging towards terms acceptable to
both of them.
In late April, AT&amp;T suggested it might go up to Dollars 110 per NCR share -
as NCR had demanded - but wanted to replace the cash consideration by paper.
That led to haggling over protection for NCR investors against any fall in
AT&amp;T's share price.
The merger agreement signed by the two sides offers slightly more protection
to NCR shareholders than the improved bid proposal from AT&amp;T last month.
Under yesterday's agreement, the number of AT&amp;T shares received for each NCR
share will be determined by dividing Dollars 110 by the average closing
price for AT&amp;T during a 20-day period ahead of an NCR shareholder meeting to
vote on the deal.
However, NCR shareholders will not receive more than 3.223 AT&amp;T shares for
each NCR share, or less than 2.708 shares.
Part of AT&amp;T's strategy in pursuing NCR has centred on the prospect of
merging its own, unsuccessful computer business into NCR and leaving the
Ohio company to manage the combined business.
Yesterday, however, AT&amp;T said that Mr Charles Exley, NCR's chief executive
who led the opposition to the bid, would retire when the merger is completed
 -somewhat earlier than expected - although he will head a 'transition
team', studying how the business should be combined. It will be four or five
months before the merger is finally effected, and Mr Exley will remain as a
consultant after leaving NCR.
Mr Robert Allen, AT&amp;T's chairman said he had accepted Mr Exley's proposals
for the succession at NCR. Mr Gilbert Williamson, currently NCR's president,
will take over from Mr Exley, and will also become an AT&amp;T director and a
member of its management executive committee. Mr Elton White, at present NCR
executive vice-president, will become president of NCR.
