FT  19 APR 91 / Survey of the Canary Islands (6): Madrid is the common enemy
 -The relaxed and friendly local political scene
POLITICAL life on the Canaries has been relatively quiet since 1936, when
General Franco left his exile on Tenerife to bring about almost 40 years of
dictatorship for Spain.
Naturally, Canarios would see the matter differently, but it is perhaps no
misrepresentation to suggest that the holiday atmosphere which supports the
islands economically has permeated their general atmosphere, which is
relaxed and friendly. The squabbles that do exist are within the traditional
rivalry between Tinerfinos and Canarios; but even they quickly sink their
differences in the face of the common enemy - Madrid.
The peak of the separatist movement on the islands was in the early 1970s,
when Antonio Cubillo led the Movement for Self-determination and
Independence of the Canary Archipelago (MPAIAC), which was implicated in
bomb explosions in 1978. The MPAIAC backed closer relations with Africa,
against being tied to the EC.
Libyan leader Col Muamar Ghadaffi caused local uproar in February 1987 when
he said that 'Spain has absolutely no legal right to the Canaries'; a number
of Libyans were expelled as a result of their alleged support for local
independence activists. But the handful of pro-independence politicians on
the islands today stand in a clear electoral minority.
Elections for all levels of local, regional and national government are to
be held on May 26. For the Canaries, the contest is largely between a
centre-right coalition and the socialists, led by Mr Jeronimo Saavedra, a
54-year-old university professor of law who was president of the first
autonomous Canarian government between 1983-87.
Of far greater political weight than the issue of separatism is the
continuing struggle concerning Las Palmas' pressure to open a second
university - the only one so far is at La Laguna on Tenerife. In April 1989
thousands of Tinerfenos took to the streets to protest against moves to
re-open the issue, responsible for the collapse of a coalition government in
1988.
Mr Saavedra says that any politician hoping for office on the islands 'has
to recognise the self-limitations of the islands. There are 7,000 fragmented
kilometres here, far from the European continent. Moreover, we have a very
strong demographic pressure, since 1980 the highest birth rate in Spain.
There is a scarcity of cheap energy supplies and we don't have basic raw
materials.'
For him, the 'only possibility that we see for the recuperation of the
Canaries' previous high growth rates or to achieve average national growth
rates is the re-launching of public investment in construction of housing.
We have a shortage of more than 10,000 houses in the urban centres. Without
that, the urban centres are not going to be able to reactivate, economically
speaking. If that continues, then the negative growth of 1990 will continue
for several more years.'
As Mr Saavedra sees it, May's battle will be fought firmly and squarely on
economic performance. The public sector is one of the Canaries' largest
employers but wages are depressed. More than 50,000 of the 450,000-strong
workforce, in his estimation, depend on various government offices of the
Canaries for employment.
'There has been an exaggerated inflation of the public sector, particularly
in the last two years and especially in the autonomous government', charges
Mr Saavedra.
A plan to reactivate the tourist sector is a vital necessity, says Mr
Saavedra, 'so that some of the obsolete installations, dating back 20 or 30
years, can be updated and improved.' He dismisses President Lorenzo Olarte's
April announcement of a Pta10bn subsidy for the tourist sector as
'misleading', in that the bulk of the subsidy is to be destined for
improvement to airport facilities.
'In that area, of air transport and infrastructure, the autonomous
government has no jurisdiction. It's a central government responsibility. To
present the reality of the situation in such a disfigured fashion is
habitual in the current government of the Canaries.'
Mr Saavedra takes a tough view of the argument, common on the islands, that
Madrid neither cares for nor thinks of the Canaries and their problems of
distance, isolation and geographical hardship. He points out that the
islands have long enjoyed favourable tax regimes.
'According to the pseudo-nationalists of the islands, who accuse Madrid of
abandoning them and mount a barrage of complaints against Madrid, the
Canaries is the poorest region of Spain. That just is not true. That hides
the fact that the Canaries is precisely in the middle; we have an income per
inhabitant only very slightly less than that of the national average. There
are communities much more worse off than ours', argues Mr Saavedra.
Nor is he worried by the imminent complete adhesion of the Canaries to the
European Community.
'The Canaries are trying to join the community with a series of very
important exceptions in order to avoid greater unemployment and inflation,
particularly in foodstuffs, since as we are going to join a system of
subventions and quotas at an international level that will inevitably mean
heading towards international prices.
'I think the only negative consequence of our becoming full members of the
community could be in our food processing industry, if we don't have - for
another five years at least - a protectionist tariff placed against those
similar goods which come from outside the EC.'
Mr Saavedra believes such protectionism is necessary to shelter small
companies from dominant multinationals. But he wants to see the end of such
minor local protectionisms - their function is 'only to protect those
factories which spring up today and which, without protection will disappear
tomorrow'.
