FT  29 APR 91 / US rethinking Moscow policy: Washington accepts that
approach to encouraging reform has failed
THE Bush administration now accepts that its approach to encouraging
economic reform in the Soviet Union has failed and that new methods will
have to be adopted.
A senior official said the attempt to stimulate reform through the
International Monetary Fund-led study of last December 'did not work',
because President Mikhail Gorbachev had been unable or unwilling to grasp
the proposals for a movement to a market economy.
This reflects pessimism within the administration about the prospects both
for reform and for Mr Gorbachev's survival. US officials are beginning to
hedge their bets by talking about contacts with conservatives in the armed
forces and defence industries as well as with reformers, such as Mr Eduard
Shevardnadze, the former Soviet foreign minister. Mr Shevardnadze is due to
deliver an important address in Washington in 10 days.
US officials have not given up hope on the possibility of a union treaty
between Moscow and republics such as the Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Byelorussia
and the Russian federation by the end of the year. But even if this is
achieved, the question remains of whether a reform programme can be worked
out and implemented.
The administration has been forced to review its approach by the marked
deterioration in the Soviet economy in the last few months, and the
continuing power struggle.
The proposal in the December report for the Soviet Union to have associate
status with the IMF and the World Bank - to assist its integration into the
international financial community - has now been put on the 'back-burner',
according to Mr David Mulford, the US Treasury undersecretary for
international affairs.
The main US priority is to sustain economic and political reform in eastern
and central Europe and to insulate those countries as far as possible from
the growing economic problems to their east. The US has pressed its allies
to be supportive of these countries.
