FT  27 APR 91 / For nothing but the truth . . : The oldest profession - and
an honourable calling
A FEW years ago, when I used to cover Opec conferences for the Financial
Times, a bizarre event took place at one of the Geneva price-fixing meetings
of the cartel. We, the journalists, said we would not attend the opening
press conference, a threat which threw into confusion the bureaucrats who
ran the show. They were aware that the absence of notebooks and cameras at
the event would make them very unpopular with their political masters, whose
vanity was legion.
This dire threat was issued because one of our number, Youssef Ibrahim, of
the Wall Street Journal, had been refused accreditation to that Opec
conference. Ibrahim had written a front-page piece, which among other things
detailed with scrupulous accuracy the rates charged, not just by the oil
producers, but also by the international hookers who, in many cases employed
by some of the less well-known oil trading companies, flew in to offer their
personal services to the delegations from the Arab world and elsewhere.
Before you become horrified, I should point out that these were the days of
the Dollars 30 barrel of oil, and one high-fixed price provokes another.
Anyway, the sheikhs and emirs were not amused by these revelations and were
particularly furious that a fellow Arab should have let the home side down
by revealing the seamy side of Opec. So Youssef was kicked out. And after
some debate, we, his colleagues, said - between teeth grinding with jealousy
at Youssef's excellent cover story - 'none of us will attend your oil price
fixing opening ceremony.' After some arguments in camera the Arabs let their
brother back into the fold, and we duly followed.
Later that day, I remember being hailed by an executive of a very well-known
oil company, a man who once had the distinction and courage to deliver a
suitcase full of banknotes to the kidnappers of one of his colleagues and
who was, therefore, greatly admired by all the journalists. This man was
much amused by the episode. 'Dominic,' he said, 'you journalists are such
strange people. Here you are, doing a lousy job for not much money; one of
your deadly rivals is blackballed, and, instead of rejoicing at his
misfortune and exploiting it, you stand by him.
'I can assure you,' he said, 'that if my company was booted out of an oil
province, our rivals would not hesitate to make the most of our misfortune,
however unfairly we might have been treated.' (This, of course, explains why
Opec beat the western oil companies, but that is another story.)
I was startled by his remarks, simply because I had never heard anyone
praise journalists before, nor have I ever since.
This episode came to my mind yesterday morning, when reading in the FT of
the deaths of two FT journalists, Alan Harper, a staff photographer, and
David Thomas, natural resources editor, whose car was engulfed by flames on
a road in the oilfields of southern Kuwait on Wednesday.
In opinion polls, journalists regularly come bottom of the list of
most-admired people. But I am old-fashioned enough to regard the profession
as an admirable one, and those who exemplify its highest quality - the
disinterested seeking out of the truth - I regard with as much respect as I
do the most honoured and begonged public servant. David Thomas, whom I knew
slightly, was of that category of writer. What the journalists at the Opec
conference a few years ago were saying is that they would put their own
career interests and expediency behind a greater ideal, which was that the
truth, however unappealing it, or its purveyor, is, should not be censored.
David Thomas's last piece, a feature on the nuclear industry five years
after the Chernobyl disaster, makes the point. We would all have been better
off if, five years ago, journalists had been able to tell the truth about
that incident, rather than be dictated to by scarcely disinterested nuclear
scientists over here and Soviet politicians over there.
I am sorry if this sounds merely sentimental, but David Thomas was an
honourable exponent of an honourable profession, and his death should be as
much a matter of public grieving as that of any British soldier doing his
duty in the Gulf.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.
