FT  23 APR 91 / Parliament and Politics: Sleepy Commons takes on funereal
atmosphere
A PRIME-time debate in the Commons on the funeral industry is not a normal
feature of parliamentary life. Coupled with rumours, which began immediately
MPs reassembled after a fortnight's Easter recess, of a two-week break at
Whitsun, it produced a feeling at Westminster that the session had
effectively turned up its toes.
Mr John MacGregor, leader of the Commons, is quick to dispel such ideas.
Parliament is dealing with more bills this session than in both the two
previous years, he says, and the government is carrying through a heavy
legislative programme. Yesterday's debate was a routine occasion for a
backbencher's choice of subject.
Mr MacGregor points out that so far 34 bills have been launched in the
1990-91 session, compared with 26 in the 1989-90 period and 30 the year
before.
In terms of controversy and length, the picture is slightly different.
The Commons will indeed be disposing of four bills this week, but
discussions on bills dealing with Scottish natural heritage and the atomic
weapons establishment are unlikely to attract full houses.
Every year has some politically inconsequential measures, such as the
Overseas Superannuation Bill which the Commons passed almost without
noticing, but most sessions have blockbusters as well.
Only the Criminal Justice Bill this year is comparable with heavyweights
such as last year's legislation on broadcasting, environmental issues and
health service reforms.
Alongside the deliberate pre-election mix of bills, MPs are also benefiting
from Mr MacGregor's positive management of the programme.
In refusing to allow his colleagues to hijack bills and expand them to
overflow the time provided, and in creating special committees to leave most
European Community legislation to the enthusiasts, he has lightened two
traditional scourges of backbenchers in search of more time with their
families.
Outside factors have also helped. Ministers mention MPs' pre-occupation with
the Gulf, and with local government elections and finance. The most
effective distraction, however, was the one that dares not speak its name -
the Tory leadership contest in November.
While the Tory party went through the most dramatic political events in most
politicians' memories, in just a fortnight, the Commons went through all
stages of three bills and the second readings of five others.
Even after Mrs Thatcher's departure, politics continued to dominate over
government. It would not have been the way of expediting legislation that
the government would have chosen, but it certainly worked.
Its effect has been to end the business managers' annual nightmare of ranks
of MPs increasingly bad-tempered and tied to Westminster by three-line whips
through long, hot July evenings.
Instead, in order to avoid both the opposite trap of devilish work being
found for idle hands and the charge of running out of steam, ministers are
emphasising the amount of business still to be done.
They acknowledge privately, however, that MPs have largely lost interest in
legislation, with the possible exception of the Finance Bill. 'They're just
looking to the election now,' said one cabinet minister.
