FT  03 MAY 91 / World Trade News: World Bank grapples with hazy demands of
greens
NO SINGLE issue has given the World Bank more bad publicity over recent
years than its record over environment. This criticism has brought change in
an institution that up to the late 1970s was dominated by civil engineers.
No World Bank project now goes ahead without an assessment of its
environmental consequences.
Even its critics agree that the bank has cleaned up its environmental act in
the last few years.
However they believe the issue is still not central enough to bank thinking.
Environmental issues are still something of an afterthought, say critics
such as Mr John Cavanagh from the Institute of Policy Studies in Washington.
Sustainability, says Ms Sandra Postel of the Worldwatch Institute, a US
pressure group, should replace growth as the main objective of economic
policy.
The environment is one of a number of newer development issues which is
complicating the bank's task and making the institution potentially more
intrusive in decision-making in developing countries.
Responding to environmentalists' demands can be difficult: the concepts they
have introduced are hard to counter but soft in definition. What does
'sustainable development' mean exactly? Mr Cavanagh speaks of the importance
of development being equitable and involving popular participation. But
these too are hazy concepts.
Practically the issue is difficult because environmental problems have to be
tackled through many agencies, both inside and outside government.
There is still a quite fundamental split between the bank and its
environmental critics over economic growth. Bank officials are still
interested in 'increasing the size of the pie', reckoning this helps to
erase poverty, thereby eliminating an important source of environmental
degradation.
The traditional market-based growth model now in vogue almost worldwide is,
however, rejected by many environmentalists as a cause rather a cure of
environmental problems. For example, Mr Cavanagh suggests environmental
deterioration in fast-growing Taiwan is not far removed from that under the
communists in east Europe.
Many environmental problems could be eased in a simple fashion - by relying
more on market pricing. Poland, Mr Larry Summers, the bank's new economist,
notes, was an exporter of tropical flowers because energy there was priced
at one-tenth of the world price. The environmental cost may have been so
heavy that producing the flowers was reducing gross national product -
so-called negative value added.
He also rejects much of the environmentalists' concern with the depletion of
scarce resources. Commodity prices are sending the opposite message - they
have fallen in real terms in the last 10 to 20 years.
Economics has also given potential answers where the price mechanism breaks
down because external costs are not factored in: for example, the idea of
auctions for 'permits to pollute'. He says it is 'foolish to deny any
substantial amount of tropical forest damage has anything to do with
incentives.'
