FT  14 MAY 91 / Survey of Computers in Manufacturing (2):  Confusion over
the levels of integration and flexibility - Intelligent Machine Tools, a
different approach
IN the beginning there were machine tools, the workhorses of every
mechanical engineering workshop in the world, which are used for cutting,
grinding and shaping lumps of metal to form components for all sorts of
industrial products or machinery.
Then, over the past 25 years, came numerical control and computer numerical
control (CNC), in the form of user-friendly units attached to the machine
tool which can be part-programmed on line by the operator or off-line in the
production engineering office.
Hand-in-hand with the CNC units, whose software can control almost any type
of machine tool, new designs of machine produced the higher precision,
stiffness and stability to take advantage of the greater accuracy that CNC
offers.
CNC, when applied to single machine tools, is well-established, and more
than 80 per cent of Japanese machine tools are numerically-controlled. The
units are powerful enough to control 'machining centres', which can often do
the work of eight or more standard machine tools, and may contain more than
100 different cutting tools.
As the cost of computing power has come down, the economics of computer
memory storage have been transformed, and CNC units can store and recall
hundreds of different instructions for a great variety of workpieces.
From the mid-1980s, further developments in CNC technology have produced the
concept of a 'flexible manufacturing system' (FMS), two or more machining
centres linked and coupled under the control of a host computer. The
important word is 'flexible,' according to the UK Machine Tool Technologies
Association: 'The combined power of the machine and host computer, and their
storage memories, is enough to manufacture all prescribed varieties of work,
in any order.'
FMS is now being being linked to computer-aided design and production
control to produce manufacturing industry's Holy Grail, Computer Integrated
Manufacturing (Cim).
The aim is to link 'islands of automation' on the factory floor with all the
other computerised functions of the manufacturing process, such as
purchasing, ordering, stock control and is proving to be a tougher challenge
than many in the computer industry had predicted only three years ago.
Put at its simplest, there appears to be considerable confusion among
manufacturers about how integrated their approach to Cim should be, or how
flexible their use of FMS. The situation is not helped by a proliferation of
computer suppliers, all keen to sell their product but varying in their
commitment to service and support.
Dr Norman Schofield, director of engineering and systems at PA Consulting
Group, says there are very good technical reasons why Cim has been difficult
for many companies to achieve.
Companies had believed that, to stay competitive, they needed to buy the
best available computers for each of the many different disciplines in the
manufacturing process - packaging, software, documentation, electronics and
mechanical engineering.
This, in turn, increased the size and complexity of the 'data package'
describing the product, and spread the data over many systems.
In one recent assignment, PA found 41 different applications used in a
company's design/engineering process alone, on six different computer
platforms, on 10 sites in three countries.
The problem for the manufacturer, says Dr Schofield, is whether it is going
to get independent advice from any of its computer suppliers if it wishes to
integrate its systems. PA has attempted to help clients through the maze by
building its own Cim centre using four computers and 12 software
applications from nine different suppliers.
The aim is to illustrate the many elements involved in applying Cim to the
relatively simple task of putting parts on to printed circuit boards.
Dr Schofield believes that open systems will be the key to developing
progress towards Cim, and says most computer vendors are prepared to accept
the inevitability of an open environment.
'Manufacturers are getting a lot more help from suppliers, which is all
leading to easier integration.'
However, he says manufacturers can help solve their integration problems
themselves in two ways.
The first goes back to the machine tool itself: manufacturers, if they have
the clout, can insist that all their machine tool suppliers install the same
controller.
Secondly, manufacturers have to accept that integrated systems can be too
heirarchical. 'Where you can have autonomy (in a flexible manufacturing
system, for example) you should let it happen. Some failed systems have
tried to make things too rigid.'
Indeed studies of the influence of FMS in the US since the mid-1980s have
shown that it is often a misnomer, since the system may be inflexible in its
design and the way in which it is used. Also several reports have claimed
that systems installed in the US lack the flexibility of those in Japan.
A recent report on the US FMS market by Frost &amp; Sullivan, the market
research publishers, says worldwide competition is forcing adoption of
flexible manufacturing in a variety of industries, but is becoming
increasingly important to batch-oriented manufacturers as product
life-cycles shorten and product changes become more frequent.
F &amp; S forecasts that sales of FMS equipment will rise from Dollars 266m in
1990 to Dollars 559m in 1995 (in constant 1990 dollars).
The biggest obstacle to installing equipment is price, and more companies
will be starting with the more limited flexible manufacturing cells (FMCs).
In the UK, British Aerospace has taken a novel approach to Cim by developing
its own manufacturing control system, Cimitar, which provides a
sophisticated computerised link between management information systems and
shop-floor controllers.
BAe began the Cimitar programme in 1983 after discovering that computer
companies could not satisfy its large-scale requirement for shop-floor
control systems. A separate company, BAeCAM, was set up in 1988 to develop
and market Cimitar worldwide, but Mr Brian Entwhistle, general manager, says
it was decided from the start to develop a generic product that could be
sold on the open market.
Cimitar, which uses DEC's Vax hardware, is in use throughout BAe but BAeCAM
recently signed up Caterpillar, the US construction equipment group, as a
user. Mr Entwhistle hopes this will provide a reference for further US
sales.
BAeCAM has also installed part of Cimitar on to an IBM PC that runs a
machine tool at BAe, elevating it from the normal download of data and
selection of tools and satisfying the need for complex communications
between the tools and the host computer.
As companies continue to grapple with the challenges of Cim, and consultants
to explain them, its ascendancy is being challenged by another acronym, Pim,
product information management, alternatively known as EDM, engineering data
management. Dr Charles Clarke of London-based Random Computing says that,
just as Cim was the catalyst for integrating manufacture, so Pim forces the
user to understand the existing process before being able to manage it or
use it.
The characteristics of Pim/EDM, which has also been described as a short cut
to Cim via Cadcam, include data management and control and data navigation
mechanisms, but the aim is enterprise-wide control of information.
This, says Dr Charles Clarke, liberates the user and allows true concurrent
engineering - designing a product and allowing its manufacture
simultaneously - for the first time.
'It links the islands of automation that yesterday's manufacturing industry
nurtured and constrains the 'paper flow' monster with its attendant
road-blocks and bottle-necks,' he says with an enthusiasm for metaphor
rarely found in studies of computers in manufacturing.
