FT  24 APR 91 / London Stock Exchange: Confusion on volume in Saatchi
TRADING volume in Saatchi &amp; Saatchi ballooned to 101m shares, of which 90m
was accounted for by Hoare Govett bringing together a seller and buyer of
45m. The Seaq ticker indicated that the transaction price was 19p. Saatchi
shares firmed  1/2 to 20 1/2 p.
The level of business drew attention to a 9.1 per cent stake held by a group
including ESL Partners, a Dallas-based finance house, and Mr Lawrence Tisch,
the chief executive of CBS, the US media company. This group underwrote part
of Saatchi's rights issue, which was completed last week.
Since the rights issue was not registered under US securities laws, ESL
(which had a large block of Europreference stock) has entered into a private
agreement with Saatchi to buy 52.6m shares at the rights price of 10p. In
addition, on Monday the group acquired 90.1m Saatchi shares in exchange for
25.8m redeemable preference shares.
In spite of much speculation to the contrary, traders and analysts close to
the company concluded that the 45m-share block and ESL's agreement were
unrelated. With over 1 1/2 bn Saatchi shares now in issue, more high levels
of turnover are likely.
Building news
There were three big developments in the building sector: the unexpected
Pounds 162.4m rights issue from Taylor Woodrow, a steep decline in profits
at Tarmac, and news that Beazer, the construction and aggregates group,
plans to spin off its UK and European businesses.
Taylor Woodrow's rights issue, a one-for-four at 200p, came as a surprise to
the market, which responded by marking the shares down to 239p. After the
initial reaction, the stock staged a rally, eventually closing only 2 off at
251p. Specialists said institutions had indicated they would support the
issue because Taylor Woodrow is seen to be one of the best-managed companies
in the construction area.
Tarmac's preliminary profits - Pounds 190.7m against Pounds 377m - were in
line with expectations but did only minimal damage to the share price. What
did hurt the stock was a gloomy post-figures meeting with analysts, who were
told that the first half of the current year had begun badly in both the UK
and the US.
Big profits downgrades were instigated, with Panmure Gordon cutting its
current year number from Pounds 190m to Pounds 125m. Tarmac shares were
heavily traded (9.5m) and closed 16 off at 229p.
Beazer settled 4 higher at 185p on 2.5m, with specialists quick to point out
the company's 20 per cent market outperformance over the last month, 68 per
cent over the last three months and 13 per cent over the last year.
BET upgraded
Business services group BET was driven higher by two reports yesterday. The
one that could be confirmed was that UBS Phillips &amp; Drew had upgraded the
stock to a trading buy.
The broker said that with the likely sale of its Biffa waste management
operation, the dividend could be held and investors should buy for the high
yield. The second story suggested that a buyer had already been found for
Biffa.
Mr Bob Carpenter of Kleinwort Benson had expected the shares to recover as
buyers were drawn by the very generous return for a FT-SE Index stock. BET
shares rose to 169p before ending 7 ahead on balance at 167p on turnover of
2.2m shares.
Cannon Street up
The refinancing operation proposed by Cannon Street Investments (CSI), the
conglomerate, received an overwhelming vote of approval and the shares
responded strongly. Analysts backed the judgment, saying the raising of
Pounds 46.7m net through a rights issue and placing of convertible
preference stock seemed to be a very sensible move.
It removes a problem, they said, by transforming gearing from 400 per cent
to 82 per cent. CSI annual profits were lower, as expected, but the dividend
distribution was maintained. The shares closed at a 1991 high of 124p, up
18.
SmithKline Beecham continued to retreat on light profit-taking, not helped
by Nikko Securities' conclusion that investors had done enough switching
from Glaxo. The former slipped 5 to 817p and Glaxo added 4 at 1076p. Before
yesterday's fall, SmithKline had gained more than 10 per cent in a month,
making it the fourth best performer in the FT-SE 100 over that period.
Fisons, down 5 at 469p, also felt the force of profit-takers in spite of
news that Merck, the world's biggest drug company, had ended research on a
potential rival to Fisons' asthma treatments. At its annual meeting
yesterday, Merck announced the abandonment of Venzair, a drug it had once
forecast would become first line therapy for asthma.
The market has been concerned that Fisons was vulnerable to new developments
in the field. 'Venzair would certainly have worried Fisons,' said one
analyst.
The prospect of first-quarter figures tomorrow from ICI continued to
unsettle trading in the stock. The price slipped 5 in early trading, then
recovered its composure to peak at 1089p before easing once again. It ended
at 1083p, up just 3 on the day. Turnover was a solid 1.5m shares.
The bullish sentiment in the oil sector - a rising crude oil price coupled
with the recent strength of the dollar - continued to drive oil shares
higher. Aiding the latest upward move by the oils was a sharp improvement in
first-quarter earnings at Mobil, the US oil group.
The heaviest turnover in the sector, 5m shares, was in BP, which moved up 5
to 354p, closely followed by Shell, 4.9m, which climbed 9 1/2 to 522 1/2 p.
The latter was boosted by the oil team at Hoare Govett, whose latest Oil
Monthly reiterated its positive stance on the sector, and focused especially
on Shell, which it views as the prime beneficiary of record downstream
margins in the Far East.
The Water Package came under another barrage of selling pressure and closed
around the day's lowest, down 23 at Pounds 2945, as more institutions, both
in London and abroad, sold their holdings or unravelled the Package units.
'This market is still extremely vulnerable and we expect this to continue at
least up until the local elections,' said one trader, in a reference to the
Labour party's policy of renationalising the water industry if it wins the
next general election.
The electricity companies, on the other hand, responded to positive
recommendations from investment analysts, with Manweb and South Wales
heavily bought after being highlighted by one of the big US investment
houses. Manweb advanced 13 to 248p and South Wales 10 to 240p.
A late downward move by British Steel was attributed to a profits
downgrading by Smith New Court. The shares held steady until the last hour
of trading, when they turned off to close 2 1/2 down at 135p.
J. Sainsbury recovered from an early loss to close a penny better on balance
at 364p as the market pondered the company's decision to redeem a Pounds
150m bond convertible into preference shares. The rise in the share price
had already prompted some bond holders to convert and so the announcement by
Sainsbury did not take the market completely by surprise.
Hammerson continued to benefit from last week's figures, subsequent buy
recommendations from analysts and presentations to institutions. The shares
were 16 stronger at one point before closing a net 9 to the good at 639p.
Volume was above average for the stock at 545,000.
McKechnie, the industrial components group, slipped 6 to 291p as analysts
adjusted full year profits estimates in the wake of lower first-half
revenue. The setback was no surprise but researchers still erred on the side
of caution, with Mr Matthew Sutherland of County NatWest moving to Pounds
23m from Pounds 25m.
Bad sentiment from Monday's profits downgradings continued to unsettle
Gestetner, the office equipment and photographic products group, and the
close was down 6 further at 207p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1991
NEW HIGHS (171).
BRITISH FUNDS (4) Treas. 8pc '91, Treas. 3pc '92, Treas. I-L '92, Do. I-L
2pc '96, AMERICANS (23) Am. Cyanamid, Ameritech, Bankers NY, Bellsouth,
Bowater, Contl. Bank, Dana, Data Gen., Dun &amp; Bradstreet, Eaton, FPL, Fluor,
Honeywell, Houston Inds., Ingersoll-Rand, Lockheed, Louisiana Land, Pall,
Pennzoil, Rockwell, Sun, Waste Mangemt., Whirlpool, CANADIANS (10) BC Gas,
Bk. Montreal, Bk. Nova Scot., Central Capital A, Derlan Inds., Hudson's Bay,
Imperial Oil, Inco, Royal Bk. Can., Tor.- Dom. Bk., BANKS (9) Dai Ichi,
Espirito Santo, Kyowa, Mitsubishi, Mitsui Tst. &amp; Bnkg., Nat. Aust.,
Sumitomo, Toyo Tst. &amp; Bnkg., Yasuda Tst. &amp; Bk., BREWERS (4) Fosters, Greene
King, Macdonald Martin A, Seagram, BUILDINGS (4) Amco, Beazer, CMW, Smart
(J), CHEMICALS (4) BASF, Bayer, Engelhard, Thurgar Bardex, STORES (10)
Alexon, Ashley (Laura), Cantors A, Coles Myer, Courts, Gabicci, Helene,
Heritage, QS, Ritz Design, ELECTRICALS (10) CML Micro., Fujitsu,
Hewlett-Packard, Learmonth &amp; Burchett, Nth. Telecom, Penny &amp; Giles, Pifco,
Do. A, Sony, TDK, ELECTRICITY (4) Eastern, Manweb, Seeboard, Sth. Western,
FOODS (7) Assoc. Fisheries, Farepak, Goodman Fielder Wattie, Kemp (PE),
Morrison (Wm) Supermarkets, Do. 5 1/4 pc Pf., Nestle, INDUSTRIALS (22) BH
Prop., BSS, Betterware, Bluebird Toys, Cannon St. Invs., China Light, Davis
(Godfrey), Dolphin Pack., Dover, Elan, Faber Prest, Fletcher Challenge,
Flogas, Handley-Walker, Nobo, Pacific Dunlop, Polymark Pfd. A, Powell
Duffryn, Russell (A), Securicor A, Security Servs., Stocklake, INSURANCE (3)
Alex. &amp; Alex., Lincoln Nat., Uslife, LEISURE (6) Campari, Classic Th'breds.,
Ex Lands, Hi-Tec, Metro Radio, Scot. TV, PAPERS (3) CIA, Lawson Mardon, TMD
Adv., PROPERTY (2) Cap. &amp; Counties, Regalian, TEXTILES (4) Lamont, Leeds,
Toray, Yorklyde, TRANSPORT (3) CSX, Dawsongroup, Mayne Nickless, TRUSTS (23)
Abingworth, Archimedes, Baillie Gifford Japan, Biotech Pf., British Assets
6pc Ln '95, Derby Inc., Gartmore Amer., Genesis Chile Fd. Ptg., Greenfriar
Wrrnts., Jakarta Fd., Korea-Europe, London Wrrnts., Malaysia Cap. Select,
Malaysian Emrg. Wrrnts., River &amp; Merc. Amer. Inc., Scot. Asian Inv. Ptg.,
Scot. Cities, Do. A, Singapore SESDAQ, Sth. East Asian Wrrnts., Thai Euro
Fd. Ptg., Tor, Westpool, OILS (10) Chevron, Exxon, Hamilton, Occidental,
Ohio Res., Oliver Res., Ranger, Royal Dutch, Shell Trans., Woodside,
PLANTATIONS (1) Highlands, MINES (5) Aztec Expln., CRA, Gencor, Northam
Plat., Spargos.
NEW LOWS (17).
BREWERS (1) Merrydown Wine, STORES (2) Cantors, Oliver Group, ELECTRICALS
(2) Sema, Synapse Comp., INDUSTRIALS (2) African Lakes, Platon, LEISURE (1)
Tomorrows Leis., NEWSPAPERS (1) Gardner (DC), PROPERTY (1) Rosehaugh,
TEXTILES (1) Youghal, TRUSTS (2) Drayton Eng. &amp; Intl., Do. Wrrnts., OILS (3)
Cairn Energy, Clyde Petlm., Tullow, MINES (1) Harmony.
