FT  25 APR 91 / Arts: Slippage - Riverside Studios
Vaut le voyage, says the guidebook; or vaut le detour. Not for Rambert's new
programme when you have to negotiate the horrors of Hammersmith Broadway.
And not, alas, for the way the troupe is performing this season. It may be
that the adjustment to an open space from a routine of proscenium
appearances has thrown the dancers off balance, but the company style looks
to me less polished and purposeful than of late years. A notable exception
on Tuesday night was Amanda Britton, who appeared in Richard Alston's Soda
Lake. This solo in silence is inspired by Nigel Hall's sculpture, which in
turn was inspired by the austere and isolated forms of a dry lake in the
Mojave desert. Miss Britton, with her wonderful linear qualities and clear,
fluent phrasing, makes a very fine impression in a piece that has previously
been danced by men. She reveals the watchful stillness of the piece in
movement that is beautifully poised, responding to the two austere metal
forms that are the sculpture (like a telegraph pole and a skeletal tree)
with images no less pure and controlled.
The novelty of the evening was the first performance of William Tuckett's
Slippage, fruit of funding from the Ashton Memorial Commission. Tuckett is
just starting to make his way as a choreographer with creations for both
halves of the Royal Ballet. He is still young, and I am not persuaded that
the chance to compose for a modern dance troupe is the best means of
extending his skills. For Slippage he has chosen a score of minimalist
chatter by Dan Jones, music that provides nothing to sustain choreographic
invention save the dubious merit of continuing to do what it has already
done at interminable length. The chief incidents of the piece amount to the
dancers peeling off layers of clothes - dull, and by Candida Cook - to
reveal themselves in dreary underwear (one chap looks like Captain Webb
about to embark upon the English Channel).
The dance, like the score, goes on. Four couples leap and walk, droop and
race over the stage, and part of the choreography has the innocent
springiness I associate with revivals of the sacred texts of early Denishawn
dance of 60 years ago. It is decent, and unmemorable, and Tuckett has
already shown us that he can do better things than this.
The problems of the Riverside space were very apparent in the revival of
Richard Alston's Dealing with Shadows. It is a piece altogether too
sprightly about a Mozart piano sonata, but when it was first seen at
Sadler's Wells last year, ebullient performance gave it a superficial charm.
In its present setting it looks diffuse and garrulous, and the choice of
printed tops and beach trunks as costume makes the dancers seem like
gigantic babies. The visual record of this season has not been happy.
