FT  02 MAY 91 / Survey of Poland (2): The search for stability - Martin Wolf
discusses the economy
POLAND has not been lucky. The crisis in the Gulf, the collapse of exports
to the Soviet Union and last year's presidential election have conspired to
blow the programme off course. But if the crew can sail through the storm
for another year or so, they should find themselves, if not in port, at
least in calmer seas.
If unlucky, Poles have been determined. They can also feel proud of what has
been achieved. There has, for example, been a dramatic growth in the private
sector. Outside agriculture, always largely in private hands, the private
sector's share of employment is estimated to have risen from 7 per cent in
1988 to 16 per cent in 1990 and its share in industrial output to have grown
from 3.9 to 11 per cent. Industrial output fell by 23 per cent in 1990, but
the output of the private sector is thought to have risen by 8 per cent, and
that of private sector retailing four-and-a-half times1.
Subsidies to production and consumption have been reduced from over half the
budget and about 15 per cent of gross domestic product in 1989, to 15 per
cent of the budget and about 5 per cent of GDP this year. Trade policy has
been comprehensively liberalised. According to Leszek Balcerowicz, deputy
prime minister and minister of finance, the only important price adjustments
to come are for natural gas, the price of which needs to rise by some 120
per cent, and electricity, the price of which needs to double.
These reforms provide essential support to the now accelerating programmes
of privatisation and restructuring. As Paul Hare and Gordon Hughes point
out, under distorted domestic prices 'an evaluation of the profitability of
firms or the branches in which they operate is likely to yield very
misleading results'2. Fortunately, this risk has been greatly reduced by the
speed with which the price structure has been reformed and liberalised.
Price and trade liberalisation have also transformed the market place. After
the perennial shortages and sloppy habits of the ancien regime, enterprises
are being forced to compete and workers to work. Food is in surplus. Shops
are full, even if with goods that many cannot yet afford.
Finally, last year's combination of a highly competitive exchange rate with
a deep industrial recession transformed Poland's external position. In 1990
Poland achieved a 31 per cent increase in the dolexports in convertible
currencies and a merchandise trade surplus of Dollars 2.2bn. These will help
Poland to cope with the higher prices of its oil imports from the Soviet
Union and the virtual disappearance of exports to that collapsing giant,
both of which hit in early 1991.
When one remembers that the reforms began in earnest only 16 months ago,
these are startling changes. But they must be set in the context of the
difficulties created by the tough, but essential, stabilisation programme
initiated in January 1990.
The fundamental elements of any stabilisation programme - a balanced budget
and a tight monetary policy - have been achieved. In fact, with the budget
in surplus throughout 1990 (though the surplus started to decline towards
the end of the year), the fiscal performance, was considerably tighter than
agreed with the International Monetary Fund. Poland also achieved tighter
control over credit than had been expected.
The government regards the exchange rate as a discipline and a stabiliser,
even though it does not view the present rate as one to be defended to the
death. Since this represents a potentially destabilising ambiguity, a more
clearly formulated exchange rate policy would be helpful. But holding the
exchange rate at 9,500 zlotys to the dollar has made an important
contribution to stabilisation, even if the real test is yet to come.
Mr Balcerowicz and his team have proved, notably in the first half of 1990,
to be Stakhanovites of economic stabilisation. Their efforts have not been
fruitless: the increase in consumer prices was running at an annualised rate
of 3,900 per cent over the last quarter of 1989; inflation then fell to 249
per cent between December 1989 and December 1990; and, if the finance
ministry's hopes are realised, should be below 40 per cent between December
1990 and December 1991.
With inflation falling, real holdings of zlotys doubled during 1990, while
those in foreign currency accounts fell by two thirds. This was sensible
behaviour. Given the high nominal interest rates in zloty saving accounts
and the fixed rate of exchange, an investment in zlotys must have been among
the best in the world.
So much has gone right. But two things have gone wrong:
The immediate decline in output and real incomes was far deeper than
expected; and
Inflation has not been brought under control as completely as had been
hoped.
In January 1990, the first month of the stabilisation programme, output in
state-owned industry fell by 32 per cent and was still 24 per cent below the
level of a year earlier in December. Puzzlingly, there were virtually no
bankruptcies (greatly to the government's surprise), profit margins remained
high (at around 20 per cent of sales) and employment changed relatively
little.
nomenon, suggests Mark Shaffer of the Centre for Economic Performance at the
London School of Economics, is that these enterprises are run as
worker-managed firms, with the principal objective of maintaining
employment, rather than output or real wages3. Furthermore, the workers who
control them assume that demand is unaffected by price.
It is partly because of the pricing behaviour of the enterprises that
inflation has remained quite high. After a trough of 1.8 per cent in August
1990, inflation has been running at 4-5 per cent a month, except for January
1991, when another burst of relative price adjustments increased prices by
12.7 per cent. The finance ministry hopes that inflation will be down to 1
per cent a month in the near future. But Mr Balcerowicz acknowledges that
forthcoming adjustments to prices of natural gas and electricity, which he
believes will be the last such corrections, will themselves raise the index
by 3-5 per cent.
The finance minister blames the resurgence of inflation in the second half
of last year on three developments:
The double oil price shock caused by the Gulf crisis and the move to world
prices for Soviet oil;
The presidential election campaign, with its populist tone and consequent
effects on wage behaviour; and
A premature relaxation of macroeconomic, above all monetary, policy.
The prime minister and the deputy prime minister are now determined to
maintain the tough monetary policy. Both welcome the positive real interest
rates - created by nominal interest rates, even on high quality credit, of
as much as 68 per cent a year - that are being enforced by Mr Grzegorz
Wojtovicz, the new president of the National Bank of Poland. Even Lech
Walesa seems to be prepared to live with the policy. But pressure for
relaxation is building up, within the government and outside.
Among the sources of that pressure are the effects on competitiveness of a
constant nominal exchange rate, though nominal wages in state enterprises
have risen by almost 150 per cent; the severe financial difficulties of some
state enterprises; the probability, following the collapse in demand from
the Soviet Union this year, that the 12 per cent decline in real GDP last
year will be followed by stagnation this year, not to mention the loss of
the market for important parts of industry; the protests of farmers; the
rise in unemployment, probably to 2m by the end of the year; and the
complaints about the fiscal controls that limit wage increases in the state
sector to 60 per cent of the increase in consumer prices.
As if that were not enough, there is a parliamentary election coming up in
October. But most of those in the government believe that monetary
relaxation creates inflation rather than expansion. Few seem likely to buy
the view of Jerzy Eysmont, head of the central planning office and a
prominent member of Centre Agreement, that it would be possible to live with
inflation as high as 100 per cent this year. They recognise that no market
economy can thrive under such rates of inflation and that Poland may never
have as good a chance to achieve stability again.
The government's commitment is revealed and underpinned by April's agreement
with the IMF, which offers Poland some Dollars 1.6bn over three years. The
government's letter of intent commits it to:
Limit its new foreign borrowing this year to Dollars 1.5bn;
Keep the exchange rate 'as one of the main points of' the anti-inflation
strategy;
Restrict growth of the domestic money supply to 43 per cent this year, as
against a 36 per cent forecast rate of inflation;
Limit the budget deficit to 0.5 per cent of GDP.
The question is whether the Polish people can be persuaded to accept, if not
like, this rigour. One hopes so, for they do have one consolation. Large
declines in real income have occurred in the Soviet Union and in all the
post-communist countries. Yet in none of them has that decline been
associated with the creation of a basis for subsequent expansion to the
extent that it has in Poland.
With the agreement on a 50 per cent reduction in official debt also achieved
and hope of a favourable agreement with the European Community, Poland has
good prospects for successful market-led growth. But first it must bring
inflation down to no more than 1 per cent a month, and keep it there. This
can be done; it can be done this year; but it may never be done if the
government yields to the pressures now upon it.
1 Paul Hare and Irena Grosfeld, Privatisation in Hungary, Poland
Czechoslovakia, Discussion Paper No. 544 (London: Centre for Economic Policy
Research, 1991. 2 Paul Hare and Gordon Hughes, Competitiveness and
Industrial Restructuring in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, Discussion
Paper No. 543. (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, 1991). 3 Mark
E. Shaffer, A Note on the Polish State-Owned Enterprises, Discussion Paper
no. 106 (London: Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of
Economics, 1991).
