FT  20 APR 91 / Gardening: A landscape fit for heroes - The Grecian way of
natural planting
IN MY GARDEN, perhaps in yours, too, some battered bushes of yellow-green
spurge are uncoiling their heads of flower. They hated the harsh February;
two varieties died in the frost; my surviving pick of the month is Euphorbia
martini, a recent hybrid which may have escaped you.
The garden would probably look better withut the rest of them: they have
become straggly, like debris washed up by a fierce winter tide on the shores
of spring. They look even worse to my eye after the past week.
Since last Saturday, I have seen spurges everywhere, cascading on hillsides,
clinging to the ground plans of ruined temples and growing with gusto only
four or five yards from a Greek taverna's traditional style of WC. It has
all provoked new thoughts. The English style of gardening is becoming
settled and complacent, but the line between gardens and wild flowers is the
one which can best provoke it to new variations. I have been testing it in
Greece, where all nature is a garden in springtime, so long as it has
escaped the Greeks themselves.
In our fashionable meadow gardens, our first thoughts are of English wild
flowers which 'conservation' has rescued from farmers. We are obsessed with
our own vanishing acreage, but the flowers in our flower beds are other
countries' wild flowers too: why not let them out into the grass and leave
them to fight with it, as they do in their own tough homes?
In Greece, spurges do not lurk on paved terraces or look angular in early
summer borders. They compete with rocks, grass, gates and newly-blasted
roads. Green-yellow Euphorbia venusta looks twice the plant in an unknown
jungle of emerging poppies, vetch and yellow chrysanthemum daisies.
If you wonder whether it is hardy, try irises in grass instead. We all
segregate these plants, but I have just seen yards of white iris competing
with white meadow-daisies, grass and a tangle of soapwort and dead nettles.
Nobody weeds them or splits them. They are so good because they are out of
the reach of gardeners and Greeks.
So, by now, is most of Greece's wisteria. In Greece, nobody prunes it twice
yearly, bothers with sulphate of potash and does all the vertiginous things
which we advise you to try at weekends. The wisteria grows and flowers with
amazing abandon, up old trees, the half-finished skeletons of concrete
apartments and wherever there is room to leap from a cafe's pergola to the
poles of a public pylon or hoarding.
Admittedly, the summer in Greece is much hotter and wisterias like to be
baked, but where are those shy-flowering seedlings with poor colours against
which we are all warned? I cannot believe that Greek gardeners only buy
named, grafted stock from reputable nurseries, yet their wisterias flower
vastly better than ours.
Ancient Greece was lucky to have no trees of eucaplyptus but when a tatty
old eucalyptus is smothered in violet-blue wistaria, you can see that there
have been gains as well as losses. The wisteria, too, was not a classical
native, but it is in Greece, not Britain that you see it everywhere up
trees, as we try to use our rambling roses.
There is also the matter of the poppies in the fields. English gardeners are
now supposed to romanticise them and replant the scarlet meadows which we
have lost, but the plain fact is that our red British poppy is not the best.
French Impressionist artists may have immortalised it in paint, but the
Impressionists did not go to Greece, either. If they had, they would have
gone wild for the poppies of dark crimson beneath the grey-green of the
olive trees.
My guide to Greek flora insists that the two colours are the same plant, the
Corn Poppy or Papaver rhoeas which we all buy from seed: it admits, however,
that it is 'a very variable plant with the East Mediterranean forms
appearing much darker coloured than the British.'
Botanists' groupings are often useless for gardeners: if these poppies are
the same, why can we not have poppy-seed from the olive-groves below Delphi
where it glows like dark wine in the vibrant undergrowth of spring?
From seed, our British poppies are a Remembrance Sunday scarlet, at best.
The nearest to the Greek colour is the black-spotted Flanders Poppy or
Papaver commutatum. Few seedsmen stock it (Thompson and Morgan of Ipswich is
an exception) but if you sew it this month in open ground, it will flower
excellently in July.
It is also true that in Britain, we do not have the same class of ruin. I am
inclined to think that the Greeks have the secret of successful gardening.
For the best campanulas, you need a hillside like Mycenae where the stones
of the lost Mycenaean palaces are full of spreading blue varieties, where
yellow-flowered omosma frutescens grows on the Cyclopean walls and there are
enough forms of yellow verbascum, salvera, silenie and well behaved pink
convulvus to keep gardeners happy if they do not like beehive tombs.
In Britain we can grow most of these plants, but we cannot grow them so
well. I am inclined to blame mythical heroes. King Arthur was no Agamemnon
and nobody is sure where Camelot was sited, le alone whether it is good for
wild geraniums. At Mycenae the myths assure us that the site is rich in
royal blood. Dried blood is excellent for alpines, but dried blood from a
dynasty seems to be even better.
If you know an elderly hero, be sure to bury him under your verbascums,
otherwise you could try burying modern mythology: the tapes of our
television soaps.
Naturally you are advised to shred them first . . .
