FT  26 APR 91 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (18): Tokyo
confounds the doubters as most Asia-Pacific markets rise - Equities
JAPANESE stocks soared in the first quarter, confounding those who thought
it would take the market a long time to recover from last year's plunge.
Early this month, the Nikkei index stood 12 per cent above its level at the
end of last year, and a full 33 per cent above last year's low. In terms of
total returns in sterling, the first quarter produced a rise of more than 20
per cent.
At around 26,500, the Nikkei still stood well short of its all-time high of
38,915, hit in December 1989, but the recovery had been strong enough for
many investors to believe that the market was unlikely to see 20,000 again
soon. The impetus for this year's rise came from the end of the Gulf war,
and from a belief that Japanese interest rates were about to fall.
Stocks began to recover even before the shooting stopped in the Middle East,
when it was already clear that Iraq could offer little resistance. The
decline in oil prices below Dollars 20 a barrel gave investors in the
Japanese market the assurance they needed that Japan's energy lifeline was
secure.
Meanwhile, investors began to believe that, after two years of high interest
rates, the Bank of Japan would shortly ease the cost of money. Following
reductions in US rates, a cut in the Japanese official discount rate, from 6
per cent was widely expected before the end of this month, even though Mr
Yasushi Mieno, the central bank governor, continued to insist that he had no
immediate plan to ease monetary policy.
His main argument was that, despite the squeeze on credit, the economy
showed only slight signs of slowing down. While car sales are falling, as
are housing starts, other indicators of economic activity still point up.
The economy, which grew by around 5.2 per cent in the year to March, is
expected by the government to expand by a further 3.8 per cent in 1991-92.
Labour shortages remain industry's biggest problem, not any threat of a
recession.
Investors are in two minds about where stocks might go next. The rally in
the first quarter was largely powered by foreign investors, who thought they
saw a chance for Japanese stocks to rise following surges in New York and
London. After the foreign buyers, Japanese individuals jumped into the
market.
But Japanese financial institutions remained rather cautious. Partly, this
is because they have less money than before to invest in stocks. Banks need
to maintain loans to industry, just as they need to control their assets
carefully to keep inside international guidelines on the ratio between
assets and capital. Insurance companies are expanding loans to industry just
as the net flow of funds from clients is diminishing. Investment-trust
companies are also seeing their customers leave for the safety of bank
deposits. Pension funds alone cannot take up the slack.
High interest rates are no friend to stocks, particularly in Japan where
dividend yields are very low and investors rely almost exclusively on
capital gains from their equity investments. Nevertheless, the resilience of
the Japanese economy, even during a world economic slow-down, means that
sooner or later some companies will generate profits increases large enough
to justify substantial re-rating of their stock. Despite pressure of rising
labour and other costs, this may not be too far away. However, stockbrokers
warn that not all companies will benefit from such gains.
Meanwhile, other stock markets in Asia and the Pacific also mostly ended the
quarter with considerable increases.
The easing of US interest rates inspired a general re-rating of markets in
the region. In February alone, stocks rose 25 per cent in Taiwan, and 30 per
cent in the Philippines. Rallies in Australia and Singapore were more
modest.
However, in all the region, including Japan, only in Hong Kong do stocks
stand well above their levels of a year ago. In other words, there is some
way to go before the losses of 1990 are recovered, let alone the highs of
pre-1987.
