FT  26 APR 91 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (10): Newcomers cut
the premiums - Insuring your home / The UK's climate may be changing - but
so is the industry's
HOMEOWNERS OUGHT logically to expect to pay considerably more for their
house buildings insurance this year. The storms of January 1990 - one of the
worst insured losses ever in the UK - were followed during the year by
record subsidence losses of nearly Pounds 1bn.
One might have expected all that to translate into a pretty sizeable
increase in premiums - especially in the context of more general climactic
trends, which are making insurers view the UK as something of a catastrophe
zone.
However, the picture is a more complex than it seems. For one thing,
competition within the insurance industry is hotting up. The few big UK
companies that once dominated the British market no longer have such a tight
grip; while the liberalisation of the European insurance market is leading
French, Swiss, German and other companies to compete in the UK.
The competition has led a number of insurers to seek ways to reduce the cost
of distributing insurance. In particular, a number have begun direct-sales -
combining newspaper, television and radio advertising with sales over the
telephone - in order to cut out the middleman.
Most British householders buy their house building insurance through their
building society, paying a commission of about 30 per cent for the
privilege. High-street insurance brokers also charge commission which, while
it is less than that charged by the building societies, can still amount to
between 15 per cent and 25 per cent of the bill.
In contrast, direct-sales companies can distribute their policies more
cheaply (with the cost of advertising and telephone back-up generally less
than the commission) and offer lower premiums.
New entrants to the market, like Royal Bank of Scotland (Direct Line) and
the Swiss company Wintertur (Churchill), are among the pioneers of
direct-sales methods; but other companies, such as Royal Insurance and
General Accident, which already have a sizeable share of building-society
business, have set up direct-sales operations.
At the same time, insurers are beginning to differentiate between risks,
charging rates that vary according to the age and building style of a
property. They have charged different rates for house contents, according to
location, for several years; this year, at least two have announced that
they are also considering varying buildings rates according to location.
The reason for this is that properties built on the clay soils of south-east
England, especially those with the shallower foundations typical before
1945, are more vulnerable to damage by subsidence. A number of buildings in
coastal or river-valley locations are more susceptible to flood, and
homeowners in such localities can also expect to pay more.
With greater competition, companies are concerned to meet claims quickly,
and are offering sophisticated back-up services. A number now offer all
policyholders the use of telephone help-lines.
For example, General Accident's policyholders have free access to the
company's advice-lines, which give customers advice on dealing with all
practical elements of a claim, including access to a recommended list of
local plumbers, electricians and other services. Royal Insurance offers a
similar service: the company's 'gold' policy provides a combined
house-buildings and contents insurance, with legal-expenses insurance, as
well as 24-hour access to a help-line.
As far as pricing is concerned, the position is clearest with buildings
insurance. The leading insurers that sell through building societies (Royal
and Sun Alliance, for example) increased their premium rates to 2.20p per
Pounds 1,000 of cover following a 10 per cent rate increase at the end of
last year.
The increases will widen the disparity between these rates and those charged
by over two dozen other companies. The direct writers obviously are among
them. Direct Line offers a rate of Pounds 1.60, for example. But there are
also a number of companies that sell either through brokers or their own
agents: they include Zurich Insurance and Co-operative Insurance Society.
Zurich sells its products through independent brokers, offers a rate of
Pounds 1.40 per Pounds 1,000 of cover for properties built after 1919, and
Pounds 1.70 for properties built between 1850 and 1919 (although this is
only available to customers living in areas safe from flooding or
subsidence).
Co-operative Insurance Society, the Manchester-based insurer, recently
reduced its rates to Pounds 1.60 for homeowners insuring homes built after
1945, and Pounds 1.80 for homes built before that date. Zurich says its
policies are cheaper than those offered by the major companies, because it
sells through independent brokers.
The new direct-line underwriters also offer cheaper home buildings policies.
Underwriters at Lloyd's of London offer a basic rate of Pounds 1.75, but
substantially less than this in some cases. High-value properties can win
cheaper rates, for example. Rates of Pounds 1.50 per Pounds 1,000 are not
uncommon for houses worth Pounds 250,000 or more, and for a house worth more
than Pounds 1m a rate of Pounds 1.25 is available.
