FT  16 APR 91 / Leading Article: Housing and inflation
HOUSING has long been a conversation piece for the British people;
understandably so, since 40 per cent of personal wealth is held in the
Englishman's castle. As is noted in a new study of quality and choice in
housing from the left-leaning Institute for Public Policy Research, the
finance of housing is also a mess. But the focus of recent attention has
been narrower, on the links between housing and inflation.
In his Budget speech, for example, Mr Norman Lamont remarked that home
ownership 'remains a key objective of policy for this government. A less
desirable development, however, was the dramatic boom in house prices during
the late 1980s, which fuelled borrowing and helped boost inflation'.
Subsequently, Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton told the House of Commons Treasury
and Civil Service committee that he was attracted by the idea of some
restriction on levels of lending for individual mortgages.
Tackling the alleged inflationary consequences of the British housing market
is more complex than generally supposed. But to the extent that the problem
is excessive growth of credit, which it is not at the moment, the best
instrument remains the interest rate. It must be used so long as the ERM
permits.
Price spiral
Fortunately, a house price spiral like that of 1987-88 remains unlikely in
the near future, even though wage inflation and house price deflation are
returning the ratio of house prices to average earnings towards the levels
of the mid-1980s. At the end of 1989, however, personal net worth in housing
was more than Pounds 800bn. Though smaller by now, it must still be very
large. The immediate risk, therefore, is that lower interest rates would
lead to an economically destabilising increase in equity withdrawal from
housing.
One reason for wondering whether this is such a risk is that the ratio of
personal debt to personal disposable income doubled in the 1980s. It is
unlikely to increase at a comparable rate in the 1990s. Yet the governor of
the Bank of England was concerned about precisely this danger when he
remarked that 'those who already have large houses might well be restricted
in the amount they can borrow when they change houses'.
Given the size of the available equity cushion, restrictions on equity
withdrawal would have to be justified not on prudential grounds, but as a
selective form of monetary control. Such a measure would run into an obvious
objection: why should people not be able to make use of the wealth locked up
in their houses?
Interest relief
An alternative to controls on equity withdrawal would be to lower the value
of housing. The withdrawal of mortgage interest relief is often recommended
for this, but its importance is exaggerated. This subsidy is now effectively
cash-limited. The capital value of a cash-limited subsidy worth Pounds 7.8bn
a year at current long-term nominal interest rates is about Pounds 80bn.
Withdrawal of the entire relief would, therefore, lower net worth in the
housing stock by little more than 10 per cent. The planned re-introduction
of property taxes would do at least as much. The relevance of withdrawing
mortgage interest relief and re-introducing property taxes is not that they
would prevent equity withdrawal, but that they should postpone the next
price spiral.
To the extent that equity withdrawal itself is the target, the appropriate
fiscal measure would be imposition of capital gains tax on the part of
equity withdrawal that corresponds to the real gains. Introduction of
capital gains tax into owner-occupied housing would, however, need to be
combined with roll-over relief.
Inevitably distorting controls on borrowing, other than purely prudential
ones, must be deemed a very last resort. Withdrawing mortgage interest
relief is justified, as is the re-introduction of taxation on property, but
neither is relevant to equity withdrawal. If something is to be done about
that danger, a modified capital gains tax should be applied to
owner-occupied housing. The chancellor has been prepared to slaughter Mrs
Thatcher's sacred cows. Can he possibly be prepared to go that far?
