FT  19 APR 91 / Code urges separation of company boards' top roles
A BLUEPRINT for the way company boards should be run was put forward
yesterday by the Institutional Shareholders' Committee, which represents the
UK's main institutional investors.
The ISC's proposals, contained in a statement of best practice, include the
separation of the roles of chairman and chief executive, the appointment of
strongly independent non-executive directors to company boards, and the
complete separation of executive directors from any control over the way
their remuneration is set.
Mr Mike Sandland, ISC chairman, said the statement was not intended to be
aggressive or confrontational. It had been produced because companies had
sought the views of their main shareholders. The intention was to codify
best practice, rather than produce a list of requirements for companies to
follow.
The ISC's paper rejects the idea of splitting company boards and creating
separate management and supervisory boards. All directors, whether executive
or non-executive, 'have an equal responsibility in helping to provide their
company with effective guidance and leadership', the ISC says.
However, non-executive directors are expected to take on many supervisory
functions. The ISC says that:
Compensation committees should consist entirely of non-executives. They
should determine all aspects of the salaries and other benefits of executive
directors. They should also approve directors' service contracts. 'Executive
directors should not play any part in deciding their own compensation
packages.'
During a management buy-out, non-executives should form a separate committee
and retain independent advisers. They should report to shareholders on the
value of the bid being made by the management team.
Non-executives should monitor the performance of the board as a whole and
report direct to shareholders if they are unable to resolve any
dissatisfaction.
Non-executives, says the ISC, should be independent. That is more likely if
they have not been employees of the company in recent years, have not acted
as its professional advisers and are not significant suppliers or customers.
Also, non-executives should not normally benefit from share-option or other
incentive schemes, should not be in the company pension scheme and should
not be entitled to compensation for loss of office.
The ISC adds its voice to others in recent years calling for a division
between the roles of chairman and chief executive.
Combining these jobs 'constitutes a concentration of power and can give rise
to conflicts', it says.
Company boards should appoint, monitor and - if necessary - dismiss chief
executives. That job is difficult if the chief executive is also the
chairman. Where the jobs are combined, a strong body of non-executives will
be needed, the ISC says.
The ISC also recommends that directors' service contracts should not run for
more than three years (even though, in law, they can run for up to five
years); annual reports should contain details of all types of
performance-linked pay schemes, share options, profit sharing and bonus
arrangements of directors; and a company's articles of association should
always place a 'reasonable limit' on the directors' borrowing powers.
The ISC's recommendations follow closely a statement last year from the
Association of British Insurers, one of the committee's members.
Role and Duties of Directors, ISC, 10-15 Queen Street, London EC4N 1TT.
The Hapless And The Paradox, Page 20
