FT  03 MAY 91 / International Company News: Defence cuts push Hughes
Aircraft into diversification
HUGHES AIRCRAFT, part of General Motors and the leading US defence
electronics company, is resigned to achieving little or no growth in its
military business between now and the mid-1990s.
This is despite expectations in the defence industry that electronics
specialists will be less damaged by declining government spending than
manufacturers of 'platforms' such as airframes.
Mr Michael Smith, Hughes' executive vice-president and chief financial
officer, said yesterday any growth would have to come from civilian sectors,
which last year accounted for barely a fifth of the company's Dollars 7.8bn
sales.
The outlook he presented during an interview was notably pessimistic on US
defence budget prospects but, in contrast to widespread caution in the
industry, bullish about opportunities for diversification making use of
military technology.
'A lot of companies have tried and failed, and we have looked hard at some
of them,' Mr Smith said. Hughes, however, had a much greater breadth of
technology than most other defence manufacturers.
The company plans to reduce its dependence on the military from 78 per cent
last year to 60 or possibly 50 per cent by the middle of the decade. Two
years ago, the figure was around 90 per cent.
Overall sales are expected to grow to about Dollars 10bn, in constant terms,
by 1995, but with military business stagnating at the current level of
Dollars 6bn a year.
Mr Smith said the company expected US spending on defence procurement to
decline more drastically than official forecasts, with annual reductions in
real terms of around 5 per cent 'at least through 1995.'
However, Hughes was well placed to pick up contracts for upgrading existing
equipment.
'After 1992 we think our defence business will actually begin to tick back
up again,' Mr Smith said.
Although its rival, Westinghouse, is supplying the radar for the latest US
fighter project, the Lockheed/Boeing/General Dynamics F-22, Hughes won the
contract for the aircraft's computer processing system.
Expected to be worth about Dollars 1.5bn, this contract opened up a new
business line, with potential spin-offs in both military and civilian
fields.
Plans for new business outside defence included satellite-based
telecommunications, air traffic control, and avionics and landing aids for
civil aircraft. Expertise in power supplies, derived from Hughes' military
radar business, would be used in electric car development with GM and in
diversification into lighting products.
Hughes also aimed to increase its share of the defence market as more
companies dropped out. Unions at TWA, the highly-indebted carrier, together
with the City of St Louis, TWA's main operating base, have filed a motion
asking the US Department of Transportation to stay its ruling on the sale of
its London Heathrow routes, writes Nikki Tait in New York.
The union-St Louis group has already filed an appeal against the decision,
which permitted TWA to sell its three principal London routes to American
Airlines.
