FT  25 APR 91 / Survey of Greece (12): Tribal feelings strained - The
pressure of immigrants from Albania and the Soviet Union
DOWN AMONG the newspaper booths and merchant stalls in Omonia Square in
central Athens, clusters of thin, weather-beaten men chat quietly. Any time
of the day and much of the night they are there, dressed in old-fashioned
jackets and ragged bell-bottomed trousers.
These are the Albanians, some of the many thousands who have crossed over
into Greece in recent months. The Greek authorities say that to date more
than 20,00 Albanians have arrived in Greece. Some have returned but at least
12,000 look like becoming permanent residents.
Most of the new arrivals are members of the Greek minority in southern
Albania - a region that for long has been claimed by Greece and that is
referred to as north Epirus in the political textbooks.
For years, Greece had expressed its concern about the Greek minority in
Albania. Now, with the government in Tirana no longer capable of, or willing
to, implement rigid border controls, the minority is flooding out. To the
Greeks, their arrival is something of a mixed blessing.
However, Greece cannot turn back its north Epirot brethren. Athens is also
aware that the new immigrants will at least bolster the Greek population.
That is now a little over 10m. The birth rate is declining and there is much
concern about what is called 'the shrinking of Hellenism'.
But the immigrants from Albania arrive with only the clothes they wear and
with few skills. Most are farm workers in their early 20s. Greece faces
enormous economic problems and is ill-equipped to deal with an immigrant
influx.
Athens estimates the Greek minority in Albania to be more than 350,000
though the government in Tirana says it is 57,000. Mr Constantine
Mitsotakis, the Greek Prime Minister, has appealed to the Greek minority to
stay at home and await the outcome of political reforms.
Greece also faces pressures in dealing with other immigrants, both legal and
illegal. Thousands of Bulgarians have entered Greece from the north. There
are numbers of Poles living for the most part illegally in various parts of
the country. Members of Turkey's Kurdish community regularly ask for
political asylum.
The Pontians are one of the more intriguing groups to arrive on Greek soil
in recent months. Pontians are an ethnic minority of Greek origin who once
inhabited an area on the southern coast of the Black Sea - referred to as
'Pontos' in ancient Greek.
According to the Greek government up to 500,000 Pontians are now dispersed
through the southern Soviet Union. With the freeing of Soviet emigration
controls, more than 25,000 Pontians have already arrived in Greece. Few
speak modern Greek but this group is unlikely to be a heavy burden on the
state.
Pontians are the butt of Greek jokes in much the same way as the Irish are
to the English or the Poles in some parts of the US. But the Pontians are a
resourceful group who through even the toughest times in the Soviet Union
survived and often prospered.
In many parts of Athens, Pontians have set up stalls selling goods brought
from the Soviet Union. As new residents of Greece, they have taken advantage
of entitlements on car imports, buying luxury models and selling them for
handsome profits.
To cope with these new immigrant groups, the government has set up a special
bureau to co-ordinate educational and resettlement activities. It is a
formidable task, fraught with social and political dangers.
Already, some concern has been raised about government plans to settle
several thousand Pontians in Thrace - a region where Muslims predominate and
one of the poorest in the country.
Greece wants to welcome its 'returnees'. But it is fully aware that its
resources are severely limited. In some ways the homecoming could not have
come at a worse time.
