FT  18 APR 91 / The Finance Bill: Cut-price option for share schemes - ESOPS
THE MOST mouth watering provision in the Finance Bill for many directors
will be clause 37, which gives companies the opportunity to grant options
under an Inland Revenue approved executive share scheme at a 15 per cent
discount to market price.
This cut-price option facility will only be available to companies which
also have an approved all-employee incentive scheme - either a profit
sharing or an SAYE option scheme. Simply setting up a wider scheme will not
be sufficient. The company will also have to notify all eligible employees
of the scheme's existence in the 12 months immediately preceding the grant
of options.
The time for determining which employees are eligible is the date on which
the executive rights are created. This creates a potential trap.
Participation in most wider schemes is restricted to those who have
completed a qualifying period of service. If there is a significant interval
between despatch of the all-employee notice and grant of the executive
options, some employees are likely to become eligible during that period.
Failure to communicate with these new qualifiers will scupper the
executives' arrangements.
No individual can be granted an executive option over shares worth more than
four times his or her salary. Since this limit operates by reference to
market value rather than to the subscription price payable by the option
holder, the grant of discounted options will not increase the number of
shares which can be taken up.
For example, a director earning Pounds 50,000 a year is subject to a Pounds
200,000 option ceiling so that if the shares are worth Pounds 1 each he can
be allotted 200,000. Discounted at 15 per cent, the same shares will cost
him only Pounds 170,000, but since the shares are worth the full Pounds
200,000 he will be deemed to have reached his limit.
Finally, the bill puts beyond doubt that any company wishing to offer this
incentive will first have to amend its scheme rules. For quoted companies
shareholder approval will almost invariably be required.
There will be plenty of time to convene the necessary meeting - discounted
options cannot be handed out before January 1 1992. Companies may also need
time to canvass their institutional shareholders who are aware of the
potential cost of cheap options and are therefore likely to suggest that
such options should only be exercisable if performance targets are achieved.
The author is a partner in the City law firm of Paisner &amp; Co
