FT  15 APR 91 / S Africa far-right may join talks
THE PROSPECT of right-wing participation in South Africa's proposed
multi-party constitutional talks later this year moved closer yesterday with
the disclosure of a confidential document from the ultra-right Conservative
party which proposes abandoning the party's opposition to talks.
The 48-page document, drawn up at the instigation of Mr Andries Treurnicht,
the leader, warns that the party might become irrelevant unless it joins
negotiations.
Up to now, the party's policy has been to insist on a separate homeland for
whites and to refuse to discuss a post-apartheid, power-sharing constitution
for blacks and whites. Its official policy remains to reject negotiations
but there are signs of a split developing.
The document, published in Johannesburg newspapers, suggests that most white
voters now support the political reforms of President FW de Klerk, and that
he would win a whites-only referendum on a new constitution due to take
place before the end of his term of office in 1994.
It says: 'We have to accept that the days of apartheid are numbered.'
However it does propose that South Africa be divided into 20 regions, some
of which would be separate white homelands.
The timetable for talks remained uncertain, however, as the African National
Congress (ANC) renewed its call to supporters to form self-defence units.
The call came from Mr Nelson Mandela, the ANC deputy president, speaking at
a funeral in Alexandra township, near Johannesburg.
Such rhetoric is likely to anger the government but will have little impact
on the peace process, currently held up by the dispute over the recent ANC
ultimatum giving Pretoria until May 9 to take more effective measures
against township violence.
Fighting between ANC supporters and those of the rival Inkatha Freedom Party
broke out last night near Mr Mandela's home in Soweto for the second
successive day. Police estimated that 50 people had been wounded. Police
discovered four bodies in the area earlier yesterday.
European Community foreign ministers are today in Luxwmbourg expected to
endorse the lifting of remaining EC sanctions against South Africa, covering
exports of iron, steel and Krugerrands.
