FT  19 APR 91 / US urges World Bank policy shift
THE US is pressing the World Bank to undertake a significant shift towards
lending to the private sector in developing countries and eventually to make
loans directly to private companies without government guarantees.
The World Bank currently lends only under government guarantee and a move
away from this would mark a profound policy change and be highly
controversial.
The US believes that the Bank should develop a strong expertise in the
private sector in the 1990s or risk being left without a big role in
developing countries which are increasingly privatising large parts of the
state sector.
The pressure from the US comes as part of talks about a capital increase for
the World Bank's private sector affiliate, the International Finance
Corporation. The US has said it wants to see half the lending of the World
Bank group, including the IFC, directed to the private sector by 1995.
A US administration official, who did not want to be named, said:
'Ultimately . . . the bank itself might become a lender directly to the
private sector.' This shift could be linked to the next capital increase of
the World Bank, he said. This is due in the mid-1990s.
The IFC, which is able to lend and to make equity investments in private
sector companies, is seeking to double its Dollars 1.3bn (Pounds 733.6m)
capital. Britain and Germany, among others, support this. The US wants to
limit the rise to Dollars 750m, and Japan is among those querying whether a
doubling is necessary.
Mr Barber Conable, World Bank group president, is keen to secure a capital
increase for the IFC before he steps down in September.
The administration official said: 'We like the IFC. We think it's done a
good job, but we think it should more private sector oriented and has not
done enough in emphasising privatisation.' But the World Bank's response to
developing the private sector had not been satisfactory.
The US feels the Bank should develop its dialogue with governments over
private sector reform, but this should involve the IFC. The US is also
looking for a private sector development division to be incorporated in
every regional department of the Bank.
The Bank has experience of lending to government financial organisations
which then lend to the private sector, but it is a policy which has proved
disastrous in many countries.
The controversy will come if the US presses for direct lending to the
private sector, which will add commercial risks to the current risks taken
by the Bank.
