FT  20 APR 91 / Letter: Strong case for keeping options open on mining in
Antarctica
Sir, The apparent change in the British government's attitude towards mining
in Antarctica is disappointing. That Australia and France (an unlikely
combination if ever there was one) are pushing the issue for blatant
domestic political reasons is well known. For Britain to follow their lead
would be shameful. No one is actually arguing for full and immediate
exploitation of resources in Antarctica but to deny ourselves the mechanism
for doing so would be short-sighted. Perhaps just one example can be used to
illustrate the case for keeping our options open.
For many years North Americans have been concerned about pollution from car
exhausts and have progressively reduced the amount of carbon monoxide and
nitrous oxides (believed to be a factor in acid rain) that cars are allowed
to emit. Europe is belatedly following.
This trend is happening around the world. To achieve these standards car
manufacturers rely on a device called an emission control catalyst that uses
platinum group metals (PGMs) to convert these gases into less harmful carbon
dioxide and nitrogen. PGMs are rare and are currently only mined in any
quantity in South Africa and Russia.
PGMs are also expensive. Platinum, the most common at Dollars 400 an ounce,
is more expensive than gold, while rhodium, the most rare, is currently more
than Dollars 5,000 an ounce. Rhodium is crucial in an autocatalyst because
it is the only metal that can reduce nitrous oxides. Production problems and
increased demand have caused the price of rhodium to jump from Dollars 1,600
an ounce a year ago to Dollars 7,000 last summer. Some observers say it
could rise to Dollars 10,000 an ounce even with planned production increases
to meet rising demand.
But what has this to do with Antarctica? The answer is that PGMs are mostly
found in geological features called layered ultramafic intrusions, such as
the Bushveld of South Africa. However, an even larger one lies in Antarctica
called the Dufek massif which coincidentally occurs in British Antarctic
Territory. It has not so far been tested for PGMs.
If ecologists get their way at the Madrid conference next month we will
never know if the Dufek contains PGMs. Reform in South Africa and Russia is
continuing but if the Dufek process is interrupted, or becomes unstable, our
supply of PGMs, and rhodium in particular, could fall.
It is worth remembering too that it is only two years since the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission investigated this market. Autocatalysts, each of
which use at least 1.5 grams of rhodium, could be threatened and the pace of
emission control might slow rapidly, possibly increasing acid rain.
Environmentalists flying or driving to Madrid, in metal cars and planes
consuming fossil fuels, should contemplate whether they really want the
world's most barren continent to be denied a potential role in improving the
world's atmosphere.
Should not my former employer, the British Antarctic Survey, give our
diplomats a full briefing before the conference?
Robert Davies,
Hawthorn, 7 Green Trees
Avenue, Cold Norton,
Essex
