FT  23 APR 91 / International Capital Markets (Government Bonds): German
bonds tumble as election gloom deepens
GERMAN government bonds opened sharply lower yesterday as the market reacted
to the defeat of the ruling Christian Democratic Party in state elections in
the Rhineland Palatinate.
The bund futures contract on the London International Financial Futures
Exchange fell to 84.98 during the morning, against Friday's close of 85.27.
However, the market showed resilience in later trading and the contract
closed at 85.15.
The benchmark 10 per cent government bond maturing 2001 closed on a yield of
8.44 per cent, down from an opening level of 8.38 per cent.
The election defeat gives the opposition Social Democrats an overall
majority in the Bundesrat, the upper house of the German parliament.
The Bundesrat can block any legislation which affects the financing of the
regional lander (such as planned VAT increases and reform of the corporate
tax structure) and any moves to change the way in which the regions are
administered. The gloom was increased by the weakness of the D-Mark on the
foreign exchange market against the dollar. The US currency opened at around
DM1.74 but fell back to trade at around DM1.7640 in late afternoon.
There are fears that the strong dollar could increase import prices, adding
to inflationary pressures in the domestic economy.
Any signs of additional inflationary pressure would be countered by tighter
monetary conditions. Fears of further tightening by the Bundesbank
suppressed bond prices at the shorter maturities end more than at the
10-year maturity.
UK government bond prices showed little reaction to retail sales figures for
March which pointed to a sharp upturn in consumer expenditure.
The benchmark 11 3/4 per cent government bond issue maturing 2003/2007
opened at 110 9/32 and closed just  1/32 down on the day, for a yield of
10.22 per cent.
Figures showing retail sales growth of 3.7 per cent for March over the
previous month were dismissed as a freak by analysts.
Most had predicted a month-on-month upturn of between 0.3 per cent and 0.7
per cent. The unexpected increase was blamed on a rush by consumers to buy
goods before the new rate of VAT (17.5 per cent against 15 per cent at the
old rate) came into effect on April 1. Elsewhere, the evidence remains
mixed. Money supply figures on Friday showed M0, the narrow measure of notes
and coins in circulation, growing at an annual rate of 2.7 per cent. Yet
bank lending was recorded at an all-time low.
JAPANESE government bonds fell back during Tokyo trading as the yen
continued to depreciate against the dollar on the foreign exchange markets.
The benchmark government bond issue No129 closed in Tokyo on a yield of
6.725 per cent, against a close of 6.705 per cent on Friday. In London
trading the 129 slipped further for a yield of 6.73 per cent by late
afternoon.
Trading remained focused on the foreign exchange market, where the dollar
continued to move higher against the major currencies, including the yen.
The US currency opened at Y138.75 and pressed ahead to around Y139.30 by the
close of London trading.
The strength of the dollar will, if sustained, increase the cost of many
imported goods into Japan. This could delay any easing of monetary
conditions by the Bank of Japan later this year.
Tomorrow, the government is expected to issue Y800bn of 10-year securities,
with a coupon of either 6.7 per cent or 6.8 per cent.
IN THE absence of a lead from economic news US government bond prices edged
lower yesterday ahead of this week's injection of fresh supply by the
Treasury. In late trading the benchmark 30-year Treasury issue was down  1/2
at 95 13/32 , to yield 8.285 per cent. The two-year note was only slightly
lower, down  1/32 at 100 1/8 , yielding 7.034 per cent.
The market appears resigned to the fact that the Federal Reserve is not
going to cut interest rates in the near future. The sell-off that came in
the wake of the Fed's inaction is complete, and yesterday's weakness was
primarily a technical move ahead of the two and five-year note auctions due
on Wednesday and Thursday this week, said dealers.
In the money markets the Fed intervened via overnight matched sales
agreements to drain reserves from the system and exert an upward pressure on
the Fed funds rate. The Fed's target for the rate remains 6 per cent, and
yesterday Fed funds were trading just below it at 5 13/16 per cent.
