FT  26 APR 91 / Commodities and Agriculture: Middle East selling drives gold
to a nine-month low
A NERVOUS shudder went through the gold market yesterday as selling from the
same Middle East source which caused havoc in three raids on the market last
year drove down the price in London to the lowest level for nine months.
Traders said the National Commercial Bank of Jeddah sold gold on behalf of
clients in Saudi Arabia and elsewhere in the Middle East just ahead of the
morning price-fixing session in London.
The resulting nervousness caused the 'fix' to last longer than usual - 50
minutes - and the gold price dropped to USDollars 353 (Pounds 208.5) a troy
ounce. It recovered later because there was no follow-up selling in New York
and closed at Dollars 353.55, down almost Dollars 2.40.
While the damage caused yesterday by the Saudi selling was relatively light,
Mr Andy Smith, analyst at Union Bank of Switzerland, said: 'If it was the
same Middle East source selling yesterday, the longer-term implications are
serious for the market. It will have an impact on investors who will be less
willing to get back into the market. It might also influence producers who
now might not be so willing to let the gold price rise before selling
forward.'
At the morning 'fix' on March 26 last year the National Commercial Bank of
Jeddah sold at least 50 tonnes, and possibly 100 tonnes, of gold and the
price plunged by Dollars 20 an ounce.
After the Saudis struck twice more, Mr Robert Guy, a director of N. M.
Rothschild and Sons, said the gold market had been damaged and that
'wittingly or unwittingly, the marketplace has been abused'.
The bank's London office declined yesterday to comment on whether it had
been selling gold or was involved in an earlier sale of sterling - Pounds
500m for dollars - which sent the pound reeling and was attributed by
currency dealers to Middle East sources.
Mr Smith said he had begun to believe the gold price would move up again but
yesterday's events meant he would stick to his forecast that the metal would
average Dollars 345 an ounce during the next few months.
Analysts suggested it was unlikely that gold was being sold to meet the
costs of the Gulf war. 'The Middle East is more likely to use gold as
collateral for loans than to sell it to raise capital,' said one.
