FT  10 MAY 91 / Survey of Hong Kong (16): Education debate has political
overtones - System faces fundamental problems
ABOUT 97 per cent of school children in Hong Kong are Chinese. But for
social and historical reasons, most are taught in a foreign language -
English. The government and educationalists argue that children would do
better if taught in their own language, Cantonese Chinese.
Parents disagree, believing that English offers educational and job
benefits. Meanwhile, businessmen are worried that English language standards
are slipping and this could threaten Hong Kong's importance as an
international financial and trading centre.
The government and educationalists deny standards are declining. They argue
the problem is one of demand; they say Hong Kong's increasingly
service-based economy needs more and more English speakers, which schools
are taking time to produce.
But both sides agree that the system faces fundamental problems that need
solving. Due to sensitivities over language and identity, efforts to improve
the system have taken on political overtones ahead of 1997.
Hong Kong has adopted elements of British and Chinese thinking towards
education. Exams are very important and some students face exams or
important tests every six to eight weeks. Some educationalists complain this
sacrifices originality. Science subjects are still more prestigious than the
arts - they are perceived to offer better prospects for jobs and emigration.
The biggest problem facing the system can be traced back to 1978 when Hong
Kong drastically expanded its secondary schools to offer free and compulsory
education up to the age of 15. Before this, the system was elitist with most
subjects being taught in English to the children of the elite.
As the system expanded, it brought in children and teachers of varying
standards. But most parents still wanted their children taught in English,
even if the child was unable to learn properly in a foreign language.
As a result, about 90 per cent of Hong Kong's half a million secondary
school students attend Anglo-Chinese schools where most subjects are taught
in English. But because of varying English language standards among teachers
and students, they are happier speaking in Cantonese. With the recent
emergence of a Hong Kong culture distinct from China or Britain, Cantonese
has also gained status as a language. Many schools have therefore resorted
to a mix of speaking Cantonese in the classroom and using English textbooks
and exams.
The language mixture has fostered a perception both English and Cantonese
standards are slipping with students unable to express themselves properly
in either language. To try and alter parental perceptions, the government
has proposed compulsory language testing of children before secondary
school. Students judged to have enough language skills, probably about 30
per cent of the total, would be streamed and receive most of their
instruction in English. The rest would be taught in Chinese.
The government hopes compulsory testing will show parents and teachers that
most children would do better studying in Chinese. But business groups
believe less English teaching means poorer English standards. To combat
these fears, the government intends to improve english teaching standards.
There are also plans to introduce vocational English courses and remedial
English teaching for secondary school leavers.
The government also needs to raise the status and morale of 47,000 teachers
if its reforms are to succeed. The wastage rate among teachers in secondary
schools hit 11.9 per cent last year. Some are leaving to acquire foreign
passports while others are being tempted by better salaries. Teachers
staying on complain of heavier workloads and declining morale. Some also
question the government's commitment to education, given the other massive
spending projects underway.
One major spending project is the government's plan to double the number of
first year, first degree places available in Hong Kong's universities and
other tertiary institutions to 15,000 by 1994/1995. The plan aims to stop
students going overseas and plug gaps left in the colony's graduate
population by the brain drain.
While the government was complimented for its boldness, there are worries it
is seeking quantity at the expense of quality. Some university educators
argue that standards will have to drop if the increased numbers of
undergraduates are to be admitted.
Meanwhile, China's attitude towards the education equation remains unclear.
According to the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration on Hong Kong's return
to China in 1997, Hong Kong shall 'on its own' decide education policies and
language in schools.
But with China's increasing role in Hong Kong and mounting business links,
few doubt China's official language, Mandarin, will grow in stature. Some
pro-China educators are now pushing for more Mandarin in school curricula.
There is even speculation that Mandarin will replace English as the language
of success after 1997.
Such moves would be fiercely contested by the international business
community, who fear more Mandarin means less English. It would also be
opposed by Hong Kong's liberals, many of whom are teachers, who are wary of
Chinese interference in Hong Kong.
