FT  20 APR 91 / Moscow catches a chill in Tokyo: Gorbachev in the Far East
SOVIET President Mikhail Gorbachev yesterday ended his first visit to Japan
and left behind a mixture of disappointment and bewilderment.
His current visit to South Korea may pass with less acrimony. He arrived on
the island of Cheju last night for talks with President Roh Tae Woo. This
first visit by a Soviet head of state to the divided Korean peninsula
reflects the rapid rapprochement between the two former cold war enemies.
The trip to Japan was a success - so Mr Toshiki Kaifu, Japanese prime
minister, and his officials maintained in public. In private, some officials
were disappointed they had been unable to wring from Mr Gorbachev any real
progress towards the settlement of the territorial issue which has dogged
relations between the two countries since 1945 and blocked a Soviet-Japanese
Second World War peace treaty.
The communique signed about midnight on Thursday by the two leaders
committed them only to 'work constructively and vigorously to finish
preparations for concluding a peace treaty'. It also contained an explicit
reference to the territorial issue, named the four disputed islands off
northern Japan which the Soviet Union holds, and called on the two countries
to take into account 'all positive elements that have been built up in
bilateral negotiations' since 1956.
The two sides are already disputing the meaning of the vague text. A
Japanese foreign ministry official said the reference to 1956 implied that
the Soviet Union acknowledged the validity of a promise it made then (and
later withdrew) to return two islands. Mr Gorbachev told a news conference
the reference meant no such thing: 'We have not revived what was missed in
the past.'
As long as the territorial dispute is unsettled, Japan says it will not lift
a ban on Japanese economic aid to the Soviet Union. However, this should not
obscure the likelihood that Japan will develop commercial links on a more
modest scale. Mr Kaifu and Mr Gorbachev signed 15 co-operation documents,
providing for Japanese technical assistance for perestroika, visits by
Soviet trainees to Japan, a Japanese trade fair in Moscow in 1992, new air
routes, and a new agreement on trade payments.
Soviet officials also handed over to their Japanese counterparts information
on some of the 55,000 Japanese who died in Soviet prisoner-of-war camps
after the Second World War. Older Japanese attach great importance to this.
However, these exchanges will do little to close the gap between the two
countries. Many Japanese were unable to understand why Mr Gorbachev had come
to Japan if he had no intention of a deal on the islands. They also had
little sympathy for the Soviet leader's great but vague hopes for building a
new order in Asia to match that in Europe.
At one point, Mr Gorbachev's press spokesman said his boss had tried to
speak on a 'philosophical' level to Mr Kaifu about improving relations. The
premier, representative of a deeply pragmatic and rather unphilosophical
people, had replied they should look at things 'case by case'. To the end,
the gulf in mutual understanding, as on the territorial issue, remained
wide.
The meeting in South Korea will be the third between the two presidents. The
talks, extended to a morning session today, will focus on ways to ease
tension on the Korean peninsula. South Korea's application to join the UN,
scheduled for September, and increased trade and economic links will also be
discussed.
Moscow, which supported North Korea in the 1950-53 Korean war and has since
been one of Pyongyang's principal allies, established diplomatic relations
with Seoul only last September. Despite repeated invitations, a Soviet head
of state has never visited North Korea.
South Korea is seeking Soviet assistance in pressing Pyongyang to allow
international inspection of its nuclear facilities. A Soviet academic said
in Tokyo this week that Moscow was considering an end to all its nuclear
supplies to North Korea, unless the latter allowed inspection of its
facilities.
As for the UN, it is unlikely that the Soviet Union will veto, in the
security council, South Korean membership. North Korea continues to oppose
separate Korean membership, arguing that it would perpetuate division of the
peninsula.
Other Moscow-Seoul issues include the legacy of the Soviet shooting-down of
a South Korean airliner in 1983. Demonstrators in South Korea have demanded
an apology for the destruction of Korean Airlines flight 007, which had
strayed into Soviet airspace.
