FT  22 APR 91 / The Queen's Awards For Export and Technology 1991: Treatment
gets under the skin for curing cancer - ICI Pharmaceuticals
ICI Pharmaceuticals, based in Alderley Park, Cheshire, has won a fourth
award for technological achievement. This year's award is for Zoladex, an
innovative prostate cancer treatment which is a step forward not only in
pharmaceutical chemistry but also in drug delivery technology.
Zoladex cannot be taken orally because it breaks down quickly in the
gastro-intestinal tract. It can be administered as a daily injection, but
ICI researchers did not consider this method to be suitable for long-term
use. Instead, they developed a sustained release formulation.
The active drug is dispersed in a small cylinder of biodegradable polymer,
about the size and colour of a rice grain. This 'depot' is injected under
the skin and then gradually releases the drug over a period of one month.
The patient - typically an elderly man - only has to visit his doctor once
every four weeks to have a new depot inserted.
Zoladex is a synthetic chemical analogue of a natural hormone, LHRH, which
is released by the hypothalamus and acts on the pituitary gland. It is much
more potent than LHRH and blocks the action of the natural hormone. This
interferes with a series of hormone-driven reactions in the body. The
outcome of Zoladex treatment is to stop the testes producing testosterone, a
male sex hormone.
Tumours of the prostate gland depend on testosterone to grow. If its
production stops, the cancer is effectively cured. This has traditionally
been achieved surgically by removing the testes. Zoladex brings about the
same effect chemically - and therefore avoids the psychological trauma and
medical risks of surgical castration.
ICI chemists first synthesised the active ingredient in Zoladex in 1976 and,
after initial biological tests had shown promising results, it entered the
development stage in 1978. But Zoladex was not launched commercially until
1987. This 11-year interval between discovery and marketing is about average
for the international pharmaceutical industry - and shows the long
timescales on which its R&amp;D strategists have to operate.
Zoladex is now on sale in more than 20 countries, including most major
pharmaceutical markets. Although its use so far has been for prostate
cancer, Zoladex has recently been approved for treating breast cancer in
several European countries and ICI is developing it for various other
hormone-related diseases.
ICI declines to disclose current or projected sales figures for Zoladex, but
some analysts believe that they could eventually reach Pounds 100m a year
for prostate cancer and a further Pounds 100m a year for breast cancer and
other diseases.
Last November ICI opened a Pounds 13.5m plant in Macclesfield, Cheshire, to
make Zoladex; demand has been so great that a Pounds 8.5m extension was
sanctioned before the main plant was complete. The whole factory will have
the capacity to make 2m monthly doses of Zoladex per year.
The development of Zoladex grew out of ICI's long-standing expertise in
hormone-based cancer treatments. Its anti-oestrogen breast cancer drug
Nolvadex, launched in 1973 and winner of a Queen's Award for Technological
Achievement in 1978, is now the world's best-selling cancer medicine.
Mr David Friend, chief executive of ICI Pharmaceuticals, says that cancer
therapy accounts for 'a large proportion' of the company's Pounds 200m a
year expenditure on drug research and development.
The pharmaceuticals business is currently the star performer of the ICI
group. The 1990 accounts show sales of Pounds 1.4bn and a trading profit of
Pounds 489m for ICI Pharmaceuticals; it accounted for only 11 per cent of
group turnover but contributed 47.5 per cent of profits. The company expects
further strong growth from ICI Pharmaceuticals this year, while its other
businesses remain mired in the depression affecting the general chemicals
industry.
