FT  01 MAY 91 / Deadlock is broken on stance in Tokyo car talks
THE European Commission yesterday ended months of wrangling over the
Community's bargaining position with Tokyo on car imports when commissioners
voted 13-2 in favour of a pack-age of negotiating prin-ciples.
These include eliminating by the start of 1993 remaining national
restrictions on Japanese cars coming into the EC, and monitoring the level
of Japanese cars imported or made in the EC until the end of 1998 or 1999,
after which time the EC will have a totally free car market.
Sir Leon Brittan, the EC Competition Commissioner, said he was delighted
that the principles upheld by him and fellow trade liberals in the
Commission - Mr Frans Andriessen, responsible for external relations, and Mr
Martin Bangemann, respon-sible for industry - had prevailed.
Two commissioners, Mr Bruce Millan from the UK and Mr Ray MacSharry from
Ireland, voted against the car proposals in person, while one of two other
commissioners absent, Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana from Italy, did so by letter.
Mr Millan, in spite of coming from the EC country with the most Japanese car
manufacturing, objected that by failing to demand 'global reciprocity' in
market-opening from Japan, the EC was unilaterally disarming itself.
In the next few weeks, the Commission will inform, but not seek the formal
approval of, the EC Council of Ministers on what it hopes to negotiate with
Tokyo.
To offset some of the risks to European car makers, Brussels will also come
up with a research and development programme to fit the EC car industry
better to meet Japanese competition by the end of the century.
Such is the sensitivity of the Japanese car issue that the Commission
refused to make public its negotiating stance, beyond confirming that at
last it had one.
However, it is understood to comprise:
Removal by the end of next year of curbs on Japanese cars in France, Italy,
the UK, Spain and Portugal.
Thereafter Tokyo and Brussels will keep a count of Japanese cars shipped
directly from Japan and so-called transplants made in the EC.
This would last until 1998 or 1999, when the total number of Japanese-made
(transplants and imports) cars would be about 2.5m.
At present Japan has 10.5 per cent of total annual car sales of 13m in the
EC and, of this share, 260,000 cars are made locally.
EC and Japanese officials will consult every six months on market trends.
If the EC feels too many Japanese cars are com-ing on the market, it will
ask Tokyo to reduce the growth in direct shipments, but not in locally
assembled cars.
