FT  01 MAY 91 / World Stock Markets: Spain's economic growth attracts
foreign investors - But shareholder protection remains a subject of concern
and some confusion
FOREIGN investors are not fully convinced by the reforms of the Madrid stock
market, but Spain, with one of the faster growing economies of Europe,
continues to attract international interest.
The Spanish market is Europe's best performer so far this year, according to
the FT-Actuaries World Indices, having risen 23 per cent in local currency
terms compared with a gain of 16 per cent for Europe as a whole. The growth
in Spanish gross domestic product is expected to slow down this year, but
still exceed the European average, according to Mr Pedro Perez, secretary of
state for the economy - a prediction that appeals to international fund
managers.
Some of the attempts to reform the stock market inspire less confidence.
Investor protection, particularly regarding takeovers and mergers, remains a
subject of concern and of some confusion to foreign investors.
As Mr Luis Carlos Croissier, chairman of the Stock Exchange Commission, said
at a recent seminar in Madrid held by Spanish brokers FG, mergers are not
covered by takeover regulations. Moreover, he added that if a potential
takeover situation occurs as the result of the restructuring of an
economically important sector, the government has the power to waive the
takeover regulations.
This can put minority shareholders in a difficult position, as they find
their shares in independent companies turn into part of a vast
state-controlled conglomerate. An example is Catalana de Gas, the country's
biggest gas distributor, which merged last year with the gas interests of
Repsol, the state-controlled oil group.
This could also happen to investors hoping to benefit from the
reorganisation of the electrical utility sector, says Mr Paul Farrow, head
of research at FG. Investors speculating on takeovers could lose out if the
government decides to treat the takeovers as mergers, as the purchaser
company would not need to offer shareholders a premium to the share price.
Nevertheless, Mr Croissier says that the bolsa has made progress in
increasing transparency, liquidity and investor protection. And foreign
interest does seem to be growing. Ms Massoumeh Khadjenouri of Shearson
Lehman Global Asset Management says that about 12 per cent of the company's
three European funds - worth Dollars 30m, Dollars 20m and Dollars 5m - is
invested in Spain. This compares with a weighting of 4.3 per cent in the
FT-Actuaries Europe Index.
Although positive on the market's outlook for the next six to nine months,
she is cautious in the short term because of the market's recent strength.
She expects to reduce the fund's weighting in Spain towards the end of the
year.
Other fund managers are less enthusiastic. Mr Dino Fuschillo of Lazard
Investors says he is only mildly positive about the Spanish market, pointing
out that it is no longer in the runaway situation of 1985 and 1986. Lazard
has Pounds 300m (Dollars 503m) invested in Europe out of total funds under
discretionary management of Pounds 3bn, and has Spain on a neutral
weighting.
Mr Fuschillo believes there are some above-average growth opportunities,
mainly in the banks and utilities, but that cyclical stocks have bounced too
high since the end of the Gulf war. He is cautious about the country's
economic prospects, but adds that some investors pay too much attention to
the prospect of rising inflation.
Most fund managers take a medium-term view of the market. Mr Ignacio Gomez
Montejo, chief strategist at FG, argues that an even longer term view is
appropriate, even though most foreign investors hold on to their shares for
an average of only 15 months.
On a 10-year view, there are three possible strategies for international
investors, says Mr Gomez Montejo:
picking companies most likely to benefit from a single European market, such
as Acerinox, the stainless steel producer, Viscofan, the food wrappings
concern, and Banco Santander - a strategy that carries the highest risks but
could also be the most profitable;
arbitrage between European markets, based on a few macroeconomic indicators;
and picking potential takeover candidates.
One disadvantage for investors is that many of the more interesting
companies are not listed on the stock market, says Mr Gomez Montejo,
although it is possible to buy funds which invest in these companies. Two or
three are already in operation and more are expected to be launched.
Although international investors still have reservations about shareholder
protection, FG predicts that by the year 2000 foreigners will own one fifth
of the total market.
