FT  30 APR 91 / UK Company News: Boosting the spirits of a shaken giant:
Measures being taken to rebuild confidence in the Pounds 4bn Allied-Lyons
group
ALLIED-LYONS, the UK drinks and food group, has discovered that six months
can be a long time in business as well as in politics.
Last October, brewing industry analysts were hailing the emergence of a more
active management style and the prospect of accelerating growth from the
group's array of spirit brands, pub property, and food.
That view was apparently confirmed with the announcement in January that Sir
Derrick Holden-Brown, chairman, and Mr Richard Martin, chief executive,
would retire next year to make way for a new management team headed by Mr
Michael Jackaman, vice-chairman and head of the group's spirits division.
Then lastmonth came the confidence-shattering blow of a Pounds 150m loss on
foreign exchange dealings.
Mr Clifford Hatch, the finance director, took responsibility for the weak
management controls that the loss implied, and resigned: and it now seems
likely that both Sir Derrick, doyen of the brewing industry, and Mr Martin
will soon follow.
Allied aims to sort out its top management problems within the next two
weeks.
If any further stimulus to rapid action is necessary, it comes from the
renewed rumblings of a threatened takeover bid.
Ofthe possible predators, only Hanson would appear to have the current
resources to make a bid for a group of Allied's size.
Its market capitalisation is Pounds 4bn; but brokers Barclays de Zoete Wedd
estimate that the company's assets areworth Pounds 11 per share - or more
than twice as much - on the open market.
Against those assets, BZW calculates that the effects of the management
problems should be short-term and minimal while the long-term potential of
the group remains considerable.
The Pounds 150m foreign exchange loss is expected to reduce pre-tax profits
for the year ended February 28 1991 by 15 per cent to Pounds 478m. Group
debt - nearly Pounds 2bn at the half-year end last September - will be
reduced by less than forecast. Gearing, which had been expected to come down
from 80 per cent to 60 per cent is likely to remain about 70 per cent.
That may impose some constraints this year, but most analysts are predicting
a strong resumption of growth, with pre-tax profits in 1991-92 rising to
Pounds 690m.
Allied has suffered to some extent from the market's focus on its
traditional brewingoperations rather than its emergence during the past five
years as one of the world's leading spirits companies.
It was a Pounds 1.8bn bid from Elders, now Fosters Brewing, that triggered
Allied's acquisition in 1986 of the Canadian spirits business, Hiram Walker,
and put it on the international map.
The groupthen consolidated its position with the Pounds 545m purchase of
Whitbread's spirits operations in late 1989.
More than half the group's profits now come fromits spirits divisions - 'and
this is the major attraction of Allied's shares,' says Mr John Wakely,
analyst at Shearson Lehman.
It has taken time to bed down the acquisitions but management is now tightly
focused on markets, distribution - including a joint venture with Suntory,
the Japanese drinks giant - and realising brand potential as consumers
worldwide drink less but drink better.
Ballantine's, its top-selling Scotch whisky, has achieved rapid growthin
Europe and Japan and makes an estimated profit of Pounds 82m a year.
Courvoisier last year recorded a bigger sales growth than any other cognac.
Kahlua, one of the world's best-selling liqueurs, contributes some Pounds
75m a year in profits; Canadian Club is the third-largest Canadian whisky
brand; Beefeater, the fourth-ranked gin brand.
'The international brands are as good as those of Guinness,' says Mr Wakely.
'And eventually, Allied is going to make as much of them as Guinness does. I
believe they will be contributing 60 per cent of the group's profits by the
mid-1990s.'
Within the UK, however, it is still Allied's brewing business that seems to
command more attention.
The group is widely regarded - by Mr Peter Lilley, secretary for industry,
among others - as having been slow to react to the changes being forced upon
the industry by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Uncertainty persists about its intention to remain in both brewing and pub
retailing.
It has held abortive talks with Whitbread about a merger of their brewing
interests. Rumours are rifeabout its interest in acquiring both breweries
and pubs from Brent Walker. It has tried to buy the European rights to the
Castlemaine lager that it brews underlicence in the UK.
The government's beer orders will force it to free 2,400 of its pubs from
tied beer supplies if it remains in brewing in November 1992. So far, it has
sold just over 500 and leased another 300. It plans to lease most of the
remainder, but its disposal programme is running behind that of Bass,for
instance.
On the other hand, Allied has improved its beer market share to about 15 per
cent through a supply agreement with Greenall Whitley; and itdoes have a
strong portfolio of brands, including Tetley's, the UK's best-selling ale.
Its pub assets may not yet be fully utilised but there is generalagreement
that the regionally-managed estate includes many well-sited pubs whose
potential is being developed with a shift towards food and premium drinks.
Brewing and pub retailing contributes about 30 per cent of Allied's profits.
The J Lyons food business, which contributes 17 per cent of group profits,
has tended to be dismissed because of its focus on mature markets such as
tea.
But the operations were subjected to an intensive strategic review in 1989
and have been reorganised under Mr Tony Hales, now one of the front-runners
for the post of chief executive. Allied disposed of its UK cereals and US
frozenfood businesses, and has focused on four sectors: franchising,
beverages, bakery and ingredients.
Its franchising activities include Baskin Robbins, theworld's leading ice
cream store operation, and Dunkin' Donuts, the US doughnut chain which it
acquired 18 months ago for Pounds 196m.
Tea provides 75 per cent of the profits of the beverages sector. Tetley is a
Pounds 100m grocery brand in the UK, which makes it bigger than Kelloggs
corn flakes or Heinz baked beans. Market share is increasing following the
introduction of round tea bags in mid-1989.
Here, as in its other operations, there is evidence that Allied was
developing, if sometimes slowly, a sound sense of direction and purpose
before theunexpected shock of the foreign exchange losses.
If management can recover its poise, the potential remains to be unlocked
and the progress of recent years resumed.
