FT  29 APR 91 / Kinnock rules out raising taxes to fund health service
MR NEIL Kinnock, Labour leader, yesterday ruled out tax increases for health
service improvements and identified with many of the policy goals set by Mr
John Major - showing how Britain's two main political parties have
converged.
Differences between Labour and the government centred largely on 'the
seriousness of the approach,' Mr Kinnock said. He attacked the Conservatives
for wanting both better public services and a cut in income tax to 20p.
'They can't have both,' he said.
Labour would not cut income taxes but would not increase them for the 'vast
majority' of people. He would not add to the already high economic burden on
households. 'There is no economic benefit in it and it could discourage
effort.' Extra spending on the health service would have to come from
economic growth, Mr Kinnock said.
Mr Kinnock conceded that many Conservatives - including the prime minister -
would like a 'free society of opportunity', a clean country, and a
competitive economy. 'The difference is that for us it is not enough to
describe those ends but to commit practical means of doing it.' He wanted
Conservatives judged on their record on the economy, the health service and
the poll tax.
As campaigning for the local elections intensifies ahead of polling on
Thursday, the Conservative and Labour parties are neck and next in opinion
polls.
Mr Major yesterday expressed confidence that the new 'council tax' would
prove long-lasting - betraying hopes within the party that last week's
announcements will help Tory candidates on Thursday.
'We now have a system that will endure, that will be acceptable and that
will enable local government to raise its resources,' the prime minister
said on TV-am.
Mr Kinnock used his television interview on London Weekend to set out his
vision of 'democratic socialism'. It required the state and the community
'to get itself organised' in advancing 'the fulfilment of the individual'.
Labour did not see 'instantaneous push-button answers' to the problems of
many essential services. 'We will not put false prospects before the people
of this country, saying you can have it all at the same time,' Mr Kinnock
said.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, leader of the Liberal Democrats, said: 'It is now clear
that there is no significant difference between what Mr Major and Mr Kinnock
intend to offer at the next election.'
Conservative victory close, says Heseltine Page 7
Council tax forecast to add Pounds 5bn to PSBR Page 7
