FT  22 APR 91 / G7 meeting will expose interest rate splits
DIFFERENCES ON interest rates have opened a division among the Group of
Seven industrialised countries which some officials say may be as wide as at
any time since the group began economic policy co-ordination in 1985.
The differing views, which will surface on Sunday at a meeting of G7 finance
ministers and central bank governors in Washington, stem from a US desire to
see lower global interest rates to tackle what it sees as a growing risk of
worldwide recession.
'Next Sunday will probably be the occasion where disagreement on the
emphasis of future economic policy among the G7 will be the most noticeable
of any recent meeting,' a senior European monetary official said.
According to a US administration official, the US believes that the 'balance
of risks' between inflation and global recession has shifted. This is
against a background of an uncertain US recovery from recession and
weakening economic growth in Germany and Japan.
'We must emphasise the importance of growth at this point because most of
the global problems . . . would be more manageable if there is global
growth,' said the US official. These problems included the economic
reconstruction of eastern Europe and Latin America, and German unification.
In a clear reference to tight German monetary policy, he said there was a
need for a 'global perspective' among those economic policymakers who
appeared now to be concerned with purely domestic issues. The suggestion was
that high German interest rates were keeping real - inflation-adjusted -
interest rates at unusually high levels in other countries.
When the US first raised the issue, at an informal meeting of G7 finance
ministers in London eight days ago, there was sympathy for the US stance
from France and Italy, while Japan appeared to remain neutral in the
discussion.
However, the US position is strongly opposed by the UK, Germany and Canada,
which believe that the chief concern of international policy should remain
the curbing of inflation, which in turn will spark economic recovery as real
purchasing power is restored. They say experience shows the dangers of
premature policy relaxation. British officials have reiterated this position
forcefully even after the jump in UK unemployment reported last week.
Their fear is that the US stance is being taken for domestic political
motives, as part of efforts to encourage the US Federal Reserve to ease
interest rates to provide a firm economic backdrop for the run-up to the US
presidential election in November next year. While the US is emphasising
that it continues to desire low inflation, opponents worry that the US is
once more raising the discredited notion of a trade-off between inflation
and recession.
Shying away from calls for growth, Page 2
