FT  27 APR 91 / Commodities (Week In The Markets): Tin could be poised for
bull run
TIN has been the outstanding performer in the base metals sector this week
and could now be poised at the start of a bull run, according to some
analysts.
Cash tin on the London Metal Exchange rose by Dollars 227.50 to Dollars
5,915 a tonne on Thursday after jumping Dollars 137.50 on Wednesday.
Yesterday the price retreated to Dollars 5,825 a tonne, leaving it Dollars
300 ahead on the week.
The main reason for the price rise is that more tin is being consumed than
is being produced, even though overall demand is not strong, according to
Stephen Briggs, analyst with Metals and Minerals Research Services. A clear
deficit is beginning to show in producers' stock figures, and LME stocks are
going down.
LME warehouse stocks on Thursday fell by 385 tonnes to 16,430 tonnes after
dropping by 415 tonnes on Monday. Mr Nick Moore, analyst with Ord Minnett,
points out that, of the six base metals traded on the LME, only tin has
stocks lower now than at the end of last year.
'The stock overhang which has overshadowed the price is at last being
eroded,' he said this week, pointing out that many tin mines around the
globe - including mines in Brazil, Australia, the UK, Malaysia and Indonesia
 -have been forced to close by low prices.
Ord Minnett is expecting a general improvement in prices this year, but
points out that, whereas demand growth has its own momentum, supply cuts
'are transitory and cannot be relied upon.'
Mr Briggs is also cautious. While the market could be on the brink of a bull
run, 'it is unlikely to go mad when sentiment towards base metals as a whole
is so unfavourable,' he said.
However, the Economist Intelligence Unit this week forecast that the tin
price will rise by 50 per cent in the next 12 months - and it is less
optimistic than the Association of Tin Producing Countries. The EIU admits
there is 'high probability' that its forecasts could be wrong because 'at
some stage it will no longer be appropriate for consumers to keep stocks at
a bare minimum.
'No-one wants to anticipate that moment, but equally no-one wants to be left
out once it arrives. When prices do rise they will rise very sharply,' says
the EIU.
It is predicting an average price of Dollars 3.80 a lb in April-June next
year, compared with Dollars 2.53 in the first quarter of this year. It
forecasts primary tin production will fall by 12 per cent this year to
159,000 tonnes, with consumption sliding 2.7 per cent to 175,000 tonnes.
In the zinc market the backwardation, or premium for cash metal, collapsed
on Thursday, prompting widespread liquidation of positions and triggering
sell stops. The premium hit Dollars 240 a tonne on Tuesday last week,
narrowed to Dollars 32 last Friday then turned into a discount of Dollars 1.
Yesterday cash zinc closed at Dollars 1,148.30 a tonne, Dollars 53 down on
the week and at a discount of Dollars 8.50 to three-month metal.
Traders said that they had expected the backwardation to narrow once an
investment fund prominent in the market recently had manoeuvred out of its
short position. But they were taken by surprise by the suddenness of the
collapse.
The lead market moved into backwardation on Tuesday in the face of tight
supplies for May delivery. On Wednesday the cash premium was Pounds 6.50 a
tonne, but Thursday saw the tightness begin to ease. Yesterday cash lead
closed at Pounds 343.50 a tonne, up Pounds 5 on the week and at a discount
of Pounds 6 to three month metal.
A nervous shudder went through the bullion market on Thursday following gold
sales from the same Middle East source which upset prices last year. The
National Commercial Bank of Jeddah sold gold on behalf of clients in Saudi
Arabia and elsewhere in the Middle East just before the morning price fixing
session in London. After a 50-minute 'fix' the gold price fell to Dollars
353 a troy ounce - the lowest level for nine months.
Mr Andy Smith, analyst at the Union Bank of Switzerland, said that if the
sales had come from the same source as last year, the longer term
implications are serious for the market. 'It will have an impact on
investors who will be less willing to get back into the market. It might
also influence producers who now might not be so willing to let the gold
price rise before selling forward.'
Gold closed in London yesterday at Dollars 353.85 a troy ounce, down Dollars
2.60 on the week.
 ---------------------------------
LME Warehouse Stocks
 ---------------------------------
(As at Thursday's close)
tonnes
 ---------------------------------
Aluminium   +3,875  to  368,475
Copper      +4,275  to  230,175
Lead          +525  to   72,375
Nickel        -168  to    4,896
Zinc        +5,025  to  109,000
Tin           -385  to   16,430
 ---------------------------------
