FT  01 MAY 91 / World Bank Washington 1991: US seeks to raise World Bank's
private profile - Fears the bank will lose relevance if it deals only with
the public sector
SHOULD the World Bank start lending directly to the private sector? Although
the US, the bank's dominant shareholder, says the move should be seriously
considered, it would change fundamentally the basis on which the institution
has operated since its birth after the Second World War. It has lent only
under government guarantee.
The debate has been prompted by a call from the World Bank affiliate, the
International Finance Corporation, for a doubling of its Dollars 1.3bn
(Pounds 764.7m) capital. The IFC, headed by Sir William Ryrie, a former
British civil servant, is the part of the World Bank group created to lend
and make equity investment direct to the private sector.
It cannot lend with a government guarantee but claims its capital
limitations are already preventing it from growing at the pace it should.
It believes its 20 per cent annual growth rate in the late 1980s should slow
to 12 per cent, but without a capital infusion soon its growth would slow to
6 per cent or less.
The timing for a capital increase could not be better.
The collapse of the communist model in eastern Europe has reinforced a
sea-change already under way in many developing countries. This has placed
the private sector and functioning markets at the centre of development
plans.
While applauding this, the US wants to see any debate on the capital
increase dependent on the World Bank itself increasing its role in the
private sector.
The price for any capital increase would be for the World Bank group -
including the IFC - to direct 50 per cent of its lending to the private
sector by 1995. The US also envisages that eventually the bank might change
its articles of association to allow it to lend directly to the private
sector.
As explained by US officials, the reasoning behind the proposal is that  -
with the increasing role of the private sector in developing countries - the
bank risks losing its relevance in the 1990s if it deals only with the
public sector. A capital increase by the IFC alone would not meet the needs
for private sector development.
The suggestion has prompted the bank to suggest a series of changes which
will increase its explicit involvement in the private sector. But there is
concern among bank officials about the US proposal.
Mr Barber Conable, the bank's president, says a 50 per cent target for loans
directed to the private sector risks 'subterfuge', suggesting the bank would
simply redefine loans so they fitted into the right category.
Mr Larry Summers, the bank's new chief economist, speaks of a confusion
between measures which help the private sector to flourish and direct aid to
companies in the private sector.
The former area, providing the so-called 'enabling environment' for the
private sector - roads, telephones and electricity - is where the bank has
its comparative advantage, he says.
The establishment of significant private sector expertise in the bank also
risks expanding its 6,000-strong bureaucracy and overlapping with the work
the IFC already does.
Even if the proposal were adopted, it is unclear what it would mean. The
term 'lending directed towards the private sector' has an elasticity which
makes its impact vague.
On its proposal for the bank to lend directly to the private sector, the US
is in a minority among shareholders, possibly numbering one.
But given the importance of the US agenda, and the need to push the
regularly requested capital infusions of international institutions through
the US Congress, the proposal cannot be ignored.
The prospect of lending to the private sector frightens some bank officials.
The reason is simple; the bank's top credit rating enables it to borrow at
premium rates in the world's financial markets. Lending to the private
sector would add immeasurably to the risks it already faces, adding the
question of commercial risk to that of a country's willingness or ability to
pay.
The IFC's own portfolio is said to reinforce this view. Some bank officials
argue its lending record is at best chequered.
