FT  03 MAY 91 / Allied forces double size of 'safe haven' in northern Iraq
A FURTHER slice of northern Iraq was yesterday put under the control of
allied forces, while in Baghdad Kurdish leaders believed that they had
extracted important political concessions from the regime of President
Saddam Hussein.
The size of the 'safe haven' for Kurdish refugees in the north was more than
doubled by the deployment of US and allied forces. 'They've moved into the
area and are securing it. They will spend the night there,' a US military
spokesman said. There were no reports of resistance by Mr Saddam's troops or
security forces, who were told on Wednesday to withdraw from the new area.
Only local police may stay and they must register in advance with the
allies. The push to a line 18 miles east of the Iraqi frontier town of
Amadiyah more than doubles the size of the original zone carved out by
western troops in Iraq in April. The allied-controlled area is now about 80
miles long and 40 miles deep. Iraq has protested that the foreign troops are
violating its national sovereignty. American, British, Dutch and French
troops took part in the operation yesterday to expand the security zone and
supplies were being ferried into the area.
The move coincided with reports that the Iraqi regime was prepared to
concede the oil city of Kirkuk as well as some of its oil revenues to a
Kurdish autonomous region, western diplomats said. The reported deal, during
negotiations between the Baghdad government and Kurdish leaders, was
reported to the UN secretary-general, Mr Javier Perez de Cuellar, by Iraq's
UN ambassador, Mr Abdul Amir al-Anbari.
One diplomat said the Kurds appeared to have won some important concessions
from Baghdad, though none had been put on paper yet. 'They appear to have
gotten the city of Kirkuk in their region,' he said, and a share of some oil
revenues derived from fields in the Kurdish autonomous region.
Mr Saddam, spurred on by the presence of foreign troops in the north of his
country, forged an agreement in principle with rebel Kurdish leaders last
week to give them more autonomy.
According to Kurdish leaders, the agreement in principle covered
implementation of a March 11, 1970, autonomy pact.
Mr Jabal Talabani, leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, said the
talks included Kirkuk, which is not formally part of the current autonomous
region of Kurdistan.
He also said Iraqi officials had agreed to abolish the ruling Revolutionary
Command Council and hold multi-party elections within six months.
British officials expressed caution over the claim.
