FT  25 APR 91 / Leading Article: Days of hope in Moscow
SUDDENLY, there is hope in Moscow. The statement agreed between the leaders
of nine republics - crucially including Mr Boris Yeltsin of Russia - and Mr
Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet president, offers the best possibility in
months for ending the zero-sum games which have been the stock-in-trade of
Soviet politicians.
They have agreed that they must, as soon as possible, sign a new union
agreement, adopt a new union constitution and then hold elections for the
union parliaments and perhaps the union presidency. But with that, they have
explicitly said that those six republics which appear determined to pursue
an independent course and not sign a union agreement, and which did not send
their leaders to Tuesday's meeting, have the right to do so.
At the same time, they warn that those which sign will establish a common
economic space, within which 'most favoured nation' status will prevail. The
implication is that non-signers will be on the same footing as former
fraternal allies in eastern Europe: that is, they can go, but they must then
pay hard currency for Soviet oil, gas and other products. This will be hard,
but it looks like freedom: an end to the 'internal Brezhnev doctrine'.
They have agreed, too, that the anti-crisis programme which Mr Valentin
Pavlov, the prime minister, laid before the Supreme Soviet on Monday will be
supported and that the strikes now paralysing important parts of the Soviet
economy should end. Mr Yeltsin seems ready to lend his authority to the
restoration of industrial peace.
Step forward
This is a big step forward. Most of these republican leaders are
increasingly powerful figures, so the deal, if it sticks, marks both a
further coup for Mr Gorbachev's political skills and an indication of their
own sober sense that they must, in these hardest of times, hang together if
they do not wish to choke separately.
But it is Mr Yeltsin's signature on the document with Mr Gorbachev's which
represents the main political breakthrough. The Russian leader will, in
seven weeks' time, run for the presidency of Russia. His previous
calculation, that his popularity would increase in inverse proportion to the
fall in Mr Gorbachev's seems to have yielded to an appreciation that if he
blows too hard, down will come Gorby, Boris and all. If the two most
powerful politicians in the Soviet Union can suppress their personal dislike
in favour of a political accord with clearly stated aims, the Soviet Union
may have a period in which it can peacefully dis-unite.
Western aid
Such an accord is essential if the country is to receive any of the western
aid, investment and technical assistance it must have.
There is, however, another large question: is the reform which the
republican leaders have agreed to support - the anti-crisis plan - actually
serious? Mr Pavlov says he wants to use the power of the state to effect
necessary sacrifices, steady the currency, balance the budget and increase
production. He has recognised explicitly that a socialist economy with no
fear factor cannot work.
But he also plans (small) privatisations this year and larger ones next. He
urges entrepreneurial behaviour. He has already pushed through price rises,
and has even freed some from state control.
There is much room for doubt. Many - not all - of the radical economists
associated with a more rapid dash for the market distrust Mr Pavlov deeply:
after all, as finance minister, he was responsible for debauching the
currency. He talks too easily of coercion, of states of emergency and of
force.
But if, in the fleshing out of his programme, he really is prepared to
bequeath decision making to the market-oriented republics and, more
importantly, to the enterprises; if he really can provide some space for
market behaviour and not simultaneously woo it and beat it, as Mr Nikolai
Ryzhkov, his predecessor, did; if he can keep the apparatus at bay - then he
may prove to be a reformer after all. And then the Soviet economy may have a
chance, even if it is a slim one.
