FT  14 MAY 91 / NatWest proposes market in small company shares
NATIONAL Westminster Bank is considering setting up a market in small
company shares to rival the London stock exchange.
Its proposal is in response to the government's call for innovative ideas to
extend share ownership. Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, has invited
suggestions from the private sector on how to provide a cheap way for people
to use high street outlets to buy and sell shares.
In response to the Treasury's invitation, a project team from NatWest
Stockbrokers is developing ideas on how the bank could best offer an
'over-the-counter' market for shares in small companies.
The bank already provides instant share dealing in 550 companies through its
touch-screen service in 278 branches. Those screens could be equipped to
quote the prices of small companies at relatively little expense to the
bank, which could offer access to its market to the public as well as to its
own customers. Ministers believe the scheme could lead to a wider share
ownership. There are currently more than 11m individual shareholders,
compared with about 3m in 1979.
Mr Neil Stapley, managing director of NatWest Stockbrokers, said: 'We are
looking at setting up a separate market for small companies. I have been
looking at various ways of extending share ownership.'
Senior NatWest directors believe the proposal could be implemented by the
end of the summer, although it still has to be approved by the bank's board.
They believe a number of small companies, which are either unlisted or have
failed to find a home since the demise of the Third Market last year, would
welcome the opportunity of being quoted in a market run by the bank.
The directors see no need to get approval for their scheme from the stock
exchange because the bank is already regulated by The Securities and Futures
Authority (formerly The Securities Association).
The stock exchange, which has already set up a committee to look at the
general illiquidity in small companies, is unlikely to be keen on an
independent NatWest market.
Mr Andrew Hugh Smith, the stock exchange chairman, said: 'The banks are in a
position to offer a cheaper service than brokers. But I hope we would
provide sufficient value for them to do it in our market.'
NatWest directors are confident that ministers, anxious to widen share
ownership among individuals before the next election, would help push
through the proposal in the face of any stock exchange opposition.
The Treasury has made it clear than any proposal aimed at spreading share
ownership more widely, particularly through retail outlets, would be
welcomed.
High street stock shop, Page 8
