FT  22 APR 91 / Al Sabahs keeping their hold on power: Kuwait's new cabinet
still includes no opposition members
KUWAIT's organised opposition groups yesterday condemned the emirate's new
cabinet as 'frustrating and disappointing', saying it indicated no will by
the ruling al Sabah family to cede any power.
Although there were 11 new faces among the 20 men sworn into cabinet by
Sheikh Jaber al Sabah, the emir, yesterday to replace the government which
resigned four weeks ago, no opposition or resistance members appeared on the
new cabinet roll.
Moreover, although the list contained fewer members of the al Sabah family,
those who did appear continue to hold the most powerful ministries.
Opposition groups, which have been calling for cabinet representation as a
prelude to the establishment of full democracy in the emirate, were quick to
condemn the new team.
'Kuwaitis will be frustrated and disappointed with this cabinet,' Mr Isa
Shaheen, spokesman for the Islamic Constitutional Movement (ICM), said
yesterday. 'Despite the immensity of the disaster in Kuwait, it seems that
nothing has happened as far as the government is concerned.'
Nevertheless, the emir did not turn a completely blind eye to Kuwait's
post-liberation pressures for change in appointing his new cabinet - a
process which appears to have been the subject of strong internal debate,
given the four weeks it consumed.
He responded to widespread criticism of the government's handling of events
leading up to Iraq's invasion by replacing the defence and foreign
ministers, Sheikh Nawaf al Sabah - who moves to the Social Affairs Ministry
 -and Sheikh al Ahmed al Jaber al Sabah, who have taken the brunt of popular
charges of incompetence.
Equally, though, the emir kept an al Sabah hand on each key ministry by
naming Sheikh Salem Sabah al Salem, the former interior minister, as the new
foreign minister and Sheikh Ali Salem al Sabah as the new defence minister.
Sheikh Salem, made himself unpopular with the opposition through his tough
response to their pro-democracy rallies in early 1989. His replacement,
meanwhile, was another al Sabah, Sheikh Ahmed Hamoud al-Jaber.
The other significant change was the removal of Dr Rasheed al Almeeri as oil
minister after what is widely seen as his belated and inefficient action in
dealing with the oil well fires. He was replaced by Mr Hamoud al Rogba,
formerly minister of electricity and water.
Although no opposition members appeared on the cabinet list, this came as
little surprise to the anti-government groups which have emerged since
liberation, most of whom recognised that the government was not going to
accede to their conditions for joining the government.
These included the replacement of the entire cabinet and a firm government
commitment to a date for elections to the national assembly, which was
suspended in 1986. The emir has promised only that elections will be held
some time next year.
The organised opposition, including the ICM and Democratic Forum, a
predominantly leftist umbrella group, yesterday promised to sustain their
anti-government campaign by holding demonstrations both inside Kuwait and in
European and Arab capitals housing large numbers of Kuwaiti exiles.
Their options, however, appear limited. 'It's hard to see what levers they
hold, apart from moral pressure and the denial of consensus,' said one
diplomat.
The government, meanwhile, appears set on a policy of wooing conservative
Kuwaitis, while promising longer-term reforms. As one of a series of recent
inducements to middle-class Kuwaitis, it has offered to cancel all consumer
and housing loans, give free flights to returning Kuwaitis and grant KD500
(Pounds 1,000) to each Kuwaiti who stayed.
However, most observers agree that the government will succeed in quieting
demands for deeper reform only by demonstrating greater efficiency than
hitherto in effecting Kuwait's reconstruction programme.
