FT  09 MAY 91 / Scots power sale takes key step
WITH the momentum of a prospectus as big asa telephone directory dropping,
the long-awaited privatisation of the two Scottish electricity companies
moved towards its crucial phase yesterday.
For months, the biggest doubt about the flotation concerned the possibility
that the government might call a general election before it could be
completed in mid June. Political setbacks for the Conservatives over the
past few weeks have virtually eliminated that risk.
Although Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, was careful yesterday not to
pre-empt the right of Mr John Major, the prime minister, to choose the
election date, he expressed the hope that there would be 'no impediment to a
successful sale'.
The flotation of ScottishPower and Scottish Hydro-Electric will complete the
privatisation of the electricity industry in Great Britain. Ulster's power
industry is to be sold next year.
It will also bring to the Stock Exchange two electricity companies that,
unlike the generators and regional electricity companies in England, have
the appeal of being vertically integrated. They generate, transmit and
distribute electricity.
Apart from being easier to understand, especially for foreign investors
accustomed to it, the vertically integrated structure of the electricity
utility makes for more balanced businesses than those of the English
companies. ScottishPower and Scottish Hydro-Electric can relate their
generation activities to established customer markets.
Although the two companies compete for large industrial customers with a
consumption over 1MW, they also share a balanced mix of generating plant,
thanks to pre-privatisation asset swaps and a network of generating
contracts between them, as well as supply arrangements with the state-owned
Scottish Nuclear.
Together they benefit from the substantial past over-investment in
generating plant in Scotland, which will make new spending on generating
plant unnecessary. As a result, the government is floating them with highly
geared debt-to-equity ratios of 51 per cent for Scottish Power and 43 per
cent for Scottish Hydro-Electric.
That gives them a big surplus of relatively inexpensive power for export to
England. to It will become even cheaper when gas from the Miller field in
the North Sea comes on stream for Hydro-Electric next year.
However the scope for exports is limited by the relatively small size of the
interconnector, the power transmission lines linking Scotland with England.
Plans to double its size will not come fully into effect until 1995.
The flotation is part of the government's policy of increasing share
ownership in Scotland, where it has hitherto been relatively low. The
incentives for individual investors to apply for shares are biased towards
customers of the two companies who need only make a first instalment payment
of Pounds 100 and may apply for their own company's shares only.
Other individual investors must buy a package of the two companies's shares,
likely to be in a ratio of 2 1/2 Scottish Power shares to one share in
Hydro-Electric, and make a down payment of Pounds 300. The exact proportions
of the package will be fixed when the offer price is decided and the
companies go on sales on May 30.
The offer is not being underwritten. Instead, the government is following
the successful practice applied in February with the English generators and
carrying out a book-building exercise among institutions to assess demand at
varying prices. It will also market the shares to institutions in Japan, the
US, Canada and continental Europe, who are expected to take not more than 15
to 20 per cent of the offer.
