FT  11 MAY 91 / Two lives dedicated to child's play: Iona Opie, the
self-appointed guardian of our childhood songs and games
LIKE Humpty Dumpty or Peter Piper, the name Iona Opie is catchy, has rhythm,
and is remembered by many people who are English-speaking and under 35 along
with their early nursery rhyme characters.
Since the 1950s, she has collected the songs and games of childhood -
jointly with her husband, Peter, until his death in 1982 - and written a
series of unlikely bestsellers about these discoveries. The Oxford Book of
Nursery Rhymes, published in 1955 is the first book many people remember
reading. If you are a parent, a dip into The Lore and Language of
Schoolchildren (1959) still tells you more about what happens to your
offspring once they pass through the school gates than any number of
meetings with teacher.
For the past 14 years, Iona Opie has been visiting the playground of her
local junior school at Liss, in Hampshire, each week to track such
developments as seasonal variations in games and the rise of sexually
explicit and scatological verses. The results will appear next year in The
People and the Playground.
The Opies were the first to realise that anthropology was as authentic in
the English playground as in the tropics. There has been criticism of them
for being timorous but, as she says: 'In 1959, you didn't publish anything
worse than the word knickers. Now, in the name of science, I'm going to
publish everything.'
'We make jokes about anything we're frightened of. Children worry about
death and joke about gruesome coffins; we worry about the troubles in
Ireland and make jokes about silly Irishmen. Children have the same need as
adults to cope with their social life.'
The nursery rhyme is uniquely British, she says: 'It's all part of being
frightfully tough and not minding the weather. We're nourished with
nonsense, and it does us a lot of good. When you're feeling downhearted, you
recite a nonsense rhyme to yourself . . . All the best people use them:
Lewis Carroll, Dickens, there are echoes in Louis MacNeice and Benjamin
Britten. They haven't got the same fantastical nursery rhymes anywhere else
in the world.
'Every other nation seems to believe that the British national character is
reflected in nursery rhymes. They're all busy studying them; Japan is very
serious about it and in Russia the translations have never gone out of
print.'
With her breezy, down-to-earth manner, English rose complexion, and
expression flitting between mockery and romantic fancy, Iona Opie looks
rather like a robust and elegant nursery rhyme herself. Although the most
eminent scholar in her field, when talking about her work, she is as
light-hearted and frothy as the verses and songs that are her raw material.
She and Peter managed to keep a spark in their anthropological writings, she
says, by remembering exactly what it was like to be a child, going out if
you were the seeker to look for people already hiding and feeling the danger
as if you were going through the jungle.
'The happiness a child can find in books and toys and games is more intense
than almost any he will experience in adult life, and the treasures of
childhood which often exist only in the memory are among our most precious
possessions.'
Her home at Westerfield House in Hampshire is a late Victorian farmhouse
shaped like a couple of Noah's arks tagged together and given over to the
rescue and preservation of children's books and toys. In 1989, she donated
half the books to Oxford University. The Opie Appeal, to acquire the other
half for the university, exceeded its target easily. Some 20,000 volumes,
worth Pounds 1m, went to the Bodleian Library, but Westerfield continues to
fill up; a set of early skipping ropes, some 1950s jumping jacks, a
collection of picture books.
She sees herself and her husband as the custodians of everybody else's
childhood, and there is a glint of obsessive, sarcastic pleasure as she
describes a punitive regime of working all hours in a self-imposed car-free,
television-free world which gave the time to catalogue thousands of verses
and singing games. 'We were both Puritans; we liked hurting ourselves.
Neither of us liked luxury. Today, I've softened a great deal. I bought the
first new car after Peter died . . .
'We once wondered why no one else had done the work we had, and the truth
came in a great light; it's economically complete suicide. Between us, we
earned the same per annum as a London police constable.
'We were terribly badly qualified. We had no academic training but we
realised this was our great advantage. Caught in the war, neither of us went
to university. We felt that if we had done we would, firstly, have known
that we were not qualified to do the job and, secondly, we would have put it
in an academic form and it would never have had the effect it did.'
By nature if not by training, though, the anthropologist was early in the
making. Her father was a doctor in Sudan and Khartoum. Peter's father was
also a doctor, in India. She had a cosy and cossetted childhood in the 1920s
and 1930s but says: 'I was a completely silent child. It didn't occur to me
that one was supposed to speak. One of my maids accused me of being sly
because, she said 'I don't know what you're thinking, ever'. Nobody told me
I ought to talk, so my whole attention was given to noticing and taking
things in.'
She married Peter 'because we were the same sort of people; we both liked
reference books.' They met when she was in the meteorological section of the
Women's Auxiliary Air Force and had run out of books. She was loaned one
written by a young man called Peter Opie and liked his personality so much
that she wrote to him.
As a young couple in the 1950s and 1960s, they had a band of helpers and
talked to more than 5,000 children, looking for evidence of a traditional
culture they were told was already dead. Instead, in schools up and down the
country they found rhymes, games and customs stretching back centuries,
passed on by oral tradition, in different but clearly related versions.
'Children, we now know, have their own code of oral legislation for testing,
betting, swapping, keeping secrets; they have tricks to inflict pain or
embarassment (Adam and Eve and Pinchme); jeers and torments for crawlers and
cheats and dunces and clever dicks; nicknames of approval and disapproval
for thinnies and fatties and greedyguts; codes for playing truant and
keeping a lookout. Riddles and witticisms and spooky tales help them fend
for themselves in the playground, nonsense rhymes fill awkward moments, mock
danger, underlines the absurdity of the adult world'.
No one before the Opies had put any of these snippets together in context,
not shown the speed at which children's oral lore spreads, like an
advertiser's dream-come-true, across the country faster than the printed
word or the slogan heard on television. The results, as VS Pritchett pointed
out in an early review, take you deeply into British life.
So what now? 'In my dotage I'll potter on with a very big book, Games with
Things. I recall a skipping game with giant elastic bands hooked round
schoolmates' ankles.' She tells me its history - 'Shanghai 1930; via Chinese
grandmothers to American children; to Holy Loch in Scotland, with US
servicemen's families, in 1960, to the derivative French skipping today' -
and instantly sets to work questioning me on my memories. 'If any of your
readers can give me more details, I'll be fascinated.'
