FT  07 MAY 91 / Bangladesh rocked by fresh gales
FRESH GALES were yesterday causing further destruction along the coast of
Bangladesh, where nearly 10m people made homeless by last week's cyclone
still await relief from hunger, thirst and disease.
The death toll continues to mount and some officials say as many as 500,000
people may have died. A lack of communications and bad weather have hampered
the relief effort and delayed an accurate assessment of the disaster.
Bangladesh's entire armed forces, police and home guard have been mobilised
for the effort, but their resources are woefully inadequate.
Local relief is supplemented by a trickle of help from abroad. Helicopters,
including three given by India, two by Pakistan and six from Bangladesh
itself, are dropping supplies for the survivors.
Aid amounting to Dollars 130m (Pounds 76.7m) has been promised by the US,
the European Community, Japan, Canada and Saudi Arabia.
There are hurdles in the way of the immediate relief work and future
recovery. Having just emerged from a period of political turmoil, the
country is struggling to tackle yet another natural calamity.
Bangladesh's inexperienced leadership and inefficient bureaucracy is
ill-equipped to tackle a human tragedy of frightening dimensions.
Foreign relief agencies in the capital Dhaka point out that the country
lacks the capacity to absorb large-scale aid and say that international
agencies will have to become involved in the relief work.
The only supplies reaching survivors are by air. Means of communication
barely exist and much of the country's infrastructure has been lost. All
roads and bridges have been destroyed.
The damage to the infrastructure and to crops and livestock could exceed the
present estimate of Dollars 1bn, a crippling burden on an economy with a
population growing at about 2.5 per cent annually, but with only a 3.5 per
cent growth in gross national product last year.
More than 200,000 square miles of the country were inundated. There is
virtually no livestock left. The country's winter crop, much of it ready for
harvesting, has been destroyed. Last year's food grain production of 10.9m
tonnes will fall sharply in 1991-92 and further imports will be needed.
Coastal embankments built as part of flood-protection schemes have been
destroyed, as well as irrigation projects, rural water supply and
electricity stations.
The economy will be particularly badly hit by the damage to the 70 foreign
exchange-earning units in the export-processing zone at Chittagong. Tidal
waves have virtually washed away their stocks and machines.
Bangladesh's lucrative shrimp industry at the port of Cox's Bazar has been
wiped out. It too will take time and money to rebuild. In Chittagong port,
sunken vessels clog up the main channel and quays, halting all trade.
A reluctance by foreign investors to put money into a cyclone-prone area is
likely to hamper rebuilding efforts.
Foreign exchange reserves have been partly shored up by the first tranche of
a loan from the International Monetary Fund and are at a fairly comfortable
Dollars 600m, worth about two months of imports. Thousands of Bangladeshis
are returning to work in the Gulf and their remittances will add to the
reserves, but they will be quickly depleted.
Bangladesh already had enough economic troubles before the cyclone.
Inflation, which reached 10 per cent last year, will be pushed higher by the
scarcity of resources. Private investment, both internal and foreign, was
already being held back until the new political leadership, in place for two
months, clarifies its policies.
For the present, long-term measures are taking second place to the immediate
crisis.
