FT  20 APR 91 / Gardening: All in the mire over peat - Arthur Hellyer calls
for cold facts on an environmental controversy
THERE IS nothing like a conservation issue to arouse the interest and stir
the consciences of gardeners and there is no doubt that the present one on
the use of peat in gardens has taken root and is becoming ever more baffling
by the day.
Within a week I have attended a day-long seminar on the subject organised
jointly by the Horticultural Development Council, the National Farmers Union
and the Horticultural Trades Association and have also received a letter
telling me that an independent study of peatlands, carried out by the Centre
of Agricultural Strategy at Reading University, shows that there is no
evidence to support the claims of environmentalists that less than 10,000
hectares of relatively intact raised mire remain in Britain.
'Raised mire,' let me explain, is the technical name for the kind of peat
bog from which the best grade sphagnum peat is obtained and this is the kind
of peat around which most of the argument rages.
Somewhere along the road a good deal of ill feeling has been generated
between the most active promoters of the anti-peat crusade and the peat
producers and I am glad that the government has become involved since
hopefully it will bring cooler judgments and more sense into the argument.
It is high time that the gardening public ceased to be bamboozled and it is
especially important that we are given reliable information about the
quantity and distribution of peat in Britain that has some genuine
significance. If it is peat that supports some of the country's eco-systems
what should be done?
I will only say that in the Republic of Ireland, where the peat industry is
highly developed, the peat producers appear to have got together with
environmentalists and concluded that the best way to satisfy both is first
to agree on what are the key environmental areas and then to engage the
producers to conserve them.
One thing that seems to be little understood is that environments are nearly
always changing. If, for some special reason, one wishes to keep them
exactly as they are, steps must be taken to ensure this. I understand that
some English peat producers already carry out such conservation measures and
that others would be glad to do so. That alone, if accepted, might well
settle matters for a good many years - by which time the particular kind of
sphagnum moss peat, which we find so indispensable for seed and potting
composts, could well have been superseded by something else.
Traditionally gardeners grew pot plants in a mixture of good loam - the top
layer of a fertile meadow cut and stacked for at least a year - well-rotted
leaf mould from either an oak or a beech wood and washed river sand. Today
this, with the exception of the sand, would certainly be regarded as
environmentally unfriendly.
In the 1930s gardeners at the John Innes Horticultural Institution were
searching for seed and potting composts that could be more accurately
formulated and perform more reliably. Among the materials they examined were
some forms of peat. Peat forming in sphagnum moss bogs proved far better
than anything else. Highly absorbent, porous and virtually sterile it
contained so little plant food that it could be ignored. What was required
for any particular plant could be added, and that was that. This peat was
also moderately acid; not so much so as to harm anything nor so little that
it would be unsuitable for some plants.
John Innes composts were invented for private purposes but soon attained
near universal use. They finally declined because of shortage of loam of
adequate quality and the arrival of pure peat composts. The new composts
were much lighter and more suitable for container plants in garden centres
and through these were rapidly introduced to gardeners. They have been
developed for 40 years and more in Britain, the US and elsewhere. We know
all about them and how to use them. There is no obvious substitute that has
all the advantages, none that we know so much about and all manner of
substitutes some of which sound positively dangerous.
Let us take it quietly, get our facts right and then, if it really does seem
necessary to do so, start experimenting with alternatives. It could take 10
years to find a really satisfactory substitute for the particular peat we
use but there is an awful lot of peat around of many different kinds.
Peat-cutting in Ireland: conservationists fear for the traditional landscape
