FT  07 MAY 91 / Japan deserves a little respect: Michael Prowse on America
America's relationship with Japan is thoroughly unhealthy. Following the
Second World War, the US initially played the role of feudal lord, Japan
that of vassal. As Japan rebuilt its economy and society, the relationship
evolved into that of teacher and pupil. The next step should have been
mutual acceptance of equality. But this has not happened: the teacher
remains overbearing; the pupil, although now adult, unable politically to
assert itself.
The teacher has decidedly mixed feelings about its student's success. When
voting with its credit cards, it loves its precocious pupil: US streets and
homes are clogged with Japanese cars, videos and cameras. Yet tremendous
resentment lurks near the surface. A poll showing that three-quarters of
Americans think Japan did not pull its weight in the Gulf war was merely the
latest in a litany of complaints.
Many Americans believe Japan has prospered by cheating: by selling goods at
artificially low prices in export markets while curbing imports; and by
acquiescing in - if not actively encouraging - concentrations of industrial
power that contravene US anti-trust law. The rise of Japanese direct
investment in the US, although still well short of Britain's, also provokes
hostility. Japan is reviled both for 'buying up' America and for restricting
the career prospects of US employees.
The pupil's success is beyond doubt. Japan has consistently produced
macroeconomic results that are magical by US standards. Growth of real Gross
National Product has averaged more than 4 per cent a year since 1981. The
unemployment rate has never exceeded 3 per cent. Inflation has been held to
an average of only about 2 per cent. Since the mid-1980s, Japan has also
turned a moderate government deficit into a surplus and, as a share of GNP,
more than halved its once-troubling current account surplus. The economy is
now slowing, but the 'recession' will be mild by Anglo-Saxon standards.
Economics, however, is only part of the story. Japan is effortlessly
outperforming the US on a host of other criteria. Schoolchildren learn much
more, especially in numerate subjects. In maths, the average Japanese
student achieves a higher level than the top 5 per cent of US high school
seniors. Japan spends about half as much of GNP on health care as the US,
yet its people are much healthier. The infant mortality rate is half that of
the US; life expectancy several years longer. Japanese streets are clean and
safe.
Nor is Japan ignoring its global responsibilities. As the world's biggest
creditor nation, it is beginning to allocate funds more carefully. By
providing more than Dollars 9bn (Pounds 5.3bn) a year in overseas
development assistance, it has displaced the US as the world's top donor
nation. The World Bank also recently cited Japan as an environmental
paragon: since 1970 it has cut sulphur dioxide emissions by 80 per cent
despite more than doubling its GNP. It has done more than any competitor
nation to improve energy efficiency and has much lower carbon emissions than
either the US or Europe.
Yet despite Japan's remarkable success in so many fields, Americans rarely
acknowledge that they have anything to learn from their former pupil. With
the possible exception of innovations in industrial organisation, the US
reaction is invariably that Japan has succeeded by 'bending the rules'. When
will the penny drop? When will the US grasp that it - rather than Japan -
needs to abandon bad habits and foolish theories?
Many of the virtues of modern Japan cannot be easily copied. The US with its
open spaces, waves of immigration and frontier spirit cannot hope to match a
social cohesiveness resulting from high population density and centuries of
isolation. Nor, saddled with a 'quick fix, no pain' television culture, can
it easily transplant austere Confucian values that persuade parents to
sacrifice almost anything for their children's education. But these Japanese
strengths at least illustrate the direction of the required changes.
The startling success of the Japanese economy - which can no longer be
dismissed as a 'catching up' phenomenon - raises a particular problem. In
his 1936 preface to the Japanese edition of The General Theory, John Maynard
Keynes speculated that the Japanese might 'neither require nor resist my
assaults against the English tradition'. He was referring, of course, to the
fact that 19th century classical economics never exerted much intellectual
pull on the pragmatic Japanese.
Scholars can argue about the causes of Japan's economic vitality. But, as
Keynes noted, it certainly does not reflect an unusual attention to free
market doctrines. The state plays a large, if often subtle, role in
influencing the distribution of resources. It regulates heavily, especially
in the financial sector. It champions producers' rather than consumers'
interests. In industry, goals like market share take precedence over
profits; pay formulas run directly counter to market principles, rewarding
seniority rather than performance. In many instances, groups are regarded as
more important than individuals. All this has led to a focus on investment,
manufacturing, foreign markets and long-term planning: notorious areas of
weakness in Anglo-Saxon economies.
Japan's economic and social record is not unblemished. But it is doing well
enough to deserve more respect from the US. Instead of getting angry about
'unfair' practices, the teacher should perhaps start listening to its gifted
pupil.
