FT  14 MAY 91 / Survey of Computers in Manufacturing (11): Search for new
applications - Robotics, still on the fringe of the industrial sector
FOR all the hype over the past 20 years about how robots would transform
manufacturing industry, they still remain on the fringes of the industrial
scene - with the notable exception of manufacturing in Japan.
According to the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, the world
industrial robot population stood at 388,000 units at the end of 1989, of
which 220,000 were in Japan, 56,000 in western Europe, 37,000 in the US and
 -very roughly - 75,000 elsewhere.
There are a number of interconnected reasons for this situation. In the
past, there has been considerable hostility from trade unions to their
introduction and managements have taken a lot of convincing about the cost
benefits.
Dr Kevin Clarke, manager of manufacturing engineering at PA Consulting
Group, says that, in many instances, robots have not delivered the cost
effectiveness they have promised. Robot manufacturers, he says, have not
developed their products technologically as fast as they might have.
'There's very little innovation, because the market isn't there,' he says.
However, the evidence of the past two years suggests that things may be
changing. Those 388,000 units represented an increase of 20 per cent from
the end of 1988, and in 1990 US-based robotics companies won record new
orders of Dollars 517.4m.
The robotics industry was in deep gloom during 1986 and 1987, and especially
in the US where it had become far too dependent on the motor industry -
which took about 40 to 50 per cent of sales.
Mr Donald Vincent, executive vice-president of the US Robotic Industries
Association, recalls that 'when the automotive industry quit buying in 1986
and 1987, it sent robotics into a deep spin.'
This decline had two results. First, it encouraged a much-needed
concentration among robot producers. In the middle of the 1980s there were
some 300, according to the International Federation of Robotics (IFR). Now,
it says, there are probably fewer than 100 true producers, led by ABB
Robotics, part of the Swiss-Swedish Asea Brown Boveri, GMF Robotics, a joint
venture between Fanuc of Japan and General Motors of the US, and Yaskawa of
Japan.
Secondly, the downturn prompted an urgent search for new applications for
robots away from the motor industry and its inherent cyclicality. Dr Clarke
singles out 'clean room' applications for robots in health care and
precision engineering, while Mr Vincent is hopeful of new applications in
the food industry, materials handling and packaging.
The wellspring for this diversification into new markets, which has already
begun, is computer power. In mechanical terms, robots are relatively simple
beasts, and robotic technology has always been based on the use of computers
to overcome mechanical limitations.
Mr Kenneth Waldron, a robotics expert at Ohio State University, says 'the
major theme which will direct commercial applications of new research in
robotics will be that of taking advantage of the huge increases in computing
power which have become available as a result of the development of advanced
microprocessors.'
Mr Waldron notes that most current industrial robot systems offer only
incremental improvements over what was possible with the first generation of
microcomputer controllers.
Current research is looking at areas such as greater use of sensing - of the
robot's environment and internal state - more sophisticated control
techniques offering greater speed and accuracy, robotic mobility and
improved control of the interface between the robot and the workpiece.
Given these trends, there has inevitably been considerable interest in
industrial vision systems for robots, which could radically change many
applications, particularly in assembly where robots have so far failed to
make their mark.
Previous forecasts for the population of vision-equipped robots have not
been realised, but it is reasonable to predict, as the IFR has, that the
continuous reduction in prices of computers and sensors, and their greater
speed and reliability, will gradually remove the technological and economic
barriers.
Many of the business trends in robotics over the past few years are
illustrated by developments at ABB Robotics, which claims to be the world's
biggest supplier - a title which the Japanese manufacturers might dispute.
ABB's purchase last year of Cincinnati Milacron's robotics business was an
important step in the consolidation of the industry around leading European
and Japanese suppliers. Mr Stelio Demark, head of ABB Robotics, says the
Cincinnati business brought with it a tremendous US customer base and
undoubted expertise in spot-welding robotics.
The nature of ABB's customer base has also been changing, and over the past
five years it has reduced its dependence on the automotive industry from
70-75 per cent of sales to 50 per cent. ABB is attracting new business from
small and medium-sized companies which had previously not bought robots. 'We
may be supplying ones and twos, but it's growing very quickly,' says Mr
Demark.
New markets include glass making, different kinds of process applications,
and palletising. This effort is backed up by spending on research and
development - 10 per cent of revenues - that is almost on a par with that of
the pharmaceutical industry.
Meanwhile the falling cost of electronics is allowing ABB to build more
capability and flexibility into its robots. ABB's latest product, the IRB
6000, was officially launched last month with claims of much greater
flexibility and capability than rival products.
Because of these developments, Mr Demark is optimistic about future growth
prospects for ABB and the industry. The view is shared by independent
observers.
In a report about to be published by Frost &amp; Sullivan, the international
market research publishers, total world robot sales are forecast to rise
from Dollars 2.15bn in 1990 to Dollars 3.41bn in 1996. The relatively small
size of the industry at the end of the 1980s is a reflection of many of the
factors mentioned above.
F &amp; S sees the Japanese market's share of world robot sales falling from 65
per cent last year to 45 per cent in 1996, while Europe's share will rise
from 15 to 20 per cent, the US will mark time at about 6 per cent and the
rest of the world will jump from 14 per cent to just under 30 per cent.
The biggest growth area is Asia, which is good news for the Japanese
producers, but Europe, says Mr Demark, is also 'very interesting,' and the
company's home base. F &amp; S sees the European market rising from Dollars 330m
in 1990 to Dollars 687m in 1996, with Germany leading the way.
Looking specifically at the European market, F &amp; S comments that the
'supplier capable of marketing a complete package including sensors,
user-friendly software and simple training and installation will achieve the
best sales penetration.'
ABB is probably justified in claiming that it offers more service and
support to European buyers than the more product-based approach of the
Japanese, but Dr Clarke wonders whether this will still be true in two
years' time. On the other hand Europe, he says, is probably not one of the
Japanese producers' priorities, given the better growth prospects in the
Asia Pacific region.
As for the balance of power in the industry, both ABB and the Japanese are
growing stronger, the big producers are getting bigger, and the smaller
robotics companies, particularly in the US and UK, are concentrating on
niches and ancillary services.
If the big producers can keep up with development in computing, the 1990s
could well bring the rewards that proved so elusive for much fo the 1980s.
