FT  20 APR 91 / Safety work fuels North Sea costs: Deborah Hargreaves says
vital maintenance will depress production
ENGINEERS are in short supply in Aberdeen as the North Sea oil industry
embarks on one of its most intensive periods of maintenance for many years.
Oil-services companies are stretched by a heavy burden of safety work to
bring installations into line with new government regulations.
As several large North Sea fields approach maturity, the industry is in a
frenzy to discover new oil and gas deposits, and a record number of
exploration wells is likely to be drilled this year.
Some maintenance work was put off last year while oil prices were rising
towards Dollars 40 a barrel during the Gulf crisis, and the biggest
companies now face a backlog of maintenance work on producing rigs. This is
partly to institute safety features recommended after the Piper Alpha
disaster, and partly to renew ageing equipment.
Production platforms are starting to wear out because some of the largest
fields are approaching maturity. Rather than build new rigs, operators are
patching up old ones in an attempt to extend their lives. The cost of
abandoning defunct oil rigs can be high, which means the industry will run
unprofitable platforms for as long as it can.
The Commons energy committee called on companies yesterday to start making
provisions now for abandoning rigs. Companies are forced to look farther
afield for oil and gas discoveries which will be linked into existing large
rigs by pipelines.
Prolonged shutdown periods to cope with maintenance work, made all the more
urgent by the increasing age of North Sea installations, will depress
production in the next three months when the UK will become a net importer
of oil.
The government, in an attempt to maintain the momentum in the North Sea, is
pressing the big companies to use idle oil exploration acreage or give it
up.
Renewed interest in North Sea exploration, brought about by a stronger oil
price over the last couple of years and forecasts of a shortfall in UK
output by the mid-1990s, could see more than 300 exploration wells drilled
this year - beating last year's record 290.
The maintenance burden remains large. North Sea output peaked last month at
close to 2m barrels a day (b/d) - the highest level for nine months. In the
next quarter, the heavy maintenance load will depress production by about
400,000 b/d bringing output to 1.5m b/d in April and around 1.8m b/d in May.
The Brent pipeline, the largest in the North Sea, closed at the beginning of
this month for the installation - which could take up to six weeks - of
emergency shutdown valves.
Chevron will complete work on the Ninian pipeline in mid-May, which was
delayed because of last year's industrial unrest, and this will further
staunch the flow of oil.
Unofficial strike action delayed some of the work offshore last year, and
this could prove a problem again this year following a row between official
and unofficial labour representatives over a proposed pay deal.
Mr Ian Wood, chairman of Wood Group, one of the UK's largest oil services
companies, said he had 1,400 employees working on offshore maintenance
compared with 800 at the end of last year.
Mr Chris Fay, head of exploration and production at Shell, the biggest North
Sea operator, said the top parts of many rigs built in the 1970s were
wearing out.
'I think there was an under-estimation of the severity of the weather,' he
explained.
The recommendations made in the Cullen report on the Piper Alpha explosion,
many of which the government has made law, will take several years for
companies to institute completely.
The additional safety work has led to an increase in North Sea operating
costs of around 10 per cent - or about Pounds 250m - this year, according to
Mr Stephen Halliday, an analyst with County NatWest in Edinburgh.
The most costly feature is providing safe havens for employees in the event
of a disaster - a problem which companies are only just beginning to tackle.
