FT  10 MAY 91 / Estonia moves cautiously through collectivist web
MR RIHO OLBERG, a 40-year-old Estonian farmer, has never known what it feels
like to own the land he farms. Although he lives on the property his great
grandfather bought from the German Baron Arthur Konstantin Sternberg in
1897, his only proof of ownership is a deed to roughly 44 hectares dating
from the days of the Russian empire.
Mr Olberg hopes to be one of the first Estonians to benefit from
privatisation. He knows it will be an uphill struggle. 'People are afraid to
show too much enthusiasm over private property because they fear a backlash
 -that their land will be once again confiscated, collectivised and they
will end up in Siberia,' he said.
Estonia, one of the three Baltic republics set on independence, is striving
to free itself from the bonds of a centrally-planned economy.
Privatisation is widely seen as the only path by which the Soviet Union can
launch itself into a market economy. For republics such as Estonia, it is
also a barometer of the pace of economic reform for foreign investors.
Estonia launched its first modest step towards privatisation last year,
permitting the sale of state-owned service, trade and catering companies
worth up to Rbs500,000 (Pounds 164,000). The results have been modest: a
beauty parlour, barber and a florist shop were auctioned in March in the
western coastal town of Haapsalu.
The republic is planning to take another step soon by selling 17 large
enterprises. It intends to put up for sale a 10 per cent stake of all medium
and large companies under the control of the Estonian state: these would
include seven companies during the first half of this year and a further 10
later this year.
However, Mr Ardo Kamratov, head of the Estonian department of state
property, believes there are pitfalls. For example, companies' shares are to
be offered first to their workers, then to local inhabitants and only then
to outsiders, including foreigners.
The seven large companies up for total privatisation include Baltika and two
other textile companies, Talleks, which builds excavators, and TLN
Taksopark, Tallinn's taxi company.
In early April, Estonia passed legislation which attempted to set the
framework for returning land confiscated after 1940 to its rightful owners.
Those who are eligible and want to reclaim land owned up to June 1940, when
Estonia was illegally annexed by Moscow, must apply to the Estonian
authorities before next January.
As a measure against speculation, land will only be returned to those who
will make it produce, according to Mr Pajo. If the owners cannot work the
land, they will be compensated, possibly with Estonian bonds or cash.
Difficult questions such as assessing the price of land and determining
compensation have not yet been addressed. And there are fears that Estonia
cannot guarantee private property will never again be confiscated.
Mr Maido Pajo, the Estonian deputy minister of agriculture, admitted that
the privatisation process in the countryside had been hindered by the
collective and state farms, which are important social units providing
education, housing and an economic livelihood for their workers.
Fifty years ago, when 60 per cent of Estonians lived in the countryside
(only 30 per cent do so today), there were about 140,000 farms of 25-50
hectares, with a few of 1,000 hectares. Today's collective and state farms
are between 3,000 and 15,000 hectares and are home to anywhere from 200 to
1,000 people.
Most of the rural land in Estonia is controlled by collective and state
farms. As a first step towards privatisation, some of these farms have
already been made into co-operatives.
Mr Olberg has been chastised by many of his fellow farmers for believing too
passionately in private property. But he has not lost his sense of humour.
'I have been normal all my life,' he says. 'The truth is that most of the
people who live around these parts have been abnormal because they don't
believe that a human can own land.'
