FT  09 MAY 91 / Management: Pyrotechnics in French tobacco - William Dawkins
reports on Seita's struggle to cope with the contradictions in its
government's policies
The prize for the man with the least rewarding top management job in French
state-owned industry must go to Bertrand de Galle, chairman of Seita, the
beleaguered tobacco monopoly.
Not only does the producer of Gauloises and Gitanes have to live with his
state shareholder's recent conversion to the anti-smoking cause; de Galle
also has to cope with the state's increasing interference in his business, a
serious constraint since the French market accounted for more than 95 per
cent of Seita's FFr11bn annual turnover last year.
Proving the rule that nobody is more virtuous than a converted sinner, the
French government has switched from being one of Europe's weakest to one of
its toughest anti-smoking administrations.
At the end of last year, parliament agreed a law banning all publicity for
tobacco from January 1993, as well as restricting alcohol advertising to
adult newspapers and magazines and a few radio stations.
The government's temptation to curb Seita's freedoms climaxed last month
when the group was forced to withdraw its latest brand, Chevignon, after a
bitter political row.
In support of de Galle the budget ministry argued that the new brand would
not attract new smokers but it would help Seita in a laudable attempt to
increase market share against US competition. But the health ministry's wish
to curb smoking at all costs won the day, thanks to the decisive backing of
Michel Rocard, the Prime Minister.
The Chevignon brand was launched jointly with the designer of trendy
youngsters' wear based on US 1950s designs. It was officially scrapped on
the grounds that it contravened an infrequently observed 1976 law against
the use of tobacco brand names on other consumer products.
de Galle was understand- ably peeved, especially in view of the fact that
the state has taken no action against cigarette brands like Cartier, Yves
Saint Laurent, Battistani - named after an Italian fashion designer - and
Dunhill, which appear to fall into the same category as Chevignon. 'It is
difficult to make my staff understand why the state wants them to go on
making cigarettes and at the same time that the public should not smoke,' he
mourns.
Faced with this contradiction, many people might feel that de Galle's
position is untenable. Yet he explains: 'The problem is not that we have the
state as a shareholder. It is that we are a company essentially active in
one national market, and a national market where the constraints are very
strong.'
The group is not nearly big or profitable enough to afford the grand
diversification strategies that tobacco multinat-ionals have practised with
such mixed success. de Galle compares his company with the privately owned
German cigarette group, Reemstma, which continues profitably to exploit its
national market and has - wisely, he believes - made very limited
diversifications outside its main business.
But being fully owned by a government that is both short of money and
against smoking clearly restricts Seita's freedom to raise money on private
capital markets. Only in 1987 did it make its first profit in 11 years. With
net revenues of FFr420m on sales of FFr10.3bn in 1989, Seita's most recent
accounting year, it only just has enough spare cash to fund its own
investments.
Yet de Galle is convinced that Seita does have a future, albeit a modest
one. The government's recent decision to allow private companies to take
minority stakes in state-owned ones gives Seita a little more flexibility
should it need a private partner, though de Galle has no specific plans. So
how does he plan to get the group out of its present fix?
Despite the strength of the French state's recent conversion to the
anti-smoking cause, de Galle does not believe his market will collapse
overnight.
He is bargaining on a 15 per cent decline over the next decade in the 95bn
cigarettes smoked annually by the French. There is scope to add to Seita's
52 per cent share of the French market by continuing its shift away from
traditional dark tobacco, towards lower tar cigarettes, which now account
for nearly two thirds of French consumption.
Seita took its first step in that direction with the launch of the Gauloise
blonde in 1984. It was seen at the time as a controversial attempt to meddle
with a valuable brand image, but has helped to reverse Gauloises' decline
against Marlboro and Peter Stuyvesant. Following the withdrawal of
Chevignon, it has just launched a light version of Lucky Strike.
All this buys Seita time, reckons de Galle, to continue the modest
diversification he began when he moved from a senior Finance Ministry job to
his present post in 1988.
The point, he explains, is to make the best possible use of the distribution
network that links Seita with the 39,000 state-licensed tobacconists or
tabacs in cafes and newsagents across France - the biggest sales network in
the country.
This asset is a relic of the time Seita used to have a monopoly of French
cigarette distribution which was abandoned at the end of the 1970s, though
it keeps its monopoly on production. Even though foreign manufacturers are
allowed to export to France freely, there is in practice no way of getting
cigarettes to the all-important tabacs other than through Seita.
Accordingly, the state group handles 98 per cent of all cigarettes
distributed in France, a useful captive market which accounted for 61 per
cent of the group's turnover last year.
Clearly, the network could, at little extra cost, be used to distribute any
product suitable for sale in a tabac, though Seita's efforts in this
direction have so far been limited. It tried to buy the Belin biscuit
company from RJR Nabisco two years ago, but was outbid by the French food
giant, BSN.
It has had better success in taking on the sale of telephone cards over the
past two years; formerly the preserve of the post office, they have become
essential to every French citizen. Sales accounted for FFr1.2bn turnover
last year, just over 10 per cent of group total, a proportion Seita hopes to
increase by introducing other products to the network.
Seita also has small but profitable businesses selling computerised sales
and stock-keeping terminals to retailers and has just begun to explore the
idea of selling its distribution expertise abroad.
In the meantime, de Galle has his hands full steering Seita through the
curious contradictions of its national situation.
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Seita 1989
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Total world sales                               Ffr10bn
Employees                                         6,200
French market share-cigarettes                      52%
                    cigars                          45%
                    pipe &amp; rolling tobacco          69%
 ---------------------------------------------------------
