FT  27 APR 91 / Despatches: Jews who seek a German safe haven
IDA WEIZMAN, from Vinkovtsy in the Ukraine, shrugged her frail shoulders
when asked why she had come to Germany along with nearly 4,000 other Soviet
Jews since last year. Hesitatingly, her husband Josef spoke instead,
explaining that oddly he was 'less afraid in Germany than in the Ukraine.'
His wife nodded. Germany was a 'civilised country' with a sense of guilt,
she said softly. It was a remarkable utterance coming from a woman with her
searing experience. In 1941, at the age of 12, she was herded with her
family into the ghetto of Vinkovtsy by the Nazis. Rescued by a Ukrainian
woman who kept her hidden under straw, she did not emerge until the Soviet
Army returned in 1944. Her father and brother were both murdered by the
Nazis.
Both Ida and Josef Weizman said they feared an outbreak of pogroms in the
Ukraine. They had ruled out Israel as a future home because their health was
poor.
Although most emigrating Soviet Jews would prefer to go to Israel, hundreds
arrive in Germany each week and nearly 3,000 last year, raising the
prospect, unthinkable only a short time ago, of a flowering of Jewish life
in the nation responsible for Auschwitz.
The economic motive is powerful among Soviet Jews planning to emigrate to
Germany. But it is inseparable from fears that anti-semitism, always present
in Soviet society, will become virulent as the disintegration of the Soviet
economy accelerates.
Most Jews admit they did relatively well in the Soviet Union, with many
belonging to the intelligentsia and some operating in the black market.
Disparaging remarks about Jews are increasingly heard in the lengthening
food queues as well as in the metro and buses. Instinctively, the Jews feel
that the overt anti-semitism of the ultra-nationalist Pamyat movement is
falling on increasingly fertile ground.
Most of those emigrating are in the prime of life and highly skilled. 'We
are getting the cream of Soviet Jewish intelligentsia,' says Matthias Jahr,
head of the Advisory Office for Jewish Emigrants. Engineers, computer
specialists and doctors were more likely to find adequate employment in the
German economy than anywhere else. They did not want to end up as manual
labourers in Israel.
Difficulties have been caused, however by the fact that many Russians have
been arriving in Berlin with forged papers declaring them to be Jews. Among
Soviet Jews this was jocularly referred to as 'capitulation.'
Boris Wolisson, 49, a balding computer programmer from Kharkov in the
Ukraine, came to Berlin last year with his grown-up son and non-Jewish
former wife.
'I feel more Russian than Jewish, otherwise I would have gone to Israel,' he
explained, waiting outside the Advisory Office. Like most Soviet Jews he was
not religious. He said his son, a talented biophysicist, was one of the main
reasons he had come to Germany. The young man's career outlook in the Soviet
Union had been bleak but he now had a chance of getting a coveted a research
position in Berlin.
A Jewish woman who came to Berlin 20 years ago waited at the Advisory Office
with her newly-arrived brother from Leningrad, an engineer, and his family.
Her brother said that his nine-year-old daughter had been subjected to
massive anti-semitism at school from children who were echoing remarks heard
at home. Symptomatically, none of the teachers intervened to stop the
harrassment.
This and worsening economic conditions had made them leave everything behind
them including a one-family house and car - a good life by Soviet standards.
'It is like a contagious disease, one family that emigrates triggers off the
decision by another family to do the same,' his sister explained. She avowed
to having adapted to life in Germany like a 'fish to water.' Her two
children, who were 14 and four years old when she came, now felt themselves
to be Germans more than anything else. Some German politicians sense the
unique opportunity to inject a vigorous new element into the tiny, ageing
Jewish community in Germany of some 30,000 survivors. Others, however,
suspiciously view the Soviet Jews as the vanguard of a horde of destitute
Russians and other easterners preparing to descend on Germany.
Thus the German authorities have displayed a somewhat ambivalent attitude
towards the Soviet Jews. Invited by East Germany, which ceased to exist last
October 3, they were officially 'tolerated' by the Bonn Government, that is,
allowed to stay for an indefinite time. At first no more than 1,000 Jews
were to be allowed in but this suggested limit was sharply criticised by
Heinz Galinski, chairman of the Central Council of Jews in Germany. The
irrascible Galinski, himself a survivor of Auschwitz and other camps,
regards the rejuvenation of the Jewish community in Germany as a question of
its very 'survival.'
Wolfgang Schauble, the German Interior Minister, promised that entry for
Soviet Jews would be handled 'generously' but could not exceed a 'tolerable'
limit. No exact figure was given but 10,000 a year was suggested as a
reasonable number. Israel, and some Jewish organisations in the US,
expressed concern over the number of Soviet Jews arriving in Germany
although it was minute compared with the 185,000 who came to Israel last
year. Ironically, problems also arose with a considerable number of Russians
who turned up in Berlin with forged papers declaring them to be Jews.
The Soviet Jews bring with them a remarkable reservoir of goodwill. The
German government this month ruled that Soviet Jews who wanted to emigrate
to Germany could no longer come as tourists but would need visas from the
German Embassy in Moscow. Lutz Voss, an official of the Berlin Interior
Department, said it was unclear whether the number of Jews to be allowed in
will be unrestricted but that no evident limit had been set by the Bonn
government. The Jews are to be treated as refugees and distributed among the
Lander (states). No Jews would be accepted as refugees once they had gone to
Israel he noted, an apparent concession to Israeli concerns.
A Soviet Jewess who was among the first Russian Jews to emigrate to Germany
instead of Israel in the early 1980s, waited patiently with her
newly-arrived brother from Leningrad, an engineer, his wife and daughter.
Like many of the Soviet Jews they live in east Germany in a former hostel
for Vietnamese workers but are eager to settle in Berlin.
The Soviet Jews have expunged as far as possible the Nazi era from their
memories. Before the Nazis, Germany represented everything which was
progressive to many Russians and Russian Jews alike.
'Germany is a democratic country,' Boris Kaplan, an engineer, remarked. He
came from Lwow in the Ukraine with his wife and son. They left out of fear
of Pamyat, the nationalist and anti-semitic movement. He said of Germany:
'The people like Jews and we like the Germans.'
