FT  07 MAY 91 / Survey of South Africa (5): Where the central fact is
violence - Patti Waldmeir looks at black politics
SOUTH AFRICA has always been a violent place, and 40-odd years of apartheid
have done little to promote a culture of political and ethnic tolerance.
Indeed, apartheid was based on the premise that different ethnic groups
could not live together in peace; segregation of races and of tribes was
essential to avoid genocidal conflict.
'People have always had drummed into their heads that there are primordial
conflicting interests between ethnic groups, that's why we need apartheid;
now they're beginning to think, maybe those people were right,' says Mr
Pallo Jordan, Director of Information for the African National Congress
(ANC), referring to the township violence which has left nearly 10,000
people dead since 1984.
The vast majority of deaths have occurred in fighting between rival black
groups. Sometimes the rivalry has been political, sometimes tribal,
sometimes purely criminal. Often, it has seemed to be, in Mr Jordan's words,
'primordial': unexplained and inexplicable, bestial and terrifying beyond
words.
Armed men mow down mourners at a funeral vigil in the black township of
Alexandra near Johannesburg. On the kitchen floor lie the brains of one dead
mourner. An elderly lady covers them with a bowl, and asks: 'Where is God
all the time?'
Nobody can explain the Alexandra tragedy. The headlines said it was a clash
between the (mainly Zulu) Inkatha Freedom Party and the ANC; but the
mourners were not primarily ANC, nor is there any proof that the attackers
were from Inkatha. The ANC blamed the police; but their only proven sin was
to fail to give the mourners sufficient protection.
Dr Tim Wilson, who runs the nearby Alexandra Health Clinic, says the
township is witnessing 'the triumph of thuggery, not ideology'. Political
parties may use the violence to their benefit, as they battle for a powerful
position in negotiations on a post-apartheid constitution. But he argues
that the fighting is not mainly political. 'Once you get the gangs going,'
he concludes, 'the thing takes on its own momentum.'
In many of the affected townships, isolating the political from the tribal
or criminal is now impossible; evaluating the role of the police is equally
difficult. The ANC accuses police of active involvement in the violence
which spread last August from politically divided Natal province (where most
deaths have occurred) to townships near Johannesburg.
Police, it says, have armed, transported and protected Inkatha vigilantes
who attack ANC supporters. Those claims are difficult to prove, but there is
ample evidence that police - who were trained to regard the ANC as
terrorists and murderers - have at the very least failed to keep warring
factions apart. Journalists who have witnessed the violence are convinced
the security forces often side, actively or passively, with Inkatha.
Wherever the fault lies, violence is the central fact of black political
life at the moment. Geographically, it is localised, concentrated in Natal
and in a handful of townships near Johannesburg. But its effect is
nationwide: the broad anti-apartheid front forged in the mid-1980s, the
height of repression, has begun to splinter.
So far, the main political victim of the fighting has been the ANC, which
could previously claim the broadest support. The violence has stirred ethnic
fears in almost every South African community: among whites, Indians, and
coloureds; among Zulus, Xhosas, Sothos and Tswanas. Mr Jordan of the ANC
acknowledges that if the violence continues, Indians and coloureds may look
to the National Party to protect them.
Among blacks, the ANC's support has certainly declined. Most victims have
come from the ranks of the ANC: 'People are beginning to say, if we join the
ANC we will be killed,' says one senior ANC official. He argues that
violence has prevented the ANC from organising as a political party; it has
had little choice but to persist with the rhetoric and tactics of the
liberation struggle, threatening to form people's defence committees to
protect supporters disillusioned with its moderate stance.
ANC leaders believe the government has turned a blind eye to violence
precisely because it weakens them, and favours Inkatha, whose political and
economic policies coincide more closely with those of the Nationalists.
Pretoria denies this; but whatever the intent, Inkatha support has surged in
the affected areas.
Minority black tribes have begun to look to Inkatha for protection. In the
lawless atmosphere of the townships, the image of the warlike Zulu dressed
for battle is a powerful one, and Inkatha exploits this overtly tribal
appeal. Mr Musa Myeni, a member of Inkatha's central committee, says
membership in the greater Johannesburg area has risen 35 per cent, and total
national membership is now 2.2m. Card-carrying ANC members probably do not
number more than 250,000 or 300,000.
It is impossible to know whether this realignment in black politics will
prove permanent. Certainly, membership figures give no reliable guide to
voting intentions: Inkatha membership is compulsory in many rural Natal
villages; and many more blacks would vote ANC than would join its ranks as
members. But if violence persists, the ANC could well see its support
continue to decline, raising the possibility that it could fail to gain a
majority in the first post-apartheid election.
Under these circumstances, one can hardly be sanguine about the chances for
peace. Mr Nelson Mandela and Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi of Inkatha have met
twice to agree peace deals; but away from the conference table, each leader
has continued sniping at the other, and further peace plans are in abeyance.
Local accords have been struck to stop the violence in some areas of Natal,
but the killing continues elsewhere, with more than 600 dead in the first
three months of this year. Mr Myeni of Inkatha says this is just the
beginning: 'We know if we say now, do it, it will be hell, real hell,' he
warns, arguing that the ANC's threat to form defence committees may provoke
Inkatha to mobilise what he says is a force of 500,000 fighting men.
South Africa is not Beirut, or even Algeria; the scale of the violence has
not reached those levels. Perhaps it will emerge from this period of
political puberty unscathed. But a culture of intolerance and violence is
taking root in the townships; every party, black and white, must have an
interest in stopping this process.
