FT  08 MAY 91 / Leading Article: An agenda for Yugoslavia
YUGOSLAVIA is in civil war. This is what the country's defence minister,
General Veljko Kadijevic, said on Monday. Tragically, his words are unlikely
to jolt the country out of the wretched cycle of ethnic hatred, violence and
unreason. Revenge, driven by historical grievances, cultural differences,
and nationalist-inspired political aspirations, hangs in the air between
Serbs and Croats, the country's two largest ethnic groups.
It is difficult to channel these animosities into the country's fragile
democratic institutions, or place them on the political agenda. That agenda
is no longer shaped by the collective presidency, which consists of
delegates from the six republics and two provinces. Instead, it is being
increasingly set by the federal army and armed Serb and Croat nationalists.
The federal army is determined to prevent nationalist mobs from controlling
the political agenda. Last week, it was sent in to prevent further bloodshed
between Croats and Serbs, after Serb militants killed 13 Croat policemen.
But Croats, under their president, Mr Franjo Tudjman, believe the military
is a Serbian-dominated army of occupation, intent on blocking Croatia's
quest for independence from the federation. That is why thousands of Croat
nationalists attacked an army base last Monday. The army's role, however, is
more complicated.
The defence minister realises that the collective presidency is unable to
agree on a peaceful political solution to Yugoslavia's crisis, or support
Prime Minister Ante Markovic's economic reforms. The crisis hinges on one
crucial disagreement between the six republics: should Yugoslavia continue
to exist within the present federal structures, or evolve into a loose
confederation of autonomous states?
Power vacuum
The paralysis of the presidency over this issue has created a power vacuum,
which paramilitary nationalist groups in the republics have tried to fill.
The army now believes the imposition of a state of emergency is one of the
few options available to break that paralysis, restore stability, and set a
new agenda.
Martial law will not win Yugoslavia many friends among western governments,
which, for their part, too often hesitated in linking economic aid with
respect for human rights and a market economy. But it could allow the army,
western governments and Yugoslavia's federal government an opportunity to
create a political environment aimed at encouraging the country's leadership
to establish an agenda for the future.
Army's role
The army's role in this agenda should be clear. It should immediately disarm
all paramilitary groups, regardless of their ethnic background. Once order
has been restored, it should withdraw to the barracks and the initiative by
Mr Alois Mock, Austria's foreign minister, to set up a group of European
'wise men', should be pursued. This group should include, besides
Yugoslavia's leaders and its neighbours, delegates from the European
Community and the G24, who are, after all, Yugoslavia's main creditors.
They should proceed to set an agenda for Yugoslavia continuing, not as a
unitary, federal state, but as a confederation of autonomous states within
their present borders. The republics should have no illusions about Europe's
intentions vis-a-vis Yugoslavia. The time has not yet come to place a
re-drawing of Yugoslavia's internal borders on the agenda; it would have
unbelievably unstable consequences for relations among the republics and for
the Balkan peninsula.
Furthermore, participants in the 'round table' negotiations should insist
that any future financial assistance, and Yugoslavia's aspirations for a
closer relationship with the EC, hinge on the foundations of democratic
institutions, respect for human rights, and a fully-fledged market economy.
Yugoslavia's leaders, with the exception of the prime minister and the army,
may baulk at such interference. But time spent viewing Yugoslavia from the
comfort of the sidelines has come to an end.
