FT  26 APR 91 / Technology: A tribe of innovators - How a waste recycling
system developed by American Indians could help in the fight against
pollution
It was developed in a dustbin in Maine by the Passamaquoddy tribe of
American Indians - but it could end by transforming the way the world burns
coal. At the very least, it should help make the US a cleaner country.
It is known as the Recovery Scrubber. But this new technology, described by
Robert Gentile, US deputy secretary for energy, as 'like using crumbs to
make a meatloaf', is simple, elegant and potentially revolutionary.
It takes waste material from a manufacturing plant, mixes it with waste
gases from the same plant, and recycles it, so that it can be used again. In
the process, it cuts waste emissions by more than 90 per cent.
The original design is intended for use in cement plants, but could
eventually be used in coal-fired power stations, where waste ash would be
used to scrub polluting gases.
'It uses a waste product to clean up the environment,' says Gentile. 'It is
so creative and innovative. And it's simple to instal. You don't have to
close your plant down to do it, it simply bolts on.'
The US department of energy liked the technology so much that it backed its
first commercial installation, at the Dragon Products Company cement plant
in Maine, with Dollars 6m (Pounds 3.5m) of the Dollars 11m total cost. The
backing was offered under the Innovative Clean Coal Technology scheme, which
awards funds to selected imaginative technologies.
Now, the Recovery Scrubber is poised to spread through the world cement
industry - where it has been described as the most significant development
in 25 years.
The scrubber not only recycles cement kiln dust - which is expensive and
hazardous to dispose of - but it cuts emissions of sulphur dioxide (one of
the gases causing acid rain) by more than 90 per cent. It also consumes
carbon dioxide, which helps cause global warming. The only waste product is
saleable potassium.
It works by mixing the dust with water to form slurry, and then combining
the mixture with waste gases from the cement kiln. The carbon dioxide in the
gas reacts with the dust in the slurry, giving reusable limestone, while the
sulphur dioxide in the gas reacts with potassium in the dust to form
potassium sulphate, which can be used as a fertiliser.
While other scrubbing systems exist, they do not have this recycling
capacity. Conventional systems introduce a new scrubbing agent, which must
be bought, and then release a sludge that has to go to landfill. 'What is
interesting is that this was developed by an Indian tribe, and it's not a
reservation concept. It's commercial, and vibrant,' says Gentile.
It is also lucrative. The Passamaquoddy Indians of Maine were once among
America's poorest people - earning a subsistence living from fishing and
farming. But through the project they have earned a commercial reputation
and the venture is being used as a case study by the Harvard Business
School. The new technology could bring them returns running into millions of
dollars.
It all began when the tribe won Dollars 40m in a land claim suit in 1980,
explains Tom Tureen, their attorney and now chairman of Passamaquoddy
Technology, the company founded to commercialise the scrubber.
After buying one of the largest commercial wild blueberry farms - from which
they now market a brand of premium ice cream - they acquired the then
loss-making Dragon wet process cement plant in Thomaston, Maine in 1983.
Shortly afterwards, they hired geochemist Garrett Morrison to help solve the
plant's problems with dust emissions. He then went on to invent the Recovery
Scrubber.
Within five years, the plant was making an annual profit of Dollars 8m. The
tribe then sold it to the Spanish cement consortium, Cementos del Norte, for
three times its original price.
With the US department of energy funding, and a further Dollars 6m from
Cementos del Norte, the tribe was able to carry out a full-scale
demonstration of the process, and has since had considerable interest from
cement companies worldwide, Tureen explains.
The technology could, he believes, be fitted to coal-fired power stations
just as it is to cement plants. 'In a coal plant with a high ash content we
would most likely use ash from the plant as an alkaline scrubber, and in the
process renovate the ash, which could then be used in cement manufacture.
You might have to add other alkaline waste, such as wood or paper waste.
'We expect there will be power plant applications where there is a high ash
content, or where alkaline waste is available, for instance in Scandinavia
because of the pulp and paper plants,' says Tureen.
But, he points out, power plants can, under the US system, win environmental
credits by investing their own money in fitting the Recovery Scrubber to
other, more suitable industrial plants. Under the credit system, as long as
a utility contributes to cutting overall emissions, it need not do so on its
own site.
'This may be more cost effective and more environmentally sound, because of
the zero discharge nature of our system. We don't convert pollution but
eliminate it, where scrubbers usually fitted to power stations add carbon
dioxide and waste that has to go to landfill.'
And at a cost of Dollars 10m-15m for most installations, the scrubber -
which also collects waste particles - is as cheap as conventional rivals.
It could, Tureen claims, play a big part in cleaning up some of the
pollution problems in the US. There is, he says, enough waste suitable to
feed the scrubber to deal with around a third of the 10m tonne per year
sulphur dioxide reduction required by US legislation introduced in 1990.
