FT  02 MAY 91 / Survey of Poland (36): The potential to be one of Europe's
crowd-pullers - Poland is trying to put itself back on the tourist map
POLAND'S previous image as a rather forbidding iron-curtain country of food
queues and secret police made it seem an unlikely choice for tourists. Now
it is making determined efforts to put itself back on the mainstream tourist
map of Europe.
Tourism has already blossomed in Poland in the wake of the political
changes. In 1988 and 1989 the number of visitors from eastern European
countries was steady at around 6.5m. In 1990 this mushroomed to 15.8m.
Visitors from East Germany, now with D-marks to spend, went up from 1.2m in
1989 to more than 9m in 1990, while those from the Soviet Union rose from
2.9m to 4.3m. In reality most were not 'tourists' in the traditional sense,
but small traders.
In the same period the number of visitors from Romania increased from 19,000
to 395,000. Most of these were not tourists, but refugees. Many of them,
sadly, are now to be found begging on the streets of Poland.
The number of visitors from western countries also rose from 1.6m in 1989 to
2.3m in 1990, with many people curious to see for themselves the changes
that were taking place.
Alongside the more well-known attractions - the historic cities such as
Krakow, Poznan and Gdansk, and the old town in Warsaw - Poland is
surprisingly rich in natural assets.
There are the Baltic beaches, heavily polluted in parts, but already a
playground for Germans and Scandinavians - and the Mazurian and Pomeranian
lakes, a belt of hundreds of unspoilt lakes and rolling hills and forest
across northern Poland.
To the east, on the Soviet border, lies the Bialowieska forest, one of the
last areas of primeval forest in Europe, and home to European bison, wild
horses, beaver and lynx. In the south, for walkers and skiers there are the
Sudeten, Carpathian and Tatra mountains.
The natural potential is there, but in many places hotel facilities are poor
or non-existent. That looks set to change.
Orbis, the state travel agency under the communist regime, underwent the
first stage of re-privatisation this year (it was originally founded as a
private company in Lvov, now in the Ukraine, 71 years ago). This gave it
independence from any ministry, and made it the official owner - rather than
just the manager - of its 54 hotels. This makes it possible for western
investors to enter into a joint venture with any Orbis hotel.
Although Orbis has a small number of western-standard hotels, built by
leading companies such as Holiday Inn, Novotel and Intercontinental, and run
on a franchise basis, many of its other hotels are badly in need of a refit.
Orbis's first priority, according to its new president, Mr Jerzy Sulowski,
will be to refurbish and extend its existing three- and four-star hotels, at
an estimated cost of Dollars 400m.
'Three-quarters of our hotels don't meet their star rating,' Mr Sulowski
admits, adding that Orbis is already negotiating with potential partners.
These hotels will still cater mainly for business travellers, but Orbis's
second priority is to build a chain of two-star hotels, many outside the
main cities, for families and mass tourism.
Orbis also operates a chain of 170 travel agencies at home with more than
1,000 branches abroad specialising in arranging travel to Poland. But here,
as in other service areas, there is rapid growth in private travel agencies
providing the kind of service, speed and flexibility which the old state
monolith conspicuously lacked.
'As far as tourism in Poland goes, we are not afraid of any competition,' Mr
Sulowski declares, although he admits that the agencies suffer from
'technical backwardness'. Communications are hampered by Poland's
notoriously inefficient telephone network, and investment is badly needed in
information technology.
Orbis is also attempting to join one of the computerised European
reservation networks.
Despite Orbis's experience of co-operation with international hotel chains,
its somewhat jaded image means that western operators may choose to go it
alone until they are convinced about the extent of Orbis's internal
perestroika.
Warsaw's Marriott Hotel has a house rule that previous employment at Orbis
disqualifies applicants for jobs at the glittering tower block which vies
for attention with Stalin's gothic Palace of Culture on the Warsaw skyline.
Trusthouse Forte is already at work restoring Warsaw's ornate Bristol Hotel
to its pre-communist glory, and foreign companies, including IAEG, Hyatt,
Conrad, Pullman, Warimpex and Accor, are all interested in constructing
hotels in Poland, according to Mr Stefan Jerzak, vice-president of the
newly-founded Commercial Bank of Tourism.
The bank could be an important element in the industry's growth. A joint
stock company founded at the end of 1990 by the state treasury, Orbis, and
two other tourist organisations, Gromada and PTTK, the bank also took over
the funds - and, broadly, the functions - of the state's 30-year-old Central
Fund for Tourism and Recreation.
The bank began operating in March, with capital of Dollars 11.2m, and has
already started granting credits to tourist companies. Although Polish law
says that banks should be open to all customers, its name leaves little
doubt about its proposed market.
'The bank aims to be the main source of investment in tourism and tourist
facilities,' Mr Jerzak says.
At home, it will co-operate with the Polish Hotels Association, providing
capital for rebuilding and for staff training.
The bank will also take over foreign exchange dealing in Orbis's travel
agencies and hotels, under licence, giving it more than 230 exchange
counters throughout Poland. It will be investing in a satellite
communications network to speed up accounting, and the processing of credit
card bills, which at present can take several weeks. In the long term, the
bank hopes to introduce its own credit card.
From abroad, Swiss, German and US investors have all shown interest in
constructing small hotels, and in converting some of Poland's many small
castles, particularly in the lakes regions. In a few years' time, Poland
could be one of Europe's crowd-pullers.
