FT  14 MAY 91 / Parliament and Politics: Delors overture fails to unite
Conservatives - European Union
EUROPEAN Commission suggestions for compromise on economic and monetary
union showed little sign yesterday of uniting the Conservatives on Europe -
or of tapping undiscovered goodwill among Tory MPs to Mr Jacques Delors, the
commission's president.
Suggestions at the weekend that Britain be allowed to sign a treaty without
agreeing on the final goals did nothing to alter the well-rehearsed
convictions of Tories at Westminster.
The anti-federalists, with the Bruges Group in the vanguard, remained
opposed to any deal by which Britain would accept, even tacitly, a single
currency. The most 'pro-Europe' Tories were anxious for Britain to react
positively.
Those in the middle remained sceptical of Mr Delors' vision for Europe and
anxious to avoid being 'bounced' into a treaty the UK might regret. Not even
an opportunity to defer awkward decisions beyond the election swayed
firmly-entrenched views. Words of encouragement were qualified by warnings
that the small print had to be examined carefully.
The government's reaction was also cautious. If a decision was to be
deferred for a future parliament, all options had to be kept open. The 'hard
Ecu' remained on the table. But officials admitted the European Commission
had at least show 'an appreciation of the UK's concerns'.
For some MPs who strongly opposed a single European currency, Mr Delors'
suggestion was acceptable only if it was clear Britain was defering the
decision on whether to accept such a move - not just the timing. And there
was no deadline for a decision.
One right-wing minister said: 'If we can dither indefinitely, it's fine. If
there is a cut-off point to the dithering, it's a fraud,'
Mr Patrick Robertson, secretary of the Bruges Group, said: 'Any compromise
which makes Britain accept a single European currency in principle would be
completely unacceptable. At present there is not enough information anywhere
to be clear exactly what the form of words would be.'
Mr Teddy Taylor, secretary of the European Reform Group, went as far as
saying: 'If the government could negotiate an arrangement 'without
commitment' we feel that this would be a very major advance in the battle to
preserve our freedom and to safeguard the nation against socialist control
and bureaucracy.'
But Mr William Cash, the prominent anti-Federal Europe MP for Stafford, said
it was 'unrealistic' to expect what amounted to a two-tier Europe to work in
practice.
Among the middle ground of the party, there was anxiety, to be seen as
pro-European, like Mr John Major. But there was suspicion about Mr Delors'
blueprint for Emu. Mr Terence Higgins, chairman of the Commons' Treasury
select committee, said Mr Delors, 'thinks he is losing the argument' and so
was trying to get British agreement for allowing other EC members to proceed
on a pre-determined timetable.
For most on the pro-European wing, however, the plan was another opportunity
the UK appeared set to rebuff. Mr Hugh Dykes, MP for Harrow East, said: 'How
crazy it is that even when the commission president proposes a helpful
compromise, meeting specific British hesitations, it is denounced by a small
number of hysterical anti-marketeers.'
Editorial comment, Page 18
