FT  18 APR 91 / Kurds foresee a long-term need for protection
THE DECISION to send US, British and French troops to establish and defend
Kurdish refugee camps in northern Iraq raises the question of how long the
Kurds will need protection from their own government.
The answer, according to Kurdish refugees and exiles, is that the United
Nations or the western powers will have to safeguard Iraq's 4m Kurds at
least until President Saddam Hussein is overthrown and possibly longer.
Kurdish groups yesterday welcomed President Bush's announcement on the
deployment of troops to protect Kurdish zones in northern Iraq, but they
emphasised that the move responded to urgent humanitarian needs without
providing a political solution to the Kurdish problem.
Most Iraqi Kurds, including the main opposition groups fighting the Iraqi
government, have officially rejected separatism and are demanding autonomy
within a united and democratic Iraq.
Few of them, remembering the killings of recent days, the gassing of Kurds
at Halabja in 1988 and the destruction of 4,000 Kurdish villages on
President Saddam's orders, will ever be persuaded to accept at face value Mr
Saddam's periodic offers of amnesty to Kurdish refugees.
Kurds say that even if President Saddam is removed, Arab nationalist and
anti-Kurdish sentiments fostered by the Iraqi authorities may cause further
misery for the Kurdish people.
'We don't want to be reduced to a refugee population in a number of camps,'
said Dr Kamal Mirawdeli, director of the Kurdish Information and Educational
Project in London.
'But even if the Shia come to power, or another government - a pro-Saudi
government - there is no guarantee that they won't behave in the same way ..
The only guarantee is for there to be a federal state and for the UN to
recognise that.'
Kurds facing long stays in bleak refugee camps are acutely aware of the
mistakes made by their Palestinian fellow-refugees. They fear they may live
to regret leaving their homes in the face of real or threatened persecution,
and moderate Kurds are anxious to restrain those who advocate terrorism.
'If we're going to have a permanent refugee problem then obviously it's
going to be worse, a lot worse than expected,' said Mr Abbas Vali, senior
politics lecturer at the University of Wales at Swansea. 'It's going to be a
breeding ground for all sorts of negative tendencies in the Kurdish
movement.'
The Kurds have few qualms about seeking military help from the outside
world. They argue that the world has obligations under the Genocide
Convention of 1948. They point out that foreign intervention to help peoples
subjected to tyranny is not unprecedented, and cite the US invasion of
Panama in 1989 and the Tanzanian overthrow of Uganda's Idi Amin ten years
earlier.
Kurdish guerrilla groups resent the suggestion that they miscalculated by
launching an ill-advised rebellion throughout Iraqi Kurdistan after the
allies defeated President Saddam's army and drove it out of Kuwait.
What in fact occurred was a spontaneous popular uprising that the guerrillas
could not ignore. At first they had only 10,000 fighters under arms, but
their ranks were swelled by mass defections from the government's Kurdish
militia.
All were lightly armed, and could not hope to hold the towns when confronted
with Iraqi tanks, artillery and helicopter gunships. They were defeated in
Kirkuk but elsewhere they simply melted into the hills to continue the
fight.
Civilians in towns, meanwhile, took fright as the government again seized
control and took its revenge; in the old days they would have taken refuge
in their mountain villages, but President Saddam had destroyed them.
If the Iraqi Kurds are ever to leave the refugee camps, which have yet to be
built to receive them, and if the international community is ever to be
relieved of the responsibility of protecting them, the Kurds will have to
become part of Iraq's political system.
'If the allied forces, the west, are looking for a stable Iraq - which is
really their primary objective rather than democracy - they must take into
consideration the fact that there can be no stability in Iraq if 4m to 5m
Kurds are excluded,' Mr Vali says.
