FT  20 APR 91 / Salary review put on education curriculum: The implications
of Clarke's attempt to outlaw strike action
MR KENNETH Clarke has a reputation for pugnacity in politics. He was at his
most belligerent 18 months ago when, as health secretary, he successfully
fended off demands by ambulance workers for an independent pay review body.
This week he became a convert to the cause, for one group of public-sector
workers at least, when as education secretary he announced plans for a pay
review body for teachers.
His decision was made in spite of strong opposition from the National Union
of Teachers, the largest teachers' union, and from many of the local
authorities which foot the teachers' pay bill. It came just a year after the
government announced its intention to restore to teachers the collective
bargaining rights which had been withdrawn four years ago after a series of
industrial disputes. That plan and the accompanying bill have now been
abandoned.
A complex series of factors are behind the volte-face. However, cost-cutting
was not one of them, going by evidence from other pay review bodies.
Mr Chris Trinder, senior fellow at the Public Finance Foundation, an
independent research organisation, calculates that since 1982-83 the
cumulative pay rise of public sector groups covered by pay review bodies has
been 113 per cent, against 99 per cent for public workers not covered.
One reason why unions, including Nupe, pushed for ambulance workers to be
covered by a review was the experience of nurses and midwives after their
review body was set up in 1983. Their pay had kept pace with average
earnings by the end of the decade, and considerably outpaced that for health
service groups not covered by review bodies.
Mr Malcolm Wing, Nupe's national secretary for health, says that the
government's staged implementation of the review body's recommendations
reduced their value during the course of the first year. However, he says
that the review bodies themselves have 'delivered the goods'.
From the government's point of view, public sector workers covered by
reviews have delivered through their industrial relations record. No
review-body workers have staged industrial action over review-body
decisions.
Mr Clarke implied this week that he was expecting teacher unions to abstain
from strikes as a quid pro quo for establishment of a review body, even
though they would not be expected to sign no-strike agreements. He indicated
that he would withdraw the review body if there were strikes.
Mr Doug McAvoy, general secretary of the NUT, says there will be neither
'silent assent (as demanded by Mr Clarke) or voiced assent', and dismisses
Mr Clarke's threat as 'hot air'. The government reasons, with some
justification, that the NUT is unlikely to order a ballot in the near future
over the principle of a review body, and may find it years to protest
against decisions made by an independent review body.
The other five unions concerned would find it even more difficult, having
given the review body a cautious welcome, although their attitude would be
tempered by whatever constraints the government put on the review body.
As well as offering the prospect of an end to industrial disputes in the
teaching profession, the government can claim that it has made a start to
improving teachers' status by giving them pay arrangements similar to those
of doctors, dentists, nurses, the armed forces and high-level public
servants already covered by review bodies. If that also implies increasing
salaries, the government may reason that higher rises for teachers
implemented through an independent review panel would fuel the expectations
of other public sector workers less than if achieved through negotiation.
The bill is expected to become law by the autumn, in time for next year's
pay settlement. Some local-authority employers feel that an agreed
settlement with the teachers would otherwise have been impossible next year
because of the combination of cash restrictions and teachers' expectations.
Other local authorities fear that the government will refuse to pay the full
cost of teachers' pay settlements in future, expecting the balance to come
from other council budgets.
This assumes that school education remains the responsibility of local
authorities - and that is by no means certain. One council negotiator
reasons that if the government's intention was merely to raise the status of
teachers and end industrial disputes it would also have included university
lecturers in the review body's ambit.
His conclusion - and that of many others in local government - is that the
review body could be a prelude to all schools being taken out of local
authority control. After all, if councils did not fund schools there would
be no point in local-authority negotiators deciding pay, as the withdrawn
bill envisaged.
Indications as to whether this formed part of Mr Clarke's thinking may
appear on Tuesday when the government publishes consultation documents on
local government.
History of antagonism
1965: Teachers' Remuneration Act puts teachers' pay on statutory footing.
Burnham Committee set up to negotiate for local authorities. Three-year
negotiated agreement.
1969: Teachers take first national strike action.
1974: Negotiated settlement and agreement to set up all-party inquiry into
teachers' pay, the Houghton Inquiry, which set teachers' salaries at 137 per
cent of average earnings.
1975: Arbitration because of anomalies of Houghton.
1979: Negotiation of pay settlement and referral to Clegg Commission, a
standing committee on pay comparability.
1980: Clegg Commission improved teachers' pay to 123 per cent of average
earnings after it had fallen back to 112 per cent.
1984: Industrial action and arbitration.
1985: Industrial action and negotiation.
1986: Industrial action, arbitration and negotiation.
1987: Burnham Committee replaced by the non-negotiating Interim Advisory
Committee.
