FT  04 MAY 91 / Sport: The heroes and villains are back - America's cup
or possibly a kind of yachting purgatory - the America's Cup starts a new
life. The Blue Peter is now flying for first-ever regatta in the new 80-foot
Cup class in San Diego, California - an world championship that is the
preamble to the main contest, which begins there next January.
All the heroes and villains are back in town - plus a few new ones. Damon
Runyon would have loved the America's Cup. Smooth Kiwi financier Michael Fay
has entered one of his three yachts while another is on charter to the
somewhat disorganised Spanish team.
Dennis Conner is a San Diegan and will sail his new boat, Stars &amp; Stripes,
for the first time. Already a few visitors are learning that you do not play
poker with The Man in his own kitchen.
Much attention will focus on the Italian team led and bankrolled by
industrialist Raul Gardini. Gardini has entered two boats in the regatta and
has told his skipper, Paul Cayard, an American who found it worthwhile to
live in Europe, that with Dollars 40m available to the programme, some
silverware on the table would be appreciated.
However, around the sailors' bars the word is that the Italians are going
backwards. The more money they spend on design and personnel, the slower the
boats get. This is a well-recognised Cup phenomenon which in 1986 stopped
the extraordinarily well-funded New York Yacht Club equipe from even making
the challenger semi-finals.
No team will be subjected to such close domestic scrutiny as the Japanese
two-boat effort. The America's Cup has become a virtual crusade in the
Ginza, inspiring everything from leisure clothes to nightclubs. Chris
Dickson, the Kiwi skipper in 1986-87, has been paid a reputed Dollars
900,000 to drive the Japanese No 1 yacht and has even learned Japanese.
Intent on a place on a more than merely financial world stage, Japan seems
set on irritating the Americans, current and near-perpetual holders of the
Auld Mug. 'We have Columbia Pictures. We have Rockefeller Centre . . . Why
not the America's Cup?' asked Kaoru Ogimi, commodore of the Nippon Ocean
Racing Club, on a recent visit to the US.
The American most determined to frustrate Ogimi's daydreams is alternative
energy billionaire Bill Koch, who came into big-boat racing in 1984 with the
purchase of the maxi-yacht Matador. Since then nothing Koch has done has
been less than precisely calculated. When he built a new maxi, Matador 2,
five years of research from 20 naval architects went into the hull design.
Third-scale models - bigger than most family yachts - were sailed off Koch's
compound at Cape Cod. At her first regatta Matador 2 won five out of seven
races without really trying. The technical director for the Cup yacht is Dr
Heiner Meldner, a nuclear physicist. Last week Koch announced that Boeing
would be supporting his technical effort.
'We plan to make every bit of technology we can find in America to make our
boat go fast,' he told the media. A bit of disinformation does not go amiss,
either. The public were told that the first yacht was under construction at
a locked shed at the Goetz yard in Rhode Island. Goetz was, in fact, paid to
keep the shed empty and secret. The real yacht was built at an aerospace
facility in the Utah desert.
A scan through the entry list reveals that nine boats from the US, France,
Italy, Japan, Spain and New Zealand are due to line up for the regatta. The
Cup has become a tussle between the dollar, the yen and (in the absence of a
European currency) the deutschmark.
But what of Britain? Peter de Savary will have his design team of Ian
Howlett and Phil Morrison in San Diego evaluating the opposition prior to
the beginning of construction of a British contender in June.
'It's hard to see a lot of strength in the fleet as it stands,' said
Howlett, who designed America's Cup challengers for Britain in 1980, 1983
and 1986. 'There are going to be some very embarrassed people out there who
have spent a lot of money. There's no doubt in my mind that we can produce
boats that are significantly faster than anything out there at the moment.'
With skipper Lawrie Smith already signed up to drive the boat and a
construction team on stand-by, the de Savary team looks in reasonable shape,
but must still be rated an outside chance.
At the end of the current regatta, however, many of the major-league players
who have already built one or two boats may be wishing they had kept their
money in the bank and done a little more watching and thinking.
'A shortage of money and time can concentrate the mind wonderfully,' says
Howlett pithily.
