FT  25 APR 91 / World Trade News: Fears grow for Gatt disputes system
WORRIES are growing in Gatt that the credibility of its dispute settlement
system may be undermined by the number of findings left unimplemented by the
delay in completing the Uruguay Round of trade talks, Peter Montagnon, World
Trade Editor, writes.
Mr Lars Anell, who heads Gatt's governing council, said yesterday he was
starting talks with parties involved to find a way out of the problem.
Resolution of the five long-standing disputes affected hinges on outcome of
the Round.
Adding to trade diplomats' worries is the fact they all involve leading
trade powers whose behaviour sets the tone for the trading system as a
whole.
They include findings against the US that its patent law discriminates
against foreign companies, and that its countervailing duties on Canadian
pork breach Gatt rules.
The EC has failed to implement two findings - against its rules on
circumvention of anti-dumping and subsidies to oilseed crushers. Japan has
failed to liberalise dairy-product and starch imports.
All, except the anti-dumping circumvention case, were raised by parties
concerned in the Gatt Council yesterday, when the US declined for the fifth
time to agree to adoption of the Canadian pork finding.
Japan said it was raising the question of US patent law, because it
understood a new investigation had been started against one of its companies
under Section 337.
No immediate solution has been found, and the view is growing that action
must be taken. Mr Anell told the council the threat to Gatt's credibility
was serious.
South Korea met a frosty reception from its fellow Gatt members yesterday
when it launched a programme to liberalise trade in a further 133 products,
mostly agricultural, as part of a phased move to unwind curbs allowed to
developing countries with balance-of-payments problems.
The US joined other countries including Canada, the EC and New Zealand in
calling the offer disappointing.
Mr Young Woo Park, Seoul's deputy ambassador to Gatt, said his government
faced opposition from farmers to the liberalisation.
South Korea, which returned to current account deficit last year for the
first time since the mid-1980s, has resisted attempts to open its farm
imports in the Round.
