FT  22 APR 91 / The underclass is no illusion
There is no underclass', screamed a headline in the Wall Street Journal last
week. I was tempted to phone the Journal's editor and suggest that he spend
six months living on welfare in a decaying part of south-east Washington.
The headlines might change if he could feel the filth, hear the gunshots,
smell the drugs and see the despair of the jobless.
The article, to be fair, was sober and well-informed. Mr Christopher Jencks,
a sociologist at Northwestern University argued that the term 'underclass'
is likely to mislead. It conjures up a chronically jobless high school drop-
out with no money, two or three illegitimate children, a criminal record and
a history of welfare dependence. Yet few people, claims Mr Jencks, fit such
a stereotype. In reality, the US has many different social problems which
are only loosely connected. Some, such as long-term unemployment, are
growing more severe; others are gradually improving. Instead of wasting time
searching for a single blockbuster cure for an illusory disease, the
problems should be tackled one at a time.
Mr Jencks's argument is developed in The Urban Underclass, a book co-edited
by Mr Paul Peterson, a Harvard political scientist. Last week, the Brookings
Institution (the publisher) hosted a high-powered seminar to launch the
book. Mr Jencks and Mr Peterson, the supposed stars of the show, proved to
be grey, professorial types. In purely theatrical terms, both were
overshadowed by two figures occupying polar opposite positions in the
underclass debate: Mr William Julius Wilson, a black sociologist from the
University of Chicago, and Mr Charles Murray, a conservative fellow at the
Manhattan Institute.
Oversimplifying somewhat, Mr Murray regards the underclass as the product of
lax morals - such as public acceptance of out-of-wedlock childbirth - and
over-generous social benefits. Mr Wilson sees the ghetto poor primarily as
casualties: victims of the structural decline in urban manufacturing
employment and the upward mobility of the black middle class, who migrated
out of inner cities to a better life in the suburbs.
Both were on form at the seminar. Mr Murray, an unabashed advocate of an
extreme form of 19th century laissez faire, has cultivated a soft,
exaggeratedly polite speaking style. His argument is usually outrageous but
the sweetly reasonable tone seems to be saying 'listen to me, I'm really a
terribly decent chap'. It is the kind of voice that would tempt an
inarticulate opponent to punch his nose.
Mr Wilson is more emotional, but seems to project an almost tangible moral
authority. The ghettos, I am sure, offend his heart as much as they offend
his reason. Last week, his booming, angry voice filled the auditorium as he
dismissed Mr Jencks's classroom thesis that the underclass, as such, does
not exist. He smouldered when Mr Murray suggested that kids suffer in
ghettos because unmarried black women are simply bad mothers, not caring
properly for their children even when they have the resources. When Mr
Murray proceeded to argue that the failure of ghetto labour participation
rates to rise when the economy is buoyant shows that young blacks do not
respond to economic incentives, he erupted.
'That's a diabolical suggestion,' he shouted at Mr Murray, who remained
unruffled, as though the topic were how to make cucumber sandwiches.
Mr Wilson defines an underclass as a group that is weakly attached to the
labour force and lives in a social environment that reinforces this economic
marginality. In practice, the definition applies to areas of concentrated
poverty in big US cities. Looked at this way, the underclass has certainly
grown significantly in the past two decades. It is, moreover, as much an
ethnic as a geographic phenomenon: two thirds of America's 2.4m ghetto poor
are black; only 2 per cent of poor whites live in urban ghettos compared
with 16 per cent of poor Hispanics and 21 per cent of poor blacks.
Mr Murray believes passionately that government action is likely to
aggravate the problems of the ghettos. Mr Jencks seems happy with piecemeal
social policies because his graphs of crime, joblessness, illegitimacy and
so forth diverge somewhat. Mr Wilson's diagnosis seems nearest the mark: the
location and composition of the underclass can be identified; therefore,
given political will, the nexus of problems it represents can be tackled
simultaneously.
An underclass is formed by a physical concentration of social problems. All
the evidence suggests that the prospects of the poor and jobless improve if
they can escape an environment in which most of their neighbours live in a
similar condition. The long-term solution thus appears obvious: the ghettos
must be razed and the residents relocated to suburban middle class areas -
thinly spread, of course, so as not to disturb the social character of
stable areas.
It could be done: few of the ghetto poor would refuse an opportunity to live
in a clean, safe neighbourhood with good schools and plentiful jobs. And the
cost might be less than that of the space programme. It will remain a dream
mainly because white middle class Americans will not stand for it: black
families who move into the 'wrong' districts still run the risk of being
fire-bombed. So far as comfortable America is concerned, the underclass
should stay out of sight and out of mind. And if helpful professors can
prove that it does not exist, so much the better.
