FT  24 APR 91 / The Council Tax: Independent commission planned - Local
Government Structure
A GOVERNMENT-appointed Local Government Commission will be established to
prepare for changes in the structure of English councils from April 1994.
The commission, while independent, will operate within guidelines designed
to achieve government intentions of replacing the present two-tier structure
of county and district councils with unitary authorities.
Single-tier authorities, says the government's consultation paper published
yesterday, would produce 'more efficient and more accountable local
government' and reflect people's sense of identity with their communities.
There will be no wholesale abolition of existing county or district
councils, although the consultation document makes clear the government's
intention to move towards unitary authorities. 'In some places, it may be
best for existing authorities to be merged; in others the best approach may
be to create or recreate quite different authorities. In some areas there
could be a case for two tiers. The aim will be to achieve the structure
which best matches the particular circumstances of each area.'
Under the present two-tier system, the paper says, there was often confusion
over which authority was responsible for providing a particular service.
Such confusion clouded accountability.
Some authorities created by the last substantial local government
reorganisation in 1974 were still not wholly accepted by the communities
they served. In areas where the two tiers needed to work together - such as
planning - there was sometimes conflict and tension between the policies of
country and district councils.
'Changing the structure of local government will not in itself solve all the
problems. But in the main it is desirable that people can identify one
authority which secures services in their area. Having a single tier should
reduce bureaucracy and improve the co-ordination of services, increasing
quality and reducing costs.'
The consultation paper emphasises the government's determination to shift
the basis of local-authority activity from the direct provision of services
to the 'enabling' role of organising them. It says the government is
committed to contracting-out local authority services to the private sector
and voluntary organisations where that is justified by market-testing. 'The
aim should be to secure the best services at least cost.'
Such a changing role of local government, the paper says, significantly
altered the presumption that there was an ideal size of authority for the
efficient delivery of services. The government expects a range of sizes for
new authorities, determined by local circumstances, to emerge from the
proposed Local Government Commission review.
The consultation paper does not propose to change the structure of local
government in London and the metropolitan counties, where unitary
authorities have existed since 1985. Ministers are, however, looking for
improved ways of handling some joint services such as voluntary-sector and
arts funding in those conurbations.
Specific proposals to establish new unitary authorities will, the paper
says, have to be 'cost-effective'. The government plans to issue detailed
guidance on the basis for costings. Mr Michael Heseltine, environment
secretary, would reach decisions on proposals to change the system of local
government in a particular area after receiving the commission's
recommendations.
The complexity of existing electoral arrangements, which vary between local
authorities, may, the paper says, 'discourage people from taking an interest
in local government'. It finds a case for reconsidering electoral cycles and
numbers of councillors. Possible changes to local electoral arrangements
will be discussed in a consultation paper.
Views on yesterday's proposals are being sought by June 14. Separate papers
are being produced on the structure of local government in Scotland and
Wales.
Room N7/20 Department of the Environment, 2 Marsham Street, London, SW1P
3EB. Free.
