FT  07 MAY 91 / Survey of South Africa (8): Shadow of scandal falls on
financial world - The trappings of capitalism are receiving some unwelcome
attention
SOUTH AFRICA's popular Sunday press has been devoting an unusual amount of
attention to the activities of the financial community.
Alleged share dealing irregularities have compromised the reputations of
some of the country's most prominent institutions and stockbroking firms,
while a large banking merger was merely further grist to the mill of those
who think the activities of the financial sector have little beneficial
impact on pressing needs in the real economy. In a country that boasts an
influential and unapologetic Communist Party, such perceptions are
unfortunate.
The reality has been different, with the start of the year notable for two
important regulatory events: the passage of the Deposit Taking Institutions
Act (DTI), and the advent of a Takeovers and Mergers Code administered by a
Securities Regulation Panel.
The DTI has two main features to it: it levels the playing field between
banks and building societies, previously regulated under two separate acts
and subjected to different capital and lending constraints; and it brings
South Africa into line with the Basle Concordat capital adequacy
requirements.
The former represents an important shift from legislation being
institutionally based to it being functionally based. The latter reflects
the Act's main policy aim - the desire to enhance risk management.
The 80s saw some injudicious asset growth, the best example being the
Bankorp group, which landed itself in trouble after growing assets by 40 per
cent in each of 1988 and 1989. The new Act will force banks to concentrate
more on the quality than the quantity of assets. This is already evident in
the modest balance sheet growth shown by some of the country's bigger banks.
It has for some time been common cause that the banking industry's huge
investment in technology would be a catalyst for rationalisation, large
volumes being the only way to make the technology pay. The DTI encourages
this trend, as the higher capital adequacy requirements will ultimately be
beyond most small institutions, and because mortgages are only 50 per cent
risk weighted, compared to other forms of loan, in terms of the Act. This
makes old-style building societies attractive merger partners because their
large home loan books allow for cheaper growth.
All of these factors applied to the merger, consummated in March, between
Allied, UBS, Sage Financial Services, and Volkskas, which led to the
formation of the country's largest bank, Amalgamated Banks of South Africa
(Absa). The formation of Absa, which controls assets of about R50bn,
represented a tidying up of the banking interests of Rembrandt, the tobacco
and luxury goods conglomerate. The UBS-led bid for Allied was fiercely
contested by First National Bank, one of the country's other big banks,
resulting in one of the most highly publicised takeover battles in the
country's history. UBS was forced to raise its original bid, of R772m, by
about R100m.
One of the most salutary features of the takeover was the baptism of fire it
provided for the fledgling Securities Regulation Panel, based closely on its
London counterpart and fulfilling broadly the same role. The principle of
self-regulation of the securities industry applies, but an important
difference is that the South African code has the force of law.
Partly through the misfortune of having to unravel a complicated
jurisdictional issue in its maiden outing, and partly by its own hand, the
Panel's handling of the dispute brought a barrage of criticism, mainly
concerning the definition of what constituted concert parties for purposes
of triggering an automatic offer to minorities.
It is not the only one to have had a rough time of it. The investigation,
still under way, into alleged irregular share-dealings involving large
financial institutions and stockbrokers, has caused waves in the industry.
The transactions being investigated involve 'front-running', the practice
whereby an institutional investment manager and a stockbroker collude to
make an illegal profit by buying and selling on to the institution, at a
premium, a line of stock which it is known the institution plans to buy.
Three prominent institutional figures have already lost their jobs, various
stockbrokers have been charged with fraud, and the whole episode has cast
doubts upon the integrity of the investment community.
While the DTI and formation of the Panel are big improvements to the policy
environment of the financial services sector, there remain other important
issues to address. These include:
The second leg of the level playing fields argument, namely the extent to
which changes to the tax system are required to arrest the trend away from
discretionary, towards contractual, saving;
Addressing structural problems on the JSE, like low turnovers and poor
liquidity, which force brokers to rationalise;
The challenge to the banking community of developing suitable risk
evaluation techniques to set about meeting the needs of the rapidly
urbanising black population.
