FT  27 APR 91 / World Bank rejects loans policy attack
THE HEAD of the World Bank yesterday outlined measures to counter US
criticism that the bank was not doing enough to help the private sector in
developing countries.
However, Mr Barber Conable, president of the bank rejected the notion that
it should have a specific target for private sector lending, as suggested by
the US.
He also said that support for direct lending to the private sector by the
bank, a controversial proposal also envisaged by the US, did not have strong
support from shareholders.
The US has suggested that the bank group direct 50 per cent of its lending
to the private sector by 1995 in negotiations over a capital increase for
the bank's private sector affiliate, the International Finance Corporation.
The IFC, which makes equity and debt investment direct to the private
sector, is seeking a Dollars 1.3bn (Pounds 760m) capital increase. Mr
Conable thought that at meetings over the next few days of finance ministers
in Washington, agreement could be achieved that an increase was needed.
Agreement over a figure would follow later, he said.
The measures to increase the bank's role in the private sector include
strengthening a private sector policy guidance committee, changing staff
guidelines to improve co-ordination between the Bank and IFC, and
incorporating the IFC into the development of private sector strategies for
borrowing countries.
Developing countries will face a shortage of official development finance
over the next decade, according to the World Bank's new chief economist.
Mr Lawrence Summers said a restoration of large transfers of development
money to third world countries was not in sight.
The World Bank group itself had transferred Dollars 9 per head of the
population (in 1991 dollars) to the developing world between 1975 and 1980.
Over the next five years, this figure would be Dollars 2. Those countries
not eligible to borrow from the Bank's soft loan affiliate would actually be
transferring money to the bank.
'Since there will not be much development money over the next decade, there
had better be a lot of good ideas,' he told a conference.
He said that improving the efficiency with which capital is used was more
important than the amount of transfers. Increasing productivity in
developing countries by a mere 0.2 per cent 'would do more for living
standards than an additional Dollars 100bn of capital.'
