FT  24 APR 91 / China widens HK airport war of nerves
CHINA has stepped up its war of nerves with Hong Kong over the government's
plans for a HKDollars 100bn (Pounds 7.53bn) airport by welcoming outline
proposals from a leading local construction entrepreneur for an alternative
HKDollars 60bn private sector-based project.
This has emerged at a time when some international construction companies
are beginning to reassess their interest in tendering for the government
project because contracts are stalled by the row with China, which is
refusing to give approval until it gains partial control over the project.
Mr Gordon Wu, founder-chairman of Hong Kong-based Hopewell Holdings, met Lu
Ping, Peking's senior official with direct responsibility for Hong Kong in
Peking during the past two days.
Hopewell officials reported that Mr Wu's ideas had been 'fully supported' by
the officials, who said they wanted to see the project 'fully in the private
sector' and would help with air traffic rights.
Although there is no suggestion of any immediate contract negotiations, the
move is significant because Mr Wu gained support from a number of leading
Hong Kong property developers and other businessmen during a series of
private conversations before he went to Peking on Sunday. It is unlikely
that the Hong Kong government would be prepared to switch to Mr Wu's plans
and hand over control to the private sector. It would also resist giving
government land to the developers.
It is believed that Mr Wu's talks covered the possibility of the businessmen
starting construction in 1997, immediately after Hong Kong returns to
Chinese sovereignty.
Two key preliminary contracts, each worth about HKDollars 1bn-HKDollars
1.5bn, which should have been awarded this month, have not yet been signed.
One is expected to go to Kumagai Gumi (Hong Kong) for reclamation work in
the Kowloon area connected with approach roads, and another is slated for
Shui On Construction, a local contractor, to move a nearby typhoon shelter
and reclaim land.
Wimpey Construction of the UK has decided not to go ahead at this stage with
an application next month to be pre-qualified for one of the largest
contracts, worth an estimated HKDollars 6bn-8bn, to reclaim land and build
the main airport platform. Other international contractors are expected to
review their interest in tendering for this and other Hong Kong projects
because of the growing air of uncertainty.
