FT  11 MAY 91 / Clocks, Watches &amp; Jewellery: The ultimate in accuracy
FOR TELLING the time with style and status, you can't beat that gold Rolex.
When it comes to measuring the age of a spot of Jurassic silt or the
life-span of a quark, it takes instrumentation on a more cosmic scale.
In the last 30 years, science has provided techniques to measure time with
impressive accuracy. For example, precise dating of pottery shards can give
invaluable information to archaeologists. Using the phenomenon known as
thermoluminescence, a specially designed oven unit linked to a standard
personal computer and a printer can produce a glow curve from which a
reliable dating can be made.
Thermoluminescence builds up over the years as a result of environmental
radiation, and the energy is stored in the crystal lattice. When samples of
the pottery are heated in the oven unit, the energy is given off in the form
of light, which can be measured to show how long the pottery has been
absorbing radiation.
Although the principle of dating pottery by measuring thermoluminescence was
first proposed in 1953, a practical method has only been developed since
about 1960, at Oxford University's Research Laboratory for Archaeology and
the History of Art. The laboratory is able to offer the service commercially
to academic institutions, museums, and auction houses such as Sotheby's. It
is, in the opinion of Professor Edward Hall, former head of the laboratory,
one of the few entirely reliable scientific tests for dating material.
Organic matter contains minute quantities - one part in a million million -
of carbon 14, a radioactive isotope of carbon which decays at a known and
constant rate. By measuring the quantities of carbon 14 present, it is
possible to determine the age of ancient remains. Carbon 14 dating has been
possible for about 30 years, but the old technique required 10 grammes of
material - an impractically large amount when attempting to determine the
age of potentially priceless artefacts. Professor Hall's contribution was
the accelerator mass spectrometer, which could produce accurate results with
a sample 10,000 times smaller.
The Oxford laboratory now tests up to 1,000 samples a year, originating in
environmental studies and oceanography, archaeology and fine art. The most
publicised artefact ever tested at Oxford was the Turin Shroud.
When measuring time in the present, as opposed to the past, it is the
caesium clock which is now the ultimate reference. Dependent on the
vibration of the caesium atom, the frequency of which is extremely stable,
atomic clocks are so accurate that, were they to be set at the birth of
Christ, they would still be correct today to within 15 decimal places.
Dr Denis Vaughan, of the Science Museum, London, showed me an early example
of a caesium clock - an imposing installation. Present day instruments are
more compact, about the size of a suitcase. Hewlett Packard produced the
first portable caesium standard atomic clock in the late 1950s, and are
still world leaders in their production.
Developments now enable you to have atomic time in your own home. In 1988,
the German company Junghans introduced a clock with a radio receiver inside
it.
Similar in principle is a quartz watch, also produced by Junghans, which
works off a transmitter in Frankfurt. It has an aerial built into the watch
strap, and, at night, when laid flat on a bedside table, it will receive a
radio signal from the atomic clock, automatically adjusting the time.
And the next step? 'This is the ultimate, as far as accuracy is concerned',
says Dr Vaughan. 'It's difficult to visualise anything further.'
