FT  27 APR 91 / Clouds over a commercial vision: Proposed cuts at Guy's
hospital have cast doubts on health reforms
Like ambulance sirens blaring in a noiseless night, the voices of managers
at Guy's hospital have shattered the peace with which the government thought
it had secured its National Health Service reforms.
Mr William Waldegrave, health secretary, spent the weeks leading up to this
month's changes renouncing the business-like style in which they were first
presented, and stressing the government's continued attachment to the NHS as
a secure, caring public service.
He appeared to have succeeded. But health is the most politically volatile
of public services and, less than a month after the calm introduction of the
reforms, the first explosion has occurred. Managers at Guy's have announced
that they are seeking Pounds 12.8m in savings, hundreds of job losses, and
the likely closure of some clinical services.
There is the greatest possible irony - and embarrassment for the government
 -in the fact that the first controversy over the reforms has come at Guy's,
one of London's most famous teaching hospitals which became a self-governing
trust on April 1.
Until earlier this year Mr Peter Griffiths, the trust's chief executive,
worked in Whitehall as deputy head of the NHS management board. Ms Karen
Caines, Guy's new general manager, went to the hospital recently from the
Department of Health where she headed the division responsible for
implementing the government's reforms. The reforms themselves were to an
extent born at Guy's - Lord McColl, professor of surgery in its medical
school and one of the hospital's top doctor-managers, was among the trusted
group which advised the government on its plans.
Guy's is run by people who played a prominent part in advancing the entire
reform programme, and who are widely presumed to reflect official thinking.
Yesterday this left staff at other hospitals fearing that Guy's, often
described as the flagship of the reforms, was steering the rest of the fleet
towards the commercial vision of balance sheet medicine which Mr Waldegrave
has tried to dispel.
The government's opponents, meanwhile, are rejoicing in the fact that the
affair has sent the whole question of NHS funding springing back up the
political agenda in what could be a general election year.
Guy's managers and Department of Health officials were anxious to stress
yesterday that the proposed job cuts are not directly related to the health
reforms and the hospital's self-governing status. While essentially true,
the argument that the cuts would probably have been made anyway was hardly
likely to cheer critics, who have claimed consistently that underfunding is
the NHS's overriding problem. Britain spends less on health care in GDP
terms than most comparable countries.
This week's events at Guy's will give added bite to a meeting at Chequers
today when Mr John Major, prime minister, Mr Waldegrave and other ministers
will discuss with senior doctors targets for improving the nation's health.
The immediate problem for the Guy's trust is that it inherited Pounds 6.8m
debt from the old system on NHS funding. Many hospitals and health
authorities have, over the past year, been taking tough measures to clear
debt and balance their books in readiness for this month's changes. Guy's
neighbour, St Thomas, has recently completed a struggle to save Pounds 8m.
Mr Griffiths wants about 600 job cuts to help clear the deficit from the
hospital's Pounds 128m budget and provide a further Pounds 6m for
reinvestment in patient services.
Some senior medical staff at Guy's argued yesterday that, following years of
repeatedly tight financial controls, there is no scope for achieving such
savings without affecting services.
Prof Stewart Cameron, professor of renal medicine, said that when
consultants voted 2-1 in favour of supporting self-governing status in a
ballot which took place before the financial picture was clear, they
believed that the trust would begin life with a Pounds 1.5m surplus rather
than a Pounds 6.8m deficit. 'We must all of us feel, if not cheated, at
least that we have been misled,' he said.
Even more alarming for many staff at Guy's and the trust's sister hospital
at Lewisham is a decision by the management to conduct a review of all
clinical services over the next three months to determine priorities for the
future. Mr Griffiths said in a message to his 8,000 staff that 'services
whose patient satisfaction level is too low will find that resources will
not be allocated to them'.
The exercise is justified by the logic of the health reforms, under which
hospitals are funded in relation to the value of contracts they win from
health authorities and general practitioners. 'If contracts are not won then
the trust has no future,' said Mr Griffiths. 'There is no fall-back
position, as there was in the past, on a block sum of money appearing every
year irrespective of how many patients were treated or, even, how they were
treated.'
For managers, a decision to concentrate on what Guy's does best is likely to
make sound managerial sense under the contract-based funding arrangements;
activities which do not meet this criteria would be left to neighbouring
hospitals.
Many doctors fear, however, that the same financial pressures which have
provoked the call for job cuts will tempt managers to concentrate on the
most profitable activities. There is concern that unglamorous areas such as
geriatric care and services to the relatively-deprived communities from
which Guy's and Lewisham hospitals draw their local patients may be at risk.
Even if Guy's gets the staff cuts and financial savings it is seeking, this
will only clear managers' desks for some even bigger potential problems.
The London teaching hospitals, as national centres of excellence, draw many
of their patients from outside the capital. They are expensive institutions
to run and, with contract funding, may show up as uncompetitive compared
with local hospitals in the new market-based NHS. Health authorities in the
home counties now operate under strong financial incentives to treat more
patients locally rather than send them to London.
In addition, the regional allocation of NHS finance will in future be
broadly related to population. This will point up an already established
fact - that the capital has more than its fair share of hospital provision.
Combined, these factors provide a recipe for aggressive competition between
the London teaching hospitals, leading to the probable eventual closure of
at least one - with many more financial dramas like this week's events at
Guy's in between.
Guy's will not be alone in seeking to reduce costs. The Bradford Hospitals
trust is likely to shed 300 jobs over the next three years to save Pounds
7m. Leeds General Infirmary is reviewing costs and the Royal London faces a
likely Pounds 1.5m shortfall this year. The problem is not restricted to
trusts - all hospitals are now funded on the basis of the contracts they
attract - m of manoeuvre in tackling it.
All hospitals are heavily labour-intensive by the nature of their work -
nearly Pounds 90m of the Pounds 128m Guy's budget goes in staff costs. Many
hospital staff on the lower grades are in poorly paid jobs where
productivity and efficiency levels are often modest.
One of the biggest challenges facing managers is to find ways of lifting
productivity, for example, by turning porters into multi-skilled general
support workers, and increasing the use of cost-effective day-surgery
treatment techniques. So, although the NHS will remain labour intensive, its
managers are beginning to follow the trend in other sectors towards fewer
staff doing more varied, highly-qualified jobs.
While public finance remains tight, this is one of the most promising means
of releasing more money for patient care. But, as the events at Guy's have
shown, NHS managers do not have the same opportunities as their counterparts
in industry to get there through quiet negotiation. Health is too much of a
political battleground occupied by sectional interests for that.
Ministers hope that the introduction of self-governing trusts will
eventually enable hospitals to be managed out of the political spotlight in
a more local, low-key way. Eventually perhaps, but not yet. By yesterday,
the events at Guy's had provoked uproar, questions in parliament, and
demands for the scrapping of the health reforms. The prospects of the NHS
being a dominant issue in the next general election remain high.
