FT  17 APR 91 / London Stock Exchange: SmithKline rises on drug sales
SmithKline Beecham put in a good performance in the wake of presentations to
analysts in London and New York. The gain was at the expense of Glaxo
because much of the discussion with the analysts concerned patents on
money-spinning drugs where worries have hit both stocks in recent weeks.
Analysts heard how the expiry of the patent on SmithKline's best seller
Tagamet would be compensated for by the sales of two new drugs: Seroxat, an
anti-depressant drug, and Augmentin, an antibiotic.
SmithKline hinted that sales of Seroxat would pass Pounds 1bn a year - an
unofficial definition of a blockbuster drug - later in the decade, while
Augmentin would be a bigger seller than Tagamet within two years.
SmithKline gained 9 to 818p on steady turnover of 1.6m. Traders noted
switching out of Glaxo, down 15 to 1085p on 2.1m.
Hanson active
Turnover in Hanson leapt to 21m in the wake of the company's announcement
that it was raising Pounds 500m through an issue of a 15-year convertible
Eurobond with a 9 1/2 per cent coupon.
The news restarted speculation that the acquisitive Hanson was going to bid
for a large company. Although all suggestions were greeted with some
scepticism by traders. Hanson itself lost 5 to 220p.
Possible candidate
Among market reactions to the Hanson's fund raising was to link the news
with recent suggestions that Brent Walker could be about to divest itself of
its successful William Hill betting shops operation.
Brent Walker shares moved higher amid speculation that Hanson may be keen on
acquiring the cash-generative William Hill organisation which comprises some
1,700 betting shops throughout the UK.
Specialists were sceptical about any Hanson move on William Hill but said
there was little doubt that Brent Walker, with debt well in excess of Pounds
1bn, would be happy to sell William Hill. 'Some form of divestment from
Brent Walker seems likely in the medium term,' said one analyst.
Brent Walker acquired William Hill in the autumn of 1989 for some Pounds
685m, financed by bank borrowings. Brent Walker shares, responding to hopes
that a William Hill sale will eventually materialise, moved up to 79p before
slipping back to close a net 4 higher at 75p.
Foremost among FT-SE stocks considered vulnerable to any predatory move by
Hanson was Pilkington. Previous speculation of a possible bid from rival
conglomerate and stakeholder BTR was forgotten as Pilkington rose against
the market to touch 207p. Later they came away from the highest to close a
net 3 firmer at 205p after turnover of 4.1m shares.
Another possible Hanson candidate was said to be Allied-Lyons, which last
month suffered weakness on the disclosure of a large currency loss. Traders
were sceptical of the Hanson speculation, but Allied still rose 6 to 535p.
Only minor improvements were scored by other stocks thought likely to
attract the attention of Lord Hanson. Hawker Siddeley weakened because it
was omitted from the list of possibles, and the shares ended 15 down at
587p.
J Sainsbury, the food retailer, dropped 11 to 379p after analysts drew
attention to the shares' recent strong performance. Since the begining of
April, Sainsbury has risen by nearly 10 per cent against a 2.5 per cent gain
by the FT-SE 100 index.
Some brokers recommended selling, while others advised switching into slower
performers such as Tesco and Argyll. There were also suggestions that the
rise in its share price may tempt bond holders to consider converting into
equity.
Mr Paul Smiddy of Kleinwort Benson said full conversion of the 1989
convertible bond would add 50m shares to circulation. Argyll was 3 lower at
316p, while Tesco was off a penny at 282p.
The near two week run in oil shares was brought to a halt by a bout of minor
profit-taking triggered by the general decline in UK markets and the initial
fall in US equities. Turnover, although well below recent enhanced levels,
remained keen as a small rise crude oil prices prompted the emergence of a
number of buyers at the close.
Ultramar was a notable weak spot, the shares sliding 9 to 323p after a
number of switches out of the ordinary and into the group's convertible
stock; turnover in the ordinary reached a higher-than-usual 1.2m shares.
Lasmo outperformed the sector, touching 372p before closing a net 2 firmer
at 366p after being given a strong push by Mr David Stedman at Daiwa, the
Japanese-owned securities house. Mr Stedman described Lasmo shares as
'undervalued and overlooked,' and said Lasmo was looking at rising
production - breaking through the 100,000 barrels a day mark in 1992. He
focused on Lasmo's big drilling programme in the next six months and pointed
out Lasmo's 24 per cent underperformance of the market since the beginning
of the year.
Legal &amp; General dipped 5 to 465p in front of today's new business figures
for the first quarter. These, analysts said, are expected to show a drop of
between 10 and 15 per cent on the same period last year.
A technical correction of the stock's outperformance over the past four
weeks - 7 1/2 per cent against the wider market - left Rolls-Royce 7 lower
at 170p. The situation was brought on, according to traders, by two sizeable
sellers not handling their business too well and pushing marketmakers into
passing stock around the market as they adjusted book positions.
Regional brewer J A Devenish outshone the leading stocks, rising 10 on
persistent buying interest to achieve the best level this year of 204p.
Smith New Court, the investment house, has favourably rated the company
since hosting a presentation back in January.
The software stocks held the limelight in electronics. Sema extended their
recent steep decline, closing a further 14 off at 335p with the market still
expecting Cap Gemini Sogeti to sell its badly-performing 27.4 per cent stake
and launch a bid for one of the other software groups. SD-Scicon, long
spoken of as a bid target, edged higher to 37p.
Among the other software issues a comprehensive review of the sector by Ms
Tressan Macarthy at Panmure Gordon highlighted the attractions of Sage,
Macro 4, Misys and Sherwood Computer. Sage jumped 16 to 252p with the 'new'
shares 16 1/2 up at 50 1/2 p. Misys continued to move higher, adding 9 to
124p. Sherwood raced up 15 to 137p.
Talk linking TI Group, 531p, with fellow engineering group Siebe, 423p,
unsettled sentiment in both and the shares lost 6 and 11 respectively.
Mannesmann, the big German engineering company, holds more than 7 per cent
of TI Group, and has admitted its desire to tackle a 'large to very large
project.'
Marks and Spencer, a strong performer since the begining of April, slipped
back 5 to 258p as 4.4m shares changed hands on renewed suggestions of weak
food sales.
Caird Group, the waste management company which suffered several traumas in
1990, traded briskly as investors interpreted confidently the news that
several main board directors, including the chief executive Mr Peter
Linacre, had increased their holdings.
The stock rose to 67p before settling 7 up on the session at 65p. Turnover
was heavy at 2.4m shares. Severn Trent Water holds a near-30 per cent stake
after allowing a conditional bid of 100p per share for Caird to lapse last
year.
Smaller-priced and USM-listed Porth advanced 3 more to 14p on continued
hopes that Sir Michael Edwardes, the former head of British Leyland, will
become chairman of the company.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1991
NEW HIGHS (176).
BRITISH FUNDS (4) Treas. 2pc IL 1992, Do. 3pc I-L 1992, Do. 2pc I-L 1994,
Do. 2pc IL 1996, AMERICANS (8) Abbott Labs., Amer. Cynamid, Gen Elect., Lone
Star, Lowes, Merrill Lynch, Texaco, USX, CANADIANS (1) Royal Bk. Can., BANKS
(4) Fuji, Mitsubishi, Mitsubishi Tst &amp; Bnkg, Mitsui Tst &amp; Bnkg, BREWERS (3)
Devenish (JA), Do. 4.5pc Pf, Wolv. &amp; Dudley, BUILDINGS (7) Allen, Attwoods,
Boot (H), EBC, SWP, Tay Homes, Ward, CHEMICALS (3) BTP, Yorkshire Chems.,
Yule Catto, STORES (9) Alexon, Blacks Leis., Cantors A, Castle Mill, Clinton
Cards, Dunhill, French Connection, Hartstone, Martin (A), ELECTRICALS (12)
Forward Tech., Johnson Elect, Micro Focus, Neotronics, Nthn. Telecom,
Pegasus, Penny &amp; Giles, Pifco, Do. A, SD-Scicon, Sherwood Comp., TDK,
ENGINEERING (4) Davy, Johnson &amp; Firth, Metalrax, Victaulic, FOODS (6)
Iceland Frozen, Kwik Save, Low (Wm), Morrison (Wm), Nurdin Peacock,
Shoprite, HOTELS (2) City Centre Rests., Resort, INDUSTRIALS (30) Amer Bus
Systems, Astra B, Bespak, Betterware, Boots, Dauphin, Davis (Godfrey), ECC,
EIS, Elga, Erskine Hse. 7 1/4 pc Prf., Fletcher Challenge, Flogas, Grampian,
Handley-Walker, Kalon, Low &amp; Bonar, Nestor-BNA, Pilkington, Do. Wrrnts,
Russell (A), Sinclair (Wm), SmithKline Bchm. A, Do. Equity Units, Spandex,
Stag Furniture, Stocklake, TLS Range, Walker Greenbank, Wills, INSURANCE (1)
Britannic, LEISURE (9) Airtours, Central ITV, Hi-Tec, Metro Radio, Owners
Abroad, Do. Prf., Radio City A, Stanley Leis., Surrey, MOTORS (2) Pendragon,
Perry, NEWSPAPERS (4) Bristol Eve., Johnston Press, Metal Bulletin, Quarto,
PAPERS (4) Enso-Gutzeit, Olives, Waddington (J), Watmoughs, PROPERTY (1)
Estates &amp; Gen, SOUTH AFRICANS (2) Anglo Am Inds, Gold Flieds Prop., TEXTILES
(1) Gaskell, TRANSPORT (2) BAA, Tibbett &amp; Britten, TRUSTS (49) American,
Archimedes Inc., Baillie Gifford Japan, Cons. Venture, Do. 120 Wrrnts., EFM
Java, F &amp; C Smaller Co's, First Tokyo Index, Flmg Amer., Flmg Fledg., Flmg
Japanese, Foreign &amp; Col., G. Rintoul Stppd. Prf., GT Japan, Gen. Chile Fd,
Gen. Cons. Stppd. Prf., Govett Atlantic, JF Pac. Wrrnts., Jersey Phoenix
Wrrnts., Do. Wrrnts., Lancs &amp; London, M &amp; G Dual Inc., Do. 2nd Dual Inc.,
Martin Currie Pac., Do. Wrrnts., Mexico Fd., Pac. Assets, Pac. Horizon
Wrrnts., River &amp; Merc. Am. Inc., River &amp; Merc. Extra. Inc., SPLIT Inc.,
SPRAIT 6.3-13.3pc. Ptg., Scot. Amer., Scot. Natl. Stppd. Prf., Scot. &amp;
Merc., Scot. Cities, Sec. Alliance, Second Mkt., Select Assets Ln. 2013, Do.
Ln. Sers II, Shires, Strata, TR Tech. Stppd. Prf., Do. Zero Prf., Thai Euro
Fd, Throgmorton, Do. Wrrnts., Throgmorton Dual Tst. Inc., Venturi Inc.,
WATER (1) Northumbrian, OILS (4) Br. Borneo, Ranger, Royal Dutch, Shell
Trans., MINES (3) Impala Plat, Pasminco, Rand Mines.
NEW LOWS (28).
CANADIANS (2) Granges Expln, Nth West Gold, BANKS (1) HSBC, CHEMICALS (1)
Astra, STORES (1) Usher (F), ELECTRICALS (4) Arlen, Chloride, Densitron,
Sema, ENGINEERING (1) Kvaerner B, INDUSTRIALS (4) Alexandra Workwear, Cargo
Control, Hartons, Tubular Edgington, LEISURE (1) Midlands Radio, PROPERTY
(3) Cussins, Hardanger, Stewart &amp; Wight, TRUSTS (2) Afex, Close Bros., OILS
(1) Cairn Energy, MINES (7) Blyvoor, Cluff Oil Wrrnts, Free State Dev.,
Harmony, Pelsart Res., Plateau, Venterspost.
