FT  27 APR 91 / Guy's on the casualty list: The solemn mood at the London
hospital
There was a dark shadow over the campus of Guy's Hospital yesterday, in
spite of the spring sun and gentle breeze blowing across London.
Crowds of patients and staff bustled between the buildings in the complex,
and an open-air coffee shop was doing good business. But a hastily-scribbled
National Union of Public Employees poster on a noticeboard nearby bore a
solemn reminder: '600 jobs cut. Never before has it been more important to
be in a trade union.'
Mr David Brown, a clerk, said: 'I'm very angry. This is part and parcel of
the move to turn the hospital into a trust. They are paving the way to make
redundancies easier.'
A counsellor at Guy's said: 'I think it's horrific. It's difficult to
understand how a hospital that was declared viable when it applied for trust
status can now suddenly be in such an appalling financial state.'
Dr Helen Crimlisk, a senior house officer, said she was concerned, but still
supported the principle of Guy's opting out. 'I'm not in favour of people
losing their jobs. But I think we've taken out a layer of administration. It
was very difficult to embark on any change in the past.
'I hope they will take this opportunity to change the way the health service
runs, to make it more efficient and relevant to the local population.'
Professor Stewart Cameron, professor of renal medicine, said: 'Flagship
Guy's is listing badly. There's no fat, there's practically no muscle and we
are virtually down to the bone.'
He said consultants - who voted convincingly for Guy's to become a
self-governing trust - were told the hospital had been projected to make a
Pounds 1.5m surplus in its first year.
'How is it that they got their estimates so catastrophically wrong?' he
said. 'And how can we have any confidence in people who have made such a
devastating mistake?'
A hospital porter said: 'I think it's scandalous. We're already
understaffed. A lot of rumours have been going about but they never tell us
anything. I suppose there's not much we can do about it.'
A pharmacy assistant was more stoical. 'I've been here a long time,' she
said. 'I could retire in three years. If they retire me, that's OK.'
'It's a shame,' said Mr Ron Kiely, a pensioner who has used the hospital for
many years.
One woman smiled as she hurried past. 'I'm not prepared to comment, but
let's just say this. The wrong people will be going.'
