FT  18 APR 91 / UK company aims to rid Kuwait of bombs
ONE OF the first contracts for clearing Kuwait of Iraqi mines and unexploded
allied bombs is expected to be signed this weekend by Royal Ordnance, the UK
arms company, and the Kuwaiti government.
The deal would be valued 'in the low hundreds of millions of dollars,'
according to one British official.
Unusually, Royal Ordnance, part of British Aerospace, would sub-contract
much of the early munitions clearance to a 150-strong unit of the British
army, the 21st squadron of the Royal Engineers. Members of the unit would
receive army pay - a factor which gave Royal Ordnance a significant price
advantage in bidding for the work.
The Royal Engineers would undertake the work for the first four months,
after which it is understood that Royal Ordnance would provide its own
clearance team.
The emergency clear-up of unexploded munitions in Kuwait, which has
concentrated on main roads and civilian areas, has been conducted
exclusively so far by allied military units and is nearing completion. To
date, more than 3m munitions of various types have been cleared.
The remaining task in the state is colossal. Iraqi minefields along the
beaches and southern border of Kuwait are untouched, while hundreds of
deserted Iraqi ammunition dumps still scatter the city.
A serious problem is the clearance of unexploded allied 'bomblets', which
litter the deserts of north-east Kuwait and large tracts of the southern
oilfields, where Iraqi armoured positions were heavily bombed.
Bomb disposal experts in Kuwait estimate that millions of such bomblets
remain unexploded, largely because they fell into cushioning sand.
'Sorting out that lot will take months - to do the oil wells thoroughly may
take years,' said Lt Col Mike Brooke of the Royal Engineers, who is
co-ordinating the allied clear-up.
Kay Associates, the US ordnance group, has already won a contract to clear
up three Kuwaiti air bases. The group had close links with the emirate's air
force, for which it provided training before the invasion.
States International and UBX, two other large US ordnance companies, are
also in Kuwait vying for what amounts to the largest munitions clearance
ever attempted. Some experts reckon a full clearance would take years and
leave little change out of Dollars 1bn (Pounds 561m).
