FT  16 APR 91 / Management: A property strategy
Property is an unpopular subject with many managers because every time the
subject has to be addressed it appears to incur a cost but provides no
tangible benefit. A rent review invariably increases costs while finding a
use for a vacant space involves marketing and management time.
But this perception needs to be reconsidered, according to the Director's
Guide to Property.* Industry's spending on new buildings and infrastructure
is enormous - more than Pounds 24bn in 1989 - making property a resource
which should be managed properly to maximise its cost-effectiveness.
The cost of occupying and using property in the form of rent, rates,
mortgage payments and upkeep must be clearly identified and included in
budgets. Increases can be planned for by noting in advance the timing of
rent reviews and maintenance commitments imposed by leases.
Businessmen must take into account the time-scale of property transactions
when making strategic plans, the guide suggests. It takes time to find
property or buyers; there may be planning consents or building warrants to
obtain; and the price will have to be negotiated. Legislation stipulates
that local authorities must consider planning applications within two months
of receipt but this time limit is often exceeded because of the work loads
of planning departments.
The first step towards devising a strategy should be an audit of the
business's property assets, the guide says. Establish what the company
occupies and where it is. Is the tenure freehold or leasehold and if
leasehold for how long?
Are there any limitations on the use of the property? Title documents can
impose conditions which control future redevelopment and reduce the possible
sale or rental price. On the other hand a company may be able to increase
the value of its property by gaining planning consent for a change of use. A
site which can be developed for housing or a supermarket may be worth
considerably more than one in industrial use.
*From Director Publications, Mountbarrow House, Elizabeth Street, London
SW1W 9RB. Tel 071-730 6060. 96 pages. Pounds 9.95.
See also this page March 12.
