FT  24 APR 91 / The Guinness appeals: Judges to hear medical view
EVIDENCE about the medical condition of Mr Ernest Saunders, the former
chairman and chief executive of Guinness, serving a five-year jail sentence
for his part in the Guinness affair, will be heard by the appeal court
today.
The three judges may decide to sit in private to hear the testimony of
doctors who have examined Mr Saunders on behalf of his lawyers and the
Serious Fraud Office.
Yesterday Mr Anthony Shaw, Mr Saunders' counsel, asked that the evidence be
heard in chambers in Mr Saunders' absence.
That, he said, would enable the doctors not to be constrained by
professional reticence about discussing Mr Saunders' condition in front of
him or in public.
He said he appreciated that the appeal was a matter of public interest being
heard in public, but there were larger humanitarian considerations.
The court could decide what it would be proper to make public in its
judgment, Mr Shaw said.
Lord Justice Neill said the court's provisional view was that the appeal
should remain public but it would consider the matter again today afterthe
doctors had met and discovered any disagreements between them.
He said: 'This is a case where we are very reluctant, unless overriding
considerations apply, to deal with it otherwise than in open court.
I think we shall need to be satisfied there are particular aspects of the
medical evidence that ought not to be publicly known.'
Mr Saunders; Mr Anthony Parnes, a City stockbroker; and Mr Gerald Ronson,
head of the Heron group, are appealing against convictions and sentences. Mr
Parnes is serving 2 1/2 years. Mr Ronson, released in February after serving
just under half his 12-month sentence, was also fined Pounds 5m.
Mr John Chadwick, QC, for the SFO, defended the allegation made against Mr
Saunders during the trial that he had intended keeping Pounds 3m of Pounds
5.2m he authorised Guinness to pay Mr Tom Ward, a US lawyer and Guinness
director.
Mr Saunders has complained that the allegation, and the way the trial judge
dealt with it, prejudiced his defence.
Mr Chadwick said the allegation had been properly made to test Mr Saunders'
credibility as a witness and correctly dealt with in the judge's summing-up.
