FT  13 MAY 91 / Leading Article: US versus the World Bank
IF THE US administration wants a greater emphasis by the World Bank on the
private sector, it has an odd way of showing it. The main manifestation so
far has been its blocking last week of agreement to an increase in capital
for the part of the World Bank group created specifically to help the
private sector: the International Finance Corporation.
The IFC, which enjoyed growth of 20 per cent a year in the late 1980s,
claims its expansion has been constrained this year by a lack of capital.
The longer the delay, the more it will be hampered from doing its job in
future.
The price the US wants for its assent to a capital increase is a more
explicit focus by the World Bank group on the private sector. Once this
price has been paid, the US has said that an increase of Dollars 750m should
be considered, instead of the doubling of its Dollars 1.3bn in capital that
the IFC is seeking.
The most significant suggestion from the US - that the World Bank might lend
directly to the private sector - would require a change in the Bank's
articles of association and implies a profound shift in Bank strategy. Yet,
however frustrating they may find US tactics, many are prepared to concede
that, up to a point, the US has a point, The Bank could work more closely
with the IFC and should do more to help the private sector.
The question is how. A distinction must be made between helping the private
sector and lending directly to it. The former does not entail the latter and
the latter does not imply the former. It is equally important to remember
what direct lending to the private sector would signify. World Bank lending
to the private sector with government guarantees would reinforce government
meddling in the private sector. But lending to the private sector without a
guarantee could threaten its credit rating.
More risk
Some might argue that the World Bank should bear more risk, but the
implications could be grave. Consider the IFC itself. It has been bolstered
by its successful equity investments in Third World stock markets and
companies, but the performance of its loan portfolio has been weak.
The fundamental question is how far direct lending to the private sector
would further the World Bank's development aims. One powerful case can be
made for such lending. The current policy means that the World Bank can give
help to state-owned companies, but not to private companies that do the same
job. That constraint on the Bank acts as a disincentive to privatisation and
an obstacle to involvement with privatised companies.
Important worries
Yet there are also important worries. In many developing countries it is
small and medium-sized businesses that most need additional capital. Since
the Bank is unable to assess the viability of such borrowers directly, it
has to rely on intermediaries to do the job. In the past, these
intermediaries have often proved ineffective and sometimes corrupt.
The value of lending by the World Bank to big private sector companies is
more debatable still. If such a company is not creditworthy, the Bank should
not lend to it; if it is creditworthy, loans from the Bank may merely keep
it out of private capital markets.
It is also important to remember that the World Bank has a unique role in
funding what will remain public functions in most developing countries:
education, for example, or large scale irrigation, or roads. Any change in
World Bank policy must not threaten its ability to raise money and lend for
such purposes.
In short, the Bank should listen to the US; it should improve its
understanding of the private sector; and it should consider direct lending
to it - but only on a limited basis and, if possible, through expansion of
the activities of the IFC.
For its part, the US should remember both that helping the private sector
does not entail lending directly to it and that development was not brought
about by the private sector alone even within the US. Not least, it should
heed its own advice about the importance of the private sector and back a
substantial capital increase for the IFC.
