FT  11 MAY 91 / International Disaster Relief: Civil war and nightmare
logistics plague valiant relief effort - The Horn of Africa has proved a
graveyard for some of the world's best and brightest aid workers
NO AREA in the world is as inhospitable to relief efforts or as difficult to
operate in as the Horn of Africa.
Some of the most valiant efforts ever undertaken to reach starving people
have had to face impossible odds in Sudan, Ethiopia and Somalia, countries
wracked by civil war, and crippled by weak to non-existent infrastructure.
Lengthy negotiations with rebels and governments - who frequently use food
aid as a political weapon - together with debilitated economies, decrepit
transport systems and red tape, have often frustrated attempts to bring food
to millions of starving people in the Horn and elsewhere in Africa.
Inexperienced aid personnel, poor information about conditions on the ground
 -particularly in the battle zones of countries afflicted by civil war - and
inappropriate, unco-ordinated donations by the scores of aid agencies
responding to Africa's disasters, have compounded the problem.
Laxatives and anti-indigestion remedies, for example, have on occasions been
included among famine supplies. And according to one author, those starving
in sweltering Somalia in the 1987 famine were given frost bite medicine
shipped from Minnesota, electric blankets and consignments of Go-Slim soup,
and chocolate-flavoured diet drinks.
At the same time, requests for more practical help sometimes go unmet.
Recently Somali rebels in the country's northern Hargeisa region received an
unsympathetic response from donors to appeals for barbed wire to fence off
mined areas, and donkeys and carts to remove refuse and distribute water.
'Most aid workers laugh at that and ask what kind of a stupid request is
that. They say 'We don't supply barbed wire, we supply food and blankets,''
said Mr Bob Koepp of the Nairobi office of the Lutheran World Federation,
which operates an aid programme for the region.
'But it is the little things, the grass roots things that are really
important. You can bring in all the food you want, but it is the small
things that people want that count.'
Nevertheless, many lessons were learnt during the famine-stricken decade of
the 1980s.
Most of the food now donated is through the United Nations World Food
Programme, which tries to ensure the quality and arrange transport.
Distribution, however, can be a nightmare.
Nothing illustrates this better than the the case of southern Sudan where in
1988, half a million people starved to death.
Civil war has raged in the south since 1983. Communications networks have
been destroyed. Roads are almost non-existent. Some are passable between
January and April, but soon get washed away with the onset of rains in
April.
Both rebels and government have used 'security' considerations to delay food
deliveries to the other side, and even attacked relief operations.
The result has been the effective crippling of vital supply routes, such as
the railway between Murglad and Aweil, in south-east Sudan. In 1989 only
four trains moved down the single-line track distributing food for civilians
in both government- and rebel-held areas. The first train, carrying 1,500
tons of food, was stopped by gunmen from an Arab militia, who robbed UN
staff personnel and threatened to execute them.
The second train was looted by hungry people.
No train has moved on the line in the last 18 months. Efforts to get it
going again have proved impossible. The government claims the tracks have
been removed in three areas and the surrounding areas mined.
Barges which used to ply the Nile river have been prevented from being used
because of government objections.
In Mozambique, where nearly 2m people are at risk of starvation, transport
problems are equally daunting.
Oxfam, the British charity, said this week that half the government's lorry
fleet was out of order and urged donors to support the government's
logistics operations.
In Ethiopia a critical shortage of fuel last month almost brought relief
operations to a standstill.
Here the World Food Programme is trying to reach up to 5.5m people, 1m of
them in the arid and almost inaccessible Ogaden and Harege region.
Ironically, the recent rains have made the situation worse - a recent
journey of 90 kilometres took 10 days.
Civil wars make a difficult situation well-nigh impossible, and often both
sides are to blame.
In northern Sudan, for example, one logistical problem, according to an aid
official, was the government itself, which commandeered private transporters
carring relief supplies, and forced them to go back to Port Sudan, unload
and then re-load government goods.
In southern Sudan, stronghold of the Sudan Peoples Liberation Army (SPLA),
the rebels are persisting in their refusal of permission for the UN to
establish a safe-passage road corridor into Juba, the besieged southern
capital, or to send in an assessment team to the southern town of Yei, where
help is urgently needed.
In Somalia, conditions are as bad, if not worse. Almost every aid agency has
had its trucks, offices and warehouses destroyed and looted. Continuing
insecurity and gunfire in the capital has prevented many aid agencies,
including the United Nations, from returning to the country.
Some aid workers in Somalia believe these concerns have been exaggerated.
'If people say it is too difficult to operate in Somalia it means they
haven't looked at the situation carefully,' said Mr Stewart Elms of the aid
agency SOS International, which has operated in Mogadishu throughout the
civil war. Government bureaucracy can also be a formidable obstacle.
This year, aid workers in northern Sudan, where 7.7m people are at risk,
faced lengthy delays over permits to travel into the interior, or to clear
goods through customs.
Constant turnover of aid personnel, and the conditions of life in the
capitals of the Horn of Africa, also compounds the problem.
'The Horn of Africa, and particularly Sudan, is so difficult to work in that
it has become the graveyard of some of the best and brightest aid workers in
the world,' said Mr Abdul Mohamed, a specialist in relief operations in the
Horn.
Yet at the end of this tale of woe, the most remarkable thing is the fact
that most of the aid eventually gets through.
The role of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) is fundamental to famine
relief operations in Africa: 'NGOs can fill the gaps until the big boys,
such as the UN agencies, come in,' says one aid worker. 'The problems may be
enormous, but they have to be tackled, and we can operate more efficiently
without the bureaucratic delays or the political complications.'
