FT  01 MAY 91 / World Trade News: Warning for paper industry
GROWING environmental pressures will make the 1990s a more challenging
decade for the paper industry than the previous turbulent one.
This forecast came yesterday from Mr Stephen Walls, chief executive of
Wiggins Teape Appleton, the EC paper company. He told a pulp and paper
conference organised by the Financial Times and the European Paper Institute
that competition would intensify in the European industry, because of
greater consolidation and over-capacity.
Mr Walls' speech echoed themes touched on earlier by, among others, Mr
Hartwig Geginat, president of the European Paper Institute. Mr Geginat
forecast that demand for paper products would remain strong, with the total
market for paper and board products growing at 3-4 per cent a year in the
next five years.
But he added changing consumer attitudes could affect the quality and
consumption of paper, as governments introduced legislation aimed at cutting
the use of packaging materials. 'Not only is the industry's use of
materials, processes and recycling under attack by pressure groups, but the
product itself is. This represents the main challenge facing the industry
into the next century.'
Mr Desmond Smurfit, joint deputy chairman of Jefferson Smurfit Group, the
Irish paper and packaging company, said the concept of quality would be
critical in the present business environment. The big European players would
continue to get bigger, he added.
Mr Takao Teresaki, a general manager at C. Itoh, the Japanese trading group,
said the Japanese market was suffering from over-capacity, caused by
'overly-aggressive' capital investment. But he forecast the industry would
quickly overcome its difficulties and return to a stable growth of 3-3 1/2
per cent a year.
Mr Hugh Whalen, executive vice-president of Canadian Pacific Forest
Products, said the paper industry was 'all too often at the centre of an
environmental issue, sometimes distorted beyond reason'.
Recycling rumpus, Page 12
