FT  01 MAY 91 / BSkyB partners in Pounds 200m refinance
THE MAJOR shareholders of British Sky Broadcasting, the five-channel
satellite television consortium, were last night signing legally binding
heads of agreement on a Pounds 200m financial package for the venture.
Agreement between the partners came almost at the last minute after
prolonged negotiations. BSkyB, the consortium formed in November from the
merger of British Satellite Broadcasting and Mr Rupert Murdoch's Sky
Television, would have run out of money later this week without new money
being injected.
Mr Murdoch's News Corporation has come up with a sizeable chunk of cash
towards its Pounds 100m share of the refinancing but most of its
contribution to the high-risk venture is in kind through contributions such
as film rights.
Pearson, publishers of the Financial Times and Chargeurs, the French
transport and communications company, not only put in their own share but
took up the slack after last week's decision by Reed International not to
put in any more money.
As a result, their stakes were increased to around 15 per cent each, while
Reed's will be diluted from 10 per cent to 4 per cent. Granada, despite
continuing controversy over both its top management and the company's
strategy, put in its share of about Pounds 25m. The money is designed to
take the satellite venture through to the end of next year.
Pearson executives recently predicted the project would break even in 1993.
The total commitment in equity, loans and guarantees until now has reached
Pounds 1.4bn.
After the merger, the plan was to raise a Pounds 300m project loan to be
organised by Barclays Bank. The partners decided to raise Pounds 200m
themselves because it is believed they could not get the terms they wanted
without guarantees.
The BSkyB channels are now available to around 2m UK homes through
individual dishes and cable networks.
The last-minute refinancing comes as dish sales start to accelerate. Sales
are expected to top 70,000 in April. The satellite service has recently been
promoted on television since the creation of a merged five-channel service
on both the BSB and Astra satellites. Under a special offer, remote control
satellite receivers are being sold at Pounds 199.99. BSkyB is still losing
close to Pounds 6m a week, compared with Pounds 9.7m at the time of the
merger.
