FT  23 APR 91 / World Trade News: US prepares to repel Chinese software
pirates - Peking is being challenged to prove it can protect foreign
intellectual property, writes Lynne Curry
UNDER pressure from the US and other foreign business executives, China is
attempting to strengthen its patent law and develop a code for the
protection of computer software manufacturers, but is hampered by
conflicting domestic interests.
The Chinese government is also making efforts to revise its patent law and
draft copyright regulations to protect computer software manufacturers, but
doing so involves many Chinese companies and 'could be a hard job',
according to the official English language China Daily.
China's lack of copyright regulations and its limited patent law were the
subject of discussion between the Chinese and a visiting US official in
February.
'The concern is enormous', said the official, Mr Joseph Massey, assistant US
trade representative. 'If the problem of piracy of software doesn't get
fixed, we will have to take action.'
While software piracy is rampant, illegal copying of other proprietary works
is also widespread. Entire sections of some bookstores only sell
unauthorised copies of foreign books.
Other examples of piracy include records, video tapes, computer hardware and
even the Disney characters, Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck. The purpose of Mr
Massey's visit was to determine how much progress the Chinese have made
towards drafting copyright legislation which would provide effective
protection for computer software manufacturers.
'It's at an early stage, but we have a lot of problems with what we have
seen,' Mr Massey said.
The trade representative said China must show progress on its draft
copyright regulations before April 15, the statutory deadline under US law,
when the trade office makes recommendations to the administration about
retaliatory actions against countries deemed to be following unfair trade
practices with the US.
This can result in additional tariffs on a country's exports to the US.
China is already on a 'priority watch' list, because of concern about the
piracy problem and inadequate efforts to prevent it.
In an effort to resolve the problems, a Chinese delegation was expected in
Washington in mid-April for talks on intellectual property rights and
bilateral scientific co-operation.
China's current patent law does not provide adequate protection for chemical
and pharmaceutical products, according to western lawyers. It protects only
the process by which a compound is made, not the product. If a chemical
process is altered only slightly, pirated versions of an already patented
compound could be made legally in China. The Chinese are considering
expanding the patent law, extending the protection period for inventions to
20 years from the present 15 and widening protection to include the product
directly obtained by such a process, according to the China Daily.
But the debate is believed to be deadlocked, with some ministries supporting
the proposed revision and the Ministry of Chemical Industry fighting it.
Apart from problems with pharmaceutical products, software piracy has
reached epidemic proportions in China. US software manufacturers estimate
that unauthorised copying of software has resulted in Dollars 400m of annual
lost sales to China.
The traditional Chinese approach to copyright and other intellectual
property issues differs significantly from the western view that some works
have proprietary ownership.
'The Chinese consider it an honour to lift someone else's work and publish
it,' said one Western businessman involved with copyright problems.
'The Chinese have a much harder time formulating a law which is acceptable
to the west, because the idea of certain work belonging to an individual is
antithetical to socialist precepts,' one western lawyer said.
A vague copyright law will become effective in June. Western observers say
problems with the legislation arise not only with its vagueness but with the
implementing regulations being debated by Chinese officials. The law does
not stipulate on the time limit that a work can be protected, and it states
that a foreign work can only be protected if it was first published or
produced in China, according to western lawyers.
Much secrecy surrounds implementing regulations which would provide more
detail about the scope of the copyright law.
Mofert is believed to favour strong copyright regulations, while ministries
 -such as the Ministry of Chemical Industry - with vested interests in
continuing to make cheap, illegal copies of software have opposed the
legislation.
'Certain ministries have been told to pirate as much software as they can,
so that when the law does go into effect, they will have everything,' one
western executive said.
'Mofert has overall responsibility for this issue, but the other ministries
are telling Mofert to get lost.'
Not all ministries are copying software illegally, and some do recognise
proprietary rights.
But Western analysts say that China's ability to provide adequate protection
for foreign intellectual property is vital if the country wants continued
access to investment and high technology.
