FT  24 APR 91 / Survey of China (3): Rivals wait as the Old Guard slowly
crumbles - While crushing all dissent, the regime is split on many issues
AS the second anniversary of the crackdown at Tiananmen Square approaches,
the Chinese leadership has reasserted its authority over a sullen but
subdued population. However, the government faces many intractable problems,
compounded by acute factional infighting which has produced a deadlock on
important decisions about policies and personnel.
Adding to the uncertainty is the advanced age and frail health of the
country's most powerful leaders, 86-year-old Deng Xiaoping, 83-year-old
economic theorist Chen Yun, and 84-year-old president Yang Shangkun. Because
of their age, many observers believe a succession struggle is already
underway. 'There is nobody in the younger leadership who has a decisive say
on policy decisions,' says a western diplomat. 'All are jockeying for
position , but they are holding back. The active phase - when Deng is dead
or incapacitated - hasn't arrived.'
The Chinese leadership is a collection of interlocking, overlapping, yet
distinct factions, now uneasily balanced, but prone to frequent conflicts,
depending on long term interests, connections and personal relationships.
Dominating the leadership today are octogenarians Deng, Chen, and Yang.
Long-time comrades and rivals, each has independent power networks
stretching back 50 years.
Deng's relationship-building dates from his early associating with Mao
Zedong in the 1930s and 1940s. Chen's connections stem from his role as the
central architect of economic planning in post-liberation China. Yang has
strong ties to the military, from the years he served as vice chairman of
the central military commission under Deng. These powerful relationships
have been further enhanced by those of his half-brother Yang Baibing, who is
head of the general political department of the People's Liberation Army.
Today, each of these aged revolutionaries has younger proteges whom they are
cultivating for the future. The most significant at the moment is Premier Li
Peng, whose patron is Chen Yun. Since the massacre in Tiananmen Square, with
which he is closely associated, Li's stature has as a consensus maker, an
economic thinker, and politician.
Although he is not Deng's chosen man, observers say Li is a leader with whom
Deng can work.
The premier has identified himself with improving the country's economy and
can take credit for reducing inflation and turning around China's balance of
payments.
But he has not addressed the country's basic structural problems, and if the
economy falters, he could become the scapegoat. Moreover, he is still
tarnished by his association with the Tiananmen Square massacre.
Jiang Zemin, secretary-general of the Communist Party, is widely seen as
Deng's protege. Formerly Communist Party secretary in Shanghai, he was
promoted by Deng to head the party after Zhao Ziyang was ousted in May 1989.
'He's got the titular crown - all he has to do is maintain it,' a western
diplomat says.
Others to watch are Shanghai mayor Zhu Rongji, Ye Xuanping, the governor of
Guangdong province, both considered reformists and Li Ruihuan, former mayor
of Tianjin and now a politburo member, who is a middle of the road figure.
At a meeting of the Chinese parliament in late March and in early April,
both Zhu and Ye were given new posts in the central government in Beijing,
with Zhu approved vice premier and Ye as vice-chairman the Chinese people's
consultative conference, an advisory council to the government. While they
may differ on many policy issues, virtually the entire leadership is said to
have agreed on the need to put the massacre of June 1989 behind them.
Closing the book on Tiananmen Square is thought to be the reason for a
series of trials this past winter in which about two dozen prominent
activists were sentenced to terms of up to 13 years on charges ranging from
counterrevolutionary propaganda and incitement to sedition.
The trials and the muted public reaction to them demonstrated the
effectiveness of the government's campaign of repression. With nearly all of
the student leaders who participated in the demonstrations of spring 1989
having fled abroad, here in China the dissidents lack a broad based
movement. So few are in prison that they are unlikely to become lightning
rods of dissent. However, should opposition erupt again, these proceedings
will be used as ammunition by those voicing discontent. United as the
leadership may be on the need to quell dissent, it remains divided on many
other issues, such as disputes over price reform, the power balance between
the central government and the provinces, and the question of whether to
emphasise coastal development rather than channelling investment towards the
more backward interior.
The most critical problem is economic reform. The party recognises that
staying power rests upon its ability to provide a higher standard of living
and more consumer goods. However, that requires correcting the economy's
structural problems, such as eliminating inefficient, overstaffed and
money-losing state enterprises, stimulating a largely unmotivated work
force, and preventing the waste of precious raw materials.
But any meaningful effort to deal with these problems could erode the
party's authority and eventually lead to its downfall.
While the power of the 45m-50m member communist party is still strong,
public enthusiasm for orthodox Marxism-Leninism has already been seriously
eroded by a decade of market-oriented reforms. With traditional Chinese
social values having also been destroyed by the communists, many Chinese
have been put off by the attempt to revive ideological indoctrination after
the Tiananmen Square massacre.
Some have even turned to religion. Although the party has sanctioned this to
a limited degree, the authorities are thought to fear that the revival of
religion creates a competitive world view.
Those who now join the party now are primarily opportunists. Apart from this
battle for hearts and minds, the role of the military will also be critical
in the succession struggle. The composition of the various factions within
the armed forces is not entirely clear, but certain issues have emerged that
are challenging it to its core. Foremost is the debate over whether military
modernisation should take priority over ideological indoctrination.
There is a generational split over this issue, and divisions already present
before the Gulf war are believed to have widened. For the younger
generation, some of whom have travelled outside China, the overwhelming
American technological superiority in the Gulf war is thought to have made a
deep impact.
For them, professional competence and acquiring more modern equipment are
more important than ideological purity.
Moreover, most of the funds from a recently announced 12 per cent increase
in the defence budget are believed to be earmarked for acquiring more modern
equipment for the air force and navy. But the PLA's older generation still
believes in Mao's doctrine of a 'people's war', with its superior numbers
and greater morale being more important than technology.
Yang Baibing, the secretary general of the central military commission, is
believed to have spearheaded the drive toward s re-politicising the PLA.
Apart from modernisation, questions have been raised about the military's
role in internal security. Some feel the army should have been a last resort
in the crackdown at Tiananmen Square. After the massacre, the army was
reorganised and regional commanders loyal to the forces of Yang Shangkun
were put in charge.
However, it remains unclear which group the military will support once the
octogenarians begin to die. Both western and east European diplomats foresee
a situation comparable to 1976 when Deng Xiaoping and senior military
leaders staged a coup d'etat by arresting chairman Mao's widow and the Gang
of Four shortly after Mao's death.
Until Deng leaves the scene, the leadership remains in a political gridlock,
unwilling to take risks to face the future.
