FT  03 MAY 91 / World Trade News: Environmentalists start to call tune in US
 -Awareness of green issues is forcing world institutions to clean up their
acts
FOR years US administrations have virtually ignored a Canadian request for a
clean-up of toxic wastes going into the Niagara River, which serves as the
border between Ontario and New York state.
Yet now, the Bush administration is putting pressure on Mexico to enforce
its environmental laws and pledging to increase bilateral environmental
co-operation while negotiating a North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta)
with Mexico and Canada.
Increasingly, environmentalists are focusing on trade issues in their
efforts to protect air and water, the ozone layer, fragile forests and
endangered species. In Congress, they receive respectful attention from
members, most of whom campaign as environmentalists.
The difference is more than the disparities between two industrialised
countries and between the richest country in the world and its impoverished
neighbour. What has changed is both the heightened awareness that
unregulated economic growth produces ecological disaster and the growing
political clout of the US environmental movement.
Environmentalists led the successful drive for a ban on ivory to save the
elephant and forced a US ban on Mexican tuna.
The World Wildlife Fund, the world's largest private conservation
organisation, joined forces with zoos, bird breeders and the American pet
industry to end the Dollars 40m US trade in exotic birds in danger of
extinction.
The Natural Resources Defence Council (NRDC) is fighting against the
proposed import of Siberian logs, saying the logs contain exotic insects and
diseases which, if introduced, could decimate American forests.
Environmentalists moved from individual trade issues to multilateral
concerns when they turned their attention last year to the Uruguay Round.
Alarmed by the drive to harmonise food safety rules, they went to Geneva to
warn that lax international standards on food imports were in danger of
superseding stricter national or state regulations. They urged negotiators
not to bargain away a nation's right to allow product bans for humanitarian
or social reasons.
Thus far, they have displayed their greatest strength on Nafta. Anxious to
break up the environmental-farmer-labour coalition against the renewal of
President George Bush's 'fast track' authority, the administration on
Wednesday offered them a series of concessions in an 'action plan' submitted
to the Congress.
Most satisfying, according to Mr Glen Prickett of the NRDC, was an agreement
to conduct an in-depth review of US-Mexico environmental issues, allowing
input by the environmental groups before the Nafta negotiations end.
NRDC wants to go even farther. It is preparing to recommend creation of a
multilateral environmental commission that would administer trade sanctions
for environmental enforcement lapses; set requirements for emissions
reporting and monitoring of polluting industry; enable 'citizen enforcement'
of pollution standards; and conduct environmental impact assessments.
Some analysts believe this is just the beginning. Mr Brad Larschan, a
Washington lawyer, says the issues involved in trade are moving away from
the traditional frictions to those not addressed by multilateral agreements.
'Environmental enforcement is an issue of comparative advantage,' he said.
'Those that don't have it subsidise their industries. Those who do tax their
industries. Over the next decade these issues will become increasingly
prominent in trade disputes.'
Mexico's trade minister, Mr Jaime Serra Puche, has welcomed the US
president's assurances to Congress that a free trade agreement between the
two countries will not harm the environment or workers' rights, writes
Damian Fraser in Mexico City.
Mr Serra was 'very pleased' that the 80-page document sent to Congress on
Wednesday 'recognised the economic advances made in Mexico' in the past few
years, and that it shattered the myths about Mexico's labour and
environmental standards.
