FT  11 MAY 91 / As they say in Europe; The oracle of Gravesham
THE INTEREST which Britain's neighbours sustain in the minutiae of the
country's politics never fails to astound. Even two days before the UK local
elections The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung carried a big story headlined,
'Great Britain Awaits the Result from Gravesham.'
I had some trouble in finding out what Gravesham was, but it turns out to be
a place composed of Gravesend, to the east of London, and somewhere else.
Anyway, its name is engraved on the hearts of the bankers of Frankfurt as
the place to watch as the 'oracle' for the next general election.
So I awaited commentaries on the results with some interest and was not
disappointed. The other Frankfurt newspaper, the Rundschau wrote: 'John
Major, the softie in Downing Street, who followed the Iron Lady, may have
collected quick points from his European colleagues, but back home in
Britain the voter apparently did not respect the unfamiliar Gentle Wave.'
They still cannot forget Major's origins. The Mannheimer Morgen said he
would have try very hard not to fall from the trapeze. 'The nasty blow of
the local elections has shown up the limitations of the Conservatives; the
aftermath of the Thatcher Era is still not overcome.'
Now try Le Monde: 'The elections constitute a serious reverse for Mr Major.
It was the first serious test of the popularity of the man who succeeded Mrs
Thatcher. The Conservatives got rid of her precisely because it seemed she
would lead them to a crushing defeat at the next parliamentary elections.'
In Europe it is still impossible to talk about Major without citing the
person the Conservatives never mention. And it seems that whatever mishaps
befall Britain's 'ruling party' they will all be laid at Mrs Thatcher's
door. Of course, if the Tories win the next general election it will be
because they will have 'overcome the heritage of Thatcherism.'
Britain's neighbours really did not like her. But they do miss her.
The Madrid daily, El Pais devoted a lot of space to the visit of Felipe
Gonzalez, the Spanish prime minister, to Britain this week - 'the first ever
official visit by a Spanish head of government.' The original event was
scheduled for last November, but was postponed - guess why. The headline
this time was: 'Gonzalez in the United Kingdom - his most delicate visit to
a European country.'
There were many problems - not the least of them Gibraltar. But there was
also the following: 'The Spanish proposal to create a compensatory fund for
the Community to which the UK will contribute as a rich member and which
will benefit the poor among which figures Spain, runs the risk of splitting
the two sides.' And Brian Redhead was telling listeners to the BBC Today
programme on Radio Four the other morning that Spain was about to overtake
Britain in national income per capita. No wonder the Spaniards were livid.
Looking through El Pais, I found an enormous amount of fascinating material.
It sees itself as the equivalent of The Guardian in Britain; leftish and and
usually friendly to the Socialist government, and yet, by reputation, a
little boring. But then it takes a lot to get Spaniards to read a newspaper;
their press has a bad name because of the long years of conformism under
General Franco when vapid, overblown rhetoric was the order of the day. But
El Pais came into being after the demise of that regime and outsells older
papers as a result.
In one issue of the paper I found an astonishing letter from a woman who
gave a direct account of the problems facing those who had been raped,
couched in terms one would not expect to find even on the medical page of
London's The Independent, which seems to specialise in such matters.
Then there was some remarkable coverage of the situation in Yugoslavia, far
better than anything in the French press, for example, where boredom with
the Yugoslav imbroglio has clearly set in. But it is not only a national
Spanish daily which covers the story extensively; regional papers have their
own special envoys in Yugoslavia. It is the echo from their own not too
distant past that has captivated the Spanish. The papers report what they
officially have tried to blot out.
El Pais carried this paragraph in a story from its man in Croatia: 'In the
villages, more than the cities, fear among the Croats is considerable. Armed
civilians, fingers trembling on their triggers, check passers-by and
neighbours. The Croatian press bombards them with 'news' about imminent
attack from Serbian territory. The Serbian press does the same, except that
the aggressors are Croats. For the man in the street, who shares his wealth
and poverty with his neighbour, be he Serb or Croat, the useless
declarations of the Presidency seem far away. They now live in fear of those
who, yesterday, were their friends.'
In the Spanish civil war, there were numbered among General Franco's
supporters an unorthodox group of fanatical royalists, the Carlists, who
proclaimed the slogan, 'Long live Death and down with Intelligence.' It
would not be out of place in Yugoslavia today.
Before leaving El Pais I have to go back to Sr Gonzalez's visit to Britain.
A banal account of the official programme ran as follows: 'The prime
minister will first hold conversations with the foreign secretary and then
be received by Queen Isabel II (my italics) . . . Wednesday begins with a
visit to Kew Gardens, known for its bonsais (their italics).'
Hands up those who knew that the Spanish for Elizabeth is Isabel: just think
who was running England when the Armada sailed. And what on earth is the
Spanish for Isabel?
Fact: There are no bonsais in Kew Gardens.
James Morgan is Economics Correspondent of the BBC World Service.
