FT  14 MAY 91 / Technology (Technically Speaking):  Gallium arsenide comes
of age
The soul of Convex Computer's new family of supercomputers is made of
gallium arsenide (GaAs), a semiconductor compound touted as a successor to
silicon as the building material for future generations of computer chips.
Since the late 1960s semiconductor experts have debated the merits of
gallium arsenide. In theory, the material offers inherent speed and power
advantages. GaAs transistors are faster and consume less power than silicon
transistors.
Making GaAs chips has, however, proven to be far more difficult and
expensive than expected. Only a handful of the two dozen or so start-up chip
companies created in the early 1980s to exploit GaAs technology have
survived. Just last week, three of the most promising US GaAs chip makers
agreed to merge.
For Gazelle Microcircuits, Gigabit Logic and Triquint Semiconductor, the
merger represents an opportunity to form an economically viable unit
combining the best of three attempts to exploit GaAs chip technology.
Currently, GaAs devices are used primarily in military applications, where
their high speed and tolerance of high temperatures is valuable, as well as
in high-frequency communications systems.
In the far bigger market for computer chips, however, silicon reigns
supreme. The worldwide market for GaAs chips was about Dollars 260m last
year, up from Dollars 200m in 1989, according to Integrated Circuit
Engineering, a US market research firm.
Nevertheless, Convex's adoption of GaAs has provided proponents with new
hope that the technology will become pervasive.
Also spurring new interest is the need for high-speed peripheral chips to
keep up with ever-faster silicon microprocessors that are used to power PCs
and workstations.
ICE projects that the GaAs chip market will grow at an annual rate of 36 per
cent to reach Dollars 1.2bn by 1995. Today, military, aerospace and
telecommunications applications account for almost 80 per cent of GaAs chip
sales, but by the middle of the decade computer applications will be close
to half of the GaAs chip market, the market researchers predict.
If GaAs does become a commercial success then it will be in part due to the
dogged support provided by the US Defence Department. The Pentagon has been
a major source of funding for GaAs semiconductor research and development
over the past few years.
Three years ago the Defence Advance Research Projects Agency (Darpa) began
funding a research programme called Mimic (Microwave and Millimetre Wave
Monolithic Integrated Circuits) to spur development of GaAs devices for
military uses.
In a controversial move, Darpa last year provided Dollars 4m in research and
development funds to Gazelle Microcircuits, to stave off sale of the
company's technology to a foreign investor.
Established semiconductor companies, several of which participated in the
Mimic programme, are now expanding their production of GaAs devices in
anticipation of a broader market. Motorola recently announced plans to build
a Dollars 100m GaAs chip plant in Arizona, scheduled to begin production
next year of chips for commercial and military applications.
The prospects for GaAs microprocessors and memory chips remain uncertain and
the chances are that silicon will remain the pervasive semiconductor
material for these devices.
None the less, Convex's decision to 'go GaAs' marks the entry of this
technology into the 'mainstream' of the chip market. After decades of
promises, GaAs looks like a technology whose time has finally come.
