FT  01 MAY 91 / Further tough period seen for manufacturers: CBI Industrial
Trends Survey
MANUFACTURERS face a further tough period before growth prospects improve,
according to the latest quarterly survey by the Confederation of British
Industry.
The survey, published yesterday, provides a broad perspective of likely
conditions across manufacturing over the next four months. It finds that
companies' order books and levels of output are still weak, with little
evidence of any rapid recovery in production or profits.
The extent of the decline in manufacturing output in the first quarter
exceeded expectations, and the proportion of companies working beneath
capacity has climbed to more than two thirds, the highest figure for eight
years.
However, the survey is broadly consistent with indications that the
recession will reach its bottom around the summer, with modest growth
starting in the second half of the year. Mr Andrew Sentance, the CBI's
director of economic affairs, said it was 'not over-optimistic' to talk
about a recovery being in sight. Pointers about a possible end to the
recession are contained in a number of specific replies to the survey, which
involved 1,297 companies, accounting for roughly half of manufacturing
employment. It was conducted between April 2 and April 17.
One important indicator is the section of the survey dealing with business
confidence. This shows that optimism among companies is continuing to
decline, but at a less marked rate than at any time over the past two years.
Altogether, 32 per cent of companies said they were less optimistic about
business prospects than four months ago, while 15 per cent said they were
more so. That adds up to a balance of companies expressing relative
pessimism of 17 per cent. In the CBI's January survey, the comparable figure
was 51 per cent, and in October last year it was 47 per cent.
A further hopeful sign for manufacturers concerns new orders. A balance of 8
per cent of companies expects orders to be lower over the next four months,
a much smaller number than the balance of 35 per cent recorded in January.
The relatively upbeat sentiment on orders is the best result for this
indicator since the CBI's survey last July.
A balance of 41 per cent of companies reported a decline in orders during
the first four months, an indication of just how bleak 1991 has been so far
for many of Britain's factories. The figure compares with a balance of 33
per cent reporting a decline in the four months to January 1991, and marks
the biggest downturn in order books since January 1981.
A balance of 43 per cent of companies reported a fall in output over the
past four months, the biggest decline since October 1980. However, a balance
of just 8 per cent expects a cut in output over next four months, a
healthier position than in January when the comparable figure was 30 per
cent.
The rate of fall in export optimism apparent from previous surveys also
appears to have slowed, with a balance of 8 per cent expressing pessimism
about prospects for overseas sales, compared with a figure of 26 per cent at
the time of the last survey.
The same number of companies in the survey reckoned they would increase
export sales over the next four months as believed sales would decline. The
consequent balance of zero was better than the balance of 13 per cent which
in January said export revenues would fall.
Capital investment intentions are still weak, according to the survey, while
spending on training and retraining appears to be holding up. Just over a
quarter of companies expect to spend more in this area during the coming
year, compared with 18 per cent which think they will spend less.
As for employment, the outlook has become marginally less bleak, with a
balance of 39 per cent of companies expecting that they will reduce their
labour force over the next four months. In the CBI's surveys in January and
in October 1990, the comparable numbers were 49 per cent and 37 per cent.
Some 200,000 manufacturing jobs have been lost in the past year, roughly one
in 20 of the factory labour force.
Manufacturing employment fell by more than 80,000 in the first quarter of
1991, and the CBI believes that a further 68,000 jobs will go in the second
quarter.
