FT  18 APR 91 / CBI welcomes parts of Labour industrial plan
THE Confederation of British Industry yesterday described Labour's strategy
for industry as 'closer to the real world' than it had been for many years.
However, the organisation said it retained serious doubts about the party's
ability to tackle inflation and control public sector wages.
Mr John Banham, the CBI's director-general, was speaking in London at the
launch of its manifesto for business, which is intended to provide a
framework for economic progress over the next decade.
He said Labour's proposals for strengthening Britain's industrial base and
raising training standards would be considered by the CBI council next week.
A preliminary assessment suggested that there were areas of common ground,
though big questions remained about aspects of Labour's economic competence
and its ability to deliver.
The CBI, he said, would support proposals for a partnership between
government and industry intended to strengthen the nation's manufacturing
base, although it did not want a return to the 'sham' of a corporate state.
Mr Banham suggested that the party's proposals for stepping up investment in
national infrastructure, supporting smaller businesses and pursuing a more
creative approach to competition policy also appeared welcome.
He emphasised that there were notable omissions in Labour's plans. It was
not clear, for example, how Labour intended to contain inflation to the low
levels demanded by Britain's entry into the exchange rate mechanism, while
the party's manufacturing strategy was in danger of drawing a potentially
damaging distinction between services and manufacturing.
Mr Banham also criticised the party for failing to acknowledge the need to
reduce the tax burden on businesses and said there were significant
questions about the financing and staffing of new organisations proposed by
Labour, including the National Investment Bank, the regional development
councils and technology trusts.
In its business agenda, the CBI singles out several prior-ities for the
decade, including controlling inflation, raising investment in equipment,
skills and infrastructure to levels achieved by Britain's leading
competitors, and bringing about a change in national attitudes towards
manufacturing.
The CBI calls for a refocusing of the activities of the Department of Trade
and Industry. It says that the DTI is currently regarded as ineffective in
helping the process of communication between business and government.
Instead, the department should provide a focus within Whitehall for the
formulation of policies aimed at improving Britain's industrial performance.
Competing in the New Europe - A Business Agenda for the 1990s. CBI, Centre
Point, New Oxford St, London WC1A 1DU. Pounds 25.
