FT  11 MAY 91 / Will the price be right?: The ITV companies and their
franchise bids
A strict Methodist upbringing has left Mr Leslie Hill, chairman and chief
executive of Central Independent Television, with a distaste for gambling.
It was only three years ago that he placed his first bet, a few pounds on a
horse at the Cheltenham Gold Cup - and won.
Early next week Mr Hill will have to make the biggest gamble of his life
with a bet that could go as high as Pounds 300m or Pounds 400m. Whether he
chooses correctly will determine whether the UK's second-largest ITV
company, covering the Midlands and responsible for programmes such as
Spitting Image and Inspector Morse, will survive. Livelihoods and
shareholders' funds are about to go on the line.
Central, together with Britain's other 15 commercial broadcasting companies,
have to deliver their bids for new 10-year licences to the Independent
Television Commission in London's Brompton Road by noon on Wednesday.
The enormity of the choice they face is coming home to some companies in the
final weekend before they must put the number that will determine their
future in a brown envelope.
'There is a seething maelstrom of emotions out there,' says the chief
executive of a company bidding to unseat an ITV incumbent. The executive,
who asked not to be named, said that until this weekend, drawing up business
plans and applications had appeared to be proceeding in a rational way. All
that, he fears, is now changing. 'The panic and fear that is gripping some
incumbents now is likely to lead them to add 1 or 2 per cent to compound
growth rates of advertising revenue,' he added. And that could lead to
significantly larger bids than expected.
There is no outward sign that Mr Hill is starting to panic. He plans to
spend the weekend reading the proofs of the bid application for the eleventh
time and thinking quietly about the decision he will take with his board.
At Thames Television, Mr Richard Dunn, the chief executive, has had his
decision made for him. He cannot make the minimum Pounds 1,000-a-year bid
because he is fighting for his life against at least two serious rivals - Mr
Michael Green's Carlton Communications and the David Frost-Richard Branson
consortium.
Mr Hill's problem, shared by several other ITV companies such as Granada and
Scottish, is that he does have a choice. No serious bidders have publicly
declared themselves against Central though there have been hints that East
Midlands Electricity, through the Midlands Development Corporation, is
attracted to the bright lights of television. Has the Severn Trent Water
Company been talking with leading continental European media companies? And
is Mr Bruce Gyngell, chief executive of TV-am, the breakfast television
company, planning a coup against the inheritor of his old company, ATV?
Mr Hill does not know for sure. So he can choose to make the minimum bid to
retain his franchise or, if he thinks he faces serious opposition, the
Pounds 30m to Pounds 40m a year over 10 years that would probably be needed
to be sure of success.
'You have got to be the highest bidder if someone else gets over the quality
threshold,' he says emphatically. The quality threshold is the first stage
of the bidding process. Only those with high-quality programme proposals and
business plans will be allowed to get through to the second round. The
envelopes will then be opened, and unless exceptional circumstances arise,
the highest bid will win.
But the question being asked in the boardrooms of ITV, is what if there are
no rival bidders out there after all, or none capable of getting over the
quality threshold?
'Those who bid high could look pretty silly, but you can't help that,' says
Mr Hill, a relatively recent arrival in the television industry. He has
worked in publishing, the record business, industrial services and
construction, but he has never faced anything like this before - a decision
that will profoundly affect his business and his employees.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand Deloitte, the consultancy firm representing seven of what
will probably be 35 to 40 bidders, believes the money committed on Wednesday
to be paid over the 10 years could total Pounds 3bn to Pounds 4bn. Such huge
sums have never been at stake before in the history of broadcasting.
Even at Central, the strain was starting to show on Thursday during an
all-day board meeting where the broad parameters of the company's bid were
being thrashed out.
Mr Michael Green owns 20 per cent of Central and in recent months he has
been an assiduous attender of board meetings. On Thursday he did not turn
up. A feeling of panic and worry descended. Was Mr Green going to use his
inside knowledge of the company to make a last-minute bid? A few telephone
calls established that his sights were still set on Thames and TVS, and
Central was able to return to wrestling with numbers again.
The general suspicion permeating the industry in the run-up to bidding has
led to a boom in business for companies which specialise in sweeping offices
for hidden electronic bugging devices.
Mr Greg Dyke, managing director of London Weekend Television, who is
believed to be facing a bid of uncertain provenance from a consortium led by
Polygram, the international record company, got very excited recently when
the sweepers' anti-bugging device went haywire in the St Paul's room where
franchise discussions were held.
'At last somebody was interested enough to bug the room,' says Mr Dyke. But
it turned out to be a false alarm, only a loose wire in the ceiling.
The only partially documented example of what may have been attempted
industrial espionage came outside the offices of MAI, the marketing and
financial services company leading a consortium against TVS. A red car was
seen outside the offices. Photographs were taken and the registration number
was traced to a private detective agency. There the trail went cold.
Different strategies and equally different attitudes to brinkmanship are
emerging as the countdown begins.
Granada Television, which may or may not face a bid from Mr Phil Redmond's
Mersey Television, will not decide how much to bid until late Tuesday or
possibly early Wednesday.
Mr Charles Romaine, chief executive of the HTV group, which faces at least
two contenders, decided his bid in an eight-hour session with his chairman,
Mr Louis Sherwood, on Wednesday. 'We are happy with the bid. If anyone wants
to bid more, good luck to them,' Mr Romaine says.
Mr Gus Macdonald, managing director of Scottish Television, is quietly
confident. Over the past five years investment in both regional and national
network programmes such as Taggart has been increased and programme deals
signed with 20 of Scotland's independent production companies.
A competing consortium that would have included Mr Conrad Black and the
Daily Telegraph went away after they encountered what Macdonald describes as
his 'great rampart of thistles'. Staff at Scottish are now asking only one
question. 'Has Gus the guts to bid low.'
After the bids are submitted on Wednesday there will be no rest for
Britain's ITV companies. The losers will immediately have to start work on
their doomsday scenarios - how much of the company can be saved if they lose
their broadcasting licences.
But how will the whole process of awarding franchises be seen once the dust
has settled? 'It will either go down as the most brilliant thing in history
or an example of how not to do something - probably the latter,' predicts Mr
Hill.
