FT  16 APR 91 / Blue Arrow Trial: Share purchase decided at high level, jury
told
THE PURCHASE of 4.5 per cent of Blue Arrow shares in the 1987 rights issue
by County NatWest Securities was sanctioned by senior management of County
NatWest, its merchant banking co-subsidiary, not CNWS itself, the Blue Arrow
trial was told yesterday.
Mr Mark Potashnick, CNWS former acting head of market making and a
prosecution witness, said he had first learnt CNWS was taking the holding
the day after the issue. It was made clear that it would be under the 5 per
cent level requiring disclosure. He said he had accepted, rather than agreed
to, the decision.
'I do not feel that the responsibility lay on my shoulders,' he said. 'I had
always seen this as a group holding which had been acquired on the back of a
very, very senior management decision.'
He had no knowledge of County or Phillips and Drew, the brokers to the
issue, taking further holdings, he told Mr Nicholas Purnell, QC,
prosecuting.
County NatWest, NatWest Investment Bank, UBS Phillips and Drew Securities
and seven individuals deny conspiring to mislead the markets over the result
of the Pounds 837m issue.
Mr Alun Jones, QC, for Mr Stephen Clark, a County director and one of the
defendants, asked Mr Potashnick whether he felt deceived and misled when
County disclosed in December 1987 that it owned 9.5 per cent of Blue Arrow.
Mr Potashnick replied: 'That may have been the case later on. My immediate
reaction was shock that, having been so careful about the 5 per cent level,
the holding was much larger than that.'
He felt the announcement that CNWS had bought the shares reflected badly on
his judgment. He was also upset when a press report named him and Mr Philip
Rimell, then CNWS chairman, as having driven the deal. He expressed his
concern to Mr David Reed, a former County director and another defendant,
At a farewell drink when Mr Potashnick left CNWS, Mr Nicholas Wells, a
former County director and another defendant, had told him nobody had ever
made him buy the shares.
'I begged to differ,' he said.
The trial continues today.
