FT  19 APR 91 / Survey of the Canary Islands (1): EC anomalies on the agenda
 -With some 7m visitors each year, tourism remains the dominant industry for
the islands. But relations with the European Community and the effect on the
Canaries' free-trade status will increasingly determine economic prospects
THE STREETS of Las Palmas, the capital of Gran Canaria, are more reminiscent
of Latin America than mainland Spain. Canarios - the inhabitants of the
seven islands which make up the archipelago - speak a Spanish which might
raise a sneer in Madrid, but would be perfectly acceptable in Mexico City.
Indeed, throughout this century thousands of Canarios have left their
homeland in waves, headed not for the bright lights of Barcelona but to make
new lives in Havana, Caracas, and Buenos Aires. Under the Franco regime in
the 1950s, at least 150,000 Canarios, with the rallying slogan 'Justice +
Work = Venezuela', left for good.
To the casual observer the shops of Tenerife and Las Palmas, crammed full of
duty-free electronic goods, cigarettes and spirits, are pure Montevideo, if
slightly more up-market. But the Canary Islands are part of Spanish national
territory (although geographically closer to North Africa), not Latin
America.
More significantly, the Canaries are now by definition part of the European
Community, following Spain's accession to the community on January 1 1986.
Yet in certain respects - particularly concerning agriculture and taxation
laws - the status of the islands' EC membership may still be tactfully
described as irregular.
The Canaries have managed to avoid being drawn into the Common Agricultural
Policy and retain the distinct advantage for tourist and resident alike of
extremely liberal tax laws and duty-free import regulations. The most
important political issue for the islands is their future relationship with
the EC, since that will largely determine economic prospects.
These anomalies are more or less permanently on the EC's agenda, though
Canarios look to Madrid to protect their privileges against the
encroachments of Brussels. One of Tenerife's more touching roadside
hoardings depicts a tail-drooped hound dismally standing in the middle of a
road. The dog is supposedly saying 'I wouldn't leave you - don't forsake
me'. While Canarios and Tenerfinos (islanders from Tenerife) are justifiably
proud of their history and can be fiercely defensive of their autonomous
status within the Spanish constitution, they are in the end supplicants at
the Madrid court, hoping not to be forsaken by their much more Euro-minded
mainland cousins.
The Canaries, though geographically linked and constitutionally unified, are
in fact two groups of islands which, over centuries, have conducted a battle
 -as yet finally unresolved - for political ascendancy. Under the 1978
constitution, the Canaries form one of Spain's 17 autonomous regions, with
an elected government responsible for local affairs. But in 1927 the rivalry
between the two major ports - Las Palmas de Gran Canaria and Santa Cruz de
Tenerife - created a split into two provinces, which remains the case today.
The rivalry is either a matter of deep cultural difference or petty economic
squabbling, depending on one's proximity to the quarrel.
Nevertheless, it is taken seriously on the islands, where there still exist
authoritative voices calling for a complete partition of the islands into
two autonomous regions, one centred on Santa Cruz de Tenerife, the other on
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
To an outsider the causes and nature of the disputes between the two sets of
islands can seem esoterically remote; but anyone wishing to do business
there should beware of the prickly partisanship of Canarios versus
Tenerfinos, and everyone against the butt of most local jokes, the Gomera).
The western province comprises the islands of Tenerife, with the capital
Santa Cruz de Tenerife; Gomera, La Palma and Hierro. The islands of
Fuerteventura, Lanzarote and Gran Canaria form the eastern province, with
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria as the capital city and, at its heart, Puerto de
la Luz, the largest port in Europe.
Plutarch wrote of the Canaries that they 'enjoy a fortunate climate in
consequence of the barely perceptible change of the seasons'. The name
stuck, and for centuries they were known as the Fortunate Islands. But the
irony is that the Canaries' climate is both a benefit and a curse, since the
sun so beloved by millions of pale northerners is accompanied by serious
water shortages, particularly on the eastern islands of Lanzarote and
Fuerteventura.
Paradoxically, the Canaries may be said to be fortunate to have survived and
developed as successfully as they have. They flourish thanks to a knack for
generating a series of economic monocultures to meet contemporary demands.
The latest such monoculture is tourism, so that in spite of years of net
population loss through emigration, the Canaries thrive on a regular influx
of British, Scandinavian and German tourists, many of whom eventually put
down roots. Around 7m tourists visit the islands each year and have
displaced tomatoes and bananas as the Canaries' best source of foreign
earnings.
In the early 19th century Admiral Horatio Nelson was one of the first
British visitors to pay a business call to Tenerife, where he attempted to
capture a Spanish bullion ship, losing an arm in the process.
While today's tourists are not likely to suffer such extreme consequences of
a foreign adventure, doing business on the Canaries might still cost the
unwary an arm and a leg, metaphorically speaking - not because Canarios are
any more voracious than other communities, but simply because the islands
are still in a process of considerable political and economic flux.
The last FT Survey of the Canaries was in 1972. Since then, Franco has
departed, democracy has returned to Spain and the country has joined the EC.
For the Canaries the intervening 19 years have, economically speaking, been
dominated by one phenomena - the vast and rapid expansion of the tourist
industry. Out of the barren and arid islands of some of the archipelago have
been created vast hotel and entertainment complexes for the package
holidaymaker interested in an annual burst of sunshine without straining
either pocket or curiosity.
But that industry is now facing a crisis of some magnitude. Of the many
issues facing policy-makers on the islands, that of tourism and how best to
promote it is uppermost in everyone's mind.
Certain islands, such as Lanzarote, have been the subject of what might be
called construction barrages, intense campaigns to build fast and furious
for the mass tourist market.
Others, such as Hierro or Gomera, are virtually unexplored and certainly
unexploited tourist markets, offering spectacular natural flora and fauna
for a more upmarket tourist whose idea of a holiday is more than two weeks
by a hotel poolside. Tapping those additional resources must be one of the
ways forward for both the islands and potential future investors.
