FT  22 APR 91 / Heseltine pledge on property tax bills
THE government will tomorrow seek to regain the initiative in the local
election campaign with a pledge that most households would pay less than
Pounds 400 a year under its planned replacement for the poll tax.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, will promise a 25 per cent
discount for single-person households and a strict upper limit on bills for
the wealthy, when he unveils details of the new property tax in the House of
Commons.
The bill for a couple living in a property worth less than Pounds 50,000 in
a low-spending local authority could be Pounds 200 or less.
Those on the lowest incomes will be exempt from payment entirely, abandoning
the poll tax principle that everyone should contribute to the cost of local
services.
Mr Heseltine's announcement will be followed on Wednesday morning by a
relaunch of the Conservative campaign for the local elections. National
opinion polls show Labour and the Conservatives each claiming about 40 per
cent support. However, the signs so far have been that Labour is heading for
sweeping gains on May 2.
Ministers last night were voicing confidence that what one described as a
'lorry load' of illustrative figures, accompanying Mr Heseltine's statement,
would persuade many wavering voters to return to the Tory fold.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, had intended to put forward the property
scheme - a property tax based on two-person households with a discount for
single people - as an option for consultation. Charges that he was
'dithering' over replacing the poll tax, have persuaded him to make it a
firm proposal to be introduced in 1993.
Labour did not wait for the full details before launching its attack. Mr
David Blunkett, its local government spokesman, said Labour's proposal for
'fair rates' was the only option which would allow abolition of the poll tax
from next April.
Ministers forecast that the new system would provide Mr Major with an escape
route from the poll tax fiasco. 'It is credible, fair and, above all, it is
not the poll tax,' one member of the cabinet said.
The tax will be progressive, because household bills will be linked directly
to the seven bands into which properties will be slotted according to their
capital values. The bands, covering properties worth less than Pounds 50,000
to those costing a Pounds 1m or more will be set nationally by the
government.
The bands will be relatively tightly compressed to ensure that average bills
for the most expensive properties are no more than 2.5 times those for the
cheapest.
That should produce a ceiling of about Pounds 700 for the most expensive
properties, apart from a few exceptional cases.
Ministers said the tight banding was necessary to ensure that voters in the
south of the country were not unfairly penalised by a return to a
property-based system. It will be seized upon by Labour, however, as a
device to protect the rich.
Mr Heseltine will say that a comprehensive 'capping' system to hold down
local authority spending will ensure that bills for the tax are kept much
lower than under Labour's alternative.
The government estimates that, despite the need for valuation officers to
slot nearly 20m homes into the new bands, the system will save Pounds 300m a
year in collection costs compared with the poll tax.
Ashdown's pact terms, Page 8
