FT  11 MAY 91 / Gardening: The menace of tunnel vision - Two perils at the
nursery
THIS unusually cold spring has widened the gap between town and country.
Towns already have buds on their roses, leaves on their mountain ashes and
flowers on wild peonies. Country gardens have roses with yellow young
leaves, retarded sycamores and a late flush of flowers on white magnolias.
The winds have tested young plants' stamina and reminded us of some sharp
lessons. They concern two modern menaces: plants in peat composts and plants
which are sold from plastic tunnels.
First, a word about a third menace which I put to you two weeks ago. The
flowers on wild fritillaries are being eaten by lily beetles.
In July, 1989, lily beetles hit the headlines in the RHS magazine, The
Garden: we were warned that they were 'very destructive to Lilium species,
while fritillaries are also at risk.' A map showed sightings of this scarlet
beetle in a 25-mile radius round Chobham in Surrey.
By August, 1990, either the beetles or the beetle watchers had extended
their travels; a second article warned that this handsome little pest had
turned up in Aylesbury, Salisbury and even Oxford, the wild fritillary's
home. Dozens of you have written, saying you have found this
beautifully-coloured pest on lilies and fritillaries, both wild and
cultivated. I have failed to find it on the fritillaries now withering in
Oxford, but it must be the reason why the flowers appeared half-eaten.
According to the Daily Telegraph, it should be killed on sight. I can see
why they are worried: it is bright red; it originated in Europe and it has
begun to infect the Tory heartlands.
The other two menaces are best met by patience and timing. They are at their
most dangerous at the moment. Every year, I vow that I will not be caught
again, but I succumb to temptation. The main cause is competitive shopping.
In March the sap is rising in all acquisitive gardeners; stocks of the best
plants are low and naturally you and I want to get in before each other. As
a result, I start my shopping in early March.
Most nurserymen bring on their plants in polythene tunnels so they will look
all too fresh and green for the public during the Easter trade. It appears
to be almost impossible to sell dormant plants with bare roots on the
general market. If the nurseries are in a hurry or if they are transporting
plants in bulk, they grow them in light, peat composts in which the plants
make a thin cocoon of tiny white roots.
I have to buy them before you do but they are quite unfit for the garden.
Two things then happen in the cycle, both of which are good for the nursery
trade but highly annoying to me. Anything left outside on a coldish night
before June is likely to go brown because it is missing the shelter of its
polythene tunnel. Anything transferred directly from a peat compost to
ordinary garden soil stands a high chance of refusing to face the struggle
and going quietly into reverse.
Sometimes, the label tells you to add more peat round the plant when you put
it in: I resent this, because the nurserymen introduced peat in the first
place and whatever we may feel about its ecology, the fact is that few of us
garden on it. The thin, white roots which have twined round the compost are
not keen to battle with an average garden's earth. I have decided to treat
plants in peat mixtures from nursery-centres as if they are glorified
cuttings which are not fit for normal life. They need a season's adjustment
in a nursery bed of friendly compost. By then, they will be fit for proper
life outdoors.
At Pounds 1.80 each, these rooted cuttings are expensive enough. However,
delay has its advantages and allows you to take revenge. During the trainee
year in the nursery bed, this year's young plants will toughen up and allow
you to split each one into four or five when you transplant them. With
patience, you can turn one into five, instead of buying three replacements
for those which fizzled out in their first summer.
The tunnel problem needs particular caution this month, but the answer is
patience. When the young plants come home treat them as if they were no
safer than young bedding plants. Fresh from a tunnel, they need to stand in
a cold frame, an unheated greenhouse or shed, until the nights warm up. If
not, they too, will die with amazing rapidity.
I have just set a record for tunnel deaths. On the Friday before last, I
planted a young Escholtzia stauntonii which had been bought at Pounds 3.50
in Wiltshire: the well-informed owner assured me that the plant was hardy.
It came from a batch on display outdoors, but evidently it was on temporary
leave from the tunnel. No exit could have been quicker. Admittedly, the
plant was also in peat, but it was stone dead by Saturday morning, even
though I had remembered to water it and nobody had gone near it with the
dog.
Be warned: young, fresh shrubs may look inviting in garden-centres under
cover, but weather is strongly against them in the next three weeks. I have
some scorched deutzias, a 'hardy' penstemon reduced to two twigs and some
white-flowered Bleeding Heart which has gone black on the tips of its
overdeveloped green leaves. Do not be deceived: what looks best is least fit
for use.
These complaints are not the result of throwing Pounds 3.50 on to a
peat-based rubbish-heap. Keen amateurs seem to share the grievances.
Patient, traditional nurseries share them too, especially when the owners
are worried about turnover, not least because of compulsory registration for
VAT.
Last weekend, the sun was setting on a veteran nursery's peonies as the
owner told me that she doubted whether two thirds of the plants sold in peat
to the public survived their first year: personally she grows and sells
everything in proper earth.
During the winter, a grower asked me to see his system: it takes perennial
plants from the seedling stage to a peat-based pot in about as much time as
it takes me to weed the main flower beds. The poor little things are
force-fed fertiliser from a drip. You and I then buy them for Pounds 1.80.
Be sceptical, be patient: what you buy with a label may be a young
alcoholic, not fit to be weaned from the bottle and exposed to hard reality.
