FT  07 MAY 91 / Economists' figures reveal rapid descent into recession
HAVING failed to spot the recession coming, economists are now engaged in
the perilous process of forecasting a recovery.
Today's spring survey by the Financial Times of forecasts from 21 City
institutions, private-sector economists and intergovernmental bodies thus
amounts to an exercise in atonement.
The profession is paying penance for half a decade of error, after
mismeasuring first the strength of consumer demand in the 1980s and then the
gathering weakness of economic activity last year.
If economists do better at analysing the progression from recession to
recovery, it may help to restore credibility to forecasting. As it is more
difficult to assess turning points in the economy, however, errors tend to
be bigger at such times than during the upswing into growth or downswing to
recession.
That said, contributors to the FT survey will have taken note of the
Treasury's Budget economic forecasts in their production of an independent
and wide-ranging digest of economic prospects for this year and next. The
March Financial Statement and Budget Report (FSBR) is one of the two
occasions the Treasury goes on record during the year.
In its FSBR forecasts to mid 1992 - which updated the November Autumn
Statement - the Treasury said that gross domestic product would fall by 2
per cent this year, but with recovery starting in the second half. That
marked a swift downgrading of economic prospects since the Autumn Statement,
in which it estimated a GDP rise of  1/2 per cent in 1991.
The FT's survey of economic forecasts describes an equally rapid descent
into recession between the new year (the last survey was published on
January 3) and the aftermath of the Budget. The GDP forecast for 1991 has
fallen from growth of 0.1 per cent in the last survey to minus 1.6 per cent
today.
The election deadline of June 1992, the constraint of keeping sterling
stable in the European exchange-rate mechanism, the weak D-Mark and the
strong dollar have been taken into account in most projections. The
staggered cuts in interest rates from 14 per cent to 12 per cent were taking
place as the survey was being compiled.
What is now preoccupying the profession is when the recovery will start,
what will stimulate it, and how long and strong it will be. Some academic
economists are questioning whether there will be a recovery at all.
Most expect the trough to come in the third quarter of the year.
There are varying levels of optimism about what comes next. The economists'
1991 forecasts are marked by the gloomy Treasury imprint. Independent
averages for output growth (down 1.6 per cent), consumer spending (down 0.7
per cent), manufacturing output (down 4.6 per cent) and export volumes (up
1.4 per cent) in 1991 are only fractionally less pessimistic than the
Treasury projections.
When it comes to 1992, the Treasury expects a substantial improvement in the
economy, while the rest have yet to be convinced.
Professor Patrick Minford of Liverpool University's economics department
sees, after the trough, 'a small recovery in the fourth quarter followed by
no further growth until 1993'.
Most gloomy of all is Professor Wynne Godley of King's College, Cambridge.
He expects GDP to plunge 2.7 per cent, and the economy to continue to
contract next year by 0.9 per cent. He says the projected increase in output
will not comprise a recovery, being too weak to bring unemployment down. By
1992, unemployment will rise to 3.3m, he predicts.
Cambridge Econometrics, like many others, fears that the damage to
manufacturing is so great that lower interest rates will be insufficient to
lift the recession.
Mr Padhraic Garvey of CE says the economy is in a severe credit squeeze,
that the service sector will contract by 2 per cent this year and that 'the
short-term prospects for growth in many sectors are quite out of line with
underlying potential'.
With the corporate sector's indebtedness remaining at record levels, the
survey finds investment dropping by 9.2 per cent this year and remaining
very weak next year.
The Treasury's 3 3/4 per cent inflation for mid-1992 prediction is not
echoed by the independents. They are generally anxious about a 'faltering
recovery'.
Observer, Page 18
