FT  23 APR 91 / Survey of The Computer Industry (26): Saboteurs are on the
loose - Networking, the art of knowing a Lan from a Wan
MR Gordon Douglas is not a happy man. He manages user relations for the
European end of Netware Users International (NUI) the 80,000-strong user
group for Novell's Netware, the world's most popular networking software.
Local area networks (Lans) are on the up and up, and Netware is the code
that binds them together allowing dozens of people to share files and
peripherals such as printers. What concerns Mr Douglas is that software
saboteurs are on the loose, networks are their prime target and publishing
houses in Germany are printing their methods.
'They publish books that tell you how to plant a virus. You might as well
bring out a title on how to make an atom bomb in your living room,' says Mr
Douglas. His anger at the virus authors becomes understandable as he details
the precautions NUI and Novell have been forced to take.
'Virus attack has been the main issue in the last 12 months, and preventing
it is very expensive. A lot of leading companies do not allow employees to
use diskettes at all, so they can't unwittingly introduce a virus into a
network. The problem with networks is that they are meant to be open to many
users.'
Mr Douglas talks of protective shells, software that checks a program every
time it is entered on to the network to make sure the code has not changed.
NUI has pressured Novell to improve the security features written into
Netware. Since Netware is a computer operating system in its own right it is
not easy for the virus peddlars to get details of its workings.
Documentation is a closely guarded trade secret. But the interface between
Netware and the users' floppy disks became a focus for attention.
'Novell has now boosted protection for files entered through Netware. I
won't say exactly what they've done, NUI tested the new release by running a
virus specifically designed to attack MoveIl networks,' says Mr Douglas.
Metware's extra defences repelled the virus.
A successful virus attack can corrupt networked data across a company. 'They
can act in a nasty way. You find all your storage for the last year has
gone. Generally the motivation isn't for gain through blackmail, it's just
anarchy,' says Mr Douglas. His scorn for the unseen enemy is very real. The
other current passion the networking community admits to is economy.
'Security and money are the two big concerns at a typical user group
meeting. In the past, networking solutions had to be high-tech and
expensive. Now the emphasis is on cutting costs,' he adds. Mr Douglas reels
off the quick fixes users are resorting to. One site has found it can use
power lines as a medium for the local area network (Lan) rather than
co-axial cable.
If you don't mind the odd hiccup in non-essential data transmission this
makes some sense. 'It's daft but cheap]' is the Douglas verdict.
Mr Gary Dyson has been in a good position to observe the rise of the Lan. In
1985 he broke away from IBM with two colleagues and formed Persona Faculty.
The dual role company selling products (Persona) and training services
(Faculty) was started up to exploit networking.
In 1988, Dyson's Pounds 825 a day training courses attracted just 50 end
users. In 1990, 1,500 people signed up to get the most out of their
networks.
Two factors contributed to this growth says Mr Dyson. The political war over
the management of data, with corporate IT departments reluctant to see too
much power shipped down to the users, was resolved. The idea of a Lan of PC
workstations has been absorbed into the corporate computing model.
International standards have moved on, reconciling the IBM sponsored
Token-ring with Ethernet, a networking protocol with its roots in the
Digital Equipment world.
'The user shouldn't have to worry about choosing between them. They both
offer adequate performance, says Mr Dyson.' Faculty has ridden out the
collapse in hardware sales.
'In these times you can't sell hardware because companies have got enough.
But networking means they can turn their PC resources into a system. You
make the employees more productive. They cope better with fewer people,' he
says.
If the Lan is now an accepted standard, what are the big corporate buyers
doing to squeeze extra value out of it? As is usually the case in the
computer industry, any vaguely fresh idea is the cue for a crop of
buzzwords.
The Lan world has now spawned groupware. Referred to in the same breath as
joint authoring and discussion databases, groupware allows users to pool
documents across a network.
The secret of the software is to co-ordinate contributions without the user
being aware of this stage management. Although it is portrayed as structured
discussion it is probably better compared to the notorious bulletin boards
used to disseminate hackers' tips.
Lotus Notes is one of the pioneering groupware products. Price Waterhouse,
management consultants, use it to control activity on the international
front, when consultants work for a common client across national boundaries.
Ms Susan Challenger, an international marketing manager at Lotus, admits
that Notes may have fuelled the buzzword business.
'We're probably to blame, but groupware is a means to exploit network
software rather than just sticking a program on a network and sharing it,'
she says.
Lotus finds that network versions of popular programs now make up as much as
a third of its sales.
Ms Challenger confesses that the distinction between the Lan and its less
famous sister the wide area network (Wan) is not something to tax Lotus's
network development teams.
'When does a Lan become a Wan? I don't know. I prefer to think of everything
in Lan terms,' says Ms Challenger.
Perhaps a recent Dataquest survey offers the best explanation for the low
profile of Wans. European Lan spending is predicted to grow from Dollars
2.6bn in 1989 to Dollars 5bn by 1993. Over the same period Wan spending will
increase by a modest Dollars 100m, from Dollars 400m to Dollars 500m.
Interconnection between Lans is proving an attractive alternative to Wans
managed by expensive mainframes. And LANS are big in Japan.
The high cost of office space in Tokyo forces a rigorous assessment of every
square foot. Encouraging staff to share peripherals is one way of keeping
the rent in check, with a Lan saving precious space.
