FT  29 APR 91 / Leading Article: UK aid and the poor
ONE OF the hallmarks of the Thatcher decade was a grudging attitude towards
development. UK aid spending fell from 0.52 per cent of gross national
product in 1979 to just 0.31 per cent 10 years later.
Not surprisingly, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
picks on this record in its latest review of British aid policy. The
relatively modest cash increases planned for the next few years will lead to
only a slight rise in real spending. Aid could even decline further in
proportion to GNP, the OECD says.
Third World lobby groups have drawn attention to the report in the hope that
Mr John Major will turn out to be more generous than his predecessor and
increase the budget accordingly. This hope looks vain and may be simplistic.
The return to fiscal deficit makes the granting of extra aid unlikely.
Anyway, increasing the budget only makes sense if recipients can usefully
absorb the extra funds and if it does not involve sacrificing the quality of
the aid programme.
Too much of the UK aid budget remains tied to the procurement of British
goods and services. The UK is one of the worst offenders in the industrial
world in this regard. The government has begun to reverse this policy, at
least where the poorest countries are concerned, but the OECD rightly says
it should do more.
Unfortunate blemish
The UK's predilection for tied aid is a blemish on a programme that is
otherwise characterised by an exemplary level of concessionality,
concentration on the poorest countries and professional evaluation of
projects and programmes. Tying aid diminishes its effectiveness. It limits
choice and raises procurement costs. Reduce tying, the argument goes, and
the effectiveness of UK aid could be further enhanced. Yet critics such as
the OECD must accept that a cut in tied aid would make it even harder to
drum up support for an increased aid budget.
Pressure for tying remains strong in industry, which too often sees the aid
budget as being primarily designed to benefit British companies rather than
the poor peoples of the developing world. Indeed, in the general argument
about the level of the aid budget, industry is all too willing to gloss over
the fact that much aid is necessary simply to offset trade protection in the
First World. The UK boasts a relatively open economy, but it is far from
innocent in this respect. If Mr Major were really concerned about
development, he should persuade his EC colleagues to abolish import
restrictions on farm products. The need for aid would certainly diminish as
protection is lifted.
Fallible institutions
The general rule is that the larger the aid budget, the tighter the strings
attached. UK spending is increasingly conditional on the recipient's
following International Monetary Fund and World Bank adjustment programmes.
This should help to ensure that spending is effective, but the principle
should not be followed slavishly. The Bretton Woods institutions are
fallible too.
Another feature of British policy is the new fashion for targeting aid
towards countries seen as offering 'good government'. This is generally
taken to mean a level of democracy sufficient to make government
accountable, minimise corruption and secure basic human rights. This has
some merit. After all it is easier to help well-governed countries. But the
policy is too vague and easily overridden for the sake of other foreign
policy objectives. Under a good government yardstick, countries like Kenya
and Malawi would not deserve to be large recipients of British aid.
Perhaps the best yardstick is the one which opinion polls suggest the public
prefers, namely the degree to which aid actually helps the very poor. This
is a standard which implies a need for good government in the recipient
country without making it into an obsession. The public is right to be
suspicious of the use of aid to further Britain's commercial interests or to
curry diplomatic favour with developing country leaders.
