FT  26 APR 91 / Kurds gamble on a Saddam promise: Few share Kurdish
enthusiasm for autonomy pact with Baghdad regime
'THE leader Saddam Hussein is our supreme ideal in practising democracy,'
trumpeted one of the slogans plastered over the walls of polling stations
during the 1989 local election in Iraqi Kurdistan.
At the time, Kurdish residents of Iraqi towns like Suleimaniya - and Kurdish
guerrilla leaders in exile - described the government-sponsored elections as
a sham and scoffed at the idea of the ruthless President Saddam having any
interest in democracy or Kurdish rights.
Today, it seems, Kurdish politicians have changed their minds and are
prepared to take him at his word.
But the brief announcement on Wednesday by Mr Jalal Talabani, leader of the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, that he and other Kurdish representatives had
reached agreement in principle with Mr Saddam on the establishment of
autonomy for Iraqi Kurdistan leaves many questions unanswered.
It is easy to understand why each side should want to negotiate. Iraq's
ruling Ba'ath Party has seen its legitimacy undermined and its army weakened
by the hopeless war for Kuwait and the subsequent uprisings in Kurdistan and
the predominantly-Shia Moslem towns of the south; as for the Kurdish
guerrillas, their continued military presence in the mountains is rendered
politically pointless unless the mass exodus into Iran and Turkey of the
Kurds who make up their constituency can be reversed.
Mr Talabani and the Iraqi government say their proposed agreement is based
on the lapsed 1970 autonomy deal which recognised the Kurdish language and
cultural identity, provided for Kurdish representation in government and
called for the economic development of Kurdistan.
Many Kurds, however - not to mention those non-Kurds who have espoused the
Kurdish cause in recent weeks - are profoundly sceptical about the value of
promises made by President Saddam.
Mr Talabani and his allies believe concessions can be squeezed now from the
weakened Iraqi leader and gains preserved by means of international
guarantees.
Yet it is difficult to see the United Nations or any of its members agreeing
to enforce a purely domestic political arrangement. Nor has it escaped the
notice of those who distrust Mr Saddam that one of his main objections to
the proposed deal is the request for outside guarantors.
When pressed on the matter, Mr Talabani told a news conference in Baghdad:
'We think that democracy will be the main guarantee of the national Kurdish
objective.' Kurdish autonomy, in other words, is supposed to be preserved by
the presence of a democratically-elected and partly Kurdish government in
Baghdad.
The regime has certainly been talking a great deal about the need for
democracy and reforms since the end of the war, and President Saddam has
taken a back seat, in public at least, to Mr Saadoun Hammadi, the new prime
minister.
But even those who sympathise with the Iraqi Ba'ath Party in its present
predicament find it hard to swallow the suggestion that President Saddam and
his colleagues are about to steer Iraq towards genuine democracy after three
decades of increasingly brutal oppression.
Yesterday, with remarkable frankness, Mr Hammadi said that Iraqi steps
towards democracy would be gradual and might not meet the immediate
expectations of other countries.
One of the reasons for the breakdown of the 1970 agreement within a matter
of years was the central government's reluctance to carry out a census in
the Kirkuk area which would doubtless have shown a Kurdish majority.
Since then the authorities have 'Arabised' Kirkuk by transporting families
from the south, to such an extent that even Kurds believe that the Kurdish
inhabitants must be a minority of the population. Mr Talabani said the two
sides would discuss the matter of Kirkuk at a later stage.
Lastly, there is the probability that a deal between the Kurds and President
Saddam will demolish the flimsy, 17-party anti-Saddam coalition which
finally emerged after the Kuwait invasion.
The Kurdish political parties are now trying to set their agreement in
concrete while President Saddam is willing to talk, but anxious Kurdish
refugees and cautious western governments could hardly be blamed for
declaring yesterday that they would wait and see.
