FT  18 APR 91 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): BA, flying on
post-war euphoria
This morning some 1,000 travel agents from all over the world will fly into
London on what is described, by British Airways which is organising the
trip, as the 'World's Biggest Educational' - travel trade jargon for
encouraging agents to book clients on British holidays.
The move will hardly attract the same sort of publicity as BA achieved for
its 50,000 free flights promotion which takes off on St George's Day next
Tuesday.
But in BA terms it is just as important. While the free flights offer has
generated an unprecedented degree of consumer awareness in a promotion -
some 5m people applied for tickets worldwide - BA is anxious to ensure that
it builds on its marketing coup.
'It's only the start of a sustained promotion this summer to bring back the
business,' says Liam Strong, BA's director of marketing and operations and
no stranger to the world of razzmatazz consumer promotions.
BA's marketing response was not a knee-jerk reaction to the current intense
competition and the dramatic slump in airline travel when the Gulf War broke
out. The groundwork was laid a year ago when BA first felt the chill of the
US and UK recessions. It reviewed its operations extensively (some 50,000
man-hours were spent on this, according to Strong) and came up with a more
integrated structure (bringing marketing and operations together) as well as
over 700 cost-saving proposals. 'We wouldn't have been able to put together
our current marketing programme without having reduced our cost base,'
insists Strong.
Although Strong's marketing plans were aimed at meeting transatlantic
competition head-on in the face of recession, BA, like everyone else, was
still caught out by the onset of the Gulf crisis last summer. 'We realised
that we had to do something to revive international travel when the world
got back to normal,' he recalls.
A planning team, consisting of nine senior executives from all parts of the
airline, was set up last autumn to plan for the post-war world. The group
met intensively while also doing their normal jobs: 'It was exhausting but
also very stimulating to brainstorm ideas,' says one of the team.
Insiders remain tight-lipped about who actually came up with the grand
scheme of giving away all the airline's seats for one day. 'It was a team
effort,' insists Charles Gurassa, BA's head of leisure, and one of the
group.
Sir Colin Marshall, BA's chief executive, was told in a car on the way to
Gatwick airport: 'He didn't bat an eyelid,' says Strong.
The very boldness of the move was its great appeal. 'I think there is a
problem in large companies that too often they are afraid of being bold,'
suggests Strong. 'One of the factors about marketing in the late 20th
century is that most companies are quite sophisticated in their marketing
techniques; so there is a real need to come up with something that makes you
stand out from the rest of the pack.'
BA brought in - in conditions of great secrecy - specialist help to
implement the programme; Saatchi and Saatchi did the advertising and a
couple of promotional companies were also retained.
Planning was based around an assumption that the war would last longer than
it actually did; the give-away flights were due to be offered in late May or
early June. The end of hostilities meant the whole programme was advanced a
couple of months.
The impact of the promotion surprised even BA. 'I think it came at the right
psychological time for people after the gloom in the early part of the
year,' suggests Strong. The cost of the promotion was about Pounds 16m -
including the Pounds 11m cost of flying its fleet free for two days (there
and back). Strong declines to say how big a chunk out of his marketing
budget this will take, but insists it has been very cost-effective: 'At a
highly conservative estimate, we've had more than Pounds 30m worth of media
publicity worldwide.'
Today's arrival of key travel agents from Europe, North America, and the Far
East, however, is just the first of a series of initiatives BA is taking.
These include:
A Keys to Britain promotion overseas to encourage holidays to be taken in
Britain. A charge card for travel and entertainments expenses which helps
companies keep track of these costs launched earlier this week jointly with
Diners Club.
Special offers to popular destinations if holidays are booked before 10 am
through a travel agent.
A frequent flyer programme for regular travellers - called Lattitudes -
which uses BA's existing Air Miles operation to enable travellers to
accumulate points for a free flight.
Strong and his colleagues have a number of other ideas for keeping interest
alive during the summer months which he is keeping under wraps at present.
But trade speculation suggests they are likely to include special offers
this summer for the 5m people who applied for the free flights.
'Although initially there was euphoria after the war ended, we know it's
going to be a tough summer for the travel business,' admits Strong. 'The war
only brought to a head the problems caused by the recession in the US and UK
and a slow-down in the Japanese market.'
Moreover, after many years when BA has faced little effective competition on
the lucrative North American routes, it now has to compete against American
Airlines and United, two of the US's strongest carriers.
The real test will come over the next few months. But Strong is confident
enough to believe at this stage that no similar initiative will be needed in
the autumn of this year. But he already has teams working on marketing plans
for late 1992 when the competition across the North Atlantic will be in its
second year and even more intense. 'We can't afford to rest on our laurels,'
he insists.
