FT  07 MAY 91 / Survey of South Africa (2): A long way from the land of milk
and honey - The lifting of sanctions is unlikely to lift the economic gloom
EVERY day in South Africa, 1,000 young people enter the workforce. Of these,
875 find no job, says Mr John Kane-Berman, director of the Institute of Race
Relations.
That will not change when the last vestiges of apartheid have disappeared,
nor will non-racial elections alter it. Even the lifting of sanctions will
probably have no dramatic short-term effect.
Indeed, it is difficult to be sanguine about the prospects for economic
growth and employment in South Africa over the next 4 to 5 years. 'It will
take time for the new South Africa to establish credibility,' warns Mr Chris
Stals, governor of the South African Reserve Bank (central bank). 'The
take-off may not occur until the mid-1990s, when the new government has been
in power for a year or two. For the next few years we must be modest about
what to expect from the economy.'
Mr Barend du Plessis, the finance minister, underlines the consequences of
this: 'Unless we can get growth going now, by the mid-1990s it will be
virtually impossible for any government to govern this country, because of
the number of unemployed.'
Some businessmen dismiss this apocalyptic vision as 'politician's talk'. Mr
du Plessis makes no secret of the fact that his message is partly political.
'It is a message to opposing political groupings in South Africa: look
fellas, if you want to play the sanctions game, you will now be playing it
not only at the expense of people who are directly disadvantaged . . . but
you are now putting that very government in which you would like to
participate, if not take over . . . you are jeopardising (its) chances of
governing a governable South Africa.'
The scenario he draws is not unrealistic, and represents the worst possible
background for negotiations on a post-apartheid constitution. The economy
contracted by 1 per cent in real terms last year, and a further decline, or
at best zero growth, is expected this year. Meanwhile the black labour force
grows by 3 per cent a year, and jobless totals soar.
Professor Jan Lombard, formerly deputy governor of the Reserve Bank,
estimates that of the 12m-strong workforce, only 8m are in formal
employment. 'About 4m are without formal job opportunities and have to eke
out a living in one way or another.' He projects this figure will grow to 6m
by the year 2000. But the Institute for Futures Research of the University
of Stellenbosch draws an even bleaker picture: assuming economic growth of
3.1 per cent for the period 1988 - 2000 (which may well prove unattainable),
nearly 8m people, or more than 44 per cent of the population, will be
without formal sector jobs by the end of the century.
Mr Stals and Mr du Plessis recognise the threat posed by every one of the
875 youths who join jobless queues each day: under-educated and highly
politicised, they have no vested interest in the survival of capitalism in
South Africa, or even in a peaceful transition to a post-apartheid society.
But they refuse to abandon their efforts at structural adjustment, which
involve the tightest fiscal and monetary policies pursued for many years.
Economists disagree on whether the 1991/92 budget will turn out to be mildly
expansionary or just neutral; but certainly, it reflects no serious move to
stimulate growth. Mr Stals constantly reiterates his opposition to any
politically-motivated relaxation in monetary policy. 'I have no problem
defending myself against pressure to use monetary policy to stimulate
growth. Even if it succeeded, it would only be temporary,' he says. So far,
he has managed a degree of independence which would make a happy man of any
Western central banker; it remains to be seen whether that will survive once
real constitutional negotiations begin.
Without access to the facilities of the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
currently blocked under US sanctions legislation, Mr du Plessis believes
slow growth would resume by the end of this year or early in 1992, 'but only
a very modest growth rate . . . for a short period of time . . . which will
be totally inadequate . . .'
Even if faster growth were possible, Pretoria could not allow it. The
pattern of the past five years would prevail: growth would be restricted to
avoid a surge in imports, which in turn would threaten the balance of
payments surplus needed to service South Africa's foreign debt. 'We would
achieve another 1.5 to 2 per cent in two years from now,' Mr du Plessis
says, adding growth would fluctuate near that ceiling rather than at the 4
to 4.5 per cent needed to keep pace with rapid population growth.
With access to IMF support - Mr du Plessis hopes normal relations will be
re-established by year-end, and estimates Dollars 2bn might be available -
'we would have confidence to let go of the economy, not to hold the reins so
tightly,' he says. Still, he remains cautious about growth: 'We would be
able to phase out exchange control, so what will happen? How many foreign
investors will indeed take their money out, what will be the flow of money
back to South Africa?'
Already, as sanctions begin to recede, capital flows are being influenced
more by what Mr Stals calls 'normal economic factors'. But those do not yet
favour long-term investment: recent violence and uncertainty over future
economic policy have shaken investor confidence. Foreign trade missions are
numerous, but commitments few. 'We've had more visitors in the past year
than in the previous five,' says Mr Meyer Kahn, group managing director at
South African Breweries. But he adds: 'That's partly political, and partly
because we have a superb summer climate: they pack five sets of swimming
trunks for every suit.'
Mr Stals says investment will come with political progress, including
lending at commercial rates from the World Bank: 'By the mid-1990s . . . I
think we're going to pull in a lot of foreign capital,' he says. 'We will
become a conduit for those who want to invest in the southern African
region.'
Businessmen point out, however, that Pretoria has always traded with its
neighbours, albeit illicitly, and that the removal of sanctions may not
provide the hoped-for boost. They note that Africa as a whole represents
only 3 per cent of world trade, and South Africa makes up a third of that
already. Given black Africa's debt problems, its prospects as a market for
Pretoria may turn out to be limited.
Nonetheless, Mr Kahn and many other businessmen remain optimistic about
post-sanctions prospects: 'We are underborrowed, we've adjusted to
sanctions, found new markets, there is a better relationship between labour
and management, our businesses are tougher, and we are leaner.'
Mr Conrad Strauss, group managing director of Stanbic, one of South Africa's
largest banking groups, offers a more sober vision: 'The best we can hope
for is that we leave this century in a greater state of socio-economic grace
than when we entered it.'
The scale of South African poverty is daunting: according to Mr Kane-Berman,
20m people have no access to electricity; 80 per cent of rural dwellers do
not have enough clean water; 84 per cent in rural areas live below the
so-called 'minimum living level' of R700 a month for a family of five. And
by 2010, there will be nearly 60m people in South Africa, twice the 1980
census level. It is far from clear that the post-apartheid economy will be
up to the task of housing, feeding, clothing and employing that many people.
Black South Africans may find that life after apartheid remains a struggle.
