FT  11 MAY 91 / Arts: Mehta in concert
WHILE ZUBIN Mehta is in London conducting Carmen at Covent Garden he has
found time to take on a few concerts as well, giving us an opportunity to
judge his form on the platform when he is not in the company of a visiting
international orchestra on a prestige tour.
To date the conductor's most notable successes here have been at the
opera-house. He led a splendid, wide-screen sound production of Puccini's La
fanciulla del West, for which he reportedly re-seated the orchestra. There
was a Tristan und Isolde, too, no less luscious sonically, though doubts
began to creep in there; and it was unfortunately the Wagner opera that
rather came to mind at his concert on Thursday with the London Philharmonic
at the Royal Festival Hall.
The evening made an unexciting start with Mozart's Symphony No 41, the
'Jupiter'. This was a typically euphonious performance, well played, keen
not to offend, though it found a more positive attitude in the finale. As
the 18th-century repertoire brings forth a new breed of conductors, it is
increasingly clear that the maestros of the big symphony orchestras, such as
Mehta, find it difficult to articulate this music. Too often it just sounds
vague.
To say that Bruckner requires the same insight is not as improbable as it
might sound. When Jochum came with the Vienna Philharmonic to perform the
Seventh Symphony, he inflected the opening statement in such a way as to
presage all the underlying tensions he felt in the music. Under Mehta the
same phrases were broad, spacious, unfolded with rapturous beauty of tone,
but otherwise featureless. And that, no less, anticipated his performance as
a whole.
Time and again one registered passages that sounded more beautiful than ever
before - orchestral textures so lusciously blended, violin lines that soared
so radiantly, that one momentarily forgot that a symphonic argument should
also be going on. In this awesome symphony there is a great journey to be
undertaken, from self-doubt and loss to hard-won triumph. But the only
significant movement here was up to one blazing climax and down again.
The London Philharmonic played for Mehta at near the top of its present high
standards. The conductor evidently enjoys a rapport with the players and it
is disappointing that the results are not as impressive as one feels, by
right, they ought to be.
