FT  17 APR 91 / The cost of curbing inflation
Even though there has been a slowing in the rate of wage increases this
year, UK unemployment has risen to l97m and is likely to reach 2.5m later in
the year. Most forecasters believe wage inflation will stay above 9 per cent
for the year, outstripping retail inflation of about 6 per cent.
The labour market is unlikely to respond to recession fast enough to prevent
unemployment rising.
After a decade of official hostility to any form of central pay policy, and
constant calls from ministers for wage bargains to be devolved to company
level, Mr John Major's government last month showed the first hint of a
change of tack. His policy unit invited the Campaign for Work lobby group to
explain its support for national pay co-ordination.
Although the invitation was cancelled when it became public, it was a token
of renewed government interest in pay co-ordination. Its supporters argue
that countries such as Japan, Germany and Australia have gained from an
annual discussion of the affordable level of pay settlements involving
employers, unions and government. This has allowed them to limit rises in
unemployment and to keep inflation under control without statutory wage
limits.
Mr Peter Robinson, a consultant to the Campaign for Work, argues that the
fragmentation of UK pay bargaining has prevented the British economy
reacting in the best manner to recession. 'The fall in wage rises so far has
been bought at a cost of 10 per cent unemployment, and that will not be
enough,' he says. 'If inflation is to go down further, it will need
unemployment of 12 or 13 per cent, and the experience of France is that that
will become a permanent plateau.'
UK support for pay co-ordination has emphasised the role it could play in
establishing a pay norm consistent with low unemployment. In spite of this
emphasis on wage control, there has been more support from unions and the
Labour party than from employers or government.
The prime backer in the union movement has been Mr John Edmonds, leader of
the GMB general union, who last year gained limited support for the idea
from the Trades Union Congress. Yet resistance has grown within the TUC from
an alliance of left-wing union suspicious of incomes policy, and right-led
craft unions organising in manufacturing. The latter group fears pay
co-ordination will benefit the low-paid at the expense of skilled workers.
The Labour party has been careful to dissociate itself publicly from the
idea of wage controls, but supports the idea of a 'national economic
assessment' each year before wage bargaining. Mr Edmonds says the idea is a
means of delivering higher real wage increases rather than battling for big
rises which are nullified by price inflation. 'It is to do with the relation
between wages and inflation. It is a means of getting decent real
increases,' he says.
The Confederation of British Industry remains suspicious of the idea, seeing
echoes of the ineffective pay restraint agreements of the early 1970s. It
wants individual companies to settle increases on what they can afford. It
seems unlikely to gain convincing backing from the TUC this year. 'It is
another good idea which could help the economy, but may end up withering on
the vine through lack of support,' says Mr Edmonds.
