FT  16 APR 91 / The Tory tranquilliser
Mr William Waldegrave is doing a good job as secretary of state for health;
if political performance is the measure he is doing somewhat better than his
predecessor, Mr Kenneth Clarke. When the new chap took over at the beginning
of November the opinion polls rated concern about the national health
service at about level with anger at the poll tax, or even just above it.
Since then, worry about the NHS has steadily if gently declined, while the
community charge, closely followed by unemployment, has become the leading
issue.
Mr Clarke joined battle with the medical profession; Mr Waldegrave has made
love, not war. The second person he consulted, after Mr Clarke himself, was
Sir Norman Fowler, the former minister and unchallenged master of the art of
keeping out of political trouble while managing potentially dangerous
departments. Mr Waldegrave's immediate task was to introduce the reforms
that officially came into operation a fortnight ago. Did you notice anything
move? Neither did I. That was what he was supposed to achieve: slip the new
system in with the minimum of fuss and the least possible political damage.
Put it in place, but for the moment let it lie dormant. His more difficult
objective has been to persuade the electorate that you really can trust the
Tories with the health service. Honest, cross your heart and hope to die, it
is safe in our hands. So he must tell us.
Mr Waldegrave is trying his best to do just that. He produced a prose poem
at a recent Conservative party conference. 'To put it bleakly, we are all
equal in the presence of death,' said he. 'Pain and its relief are the same
for all.' Inequalities in pay, in status, in ability were acceptable because
they could only be suppressed by suppressing liberty. 'But in health, no . .
. our hearts revolt against the idea that one child with leukaemia should be
treated, and another not, because of the luck of the economic draw.' This is
not the kind of talk to which we became accustomed during the previous
decade.
The new minister's small achievement has not passed unnoticed. He is
sounding like a Labour spokesman for the health service. So the opposition
has chosen the NHS as the subject for tomorrow's debate in the House of
Commons. It wants to knock Mr Waldegrave about a bit. Labour will always
score tops in the public estimation of which party is likely to be a better
manager of the NHS, but the Conservatives' success in narrowing the gap over
the past six months may have begun to spoil its grand strategy.
That strategy is now obvious. Labour is running a permanent election
campaign, at a level of intensity that seems to increase every week. The
party's erstwhile strategic genius, Mr Peter Mandelson, helped Mr Neil
Kinnock produce a policy review in 1989. That was 'Meet the challenge, make
the change'. It was boiled down and re-edited to emerge last year as
'Looking to the future'. Mr Mandelson has a constituency to nurse, so last
October he resigned as director of communications. The party's new
strategists, directed by Dr John Cunningham, have learned the Mandelson
lesson - that the essence of salesmanship is repetition, enhanced by
incremental product development.
They are skilfully packaging and re-packaging the policy review papers,
moving out specialist lines, looking for niche markets. To take just two
recent examples, in February we were given 'Modern manufacturing strength';
in March 'A new ministry for women'. This morning the entire schmozzle will
be re-issued in a fresh edition, whose likely title, 'Opportunity Britain',
is a direct lift from Mr John Major. If Labour believes as firmly in the
rest of capitalism as it does in its marketing methods no one need fear a
Labour government.
The health niche is tackled in another product launch, 'A fresh start for
health'. If you read it carefully you find that the essence of the
government's new system has been accepted by Labour. The terminology is
different, but public purchasers of health care will contract with
providers. Labour wants to take the concepts of competition and a market in
health out of the reckoning, but whoever heard Mr Waldegrave mention such
things, in public or in private? To his way of thinking the new independent
hospital trusts are small versions of the old Morrisonian nationalised
industries, which is why Labour may be disinclined to abolish them if it
wins the election. As to all those Tory-installed computers churning out all
those detailed cost estimates, Labour could only jettison them if it was
insincere in its desire to enable the NHS to win the argument for more
funds.
Meanwhile, the Conservatives struggle to produce a new basic policy
statement, a continuous recycling exercise being beyond their dreams. In
health, they will doubtless draw on the rich seam to be found in Labour's
booklet. Mr Major has already pinched their charter for patients; Mr
Waldegrave is working on a government green paper, due next month, that will
proffer a new 'health strategy'. He has gone back to the Beveridge report,
prepared during the Second World War, to find his guiding principles:
prevention, cure and rehabilitation. It is the merest of coincidences that
these also appear on page five of Labour's 'A fresh start for health'.
As to Mr Clarke, he is undoubtedly in the right job now. Since he became
secretary for education, Labour's traditional lead in that area has begun to
melt away, just as in health. Mr Clarke is not being quite so rumbustious
with the teachers as he was with the doctors. His pronouncements on the need
to simplify the national curriculum and move from complicated 'assessments'
towards easily understood tests are popular with parents. And if he runs out
of ideas there is always Labour's growing bookshelf to rob. But he should be
careful about what he does with what he steals. His bluff, no-nonsense Tory
way of putting education policy could be the winning approach.
