FT  10 MAY 91 / Survey of The Food Industry (2): Border raiders in action -
Europe remains ripe for mergers
TRANQUILITY, it would appear, has returned to the mergers and acquisitions
scene in the European food industry. Gone are the mega-deals that peaked
with the Dollars 25bn leveraged buy-out of Nabisco in late 1988. The
fantastic prices companies paid as the Nabisco businesses were auctioned
off, and others deals that followed, are also only fond memories for the M&amp;A
specialists.
But the lack of headline-grabbing deals, with the notable exception of
Philip Morris's purchase of Jacobs Suchard last June, is misleading. While
many of the largest and most obvious targets for acquisitive food
manufacturers have now been bought or are not for sale, there continue to be
numerous middle sized deals reflecting multi-national and smaller company
enthusiasm for Europe.
Not all the excitement is to do with the arrival of a single market in 1992.
Unilever, United Biscuits and Kellogg are among companies which had
recognised how ripe continental Europe was for concentration even before the
promise of greater cross-border trade.
Compared with the huge but maturing US market, where competitive stalemate
is looming, some product areas retain significant growth potential.
In the Pounds 3bn snack market, for instance, less than half the market is
controlled by the four major players. And Europeans are consuming sometimes
as little as half as many biscuits, snacks and soft drinks as Americans.
Forecasters such as Mark Lynch, of Warburg Securities suggest this market
will grow 27 per cent in volume over the next five years and probably more
in value terms.
These groups' new emphasis on Europe is already showing on the bottom line.
In 1990, sales at CPC, the US food group, for example, grew 12 per cent
worldwide but by 41 per cent in Europe partly as a result of its acquisition
from SmithKline Beecham of the Marmite, Bovril and Ambrosia businesses.
'The single Europe act is a real opportunity and a chance to restructure
especially in the area of sourcing,' says Morris Tabaksblat, the main board
director who chairs Unilever's food executive.
Last year, Unilever provided Pounds 305m before tax to streamline businesses
in Europe where it has 60 per cent of its food sales. The opportunity to
supply regional markets from large manufacturing centres instead of
artificial national markets from within their own borders will lead to
economies of scale on production and distribution, Tabaksblat says.
United Biscuits has similar plans to Unilever's and hopes to double Europe's
share of its trading profit to 12 per cent by 1995. Its failure to beat BSN
of France to Nabisco's biscuit and snacks business was a setback but the
Pounds 168m it spent buying businesses in Europe last year nevertheless
helped make it the continent's second largest biscuit maker.
In a less dramatic way these investments should lead to margin improvement
through the elimination of independent distributors and more efficient
manufacturing.
Cadbury Schweppes' recent Pounds 122m purchase of Oasis and Gini bottling in
Belgium from Perrier Sources, and its distribution agreement with
Apollinaris Brunnen, Germany's largest mineral water company, shows a
similar desire for critical volume in the drinks market.
The bout of investment by US and European groups is likely to lead in
two-three years to another wave of unbundling, similar to the sale of
Nabisco's biscuit and snacks business to BSN and Pepsico's purchase shortly
afterwards of Nabisco's UK snacks business.
'After a period of indigestion the companies will want to get back to real
areas of strength,' says Jim Grover, a director of OC&amp;C Strategy
Consultants. 'It is going to be increasingly difficult to be a follower
without strong brands.'
Hand in hand with the lower-key merger and acquisition activity has been an
increased focus on joint ventures and distribution arrangements. Some of
these are more permanent than others.
Cereal Partners, the 1989 link between General Mills of the US and Nestle of
Switzerland, was seen as so strong that Ranks Hovis McDougall, previously
second only to Kellogg in the UK, sold out in June last year to the
newcomer.
Others partnerships, such as Borden of Germany's link with the Hungarian
state-owned bakery, Favarosi Sutoipari Vallalat, arise from the
peculiarities of operating in emerging eastern European economies.
Yet others deals, in particular joint distribution agreements, are more
likely to conceal a Trojan horse. They are useful while the partners gain
experience of each others' markets but require a kind of discipline that
rarely lasts.
Differences of approach frequently lead to one partner taking out the other,
as when Unilever in March bought the remaining 50 per cent of
Margarinefabrikken Alfa Solo, a Danish producer of margarine, that it did
not own already.
These deals appear to be a kind of half-way house in the slack phase of the
acquisition cycle. But they may become less noticeable once acquisitions
resume. And resume they will. 'The next 10 years will bring big M&amp;A activity
in Europe like in the US in the last 10 years,' says Tabaksblat.
So what of the European market potential for smaller companies? 'It will be
OK for the own label manufacturers as suppliers to the retail trade,' says
Mr David Lang who heads Henderson Crosthwaite SP food team. 'It is the
in-between company brand manufacturer that is threatened.'
Those without strong market positions in a country or who are small in the
European context and are unable to tap economies of scale might consider
divesting weaker brands unless they can dramatically and rapidly increase
their size, agrees Grover.
Own label producers, who are enjoying growth in the UK away from the brand
battles, will have to wait longer in Europe, says Mr Christopher Haskins,
the chairman of Northern Foods.
Even more sophisticated European retailers such as France's Carrefour remain
far behind the likes of Tesco and Sainsbury in the UK in terms of central
ordering or stock control.
'While we cannot find retailers like Marks and Spencer and Safeway the
opportunities for fresh food are limited,' he says. With the opening of the
Channel tunnel, delivery of fresh food overnight from Rotherham to
Dusseldorf would be feasible as long as German retailers agreed to encourage
the new market.
So what of the direct effect of 1992 on product harmonisation and changes in
taste? Most analysts believe the next wave of acquisitions will have little
immediate impact on harmonising consumer taste.
Weaning the French from their local patisserie or the Belgians off their
Godiva chocolates is considered by food experts to be a long term project.
Some branded goods will travel the continent but in terms of the
Euro-sausage or the standardised Euro-Bagette, 1992 is still a long way off.
