FT  26 APR 91 / Argentina seeks UK help on privatisation
ARGENTINA is seeking UK expertise to help with the next stages of its
ambitious privatisation programme.
Mr Guido di Tella, Argentine foreign minister, met representatives of
British companies and financial institutions, including Baring Brothers, the
merchant bank, and ICI, in London yesterday, to discuss the privatisation
programme and encourage UK investment in Argentina.
'We are very interested in the British experience of privatisation,' he said
in an interview with the Financial Times. 'Britain has great expertise in
this matter, particularly in the creation of regulatory mechanisms to
monitor companies after privatisation.'
The first phase of Argentine privatisation was criticised for its haste and
dogged by rumours of corruption. The gas, water and electricity industries,
including SEGBA, the greater-Buenos Aires area electricity company, are next
in line, and Argentina is eager to ensure adequate regulatory frameworks and
maximise competition.
Mr di Tella, who met Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, on Wednesday,
was optimistic on relations with Britain. 'We have a specific problem with
the (Falkland) Islands and the fisheries issue, but commercial relations are
excellent.'
Trade with the UK was growing very quickly, he said. 'Exports from the UK to
Argentina, which had been lagging, have been picking up.'
Trade between the two countries had recovered only slowly after the 1982
Falklands conflict. However, after Britain and Argentina established full
diplomatic relations last July, Argentine exports grew quickly to a monthly
average of about Dollars 20m (Pounds 11.7m) by the end of last year, against
only Dollars 3m previously. UK exports stood at about Dollars 13m a month.
Mr di Tella was adamant that Argentina would not relinquish its claim to
sovereignty over the Falklands. 'We think we have right on our side. We
think we will eventually convince the British government and the islanders
to accept a different sort of settlement. However, we are aware of the
peculiarities of the islands and their history and this is something we want
to respect. We are willing to discuss all sorts of arrangements with the
islanders that would be more congenial.'
Guido di Tella, 'Interested in British experience'
