FT  30 APR 91 / Sweden tires of paying for social democracy
SWEDEN IS one of the few countries that still seems to take May Day
seriously. But tomorrow, as the red flags unfurl, thousands take to the
streets and the faithful sing the Internationale, many Social Democrats must
wonder whether the party that has dominated Sweden for nearly 60 years is
not in terminal decline.
For Mr Ingvar Carlsson, the prime minister, in particular, tomorrow promises
to be a bitter day. As he tries to rally the troops less than five months
before the general election, support for his Social Democrat party has
fallen to a record low of 28.7 per cent, according to a recent poll.
Among voters under the age of 30, the party has a mere 17.5 per cent
support, only two points more than the three-month-old maverick right-wing
New Democracy party. Even among blue-collar trade unionists, fewer than 40
per cent back the Social Democrats. And in the big cities the party faces
annihilation.
The collapse of support has come fast. Only three years ago 43.2 per cent
voted for them at the polls.
The party's troubles are not based on political indecisiveness or lack of
firm action. The Social Democrats have not fallen apart or drifted on to the
rocks. Indeed, the under-estimated premier, who took over after Mr Olof
Palme's assassination in February 1986, has shown patience and finesse in
establishing cross-party agreements that have taken Sweden in a more
liberalising, free market direction.
On issue after issue Mr Carlsson has been able to break through the policy
impasse. After years of talk, the tax reform was implemented, shifting the
burden from incomes on to goods and services. An earlier commitment to start
phasing out the country's nuclear reactors from 1995 threatened to devastate
industry, but Mr Carlsson achieved a compromise whereby nuclear power will
not go until a credible alternative exists.
Two other lingering issues have been resolved. Terrestrial commercial
television is coming to Sweden at last, and the much-debated road and rail
bridge is to be built over the waters of the Oresund linking Sweden with
Denmark.
Moreover, Mr Carlsson's government intends, after surprisingly little
argument, to apply for Swedish membership of the European Community this
summer.
Yet none of this has made any difference to the poll ratings. Perhaps some
voters reason that if Sweden is becoming more liberal they might as well
vote for the most liberal-oriented parties. Others are upset by what they
see as the abandonment of cherished Social Democratic commitments to social
justice and equality.
The party has also lost its reputation for competent economic management.
The so-called Third Way economic strategy of the 1980s, between the free
market and the Soviet-style command economy, has failed, with raging wage
inflation, sluggish productivity, balance of payments deficits, worsening
competitiveness, rising unemployment and stagnant living standards.
The recently published memoirs of the former finance minister, Mr Kjell-Olof
Feldt, point to another important reason for the decline of the Social
Democrats. Interest groups such as the powerful LO blue-collar union
movement have exercised too great an influence over the party, demanding
more resources for the huge welfare state, which Sweden could not afford.
Mr Carlsson can draw comfort from one thought: no coherent political
alternative exists to the Social Democrats, who remain the largest party.
The opposition is split seven ways. After the elections, Sweden may well
have a non-Socialist coalition government, but one that is not strong enough
to take the necessary tough economic decisions.
