FT  09 MAY 91 / BMA to demand suspension of NHS reforms
DOCTORS' leaders will today ask Mr William Waldegrave, the health secretary,
to suspend progress on the government's National Health Service reforms and
examine alternative ways of improving the service.
Representatives of the British Medical Association will meet Mr Waldegrave
in an atmosphere of political tension over the reforms, which took effect
only five weeks ago. Two of the new self-governing hospital trusts formed as
part of the changes have already announced up to 1,000 job losses, and the
Universities Funding Council has expressed concern that the reforms might
damage medical education.
The BMA, which lost all contact with the government during its campaign of
opposition to the health reforms, will offer to take part in joint talks
with the government to explore alternative ways of improving services to
patients.
In return, it wants Mr Waldegrave to 'urgently review the consequences of
the internal market concept' on which the reforms - which separate the
funding of health care from its supply - are based. It will also call on the
health secretary to stop preparing to introduce further self-governing trust
hospitals and GP fund holders next year.
Relations between the medical profession and government have improved since
Mr Waldegrave became health secretary. Although he has shown willingness to
examine the progress of the reforms with the BMA, he is unlikely to respond
favourably to demands to suspend their development.
Dr Jeremy Lee-Potter, chairman of the BMA council, said the 'current chaos'
in the NHS was a direct result of imposing an unworkable administrative
system on a service that was already facing financial crisis.
'The government has got it wrong because it did not listen,' he said.
North Western regional health authority has appointed British Airways to
advise on ways of improving services to patients.
The airline will adapt its customer services training courses to help
develop similar initiatives in the health sector.
