FT  18 APR 91 / UK Company News: 74% contraction to Pounds 6.8m at Higgs and
Hill - Call for Pounds 24.8m adds to growing list of companies in the sector
opting for rights issues
HIGGS AND Hill yesterday became the latest British construction company to
announce a rights issue. So far this year construction and property groups
have called for more than Pounds 700m in 11 rights issues.
Higgs, which also unveiled a 74 per cent fall in pre-tax profits last year
to Pounds 6.84m, is seeking to raise Pounds 24.8m. It is offering
shareholders two shares at 260p each for every seven already owned.
Higgs' share price fell from 340p to 332p following the announcement.
At the beginning of 1991 the company's shares stood at 264p.
Sir Brian Hill, chairman, said the cash from the rights issue would be used
to invest in commercial property in continental Europe; expand the company's
recently formed UK civil and water engineering business; buy more land for
UK housebuilding; and for seedcorn investment to encourage construction in
eastern Europe.
Higgs said it had just received a letter of intent for a Pounds 50m contract
to redevelop the Hotel Praha in Prague into a five-star Hyatt Regency Hotel.
It was the first private sector order to be won by the company's recently
established Prague office.
Sir Brian said the group was also considering two small acquisitions by its
civil and water division. He added: 'It is better to take advantage of our
share price now and raise money through a rights issue, rather than wait
until we have specific deals to announce and maybe have to raise loans
instead.'
At the end of last year Higgs had net debts of Pounds 18m - equivalent to 20
per cent of shareholders' funds. In addition, it has guaranteed about Pounds
5m of borrowings out of total debts of Pounds 31m in two joint-venture
property companies.
Sir Brian warned that a recovery prompted by lower interest rates would take
time to work through and that trading would remain difficult this year.
Pre-tax profits in 1990 fell from Pounds 26.55m to Pounds 6.84m, the first
decline in a decade. The figures included provisions of Pounds 7.37m against
possible future losses, principally against three of the group's
housebuilding sites acquired in 1987 and 1988 when the housebuilding boom
was its peak.
Turnover rose to Pounds 487.98m (Pounds 419.13m) and earnings worked through
down at 10.2p (52.2p).
The collapse of the UK commercial property market has also led the group to
write down, by Pounds 5.4m, the value of its commercial property investments
against reserves. This the group's joint venture, Shipgates retail centre in
Bolton, previously classed as a trade investment.
The taxable profits would have been even lower if Shipgates had not been
re-classified.
Profits in the first six months of last year were reduced by a Pounds 4.1m
provision against Shipgates.
In the event, commercial property profits, despite solid performances from
France and Spain, fell to Pounds 4.48m (Pounds 12.13m) . Construction
profits also fell, to Pounds 8.28m (Pounds 8.57m). Housebuilding in the UK
saw a decline to Pounds 1.45m (Pounds 7.06m).
Higgs is proposing a reduced final dividend of 14p (15.6p) for a maintained
total of 20p. It forecasts a similar pay-out this year on the enlarged share
capital.
COMMENT
A discount of 19 per cent and a yield of 8 per cent on an ex-rights price of
322p should ensure that the issue will be a success. The yield rises to 10
per cent on the issue price of 260p. There are, however, better recovery
stocks around. The group which has the reputation of being one of the UK's
best contractors will on its own admission continue to struggle this year.
Construction margins and orders should continue to dwindle in the face of
the flight by investors from UK commercial property. Higgs and Hill by
comparison is not strong in UK housebuilding which is likely to be one the
first sectors out of the recession. Commercial property may be stronger in
continental Europe but has lost some of its shine as interest rates have
risen. Profits could be about Pounds 8m this year. The company is safe and
secure but is unlikely to prompt a rush to buy at this stage of its
development.
