FT  17 APR 91 / Government Bonds: German bonds hit by wave of heavy futures
selling
HEAVY selling of German government bonds in the cash and futures markets
yesterday afternoon pushed prices down.
Traders expressed surprise as the London International Financial Futures
Exchange Bund future moved through a half-point range yesterday to close at
85.46, suggesting significant selling.
The spread between 10-year German bunds and 10-year French government
securities narrowed to less than 50 basis points. Traders said there had
been a narrowing of the spread in recent days as dealers had marked down
prices in the German market more swiftly than in the French.
Some traders pointed out that the narrowing of the spread could tempt
investors to switch into German bunds. Investors have been selling German
bunds and buying Spanish bonds and UK government bonds.
There are hopes of further interest-rate cuts in these markets, whereas in
the German market the Bundesbank might raise the official interest rate when
its council meets on Thursday.
UK GOVERNMENT bond prices slipped to close down on the day, having increased
slightly as news of the Bank of England's gilt auction were announced
yesterday afternoon.
As prices rose, some dealers sold. The market was not helped by the poor
performance of the US and German markets.
The Bank of England announced that it was to auction a further Pounds 1.2bn
tranche of 10 per cent conversion stock due 1996 on April 24. The existing
stock closed down  1/32 point, as did the benchmark 11 3/4 per cent gilt due
2003/07.
The existing 9 per cent Treasury stock due in 2008 closed at 93 1/16 . The
Bank offered a further Pounds 800m of the stock last week with a minimum
tender price of 94 1/2 , which was undersubscribed, and the market is
speculating that the Bank may have to cut the minimum tender price.
JAPANESE government bond prices rallied in response to a domestic news
report that the Bank of Japan would ease monetary policy.
The yield on the benchmark No 129 10-year government bond fell from 6.72 per
cent at Monday's close to a low of 6.615 per cent on the news. However, a
Bank of Japan official later denied the story and emphasised the Bank's
commitment to tight monetary policy. The yield closed in Tokyo at 6.635 per
cent.
Traders in London said they expected to see some profit-taking at the long
end of the market with investors switching into medium-dated bonds. Yen
weakness prompted some light selling among European investors, traders said.
US government bond prices recovered from early weakness yesterday to end
slightly firmer after Mr Michael Boskin, the White House chief economic
adviser, predicted interest rates would fall further.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year bond was up  3/32 at 97 9/32 ,
yielding 8.111 per cent. The two-year note, however was slightly easier,
down  1/32 at 100 7/16 , to yield 6.862 per cent.
Although Mr Boskin has direct influence on monetary policy, his remarks were
taken as fresh evidence that the pressure is still on the Federal Reserve to
ease policy.
Earlier government figures showed industrial production fell 0.3 per cent in
March and housing starts - regarded as a useful leading indicator of
economic trends - declined 9.3 per cent in the month.
Bonds eased after the figures were released, which suggested that
disappointment at the lack of an interest rate cut from the Fed counteracted
the normally positive impact on prices of bad economic news.
