FT  30 APR 91 / Survey of Singapore (4): Efficiency gives akeen edge -
Shipping: port prospers from its strategic location
LIKE Hong Kong, Singapore is blessed with a deep water harbour as its only
significant natural resource. Unlike the British crown colony, however, it
cannot rely on the business of a large immediate neighbour such as China to
help ensure that its port facilities thrive.
Singapore has thus been thrown back on its regional connections and
strategic location on the main shipping routes between Europe, Japan and the
rest of the Asia-Pacific region to develop a port which generates half its
business offshore and claims to be a world cargo hub.
Singapore is not only the world's busiest port in terms of shipping tonnage
handled, it also last year pipped Hong Kong at the post to become the
world's largest container port. Containers handled rose 20 per cent to 5.22m
20 ft equivalent units (TEUs) compared with 5.1m in Hong Kong. The story of
the port is typical of Singapore's approach to economic development, right
down to a present serious struggle with capacity limits. It owes its success
to a classic local combination of government-mandated enterpreneurialism and
investment in high technology that has brought about a keen edge in
efficiency and productivity.
Though a public board responsible to the government, the Port of Singapore
Authority (PSA), is expected to do without subsidies and pay its share of
taxin the form of a 10 per cent levy on turnover and a further 20 per cent
on operating profit. It is expected to finance its capital investment
internally.
Thus it has been forced into an intensely commercial approach. The PSA
marketsitself actively around the world and prides itself on customer
service. According to Mr Goon Kok Loon, deputy executive director, important
selling points include predictability of berth availability and speed of
turn round. Mr Goon says the average containership can now be turned round
in 10 hours.
The port isnot only an integral part of Singapore's concept of itself as a
regional transport and communications hub. It helps underpin other local
service industries such as banking and brings in a wide range of ancillary
business.
Thus demand for warehouse space has risen through Singapore's position as a
designated delivery point for contracts written on the London Metals
Exchange. It has become an accepted handover centre for ships which are sold
in the second-hand market, and this has helped the ship surveying business,
Mr Goon says.
Singapore enjoys a significant niche in ship repair and maintenance. In
spite of high localwages, this sector has been buoyed up by the high level
of its technology, which means repairs can be done quickly even to
sophisticated modern tankers.
It has thus managed to stay cost-effective in comparison with rival centres
such as Korea, and now, according to brokers Smith New Court, is looking to
an increase in business maintaining tankers built in the active years of the
early 1970s and which are coming up for special survey and repair.
By contrast Singaporeans play a less dominant role as shipowners. Though it
is home to Neptune Orient Lines, which has a modern fleet and an aggressive
expansion policy, the country boasts few entrepreneurs willing to take on
the risks of large fleet ownership. Its shipping fleet ranks only 13th in
the world.
The government hastaken steps to correct this by extending local tax
benefits to ships registeredoutside Singapore. Industry executives say part
of the aim was to encourage ship owners to transfer business to Singapore
from Hong Kong and to help ship-management business, which is seen as an
important ancillary service.
'Singapore has become a new option as a base for operations,' says Mr Chung
Chee Kit, executive director of Steamers Maritime. However, there has been
no immediate rush to set up shop in Singapore and other executives say they
are still uncertainabout the impact of the move.
Back at the port, Mr Goon is unphased by Singapore's well-documented labour
shortage. The large increase in volume in the last 20 years has compelled
the port to move in the direction of computerised automation. Computers now
decide where containers should be stacked and in what order they should be
loaded and unloaded.
This in turn has allowed the portto shed some 3,000 workers over the last
decade, leaving a total of 7,115 workers last year. Most of those that
remain are expected to be computer-literate even if their job is simply
driving a crane. All are expected to undergo at least six days training a
year.
To cope with what has become a serious shortage of capacity, the PSA is
investing some SDollars 1.1bn in a new container terminal. The first berth
should be ready by 1992 and, when the terminal is finished in 1996, the
port's container handling capacity will have doubled to 10m TEUs.
So confident is Mr Goon of continued productivity growth, that he says this
large expansion will be accompanied by only a slight increase in the labour
force. It may not be possible to improve much on the speed of turnround.
With a net surplus last year of some SDollars 459m last year and over
SDollars 2bn invested in fixed deposits in the bank, the money needed to pay
for this investment is also scarcely aproblem. Indeed, if anything, eyebrows
are more frequently raised at the way inwhich the PSA, like other utilities
in Singapore and in spite of its heavy investment programme, has accumulated
large cash reserves. The disposition of this surplus may turn out to be a
much bigger headache than growing the business.
