FT  08 MAY 91 / Yugoslav army moves to curb civil conflict
YUGOSLAVIA'S federal army mobilised yesterday amid signs that ethnic unrest
was spreading from Croatia to other republics.
Reservists were called up in Serbia and tanks were deployed to guard three
bridges on the Danube river between Croatia and Serbia.
The country's civilian leadership, meanwhile, remained deadlocked on whether
to impose a state of emergency in an attempt to restore stability and
contain ethnic conflicts. It said it would continue its talks today.
Mr Ante Markovic, the prime minister, and Mr Veljko Kadijevic, defence
minister, attended yesterday's inconclusive session of the presidency, the
country's collective head of state.
Mr Franjo Tudjman, the president of Croatia and a critic of the army's role,
had talks with Mr Markovic on Monday night and flew to London yesterday.
He met Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, who said he hoped a
political solution could be found to keep Yugoslavia together as an entity.
The two western republics of Slovenia and Croatia oppose any imposition of a
state of emergency, while Serbia, and the army, want to deploy more military
forces in Croatia.
Thirteen Croat policeman were killed last Thursday, reportedly by rebel
Serbs.
Yesterday's stalemate means that violence between Serbs and Croats, which
has claimed 18 lives in the past week, threatens to continue unabated.
Peasants in Listica, a predominantly Croatian region in Bosnia-Hercegovina,
put up barricades to stop army tanks and troops from passing through. Local
politicians said Listica would rise up to defend Croatia if the republic was
attacked by the army.
The spectre of ethnic conflicts spilling over to Bosnia would have a rapid
destabilising affect on its population which is a delicate balance of Moslem
Slavs, Orthodox Serbs and Roman Catholic Croats.
Any sign of more intervention by the army in Croatia is also likely to
infuriate the Croats, who regard the federal army as pro-Serbian.
Yesterday, Croatian workers occupied an arms factory in the town of
Slavonski Brod in central Croatia. The workers tried to prevent the army
from removing 100 new tanks from the factory.
Mr Kadijevic said on Monday the army would intervene to stop ethnic clashes
and would no longer tolerate anti-army activity. The army's toughened stance
followed the killing by a Croat policeman of a soldier during anti-army
demonstrations on Monday in Split, Croatia's second biggest city.
There were calls for a peaceful resolution from Cardinal Franjo Kuharic, the
primate of Croatia, and Serbia's Orthodox Patriarch, Pavle.
Serbia's opposition coalition yesterday accused Mr Tudjman and Mr Slobodan
Milosevic, the republic's president, of 'mobilising fear among Croats and
Serbs' and called for an anti-war demonstration tomorrow in Belgrade.
Observers in Belgrade say the crisis in Croatia plays into the hands of Mr
Milosevic. Serbia's leadership is using the crisis to demand military rule
in Yugoslavia, which would stop Mr Stipe Mesic, Croatia's representative to
the eight-member presidency, from becoming the president of Yugoslavia next
Wednesday under its rotating system.
In London, Mr Hurd told Mr Tudjman that violence was not an answer to
Yugoslavia's problems, and that he supported the view that the country's
constitution, particularly the provisions referring to a rotating
presidency, should be respected.
