FT  09 MAY 91 / Government to sell 100% of Scottish electricity
THE GOVERNMENT is to sell 100 per cent of the two Scottish electricity
companies, ScottishPower and Hydro-Electric, it announced at the launch of
the pathfinder prospectus for the flotation in Edinburgh and London
yesterday.
ScottishPower, the larger of the two companies, expects to show an operating
profit of Pounds 261m for the year to March 1991 while Hydro-Electric
forecasts an operating profit of Pounds 121m.
Pro-forma pre-tax profits excluding exceptional items are forecast at Pounds
225.7m for ScottishPower, and Pounds 97.7m for Hydro-Electric. Post-tax
profits are put at Pounds 153.6m for ScottishPower and at Pounds 72m for
Hydro-Electric.
Both companies said they would follow a progressive policy on dividends and
expect to increase them in real terms. On a pro-forma basis, ScottishPower's
total dividend pay out for the year ending March 1991 would have been Pounds
75m, the company said. The equivalent Hydro-Electric dividend is calculated
at Pounds 35m.
The two expect a lower tax charge in future than the one assumed for the
calculation.
Debt levels for the two companies at March 31 were also revealed.
ScottishPower starts life in the private sector with debt-to-equity ratio of
51.4 per cent, based on liabilities of Pounds 284m at March 31, 1991. With
Pounds 228.2m of indebtedness, Hydro-Electric had a gearing of 43 per cent.
The price of the shares will be announced on May 30, and all share
applications must be in by June 12.
The flotation of the two companies will complete the privatisation of the
electricity industry in Great Britain. Ulster's power industry is to be sold
next year.
For months, the biggest doubt about the flotation concerned the possibility
that the government might call a general election before it could be
completed in mid June. But political setbacks for the Conservatives over the
past few weeks have virtually eliminated that risk.
Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, expressed the hope that there would be
'no impediment to a successful sale'.
The flotation will also bring to the Stock Exchange two electricity
companies that, unlike the generators and regional electricity companies in
England, have the appeal of being vertically integrated. They generate,
transmit and distribute electricity.
Privatisation of the companies is part of the government's policy of
increasing share ownership in Scotland, where it has hitherto been
relatively low. The incentives for individual investors to apply for shares
are biased towards customers of the two companies who need only make a first
instalment payment of Pounds 100 and may apply for their own company's
shares only.
Other individual investors must buy a package of the two companies' shares,
likely to be in a ratio of 2 1/2 ScottishPower shares to one share in
Hydro-Electric, and make a down payment of Pounds 300. The exact proportions
will be fixed when the companies go on sale on May 30.
The offer is not being underwritten. Instead, the government is following
the successful practice applied in February with the English generators and
carrying out a book-building exercise among institutions to assess demand at
varying prices.
It will also market the shares to institutions in Japan, the US, Canada and
continental Europe.
