FT  01 MAY 91 / Leading Article: And Ridley begat Lilley
BIRMINGHAM business lead-ers yesterday witnessed Mr Peter Lilley, the trade
and industry secretary, conduct the political equivalent of a humane
killing. He politely did away with the idea from Mr Nicholas Ridley, his
predecessor, that the Department of Trade and Industry should revert to
doing little more than the pre-war Board of Trade.
Mr Lilley's welcome clarification that the DTI does have a role is more
evidence that words such as sensible and practical rank alongside conviction
and principle in this government's vocabulary. Mr Lilley's aim in recasting
his department's role was as much political as industrial: to rebuild
bridges with industry battered by his predecessors and the recession and to
respond to Labour's industrial policy programme.
He castigated the interventionist industrial policies of the 1960s and
1970s, but acknowledged that despite their failure government has to go
beyond the confines of Ridleyism. Mr Lilley's methodical style contrasts
markedly with the marketing glitz of Lord Young which industrialists so
distrusted.
Yet he did not concede any ground to the Labour party. It is now easier to
identify where Labour and the Conservatives differ on issues of principle
and where on questions of implementation.
Rhetorical agreement
There is at least rhetorical agreement on the importance of a strong
manufacturing base, an effective training system, policies to promote
innovation and partnership between government and industry. There are,
however, significant differences about how these policies should be
delivered.
The two parties part company on other fundamental issues. Labour proposes a
panoply of tax breaks to encourage research and development. It would create
a plethora of quangos to deliver its policies. Mr Lilley rightly puts
competition at the centre of an industrial policy to promote innovation. His
reforms will thankfully simplify rather than multiply the government bodies
industry has to deal with.
In other words, Mr Lilley is steering in the right direction. But as he
acknowledged, there is more to be done. Forthcoming speeches on competition
policy, regulation and innovation should put more flesh on yesterday's
skeletal policy framework. Policy towards innovation should be the clearest
test of the effectiveness of the new approach.
Innovation policy
In the last decade, government policy on innovation - which ranged from the
ambitious Alvey programme of research into information technology, to the
encouragement of collaborative research between small companies - did
nothing to reverse Britain's relative decline in the innovation stakes. This
is a stark contrast with the record on manufacturing productivity, which
rose dramatically as managers used the framework of government economic
policy and trade union legislation to push through long-overdue changes to
working practices. One of the chief tasks for the DTI this decade should be
to follow up the productivity improvements with similarly effective policies
to promote innovation. British companies are much more efficient at making
products. They now need to become better at developing new ones.
There are limits to the government's proper role. Innovation mainly depends
upon the ability of managers to exploit technology commercially.
But Mr Lilley can go further than his Birmingham agenda of streamlined DTI
schemes and an R&amp;D scoreboard of the most innovative British companies. The
debate over short-termism has produced plenty of ideas, from better R&amp;D
disclosure to improved links between higher education establishments and
industry. Mr Lilley should put the DTI at the heart of this evolving debate.
Meanwhile within Whitehall, welcome recent understandings between the
employment and education departments point to further potential gains from
interdepartmental efforts. It would help, for example, if the Advisory
Council on Science and Technology, which is responsible to the Cabinet
Office, were replaced by a more effective body.
