FT  30 APR 91 / Leading Article: Financing the hospitals
THE ROW over the decision by Guy's hospital trust to cut its staff by a
tenth is a typical piece of British political humbug, exacerbated by the
special circumstances of the National Health Service. Mr William Waldegrave,
the health secretary, denies responsibility for the cost-saving measures
which Mr Peter Griffiths, the trust's chief executive, thought necessary,
although he does accept that Coopers &amp; Lybrand Deloitte had previously
indicated that only 12 of the 57 self-governing trusts that came into
operation on April 1 were free of financial difficulties. He might have done
better, politically speaking, to try to maintain what his department calls
the 'steady state' throughout the first year of the implementation of the
reforms - that is, no change until the system is bedded down.
At the same time Mr Neil Kinnock, the Labour party leader, persists in his
charge that the National Health Service is 'underfunded', perhaps to the
tune of some Pounds 4bn, while also laying claim to such financial rectitude
that if he won the election no extra money would be diverted to health until
a combination of economic growth and a freeze on the standard rate of income
tax had made it prudent to spend the fruits of fiscal drag.
Difficult tasks
In purely populist terms, Mr Waldegrave has the more difficult political
task. He has to stand by the April 1 reform, the essence of which is that
the health districts, which purchase care, shall be managed separately from
the hospitals that deliver it. He has been resolute in insisting that the
actions of the independent management of Guy's are Guy's business, but he is
under some pressure from his own backbenchers to respond more pliantly to
the usual pelting from an NHS that has the benefit of 40 years of experience
of extracting money from governments by harassing ministers. He should
continue to resist such blandishments.
The row has come at a particularly awkward moment - just when the
Conservatives thought they had introduced the reforms without fuss, and on
the very weekend chosen by Mr John Major, the prime minister, to stage a
set-piece country seminar on how preventive medicine and other elements of a
health strategy might be put in place. It was not thought possible to
eliminate Labour's poll lead as the party to be trusted with the health
service, but there was some hope that the gap could be narrowed.
NHS guardians
This may now be difficult. Spending on the NHS has increased by 41 per cent
in real terms since 1979, when the present Conservative government first
returned to office. The larger increases have come towards the end of the
period, partly in response to a Labour onslaught in 1987-88 and partly to
ease in the new structure, which was created in response to the opposition's
attack. Against that, the index used by the government to arrive at its
estimate of real extra spending is general and not specific to health, where
costs rise more quickly as a result of advances in medical practice and the
growth in the elderly population. This lies behind Mr Kinnock's
'underfunding'; the humbug arises because both parties are competing on the
claim to be the best steward of the NHS while neither is able to pledge much
higher expenditure.
What Mr Major has stated, however, is that money saved by Guy's and other
cost-cutting trust hospitals will not be snatched back by the Treasury but
retained in the health service. There is an opportunity in this, if
anecdotal evidence of NHS inefficiency is even half right. Labour is against
trusts, but not the purchaser-provider divide; nor can it seriously oppose
the construction of a cost information bank within the service. None of this
constitutes a true market, but talk of putting the market to work inside the
service has been abandoned by the government. The opposition cannot be
expected to let go so easily of this convenient fiction. In the world
outside party politics, the new arrangements hold out a modest prospect that
wasteful practices, some of them imposed by health service unions and
profligate consultants alike, can be excised.
