FT  30 APR 91 / UK Company News: Warringtons shares suspended pending
finance statement
SHARES IN Warringtons were suspended at 17 1/2 p yesterday morning pending
clarification of the commercial property company's financial position.
Alfred McAlpine,the construction group which last week announced a 1-for-2
rights issue and which owns 37 per cent of Warringtons' ordinary shares,
immediately said that it had made full provision against the investment in
its 1990 accounts.
Warringtons' announcement comes some two months after it had first revealed
it was attempting to refinance its business. Executives at the company were
not available for comment yesterday.
In February's statement, Warringtons said the marked decline in the UK
property market together with high interest rates had had aconsiderable
effect both on the capital value of its developments and its ability to
dispose of them.
In its 1990 accounts, McAlpine made a Pounds 20m below-the-line provision
against its investment in the company. The shares were obtained when it
injected its property activities into Warringtons in June 1988. Laterit also
acquired Pounds 9.5m worth of preference shares in the company.
Warringtons has not reported results since June last year, when it announced
a 26 percent rise, from Pounds 1.03m to Pounds 1.3m, in pre-tax profits for
the half year to March 31.
The shares, down from 66p in April last year, hit a low of 7p on the
statement two months ago.
The company expanded rapidly into property development and away from
contracting after new management led by Mr Graeme Jackson, chairman and
chief executive, took over early in 1987.
As at September1989, before it expanded further partly by acquiring more
properties from McAlpine, net assets per share stood at 100p. Shareholders'
funds then totalled Pounds 28m. The company had Pounds 26.13m worth of
secured short-term bank loans and overdrafts, and some Pounds 8m-worth of
long-term bank and mortgage loans. Midland is its principal banker.
