FT  24 APR 91 / International Capital Markets: Bank chief hits at settlement
systems
SYSTEMS for settling securities transactions seldom allow for the transfer
of securities only against payment, whatever they may claim, Mr Pen Kent, an
executive director of the Bank of England, warned yesterday.
Speaking at a conference in London, Mr Kent said that many countries had
improved their settlement systems to meet the requirements laid down by the
G30. Status reports on the level of development in 21 countries around the
world will be produced by the G30 in the next few days, he said.
However, few had succeeded in developing a true system of delivery against
payment, in which cash is released only against the delivery of securities,
and vice versa. This leaves a residual risk in settlement systems which
appear to offer buyers and sellers full security, he said.
'Perfect synchronisation is very difficult to achieve,' Mr Kent warned. 'In
practice, settlement systems may well involve intermediaries explicitly or
implicitly guaranteeing the performance of the principals to overcome timing
inconsistencies.'
Ideally, he said, delivery versus payment should involve real-time transfer
of cash at the time of the trade, with payments being made gross rather than
netted out.
'More work needs to be done on delivery versus payment (DVP). I do not think
most systems do achieve DVP as I have described it,' he said. 'Many systems
exchange stock against some form of payment. Legal title, however, may not
be guaranteed. Payment may not be in immediate good funds. The system may
rely on the good name of an intermediary such as a bank or depository.'
Mr Kent added that regulations which will allow the development of Taurus,
the UK's long-delayed new settlement system, will be published within days.
The delay in the regulations, to be produced by Department of Trade and
Industry, has already meant that the introduction of Taurus has been put off
from October this year to next spring at the earliest.
Mr Kent warned that the regulations, when published, would be long and
detailed, but that they have been designed 'to minimise the changes to
existing legal rights and obligations.'
