FT  20 APR 91 / The angry young men who look back in yearning: The problems
of a generation deprived of causes to write for, fight for and die for
still the nearest thing to establishment graffiti - that Mr John Osborne is
having great difficulty in putting on his latest play which, as I understand
it, would be an up-to-date version of his 1950s triumph, Look Back In Anger.
One of the themes of that play was the absence of Causes for young men to
write, fight and die for. This made them very angry. The fascists had been
seen off, and the Vietnam war hadn't started. There was no great campaign in
which a young man could sublimate his more aggressive sexual energies, with
the result that Osborne's angry young man became verbally, if not
physically, brutal to his adoring girlfriend.
When one considers the great increase in reported crime of sexual assault,
particularly among young married couples, it is clear that Mr Osborne has
not lost his sense of timing and perception; and it is a pity that he is
finding it such a struggle to persuade an actor to take the leading role in
his new play.
Both on the left and on the right, the great causes to die for appear to
have collapsed. The death of totalitarianism in eastern Europe has left a
great void in our consciences. While it is unfortunately the case that the
people of eastern Europe are still damp, poor and unhappy, they are damp,
poor and unhappy about material things, such as housing and food, and this
is strangely unsympathetic.
Now that they can vote for whom they want to keep them damp, poor and
unhappy, they are no more heroic than a Liverpool couple who have been kept
waiting rather too long for a bigger council flat.
The left, too, has suffered a terrible loss of moral direction. Its
political anger has always been aimed at the United States. I have never
understood the deep loathing that many intellectuals have for America and
all its works, but it is an undoubted phenomenon and one which acts as a
bond throughout the wine-bars of Europe.
In the 1980s, Nicaragua was the great focus for this visceral anger but the
poor dears have not yet recovered from the unfortunately democratic
demolition of the Sandinistas and have suffered even more anguish as the
former Sandinista leaders have turned their great minds to exploiting
capitalism rather than opposing it: one has even made a great success of
running a private airline. If Graham Greene had not been so old, one might
have speculated that he died of a broken heart.
And, alas, the Americans' campaign to oust Iraq from Kuwait has not lived up
to expectations. They have resolutely refused to install a puppet regime
either in Kuwait or in Iraq, as if they had never read any articles by John
Pilger. And now, unforgiveably, the Americans are trying to help the Kurds.
Where is the Machiavellianism in that? Where is the conspiracy? The Kurds
control no oil; they are a destabilising force in Turkey, America's great
hope for the eastern defence of Nato; they have no large American diaspora
to be reckoned with in the future Presidential election.
How can a young man grow into adulthood and maturity if he is being denied
the right to despise American cynicism and moral corruption?
The worst of it is that the Kurds would have been a perfect Cause -
powerless, pointless and primitive. They would have been the best hope of
those who wish to work out their own adolescent self-loathing on a people
who are pathetically grateful for any kind of support at all.
But even that Cause has been appropriated by the grown-ups. The young have
every right to be angry. Go to it, Mr Osborne.
Dominic Lawson is the editor of the Spectator.
