FT  01 MAY 91 / Letter: A healthy lesson for teaching
Sir, The testing of seven-year-olds in schools is under way. For up to six
weeks this term my daughter's education is being replaced with a routine of
assessment and testing. The experience of the first week of this process has
been damaging and disruptive.
It is not entirely the actual testing which is at fault. My daughter appears
to find that relatively unproblematic. What upsets and confuses the children
is the change in the teacher's role which the testing requires and the
difficulty of managing the rest of the class while small groups are tested.
The close relationship of co-operation, investigation and questioning which
characterises good primary education has been replaced for the period by a
teacher who is not allowed to answer children's questions and cannot be
approached for lengths of time.
The process demands that children be tested to the point of failure. That in
itself is clearly wrong educationally. But to do this at the outset of
children's education, to deny them the possibility of learning for the value
they find in it for themselves, to defeat them as they start, is the action
of a government with no genuine educational intentions,
This week William Waldegrave, the health secretary, commended the management
of Hospital Trusts and suggested they know more about delivering patient
care than his department. Why does this not apply to teaching? The
discreditable behaviour of Kenneth Clarke, the education secretary, in
continually intervening in points on teaching practice sits badly in
contrast.
The introduction of the national curriculum, despite its under-resourcing,
has required the development of pupil profiles. These provide a much more
informative picture than the levels one, two or three that these tests will
reveal and without weeks of classroom damage. Profiles could be used to
engage parents, teachers and pupils in constructive assessments.
We are fortunate that quality control in the workplace is not designed by
this government. This first round of testing at seven must be the last.
Peter Templeton,
17 New Town,
Dawley,
Telford, Shropshire
