FT  22 APR 91 / The Queen's Awards For Export and Technology 1991 (Company
Profiles): Excavators clear a path - Komatsu
WHEN Komatsu, Japan's largest construction equipment group, announced in
December 1985 that it was to begin manufacturing hydraulic excavators and
wheeled loaders in the UK, the move took many in the industry by surprise.
Komatsu had been more reluctant than most Japanese companies to set up
production overseas, preferring to supply foreign markets from its
well-managed factories in Japan.
But the previous two years had seen the Japanese construction equipment make
significant inroads into the European market, and in July 1985 the European
Community introduced anti-dumping duties on Japanese hydraulic excavators of
26.6 per cent.
That was one reason why Komatsu decided to take over a factory at Birtley
near Newcastle-upon-Tyne that had been closed one year earlier by its larger
worldwide rival, Caterpillar of the US, with the loss of 1,000 jobs. But the
chief aim was to respond more quickly to the needs of European customers.
It is in that context that the receipt by Komatsu UK of a Queen's Award for
export achievement should be seen. Komatsu's aim was to make Birtley the
European manufacturing centre for hydraulic excavators, and it remains the
Japanese company's only facility in Europe devoted solely to manufacturing.
Komatsu is now the largest hydraulic excavator producer in the UK, and with
annual sales of nearly Pounds 100m it believes it is on the way to being the
largest in Europe. It exports around 70 per cent of its output of around
2,000 units a year.
The Birtley plant has become an integral part of Komatsu's European
oper-ations. Until a few days ago, it produced a mixture of excavators and
wheeled loaders, but production of the latter has gradually been transferred
to Hanomag in Germany, which has been controlled by Komatsu since late 1989.
This will allow Komatsu to expand its range of excavators produced at
Birtley. The company makes six basic machines in the 12 to 30-tonnes class
and offers 16 variations on each product.
Mr Saichi Etchuya, Komatsu UK's managing director, says the company chose
the north-east as its home for its 'outstanding combination of skilled
labour, available resources and excellent communication links with the rest
of Britain and Europe'. The company claims it is the first Japanese group in
the north-east to receive the export award.
Komatsu's approach to running Birtley has been to adopt 'the best of both
worlds' by integrating Japanese management practices with UK resources.
Local content of its machines is around 70 per cent.
This strategy, along with increasing steps towards autonomous, localised
management, has enabled Komatsu UK to win recognition as a 'UK company'. In
October 1988 it was accepted as a full manufacturing member of the UK
Federation of Manufacturers of Construction Equipment and Cranes, and hence
of the Committee for European Construction Equipment.
Mr Etchuya says the award 'clearly recognises the contribution made by all
of our employees and the efforts of our sales and distribution outlets'.
Employment at the plant has been fairly stable in recent months at 450,
which compares with an earlier target of 370.
The award comes at a testing time for Komatsu and its rivals in the
construction equipment industry. Producers are facing a severe fall in
demand in the UK, but this has been offset by extremely buoyant conditions
in Germany, prompted by reunification.
The decision by Komatsu and other Japanese producers to set up plants in
Europe may have been forced upon them, but the environment in the early
1990s is very different from that of the mid-1980s. Around 85 per cent of
Japanese excavators sold in Europe are produced there too, mainly by Komatsu
at Birtley and a Fiat/Hitachi joint venture in Italy.
And the anti-dumping duties, imposed for a five-year period, expired quietly
last year.
