FT  07 MAY 91 / Yugoslav army on combat alert after ethnic clashes
YUGOSLAVIA'S federal army was yesterday put on combat alert following the
killing of a soldier during unprecedented anti-military demonstrations in
the Croatian port of Split, writes Laura Silber in Belgrade.
Yesterday's clashes were the first in which the army has been directly
attacked and a soldier killed.
They raised fears that the military might impose a state of emergency. The
army's statement is also seen as an ultimatum to Mr Franjo Tudjman, the
president of the republic of Croatia, who has criticised its role in
quashing inter-ethnic conflicts.
It accused Mr Tudjman of encouraging attacks on the army in Croatia and gave
him two hours to stop any more.
The military has played a key role in trying to prevent open clashes between
Serbs and Croats in recent months. Croats feel that the army's intervention
in their republic is not even-handed.
The soldier was killed yesterday when fighting broke out between about
30,000 demonstrators and army units.
The demonstrators had marched on the Yugoslav navy headquarters in protest
against the military's alleged support for an insurrection by Croatia's
Serbian minority.
Thirteen Croatian policemen were killed last Thursday in gun battles with
Serbs in the village of Borovo Selo, north-eastern Croatia. The Yugoslav
presidency authorised the army to intervene to prevent new clashes.
Croatia's government yesterday claimed professional terrorists took part in
the the ambush of the police.
The demonstrations in Split, which were organised by Croatia's independent
trade union, erupted into violence after the protesters attacked two
transporters guarding the naval base, reported Tanjug, the Yugoslav news
agency.
Mr Tudjman yesterday called on all demonstrators outside military barracks
to disperse. For three days, demonstrators have blocked army barracks in the
town of Gospic, 120 miles north of Split.
At the weekend, however, Mr Tudjman had asked local leaders in Trogir, north
of Split, why they 'did not demonstrate in front of the headquarters of the
naval base, so that the world could see this is not only a battle against
(Croatia's) leadership, but against the entire nation?'
This provided the army with an opportunity to challenge Mr Tudjman's
authority.
Political leaders in Split yesterday demanded that the army should lift its
blockade of the village of Kijevo.
Ethnic tensions were raised by the army's blockade of Kijevo, a Croatian
enclave situated in the predominantly Serbian region of Krajina. Serbs in
Krajina, roughly one-third of Croatia's territory, say they will secede to
join Serbia.
Power vacuum, Page 4
