FT  03 MAY 91 / Welcome to Robb's school of business: How a new boss is
bringing a market-driven philosophy to the drugs company
When Wellcome's new management took over last summer, rivals in the
pharmaceutical industry still called the company Wellcome University - a
slightly derisory nickname that referred as much to its allegedly
uncommercial business attitudes as to its scientific excellence.
Mr John Robb came from Beecham to succeed Sir Alfred Shepperd. Sir Alfred
had run Wellcome as a private company owned by the Wellcome Trust medical
charity and seen it through the 1986 stock market flotation.
Working with a new non-executive chairman, Sir Alistair Frame, and finance
director, Mr John Precious - who left the Tioxide pigments group just before
it was taken over by ICI last year - Mr Robb quickly finished off Wellcome
University.
The new team told staff the company would no longer pursue projects that
seemed scientifically fascinating but commercially unpromising. The group,
they said, would undertake a vigorous cost-cutting programme, including the
loss of 40 out of 400 head office jobs, to boost profit margins.
By the end of last year, the company had closed its unproductive Wellcome
Biotechnology subsidiary and sold two businesses: vaccines to Medeva and the
Calmic hygiene services group to Rentokil.
Wellcome had been prepared simply to phase out vaccine production. The
vaccine business had become a symbol of corporate history, since the
company's founder, Sir Henry Wellcome, placed such importance on this area
in the late 19th century. But the board was pleasantly surprised to discover
that others were prepared to pay Pounds 20m for the vaccine business.
Market reaction to the first financial results reported by the new
executives, for the year to September 1990, reinforced their cost-cutting
message.
Mr Robb was not displeased when Wellcome shares fell by 15 per cent on
November 15 following the announcement of pre-tax profits Pounds 25m below
analysts' forecasts.
Yesterday's events - half-year profits Pounds 15m above market expectations
and the share price up 10 per cent - were almost the reverse of six months
ago; and they show that the cost-cutting message is getting through.
Even research and development spending, which had been rising rapidly at
Wellcome and other drug companies, fell from 14.7 to 14.1 per cent of sales.
But the transformation of Wellcome into a commercial group is far from
complete. The next big step is likely to involve the sale of its
environmental health and diagnostics businesses.
Mr Robb says Wellcome will retain 'only businesses which make, or have the
potential to make, a worthwhile contribution to our earnings per share'. It
is believed that environmental health (with 1990 sales of Pounds 83m) and
diagnostics (Pounds 38m sales) do not fit that criterion and the company is
actively negotiating their disposals.
If so, Wellcome will be concentrating on prescription drugs (Pounds 1.1bn
sales last year) and consumer healthcare (Pounds 200m sales). Mr Robb, who
made his reputation building up Beecham's consumer business, regards
healthcare as a core business for Wellcome. He wants to expand it,
particularly in continental Europe, where Wellcome has virtually no presence
in non-prescription medicines.
Another objective is to shift the group's geographical balance eastwards. In
1990, 55 per cent of sales were in the US and UK. Mr Robb's wants to sell
more medicines in Japan.
Mr Robb says one of the most sensitive issues for the future will be how to
cut costs in the poor countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America. Wellcome
is extensively represented in these regions due to its founder's
philanthropic and scientific interest in tropical medicine.
The prevalence of Aids in Africa makes the issue even more difficult, since
Wellcome's Retrovir is the leading treatment for the disease.
'It would be a difficult decision to walk away from those countries, and we
would have to move very cautiously,' he says. 'But a lot of effort goes into
them, with very little return. And it is difficult to ignore unprofitable
elements in the company.'
