FT  25 APR 91 / Gorbachev agrees to relax grip on the rebel republics
REBELLIOUS Soviet republics will be allowed to pursue their plans for full
independence under the constitution following a landmark agreement between
embattled President Mikhail Gorbachev and Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian
leader, on a new union treaty.
The deal may open the way for a much broader base of political consensus and
could bring further agreements on a new government composed of different
political forces. It also saved Mr Gorbachev from serious challenge during
the first day of a plenary meeting of the Communist Party's Central
Committee, at which some hardliners were expected to press for his
resignation.
A joint statement, published yesterday after being signed on Tuesday night
by the two men and eight other leaders of Soviet republic, commits them to
an agreement on such a treaty, followed by a new constitution and fresh
union elections, as soon as possible.
The plan agreed yesterday would also explicitly allow the six other
republics - the three Baltic republics of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia plus
Armenia, Georgia and Moldavia - the right not to sign a union agreement.
These republics were not represented at the meeting. The agreement in turn
implies, although the phrasing is vague, that the six could instead proceed
to full independence.
The statement warns that those republics would then be expected to settle
their accounts with the union in hard currency. Mr Yuri Kahn, Estonia's
permanent envoy to Moscow, welcomed the declaration as 'progress' even
though it would mean paying more for energy and other supplies.
'Of course, economically it will be very difficult but it is a very
important step in the direction of a market economy. We understand that
sooner or later we must go to world market prices,' he said. Politically, it
had the merit of recognising the Baltic states' 'legal right not to sign the
union treaty'.
Mr Gorbachev's coup in securing agreement on some of the most fundamental
issues facing the Soviet Union opens the possibility of further talks on a
new form of government bringing in different political forces - or, as some
people are calling for, a more powerful Federation Council uniting leaders
of the republics under Mr Gorbachev's chairmanship.
It also suggests that the Soviet president is moving away from the hardline
camp on whose support he has relied in recent months, back to an alliance
with more radical forces. In so doing, he risks the wrath of groups such as
the Soyuz faction in the union parliament, which has already called for a
special congress to review his performance. Mr Gorbachev got the agreement -
published yesterday only in the late editions of Pravda, the organ of the
Communist Party central committee - just as the central committee was
gathering for a plenary meeting at which hardliners had threatened to raise
the issue of his future as general secretary.
First indications were that he had avoided any serious challenge. Members of
the central committee said that specific motions to unseat him had been kept
off the agenda.
The key to the agreement with the republics apparently lies in the final
paragraph which says that its signatories realise that 'these measures are
inconceivable without a fundamental increase in the role of the union
republics.'
A spokesman for the government suggested this would be achieved through
economic agreements between the centre and republics.
The anti-crisis programme spells out 10 types of economic agreement to be
concluded with the republics, in areas ranging from price liberalisation and
privatisation to the formation of the budget.
Mr Yeltsin's press spokeswoman said that she believed the statement would
lead to the start of the 'round table' talks proposed by the Russian leader.
At the same time, Mr Yeltsin has lent his authority to a call for an end to
strikes and for 'strict compliance with current laws'; to a 'special regime'
of work in basic industries; and to a statement which characterised as
'intolerable' any attempts to attain political ends through 'incitement to
civil disobedience, strikes or calls for the overthrow of the existing
lawfully elected state power bodies'.
It was not clear last night whether the agreement would succeed in ending
the current wave of strikes, in spite of Mr Yeltsin's considerable authority
over striking miners in the Russian Federation.
Meanwhile, the Soviet army appeared to be keeping up the pressure in
Lithuania by taking over the Agro-Industrial Bank in Vilnius, the capital,
in spite of the start of talks between the central government and Lithuania
and promises by the Kremlin to resolve disputes by political means.
Editorial Comment, Page 20
