FT  24 APR 91 / Survey of China (2): Quest for allies in an uncertain world
 -Foreign policy is in turmoil
FOR China, as for many other countries who have for decades preyed on the
superpower conflict between the Soviet Union and the US, these are
distressing times.
Where is the counterweight to 'American hegemony', so amply and effectively
demonstrated, from Peking's point of view, in the Gulf War? Is Japan about
to rise afresh, encouraged by the US, as a military force in the Pacific?
How are the European powers, obsessed with upheavals in eastern Europe,
altering their perceptions of Asia? And how will demands for independence by
Soviet republics in central Asia upset Peking's grip on Tibet, Xinjiang and
Mongolia?
China's first instinctive response has been to offer succour to President
Gorbachev. Peking cannot feel comfortable as the sole remaining torchbearer
for international socialism. Whatever the differences with Moscow over the
correct path for the development of a socialist state, the wholesale
discrediting of the socialist model is of as little comfort to China as it
is to Moscow.
Aggravating Gorbachev's misfortunes would only increase the risk that chaos
inside a disintegrating Soviet Union would spread up to, and across, China's
central Asian borders, perhaps fomenting unrest in its own minority areas.
By standing firmly for stronger central control, and by resorting to the
military for help, Gorbachev has struck a resonant chord among China's
leadership.
There is, therefore, powerful symbolism in China's recent SFr1.5bn
'commodity loans' to Moscow - the first made to the Soviet Union by its
one-time protege, and Peking's friendliest gesture to Moscow in decades.
Next month's visit to Moscow by Jiang Zemin, China's Prime Minister, is also
the first of such seniority since Mao Zedong went there in 1957.
Alongside the symbolic succour, there is also powerful self interest. China
is keen to acquire sophisticated Soviet military hardware, in particular Su
27 aircraft. Jiang Zemin is expected to discuss the matter while in Moscow,
and a deal is expected to be signed before July.
The Gulf War has also provided a sharp shock to China's foreign policy
planners, but in diplomatic terms has been handled with dexterity. Support
for the allied cause in the UN won support in Washington. Even when Qian
Qichen, the foreign minister, opted to abstain in the UN vote authorising
the use of force against Iraq, he managed to do this without antagonising
the allies: President Bush agreed to see him on the day following the vote,
apparently against the advice of advisers. He took the view that China could
have vetoed the resolution.
At the same time, Qian managed to demonstrate through its abstention that
China remains committed to an independent foreign policy, and to its support
for Third World countries. He also preserved China's relationship with Iraq,
an important customer for Chinese arms.
China is nevertheless walking a tightrope in its relations with the US,
which were traumatised following the Tiananmen massacre two years ago. Qian
has said that the war against Iraq was 'a big hegemonist power versus a
small hegemonist'. The US in turn is harbouring anger over China's extensive
arms trade with volatile countries in the Middle East.
For China, the Gulf War was not just a striking demonstration of US military
might: it heightened anxiety over the emergence of the US as the single
dominant world superpower. There is also a nagging awareness that in the
post-Cold War era, the US needs China less than it used to.
American keenness to get Japan to take on a bigger peacekeeping role in the
Pacific - in particular through a larger naval role - also prompts alarm.
Memories of Japan as a regional military power are painful still.
Closer at hand, conflict looms with the US in the improbably-linked areas of
trade and human rights. Ever since the Tiananmen massacre, the US Congress
has put China's poor human rights record under the microscope. The recent
visit to the US by the Dalai Lama has heightened antagonism.
These issues have become linked with trade ever since Congress opted to use
the annual debate over extension of Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status to
trading partners as a means of punishing tyrannical governments. China
argues that this is an unacceptable intrusion into its internal affairs.
US Congressmen argue in turn that it is an internal US affair whether it
gives favourable trading status to a country or not. The fact that China now
has one of the largest visible trade surpluses with the US - more than
Dollars 10bn last year - only exacerbates the conflict.
The MFN debate starts in earnest early in June. Betting men say that, after
a bumpy ride, China will regain MFN privileges for another year. To lose
them would inflict immense damage to China's external trade and would savage
Sino-US relations.
China's response to uncertainties in relations with both the US and the
Soviet Union has been to forge new friendships where possible. A recent tour
of seven European countries by Qian Qichen was part of such a strategy.
Improved relations with India - which have been in deep chill since a short
border war in 1962 - are likely to be symbolised by a visit to Delhi later
this year by Li Peng, China's prime minister. This would be the first visit
to the Indian capital by China's head of government since the late Zhou
Enlai in 1960.
Other significant developments include decisions over the past year by Saudi
Arabia, Indonesia and Singapore to abandon diplomatic recognition of Taiwan
in favour of Peking. These constitute an important breakthrough in China's
long term diplomatic strategy of isolating Taipei. They also reinforce
China's position at the heart of the Third World community of nations, and
symbolise an easing of fears in south east Asia over expansionist communism.
These improvements give much-needed solace as China nurses anxiety over the
global power balance, but do nothing to alter the country's reflexes in
times of uncertainty. As Li Peng emphasised only two weeks ago: when 'the
old global structure has disintegrated', the priority must be to 'rely on
ourselves, work hard, and build the nation through thrift and diligence'.
