FT  24 APR 91 / Survey of China (7): US Congress holds the key - David
Dodwell on China's need to guard its trade and investment
MENTION MFN to Peking's trade officials and you get a beneficent smile and a
glib 'No problem'. Mention MFN in Hong Kong or Guangdong, and you see sweat
on the temples.
By June 3, President Bush must agree to renew for another year the Most
Favoured Nation status that assures China low-tariff exports to the US.
Signs are that in spite of deep reservations, President Bush will agree. But
within the following 60 days, it is likely that the US Congress will summon
the two thirds majority it needs to veto the renewal. All will then hang on
a Senate vote.
In spite of complacency in Peking, the consequences of losing MFN status
would be grave for China.
Exports to the US would fall by at least 50 per cent, according to the
American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong. Guangdong province, with most at
stake, would lose about Dollars 2bn in exports, with over 1m workers losing
their jobs. Guangdong's GDP would slump by 10 per cent.
Describing the 'deadly impact' of losing MFN privileges, Mr John Kamm, then
President of Hong Kong's American Chamber of Commerce, told Congressional
hearings last year: 'The open coastal provinces and cities - the China of
reform - will be hard hit. Their leaders - supporters of the deposed party
secretary Zhao Ziyang - severely undermined by rapid falls in living
standards which owe much to export earnings.'
This evidence, which played an important part last year in persuading US
congressional critics of China to renew MFN status, is about to be replayed
in Washington. If anything, the mood is even more grim. Regrets in the wake
of the Gulf war over the price paid for supporting Saddam Hussein over past
decades have prompted US leaders to toughen their stance against regimes
they regard as tyrannical.
Protectionist sentiment in the US has also hardened. China admits a trade
surplus with the US, even though it does not acknowledge that a large
proportion of China's re-exports through Hong Kong are in fact exports to
the US.
An array of administrative measures in China to trim imports have also
aroused Washington's anger. They were introduced to tackle rampant inflation
inside China, as well as to shore up foreign exchange reserves ahead of a
debt-repayment peak in 1992-93.
The result has been to give China its first visible trade surplus since
1984. Exports rose 18.1 per cent in 1990 to Dollars 62bn, while imports fell
9.8 per cent to Dollars 53bn. A surplus on invisibles boosted the current
account surplus to Dollars 13.1bn.
While textile exports have struggled against competition particularly from
Pakistan, and petroleum exports have slipped because of mounting domestic
demand, China is expected to retain a strong competitive advantage in coming
years in the export of consumer electronics - including TVs, radios,
microwaves and computers - and in pharmaceuticals and machine tools.
Tourism has also begun to recover after Tiananmen. After a 23 per cent slump
between 1988 and 1989, more than 27m tourists visited China last year, a 12
per cent improvement on the year. Tourism revenues have recovered to the
1988 level of Dollars 2.2bn after a 20 per cent fall in 1989.
Perhaps to the alarm of Peking's more conservative economic planners,
international trade has risen in importance to assume a considerable
significance in the domestic economy.
Foreign investment flows have played a parallel role to trade. Peking says
foreign investment amounted to a record Dollars 6.57bn in 1990, a leap of
17.3 per cent from 1989. Since both Japan and the US say their investment
was down, the impetus came largely from Hong Kong and Taiwan.
Even more encouraging from Peking's point of view is that hotel and property
deals - which accounted for a large share of investment through the 1980s -
have slumped. According to the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and
Trade, about 90 per cent of investment last year was in manufacturing,
regarded as being of much greater intrinsic benefit to the economy.
In a bid to attract more high technology investment, China has set up 27 new
high-tech zones across the country, lifting the total to 38. Foreign
investors in the zones will pay just 15 per cent income tax - compared with
the standard rate of 33 per cent. If they export 70 per cent of their
output, tax falls still further to 10 per cent. The government's aim is to
boost high-tech output value from the current level of RMB7bn to RMB25bn by
1996.
Prospective investors nevertheless continue to complain that doing business
in China remains testing. Many fail to anticipate how many years it can take
to conclude a deal.
Equally commonly, 'cheap' labour can become expensive when undisclosed
bonuses and subsidies are added. A lack of control over land-use fees,
energy costs, or provisions for infrastructure can also provide nightmares
for financial controllers back at company headquarters.
These and more general factors point towards a bleaker investment climate in
the early part of the 1990s: the higher priorities of reconstruction in the
Gulf, forging links in eastern Europe, or simply battening down against
domestic recession, mean that many traditional western investors will not be
running hotfoot to China.
However, strong and ongoing investor interest from Hong Kong and Taiwan in
China's south, and perhaps from Japan and South Korea in the north, may help
to insulate the country from an otherwise more difficult foreign investment
climate.
Either way, whether Peking's conservative leaders like it or not, China's
doors to the outside world have been firmly opened. The importance of trade
and investment to the national economy is now so great that the price of
closing the doors is probably too high to contemplate. This in the longer
term has to provide reformers with confidence that economic trends will
eventually play into their hands.
