FT  27 APR 91 / Merchant bank goes into administration
EDINGTON, the five-year-old merchant banking arm of Henry Cooke, the
Manchester-based financial services group, went into administration
yesterday to safeguard Pounds 20m of depositors' funds after a run of
withdrawals by local authorities.
Mr David Adams, chief executive of the Henry Cooke Group, blamed the
difficulties of Chancery, the London financial services group, which went
into administration in February. 'Local authorities have about Pounds 26m
frozen in Chancery and their advisers have been telling them to be very wary
of smaller banks,' he said.
The result was that local authorities, which temporarily withdraw funds at
the end of their financial year to balance their own books, have not been
putting them back on deposit shortly afterwards, as before. Up to Pounds 15m
was involved and that caused liquidity shortages.
'The bank's balance sheet remains strong,' Mr Adams added. 'Our action has
been taken with the full knowledge of the Bank of England. By going into
administration, we can ensure an orderly winding down and all depositors
will get their money back.'
The action also protects the more important Henry Cooke Lumsden (HCL)
stockbroking arm of the group. Both HCL and Edington are wholly owned by the
group, in which Refuge Assurance has a 20 per cent stake.
HCL, one of the biggest stockbrokers outside London, has 27,000 clients and
about Pounds 1bn under management. It survived the 1987 crash with only 5
per cent cuts in staff. It now employs about 220 people in Manchester, Leeds
and London.
Edington has had a bad debt arising from a fraud in the past two years, but
Mr Adams said that had been well contained. It resulted in changes in
Edington's senior management, however, including the departure of Mr Angus
Scrimgeour, its co-founder.
Chancery had a similar type of deposit book to Edington, attracting local
authorities and some corporate funds.
Lending activities were different and Chancery suffered in the recession in
property markets. Edington was involved in the relatively low-risk,
low-priced and well spread northern merger and acquisition market, as well
as regional lending for corporate expansion.
Edington's loans will now be managed by the administrator. The process of
winding down is thought unlikely to take less than two years.
