FT  26 APR 91 / Exxon may face Valdez criminal trial
EXXON faces the prospect of a costly, lengthy and highly- publicised
criminal trial unless it agrees to raise substantially the Dollars 1.1bn
settlement it reached with the US and Alaska governments over the Exxon
Valdez oil spill.
The oil company's liability for damages from the March 1989 disaster has
been reopened by a US judge's decision to reject as inadequate the Dollars
100m criminal fine which was included in the settlement. The remaining
Dollars 1bn is a settlement of civil damages.
Exxon said yesterday that 'while we are carefully considering the
implications of the judge's decision, we are continuing our preparation for
trial.'
The company has 30 days to decide whether to withdraw its guilty pleas to
four violations of environmental law, and thereby face a criminal trial.
Judge Russel Holland indicated that he would treat the case as a priority,
raising the prospect of a trial as soon as June or July.
The federal justice department warned that the rejection of the criminal
fine also threatens the Dollars 1bn civil settlement. Judge Holland said
that the fine, although the biggest in an environmental case, was not a
strong enough deterrent.
'I'm afraid these fines send the wrong message, suggesting that spills are a
cost of business that can be absorbed,' he said.
Ms Hope Babcock, general counsel for the National Audubon Society, a
Washington-based conservation group, predicted that Exxon would return to
the bargaining table on the criminal settlement, but that the justice
department and the Alaska state government might also seek higher civil
damages.
According to Ms Hope, a trial would result in a fine of at least Dollars
700m, with an indeterminate upper limit, especially if the case was heard by
a jury.
Pressure on Exxon over the disaster has increased on several fronts in
recent weeks. The US government earlier this month published a summary of
scientific studies which indicate that environmental damage caused by the
spill was much greater than initially thought.
