FT  18 APR 91 / GPA warns on profits despite 66% rise in lease revenues
GUINNESS Peat Aviation (GPA), the world's largest aircraft leasing company,
warned yesterday that it would show a modest growth in profits compared with
the previous year, despite a 66 per cent rise in lease revenues.
Mr Maurice Foley, GPA's president, said the company's rate of profits growth
had slowed significantly. 'Unless there is a remarkable last quarter, our
profit this year will be relatively modest,' he added.
He also said it was unlikely, although not impossible, that the company
would be floated on the stock market this year. Mr Foley suggested that a
flotation was more probable next year.
Although the company will not release its results for the latest 12 months
until June, it decided to announce its aircraft lease revenue figures for
the year ended March 31, 1991 in an effort to bolster confidence in its
business prospects.
Mr James King, head of the company's aircraft leasing division, conceded
that the past year had been particularly difficult for the airline industry.
The sector is estimated to have lost about Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.2bn) in the
past six months because of the combination of the Gulf crisis, higher fuel
prices and the general economic slowdown.
But he argued that some City forecasts were excessively pessimistic. Mr Tony
Ryan, GPA's chairman, also added: 'There has been an over-reaction to the
short-term factors which have adversely affected many airlines in recent
months. As a result, some commentators' perceptions of the future prospects
of the civil aviation sector have been unduly gloomy.'
Contracted lease revenues rose 66 per cent from Dollars 5bn to Dollars
8.3bn. GPA said it sold or leased 176 aircraft to its airline customers, a
17 per cent increase over the year before. It also sold a further 40
aircraft to investors on whose behalf it continues to manage the related
aircraft leases.
At the end of the latest financial year, the company owned or leased-in 306
aircraft compared to 240 during the previous 12 months. GPA took delivery of
82 new aircraft in the last year, all of which it said had been placed with
customers. The company said only two available aircraft were not leased at
the end of March.
After-tax profits of the Shannon-based group showed a 9 per cent rise to
Dollars 196m for the nine months to December 31 compared to the previous
year.
