FT  25 APR 91 / America's class act: The significance of US education
reforms
'Think about every problem, every challenge we face today. The solution to
each starts with education' - President George Bush unveiling the America
2000 Strategy.
There is a scene in My Fair Lady in which Professor Higgins begins to dance
about, unable to contain his delight. 'I think she's got it]' he exclaims as
Eliza Doolittle, his pupil, starts to talk like a lady.
It would be an exaggeration to claim that President Bush has suddenly got
the hang of educational reform. But the bold strategy outlined last week has
put congressional Democrats on the defensive and delighted some
educationalists. Mr Albert Shanker, of the American Federation of Teachers
(and no particular friend of the White House), was not happy with every
small detail. But he graciously described the package as a 'major turning
point in the history of American education'. No previous US president, he
said, had taken such a detailed interest in the future of school education.
Mr Lamar Alexander, Mr Bush's eloquent education secretary, can claim most
of the credit. Unlike many cabinet appointees, Mr Alexander knows his
subject: as governor of Tennessee in the 1980s, he was one of the first
state leaders to recognise the importance of school reform.
The America 2000 programme bears a striking - if unacknowledged -
resemblance to the UK educational reforms of the last Thatcher government.
The Thatcher strategy had three main elements: a new national curriculum;
measures to promote competition and parental choice; and business-funded
schools to 'break the mould' of bureaucratic local authority schools.
Each element is precisely mirrored in the White House plan. The main
difference is that Mr Bush lacks a British prime minister's powers. The US
constitution grants state and local governments primary responsibility for
education. Federal educational spending accounts for only about 6 per cent
of the total school budget. With few direct powers and little financial
leverage, Mr Bush must rely heavily on his powers of persuasion.
The parallel to the UK's national curriculum is a set of new 'world
standards' to be developed in each of five core subjects: English, maths,
science, history and geography. Mr David Kearns, the deputy education
secretary and former president of Xerox, argues that US businesses began to
make progress in the 1980s only when they started comparing themselves with
'the best in the world'. US schools are now being set the same challenge.
To measure performance in the core subjects, Mr Bush is planning the first
national examination system in US history, to be known as American
Achievement Tests. These will be taken at the ages of about 10, 14 and 18.
National tests could make a substantial difference: for the first time it
will be possible to compare performance not only between school districts
but between states. In future, Mississippi parents will be aware if their
children's results are lower than those of students in New York or
California or - in theory - Tokyo.
Critics argue that national tests will kill educational diversity and
inhibit teachers. They say US children are already burdened with too many
tests. Mr Alexander's response is convincing: the new exams will replace,
rather than add to, existing tests. They are intended to be of a higher
quality than the multiple-choice quizzes on which most American children are
reared: students will be expected to write essays and solve complex
mathematical problems as is commonplace in Europe and Japan. 'Teaching to
the test' may, therefore, promote better teaching. Finally, students in
different states may not need to take the same exams: different tests
calibrated to the same educational standards (rather like different A-level
exam boards in England) may be used.
For constitutional reasons, the national tests will be voluntary. But
colleges and employers will be encouraged to use them for selection
purposes. Presidential citations will be awarded to students who do
exceptionally well.
The second main plank in Mr Bush's strategy mirrors UK efforts to promote
competition between schools. The Thatcher government passed legislation in
1988 giving parents a wider choice of schools within local authorities.
Schools were also given the right to 'opt out' of local authority control
and be funded directly by Whitehall.
Mr Alexander would love to possess such powers. 'I don't know how we ever
got into this situation in America of denying a broad choice of schools to
parents,' he says. 'Everything else in America we choose: our cars, our
cities, our jobs, where we live.' Eight states have already passed 'school
choice' reforms. But the administration intends to inject momentum into the
choice movement by offering about Dollars 200m in incentives to states and
local governments that pass legislation promoting competition. Mr Alexander
also wants to revise the federal government's Dollars 6bn programme for
disadvantaged and under-achieving pupils (known as Chapter 1) so that
'federal dollars follow the child to whatever extent state and local
policies permit'.
Measures to permit greater choice among public schools are likely to be
grudgingly accepted, although there is little evidence that they raise
educational standards. Critics rightly worry that schools may end up
selecting pupils rather than parents selecting schools. If that happens, the
already troubling segregation by race and class caused by distinct black and
white residential districts could be exacerbated.
What most alarms critics, however, is the suggestion that, as a result of
choice policies, public money might flow to private and Catholic schools. Mr
Alexander points out that the GI bill subsidising the college education of
ex-servicemen after the Second World War did not stipulate that the money
must be spent in the public sector. By analogy he would like disadvantaged
children to be able to spend Chapter 1 dollars in private schools. Opponents
say this would wreck the finances of already underfunded inner-city public
schools.
The third main element in the Bush strategy closely parallels the British
city technology colleges initiative. The Thatcher government sought business
backing for the creation of new schools that would act as 'beacons of
excellence' for the public sector.
Mr Bush is doing the same - only on a grander scale. Under the plan, the
business community will raise Dollars 150-Dollars 200m to fund the New
American Schools Development Corporation, a new non-profit organisation.
This will award contracts next year to between three and seven research and
development (R&amp;D) teams drawn from companies, universities, think tanks and
others. The R&amp;D teams' task will be to 're-invent the public school'. The
goal is to have at least 535 new-style schools - at least one for each
congressional district - in operation by 1996.
It is easy to mock the notion of 'reinventing' public schools. But the plan
has real potential: schools are arguably one of the few institutions that
have failed to adapt to great social and economic changes in the 20th
century. Mr Alexander expects the R&amp;D teams to begin by 'erasing all
conventional assumptions and constraints' about schooling, such as the
calendar and schedule, the curriculum, the class size, and the nature of
learning materials. The only constraint is that the new schools should
achieve the standards set in the new national exams at a cost no greater
than that of conventional schools. US ingenuity just might produce an
educational innovation the rest of the world will want to copy.
Mr Alexander carefully describes the reform package as a 'national strategy'
rather than a federal policy. At a cost of only Dollars 690m, the programme
can hardly be said to be usurping the educational role of the states. There
are certainly big omissions: the White House is offering neither new money
nor new ideas in the vital area of pre-school education. It is doing nothing
to reduce vast disparities in educational spending in rich and poor
districts (it is not even trying to shame states into making equal
educational opportunity a reality). But some of the proposals - particularly
national exams and research into new schools - deserve congressional and
state support.
The strategy cannot hope to raise educational standards quickly: no policy
framed in Washington could do that. But there are enough ideas to take the
bite out of criticism that Mr Bush lacks a domestic agenda. To the
consternation of Democrats, the 'education president' is in danger of living
up to his name.
