FT  24 APR 91 / Time runs out for trading in the pit
PIT trading of equity options is to be abolished in favour of a screen-based
system, under recommendations to be sent to members of the London Traded
Options Market and the London International Financial Futures Exchange
today.
Officials said the merger of LTOM and Liffe was still planned before the end
of the year.
But certain issues, such as trading procedures at the new exchange, will
have to be re-examined if members agree to the proposal.
Only index-linked options - the FT-SE 100 contract and the FT-SE Eurotrack
100 contract due to be launched in June - will still be traded under the
open-outcry system.
Job losses among the 40 or so firms which trade on LTOM are expected, at
least in the short term. A senior dealer said the reaction among traders
when word of the proposals filtered into the market was one of shock. 'It's
all happening too quickly,' he said with many dealers worrying that they
could soon become redundant.
The change is intended to tackle chronically low volume in the stock options
market. In the US, the volume of equity derivatives is equivalent to 140 per
cent of the underlying stock market, compared with just 20 per cent in
London.
Unreliable price quotations deter retail investors, while dealers dislike
the lack of anonymity which often means revealing their trading in the stock
market.
'The only practical way we can see to achieve anonymity is through a fully
automated trading system,' said Mr Michael Jenkins, chief executive of
Liffe.
Liffe and LTOM are proposing a move to 'a fully automated market which, in
addition to allowing anonymity, would also incorporate automated quotation
mechanisms for all market-makers, small-order automated execution and a
facility for negotiating block trades'.
But some of the large institutions, which account for most of the business
in the options market, were uncertain whether a screen-based system would
increase turnover.
Despite such reservations, changes which will promote a successful merger
will be welcomed by the Bank of England.
Having initially played the role of marriage broker, the Bank is keen to see
the union consumated and is unlikely to be concerned by the relegation of
share options to a trading screen.
