FT  25 APR 91 / Survey of Greece (14): Foreign visitors set to fall at least
10% - How the country's tourist bodies and hoteliers are trying to win back
lost trade
ZEUS XENIOS, the ancient Greek god in charge of offering hospitality to
strangers, seems to have turned his back on the tourist industry. For the
third time in six years, a disastrous plunge in bookings threatens to wreck
a promising year for earnings.
Once again, a US travel warning to its nationals to avoid the eastern
Mediterranean because of the risk of terrorist attacks following the Gulf
war is scaring off the high-spending sector of the Greek market: Japanese
honeymooners, incentive groups and conference organisers as well as the
older Americans who like cruising in the Aegean.
Similar advice in 1985 was blamed for two unfavourable seasons that
followed. Then came a terrorist attack aboard a cruise ship in 1988. This
year a series of bomb explosions damaged foreign bank branches and tourist
buses and a badly aimed rocket narrowly missed a luxury hotel. There were no
injuries but concerns over visitors' safety have revived.
As in the past, the Greek Tourist Organisation (EOT) is trying to win back
lost trade through heavier advertising. This year's campaign will cost Dr6bn
(Dollars 33m). It is being co-ordinated for the first time by a group of
Athens advertising agencies with international affiliations. This, it is
hoped, will prove more effective than relying on haphazard media-buying by
EOT offices abroad.
Senior Greek tourism officials have visited the big tour operators in
Britain and Germany, their two main markets, as well as the US, offering
reassurances about airport security and the government's determination to
crack down on terrorism.
'We constantly point out that Athens is still one of the safest cities in
Europe for visitors, in spite of what has been going on,' says Mr Nikos
Iatrakos, EOT's secretary-general. 'However, we still face a considerable
drop in numbers this year, 10 per cent at minimum but perhaps as much as 20
per cent.'
In 1990, tourist arrivals reached a record 9.3m, a 9 per cent increase over
the previous year's 8.5m, the average figure for most of the past decade.
Official foreign exchange inflows totalled Dollars 2.57bn, up from Dollars
1.89bn in 1989.
But if credit card purchases, cruise earnings and tour operators'
commissions paid abroad are counted in, overall tourist earnings rose to
Dollars 4.1bn, almost 6 per cent of GDP. Income for 1991 was expected to be
well over Dollars 5bn but 'now we'll be lucky to maintain last year's
levels,' says Mr Iatrakos.
The worst-affected region this year will undoubtedly be Athens. Despite its
chronic traffic and pollution problems it remains the focus for most
conferences and incentive tours and a starting point for the classical tours
favoured by the Americans and Japanese.
Hopes of substantially boosting tourism in the capital during the 1990s
suffered a setback last autumn with the failure of Athens' bid to stage the
1996 Olympic Games.
Advance bookings for the Mediterranean Games in July, one of several major
sports events planned as dress rehearsals for an Athens Olympics, are
disappointing, according to the organisers.
But amid the general gloom, tourist officials note one optimistic pointer
for the future: the sale of the 100-year-old Grande Bretagne Hotel, to a
Dutch-based investment company which has transferred management to Ciga, the
international hotel group. As a family-run establishment, Athens' best-known
luxury hotel could barely make ends meet, with occupancy averaging only 55
per cent in recent years.
Ciga is expected to invest considerably in refurbishing to bring the Grande
Bretagne's facilities up to the standard of its other traditional luxury
hotels around Europe. 'The presence of a really top-quality hotel in Athens
will upgrade the surrounding area and encourage other hotels to try harder,'
says Mr Iatrakos.
The government is already trying to ensure that older first-class hotels
around Greece, including some in spectacular settings, are upgraded to the
standards of increasingly demanding guests. It is breaking up a
state-controlled hotel chain and offering individual units to private
operators on long-term leases.
Improving hotel facilities is one of the easier ways of attracting more
older, wealthier tourists, something Greece has been trying to do for years
but without conspicuous success.
With 433,000 hotel beds, Greece has no shortage of accommodation. But many
large island resort hotels built in the boom years of the 1970s have not
been maintained to international tour operators' standards. Occupancy levels
in Corfu and Rhodes have slipped in recent years.
It is no coincidence that the one area where bookings picked up sharply once
the Gulf war ended was Crete, which boasts some of the best-run hotels in
Greece. Last year the island drew over 1.7m tourists, close to 25 per cent
of total arrivals.
'Large-scale tourism didn't start in Crete till the early 1980s. The resort
hotels are newer and better managed and many of the mistakes made elsewhere
were avoided. As a result, we get a very high proportion of return
visitors,' says Mr Thanos Habipis, chairman of the Cretan Hoteliers'
Federation.
