FT  03 MAY 91 / Leading Article: Antarctica's frozen future
ONLY A short time ago, it seemed as if the long debate between those who
want to turn Antarctica into a world nature reserve and the proponents of a
regulated exploitation of its potential mineral resources, would never be
resolved. A group of nations, led by Australia and France and convinced that
an environmental disaster would overtake the frozen continent if it were
opened to mineral exploitation, insisted that the 39 signatories of the 1961
Antarctica treaty should impose a permanent ban on mining. Others, such as
Britain, Japan and the US, considered it was wrong to commit future
generations to policies which might no longer be appropriate in a very
different economic, political and environmental context.
Yet after the latest conference of member countries in Madrid, it suddenly
looks as if a compromise on this contentious issue is in the offing. All the
member countries realised, after the deadlock reached at their previous
meeting in Chile last November, that the necessary consensus for decisions
could be achieved only if they abandoned their entrenched positions. The
proposed 50-year moratorium on mining prospection and exploitation offers a
politically acceptable way out of the impasse, though it appears to favour
the environmentalists more than the mining lobby.
Britain, the US and Japan have always argued that their main objection to
the Franco-Australian position was that it involved a permanent ban on
mining activities. They made it clear that, if the new arrangements allowed
the exploitation of Antarctica's mineral wealth in the long run, that would
be acceptable, given an agreement on the duration of the ban. Yet it appears
that the moratorium, in the compromise proposed by Norway and Spain, would
be virtually open-ended. It would remain in effect even after the expiry of
the 50-year period, unless a 75 per cent majority of the treaty's
consultative members decided otherwise, an unrealistic prospect.
Whether such a long moratorium is in the best interests of the international
community remains a moot point. Certainly, in a world increasingly subject
to environmental disasters, ranging from the explosion at the Chernobyl
nuclear power station to the horrific oil fires of Kuwait, it is tempting to
embrace the idea that an environmental safe haven can be created somewhere
on this scarred planet.
Yet the arguments on the other side should not be minimised. Though no
valuable mineral deposits have yet been discovered on the continent,
Antarctica's coastal shelf is estimated to contain substantial oil
resources. These might be sorely needed in the event of a future world oil
shortage, either as the result of depletion of existing reserves or military
conflicts in traditional oil-producing regions.
Rather than opting for the extreme course of taking an area equivalent to
one-tenth of the world's land and sea surface out of economic circulation
for 50 years or more, it would be better to search for an intermediate
solution. A shorter moratorium of perhaps 20 to 30 years would allow
sufficient time for international regulations to be worked out to ensure
that mineral extraction, when and if it eventually takes place, is conducted
within generally accepted environmental norms. It is unfortunate that the
consensus required by the Antarctica treaty appears virtually to have ruled
out such a solution.
