FT  16 APR 91 / FT Law Report: Worker gets damages plus pension
SMOKER v LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY
WOOD v BRITISH COAL CORPORATION
House of Lords (Lord McKay, Lord Chancellor, Lord Bridge of Harwich, Lord
Brandon of Oakbrook, Lord Templeman, Lord Lowry): April 11 1991
A DISABILITY pension to which an employee has contributed is a form of
insurance, and is therefore not deductible from damages payable to him by
his employer for personal injuries arising from the employer's negligence or
breach of statutory duty.
The House of Lords so held when dismissing an appeal by the London Fire and
Civil Defence Authority from Mr Justice Auld's decision that it could not
deduct ill-health and injury pensions and injury gratuity from damages for
personal injuries payable to its employee, Mr AF Smoker; and when dismissing
an appeal by the British Coal Corporation (BCC) from a Court of Appeal
decision that it could not deduct disability pension from damages payable to
its employee, Mr Roy Wood.
LORD TEMPLEMAN said that in the first appeal, Mr Smoker was employed as a
professional fireman by the Greater London Council.
On February 7 1985 he was disabled in an accident caused by his employer's
negligence or breach of statutory duty. He lost Pounds 13,525 which, but for
the accident, he would have earned between December 15 1985 and December 15
1987, when he would have retired.
Between December 15 1985 and December 15 1987 he received Pounds 9,926
ill-health pension, injury gratuity, and injury pension from the fire
authority.
The question was whether the authority must pay Pounds 13,525 for loss of
earnings, in which case Mr Smoker would be Pounds 9,926 better off than he
would have been had the accident not occurred, or whether it was only liable
to pay Pounds 3,598 on the ground that the damages must be reduced by the
amount of pension and gratuity received.
When Mr Smoker became a fireman he became a member of the Firemen's Pension
Scheme. He contributed 10.75 per cent of his wages to the scheme, and the
fire authority contributed twice as much.
In the second appeal, Mr Wood was injured on April 14 1982, in the service
of the BCC, in an accident for which the BCC was 75 per cent responsible.
The BCC's liability for damages was assessed at Pounds 54,959, after
deducting Pounds 8,699 on account of pension receipts to which Mr Wood
became entitled under the Mineworkers' Pension Scheme.
The question was whether the Pounds 8,699 was deductible.
Under the Mineworkers' Pension Scheme, Mr Wood contributed 5.14 per cent of
his pay, and the BCC contributed a like amount.
In Mr Smoker's case, Mr Justice Auld decided he was bound by a House of
Lords decision not to allow deduction of the pensions and gratuity. The fire
authority now appealed direct to the House. In Mr Wood's case the Court of
Appeal held that the pension receipts were not deductible from damages. The
BCC now appealed.
In Bradburn v Great Western Railway (1874) LR 10 Ex 1 it was held in a
personal injuries action that a sum received by the plaintiff under an
accident insurance policy could not be taken into account in reduction of
damages.
Baron Pigott said 'there is no reason or justice in setting off what the
plaintiff has entitled himself to under a contract . . . in the event of an
accident'.
In Payne v Railway Executive (1952) 1 KB 26 the Court of Appeal declined to
allow the defendant to set off disability pension against damages.
Lord Justice Cohen approved the trial judge's statement that: 'Just as the
wrongdoer cannot appropriate to himself the benefit of the premiums paid by
the injured party to cover accident risks, so he cannot appropriate the
benefits accruing from the injured party's service which similarly entitled
him to those benefits.'
In British Transport Commission v Gourley (1956) AC 185 the House of Lords
held that in awarding damages for loss of earnings the court must allow for
the tax the plaintiff would have had to pay.
Earl Jowett said the general principle governing assessment of damages was
that the injured party should be awarded such sum as would put him in the
same position as he would have been in if he had not sustained the injuries.
He said 'There are . . . exceptional cases in which this dominant rule does
not apply, as for instance, in cases of insurance.'
In Browning v War Office (1963)(1963) 1 QB 750 the Court of Appeal by
majority held that disability pension must be taken into account in
assessing pecuniary loss. The majority relied on Gourley and disapproved
Payne.
In Parry v Cleaver (1970) AC 1 a police constable was severly injured by a
motor car driven negligently by the defendant and became entitled as of
right to a pension on being discharged from the police force for
disablement. The House held by three to two that the pension should be
ignored in assessing loss.
Lord Reid said that Gourley reaffirmed the rule that the plaintiff could not
recover more than he had lost; but it did not deal with sums which came to
the plaintiff as a result of the accident, and which would not have come to
him but for the accident.
He said: 'As regards moneys coming to the plaintiff under a contract of
insurance, the real and substantial reason for disregarding them is that the
plaintiff has bought them and that it would be unjust and unreasonable to
hold that the money which he prudently spent on premiums and the benefit
from it should enure to the benefit of the tortfeasor.'
He dealt with the nature of a contributory pension. He said the products of
the sums paid into the pension fund were in fact delayed remuneration for
current work. But the man did not get back in the end the accumulated sums
paid into the fund on his behalf.
He said: 'This is a form of insurance. Like every other kind of insurance,
what he gets back depends on how things turn out . . . I can see no relevant
difference between this and any other form of insurance. So, if insurance
benefits are not deductible in assessing damages . . . why should his
pension be deductible?'
The minority in Parry relied on the general principle in Gourley
In the present case the employers sought to distinguish Parry on the ground
that they were in the triple position of employers, tortfeasors and
insurers.
That made no difference to the principle that the employee had bought his
pension which was 'the fruit, through insurance, of all the money which was
set aside in the past in respect of his past work' (per Lord Reid).
The employers, failing to distinguish Parry, invited the House to depart
from it.
Lord Gardiner's practice statement (1966) 1 WLR 1234 announced that the
Lords of Appeal, while treating former House of Lords decisions as normally
binding, proposed to depart from a previous decision when it appeared right
to do so.
In Fitzleet Estates (1977) 1 WLR 1345 Lord Wilberforce, rejecting a plea to
depart from a previous decision reached by bare majority, commented that all
the arguments in favour of the appellant had been advanced in the previous
decision, and that there had been no change of circumstances.
In the present case all relevant authorities were cited and all relevant
arguments had been advanced in Parry and there had been no change of
circumstances.
The employers claimed there had been a change of circumstance in that Parry
introduced uncertainty in the law, and in that since 1970 there had been a
clear trend at common law against double recovery.
But Parry established clearly that pension benefits were not deductible and
that double recovery was not involved.
There was nothing in the authorities which cast doubt over the effect or
logic in Parry v Cleaver.
The appeals were dismissed.
Their Lordships agreed.
For Mr Smoker: Richard Clegg QC and Allan Gore (Robin Thompson &amp; Partners).
For the fire authority: John Samuels QC and Kerstin Boyd (Masons).
For Mr Wood: Richard Clegg QC and Simon Grenfell (Brian Thompson &amp; Partners,
Manchester).
For the BCC: Simon Hawksworth QC and Margaret Bickford-Smith (Nabarro
Nathanson).
