FT  18 APR 91 / Government Bonds: US long bond prices rally as freight rail
strike bites
THE EXPECTATION that the nationwide freight rail strike which started
yesterday might slow the pace of economic activity lifted government bond
prices at the long end during the day.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond was up  3/32 at 97 3/8
to yield 8.102 per cent. The two-year note, however, was unchanged at 100
7/16 , yielding 6.862 per cent. Trading was said to be quiet.
In the absence of a move on interest rates from the Federal Reserve, the
bond market looked elsewhere for a lead and found it in the rail strike.
Estimates suggest that the 235,000 railworkers' industrial action could stop
the flow of one third of US goods in the country, making as many as half a
million non-rail workers temporarily out of work. Bad news for the economy
is traditionally good news for long bond prices.
The market was also helped by a report that Mr Alan Greenspan, the Fed
chairman, had said at a conference yesterday that while the recovery was
under way, there was more economic weakness ahead. He was also reported to
have said that US inflation was under control, and his remarks were seen by
the market as a hint that further interest rate cuts might be in the
pipeline.
EUROPEAN bond markets were lifted by the rally in the US market towards the
end of the session, but activity was limited, according to dealers.
The yield spread between French and German government bonds reached another
historic low of 48 basis points. Some investors are now taking profits on
that spread trade, unwinding positions taken at the turn of the year when
the spread was around 100 basis points.
However, others are keeping the trade in place in the expectation of further
tightening. Mr Alex Mitcheson-Smith, an analyst at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew,
expects French and German inflation rates to cross over this summer, and
government bond yields to cross in the third quarter.
Volume in the German market was low yesterday, but prices were lifted by the
rally in the US. Dealers said that there are some short positions in the
market, which could prompt something of a short-covering rally in the next
few days.
The Bund futures contract on the London International Financial Futures
Exchange ended at 85.80, up from 85.46.
Trading in the gilts market was confined to a narrow price range in low
volume yesterday. The market failed to react to data showing a Dollars 3.1bn
borrowing requirement in March, in line with expectations.
The Bank of England's Pounds 1.2bn tranche of 10 per cent gilts due 1996, to
be auctioned next week, is trading on a when-issued basis at 48 7/8 (the
stock is partly paid), in line with the outstanding issue.
