FT  17 APR 91 / Allies comb Kuwait for delayed action bombs
ALLIED bomb disposal experts are combing Kuwait in search of sophisticated
Iraqi charges capable of detonating up to 500lb of high-explosives 99 days
after being set.
A cache of 52 such devices has already been discovered, but allied
commanders are worried that the Iraqis may have set and hidden a few of the
time-delayed charges in key installations before their hasty retreat in late
February. If the charges were planted, they could detonate explosives any
time up to the end of May.
The device, which bomb disposal officers describe as a 'sinister and
sophisticated development', is a further indication of Iraq's determination
to cause as much damage as possible to Kuwait before retreating.
Allied generals raised the matter of the devices with the Iraqis during the
post-war talks held in Safwan; any remaining live charges in the country
would directly breach the formal ceasefire agreement. However, Iraqi
generals were apparently unable to give any information on the booby-trap
explosives.
Allied officers say they believe that the unexpected speed of the Iraqi
forces' capitulation in Kuwait interrupted any plans to deploy the explosive
charges.
Nevertheless, the 1,000 allied bomb disposal experts working to clear Kuwait
of mines and unexploded bombs were briefed this week on the Iraqi device and
are continuing to carry out searches at all Kuwait's power, oil and other
key installations.
'If we get to the end of May without anything happening, we'll be reasonably
confident,' a senior allied officer said yesterday.
The original stock of devices was discovered in workshops in al Ahmedi, the
country's main oil centre south of Kuwait City. All of them were packed in
boxes and none had been set.
The devices gave no clue where they were manufactured, but allied officers
say they are 'far the most sophisticated' of any Iraqi explosive device yet
found.
Each comprises a booster charge of about 6lb of explosives in a metal
cylinder about the size of a milk bottle, equipped with highly sophisticated
microcircuitry to enable a time delay from an hour to 99 days. This, in
turn, is set in a frame within a 26-inch bicycle wheel - a format which
allied officers describe as 'rather a mystery'.
However, ordnance disposal experts say the frame is exactly the right size
to be fitted on to a 50-gallon drum, which if filled with high explosives
could render an effective charge of 500lb of explosives.
Moreover, the bicycle wheel could also be fitted inside a pipeline, which is
the possibility causing disposal experts the most concern.
