FT  14 MAY 91 / Commodities and Agriculture: LME monitors copper market as
squeeze tightens
THE LONDON Metal Exchange executive yesterday said it was carefully
monitoring events in the copper market where a technical squeeze has been
causing severe volatility.
As the squeeze reached its climax yesterday the price of borrowing (buying
cash and selling forward) for one day reached Pounds 40 a tonne.
During recent upheavals in the zinc market, the LME executive persuaded
those with metal to lend to restrict the cost of borrowing for a day to
Dollars 20 a tonne and some dealers asked last night why the cost of
borrowing copper had been allowed to rise much more substantially.
Mr Martin Abbott, the LME's director of marketing, said: 'Our duty is to run
an orderly market - not to limit the cost of borrowing or the back-wardation
(the premium for metal for immediate delivery compared with the three-month
price).'
Copper's backwardation widened to Pounds 100 a tonne at one stage yesterday
and traders said this would continue to stimulate a flood of the metal into
LME warehouse stocks. Copper stocks already stood at 261,775 tonnes at the
weekend, the highest total for seven years, and traders estimated that
today's stock report would show a further increase of about 10,000 tonnes.
Mr Abbott said however, that, although the LME's copper stocks were
relatively high, it would be wrong to assume that all the metal was
available to be sold on the market. The owners might well be 'parking' the
copper briefly in LME warehouses.
The copper market was going through a 'choppy period' of volatility because
there was still a split of opinion about whether there would be a surplus
this year, Mr Abbott suggested. This choppiness could go on for some time
before there was a clear consensus of opinion about the fundamental
direction of the market.
However, many analysts now insist that the recession which is begining to
make its mark on even the strongest economies will far outweigh any
interruptions to copper supplies this year.
In the latest Metals and Mining Monthly Update from Carr Kitcat &amp; Aitken,
part of the Banque Indosuez Group, analyst Mr Robin Bhar says key copper
consuming sectors in the US (construction, autos and capital goods) will
remain depressed and consumption in Germany is likely to be restrained by
slowing economic growth caused by the mounting costs of reunification.
Consequently, says Mr Bhar, copper stocks will keep rising during 1991 and
the price is likely to fall decisively below Dollars 1 a lb, perhaps to
between 70 cents and 80 cents a lb. The dollar price ended at Dollars 1.04 a
lb last night.
In sterling terms, cash copper ended at Pounds 1,443 a tonne, down Pounds
6.50 from Friday's close, while three-month metal was Pounds 1,346, down
Pounds 11.50.
