FT  01 MAY 91 / Letter: No quick route to creating a free market economy
Sir, Implicit in Stanley Katz's excellent article ('East Europe should learn
from Asia', April 24) are also some lessons for the west with respect to the
regeneration of the former command economies.
First, despite the reservations that many would share about Mr Katz's
specific suggestions, there should be a wider acceptance of the fact that
western nations are no more experienced at building market economies in a
matter of weeks and months than anyone else. While the theoretical appeal of
an overnight metamorphosis is great, the (as yet still unknown) costs in
terms of jobs and livelihoods seem frequently to be dismissed rather
lightly.
Of course, the transition will inevitably involve high costs but, given the
fragile nature of the new democracies, failure to account correctly for the
crucially important public support for reform risks the failure of the
reform process itself. The exercise continues to be an experiment where
there is no place for narrow minds and capitalist dogmatism at the expense
of political and social sensitivity.
Moreover, to say we live in free market economies is to make a claim that
must be riddled with caveats. It is rather sanctimonious to insist that the
eastern Europeans should embrace the market while the west is often
reluctant to do the same. For example it is clear that the question of
property rights is central to the reform process and that the case for
privatisation is extremely strong.
However it could be argued that the British can hardly afford to preach
about privatisation on the basis of its recent experience, which boasts the
conversion of public monopolies to private ones and the legally enforced
protection of utilities from competition as its main features.
The temptation must be avoided smugly to assume that the west has all the
answers. There are far too many opportunities and aspirations at stake.
Jim Egan,
31 Kidbrooke Grove,
Blackheath,
London SE3 OLE
