FT  10 MAY 91 / Amnesty reports 10,000 detained in Punjab
MORE THAN 10,000 Sikhs are being held in the Indian state of Punjab under
sweeping anti-terrorist laws and without any chance of being brought to
trial, according to Amnesty International, the human rights group.
In a critical report on human rights abuses by Indian security forces,
Amnesty says that suspected government opponents are routinely tortured in
police stations and detention centres. It accuses the police of staging fake
'encounters' with Sikh militants in which hundreds of Sikhs have been
killed.
Amnesty has been denied permission to visit the Punjab by three successive
Indian governments. Its report, published today, in which it recommends an
end to arbitrary arrests, torture and extra-judicial killings, is thus based
on sworn statements from victims, court records and investigations, and
newspaper reports.
Amnesty's condemnation of the Indian government's handling of the Sikh
separatist movement comes only a few days after an equally damning report by
Asia Watch, the US human rights group, on abuses by Indian security forces
in Kashmir.
Asia Watch, which visited Kashmir with government approval, says that it has
collected testimony on 200 extra- judicial killings by security forces since
the beginning of 1990, as well as many instances of torture. Asia Watch says
that government forces have engaged in the summary execution of suspected
militants, house-to-house searches, during which whole families were seized,
and the wanton destruction of civilian property.
Both Amnesty and Asia Watch strongly condemn the tactics of Sikh and
Kashmiri militants. Amnesty says that according to official statistics
issued in July 1990, armed groups in Punjab had killed 4,000 people,
including 500 police officers, since May 1987. It says that since July 1990
the numbers of political killings of all kinds have increased.
In Kashmir, Asia Watch says that militants have flagrantly violated
international humanitarian law by killing , kidnapping and assaulting
civilians.
It says that Moslem militant organisations have issued death threats and
have assassinated members of the militant minority Hindu community.
Hindu revivalism, page 15
