FT  11 MAY 91 / Granada lowers dividend and strives to reduce debt
GRANADA, the UK leisure and television group, unveiled a financial package
yesterday designed to reduce debt and secure its future.
At the same time it announced a cut in the final dividend of just over 40
per cent which contributed to a 27p fall in the share price to 184p.
A proposed one-for-three rights issue at 140p a share is expected to raise
Pounds 163m and Granada's bingo clubs will be sold to Bass, the brewing and
leisure group, for Pounds 147m - Pounds 56m in cash and the assumption of
Pounds 91m in debt.
The moves follow several weeks of speculation and uncertainty about the
company and its top management.
Mr Derek Lewis, the chief executive, announced his intention to resign and
he will leave as soon as a successor has been appointed.
The resignation was widely seen as linked to the disappointing performance
of the company in recent months and the chances of completing the rights
issue. Mr Peter Davis, chairman and chief executive of Reed International
and a critic of Mr Lewis, also announced his intention to resign as a
non-executive director when the rights issue has been completed.
Granada estimated pre-tax profits of Pounds 38m for the 28 weeks to April 13
compared with Pounds 63.3m for the same period last year. The sharp drop in
earnings, in line with City expectations, reflects the effects of recession
on the company's consumer related businesses.
Earnings per share are expected to be 6.4p compared with 11.7p and the board
is planning a hefty dividend cut from 4.4p to 2.5p, making a total for the
year of 7p down from 12.3p last time.
The company said: 'The combination of the rights issue, the sale of Granada
Clubs and the reduction in the dividend will significantly improve the
strength of the group's finances and provide a base for dividend growth when
trading conditions and the group's results improve.'
Granada appears to have had a narrow window of opportunity to create the
package.
The rights issue could not be launched until a Pounds 200m refinancing of
British Sky Broadcasting, the satellite venture in which Pearson, publisher
of the Financial Times, is a significant shareholder. The deal, bringing
Granada's BSkyB commitment to Pounds 237m, was signed last week.
Uncertainty about Granada's future had to be dispelled before Wednesday when
Granada Television has to submit its bid for a 10-year commercial
broadcasting licence which would run from the beginning of 1993.
Background Page 10
London Stocks Page 15
Franchises Page 9
Lex Page 24
Markets Weekend II
