FT  23 APR 91 / Survey of The Computer Industry (19): 'Let the industry do
what it does best' - Reverse Engineering, conflict and compromise
REVERSE engineering, the practice of unravelling a competitor's product to
learn how it works in order either to emulate it or to attach proprietary
equipment, achieved unlikely political notoriety last year after a European
Commission draft directive designed to protect software makers unleashed one
of the fiercest bouts of lobbying ever witnessed in Brussels or Strasbourg.
The purpose of the draft directive was both simple and honourable; to
protect the creators and suppliers of personal computer software who are
being cheated annually of about Pounds 3bn in Europe through unauthorised
copying of their products.
The idea was to eliminate existing disparities between the copyright
protection systems for software in the member states as part of the
Commission's general plans for the harmonisation of EC law for 1992.
As such, it was supported to the hilt by organisations such as the Business
Software Alliance, the Software Publishers Association, and the Federation
Against Software Theft.
The Business Software Alliance, established by six of the world's leading PC
software suppliers - Aldus (desk top publishing) Ashton Tate (database)
Autodesk (computer aided draughting) Lotus (spreadsheets) Microsoft
(operating systems) and Wordperfect (word processing), has taken a leading
role in initiating legal proceedings against companies it believes guilty of
software theft.
However, what turned a commonsense measure designed to protect software
companies in a uniform manner across Europe into a political hot potato was
the fine detail in the draft. Computer manufacturers realised quickly that
the provisions of the directive would specifically forbid unauthorised
reverse engineering and in doing so, hamper their efforts to compete with
the leaders of the industry such as International Business Machines (IBM)
and Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC).
A campaign led by the hastily formed European Committee for Interoperable
Systems (ECIS), to persuade members of the European parliament and the
Commission to modify the directive was immediately initiated.
The software suppliers, together with IBM and DEC who saw the opportunity
legally to forbid Japanese manufacturers access to their technology, took
the opposite line and for some months the two lobbies fought a fierce war of
words.
It was not surprising that the Commission's draftsmen failed to anticipate
the scale of the row they were to precipitate. Reverse engineering, while
simple in concept is complex in detail and the extent to which it is used is
essential. Furthermore, its use in the computer industry is rarely
appreciated by outsiders.
It is an easy concept to understand in conventional engineering. Automobile
manufacturers routinely take their competitor's vehicles apart to see what
makes them tick. So what is reverse engineering in computer software?
It is software archaeology, according to Mr Gilles Lafue, a software
specialist with Andersen Consulting. 'It consists of extracting the
software's functionality (what the software does) and the design (how it
does it) by analysing the software's implementation - that is, programming
code, data structures, files and databases.'
It is necessary because of the dominant position of a small number of
manufacturers who are able to set de facto standards for data processing
systems. That means essentially IBM and DEC. Other manufacturers must so
design their equipment that it can be connected to IBM's or DEC's if they
are to have a share of the data processing cake. To do so, they have to
understand the design of the connection, or interface, in great detail.
That knowledge can be acquired either directly from IBM or DEC - leaving the
competitor at the mercy of the industry leaders - or it can obtained by
reverse engineering with or without their permission.
Of course, reverse engineering can be used to create a competitive product
through copying or improving on the original which is why software makers
are keen to have it banned. Many of the best software innovations are not
patented but simply hidden away in thousands of lines of computer code to
prevent copying; legal reverse engineering, the software specialists
complain, would be tantamount to a plagiarist's charter.
It was not simply hardware manufacturers and software houses who were upset.
Europe's computer users realised their ability to carry out essential
maintenance on their software would be hindered by the directive.
(Maintenance, in the software business, means modifying and extending
existing programs rather than repair.)
A compromise position was reached in December last year when a version of
the directive was agreed in Brussels which provided for:
Classification of software as literary works
A definition of originality
A common term of protection in accordance with the Berne Convention
Legal reverse engineering in limited circumstances.
These circumstances are when the retrieval of information is confined to the
parts of the original program necessary for inter-operability, when the
information retrieved is not communicated to third parties except to the
extent necessary for the operation of the new program and the information
retrieved is not used to create or market a program that infringes a
copyright in the original program.
The compromise proved broadly satisfactory to the hardware manufacturers and
to the software suppliers. However, the issue has continued to spark
controversy.
Earlier this month, the European parliament's committee on Legal Affairs and
Citizen's Rights proposed 11 amendments to the draft directive which clarify
the scope of the directive for research and analysis and the status of
interfaces between hardware and software under copyright law.
It has resulted in a new round of lobbying with ECIS in the forefront of a
campaign to persuade MEPs to vote in favour of most of the amendments.
Meanwhile, the Business Software Alliance which represents over 800
publishers of PC software, has decided it is time to call a halt.
In an open letter to the legal affair committee earlier in the year it said:
'After over a year of extended lobbying, it was finally possible last
December to reach a compromise that virtually the whole computer industry
could accept. We believe that it is now time to include all of the lobbying
and political debate and let the industry get back to what it does best -
producing hardware and software - under the terms of this compromise'.
