FT  26 APR 91 / Arts: Onnagata - Sadler's Wells
Lindsay Kemp, performer and director, high priest of theatrical camp and
drag, is back in town; and, despite the passage of the years, he's just the
same - a self-indulgent trashmonger. This time, however, he is occasionally
touched by things I never thought he could show - soul, wit, eloquence,
talent.
As every FT reader of course knows well, an onnagata is a specialist
travesty performer, a male member of the Japanese Kabuki theatre who
performs only female roles. Kemp takes the idea of the onnagata as the
premise for what gradually becomes a one-person autobiography, an anthology
of Kemp memories. Sounds pretty icky, doesn't it? I was dreading it. For
over half of Onnagata, which is a hundred-minute vehicle for him (no
interval), he and his type of theatre revert to their usual kind of dull,
incense-laden, narcissistic, tacky mystique. But it is far more
forward-moving than most Kemp theatre; and its use of lighting and fabric is
often marvellous.
Kemp's manner tends to be a drag-queeny mix of grande dame and sentimental
grande horizontale. Half of him bravely copes with the ardours of diva-dom,
half of him basks in fond memories of being a great star, lover, whore,
queen bee, murderess, etc. This persona - which some people find so
liberated and liberating - has always struck me as pretty sickly, and I'm
grateful for the unwonted dash of fun he occasionally adds here. And I'm
held by the way he makes Onnagata entirely a personal account. Four other
performers keep reappearing, but veiled and garbed in black - 'invisible'
Bunraku puppeteer figures.
The best scene - his long initiation and debut as onnagata  - occurs early
on. As metaphor, it keeps developing. The puppeteers mask, robe and
transform him. (Something of the objective nature of Japanese theatre rubs
off on him here.) At one point, he quivers in his robes like a moth;
whereupon flames, carried by the 'invisible' men, are carried onstage. You
see just how the onnagata is both frightened and attracted by performing, is
both trapped and excited. In the slow fan ritual dance that follows, gender
really isn't the point; beauty is.
The scenes that follow, much more obviously sensationalist, are far less
interesting. He 'remembers' being various female figures across history and
the globe. His Salome kisses John the Baptist's head (while a voice sings
Dalila's 'Mon coeur s'ouvre a ta voix'). His Isadora Duncan does some
lumpish half-steps to a Brahms waltz, and his Loie Fuller does some rather
fine things with two huge wings of fluttering fabric and changing colours of
light (while - heaven help us  - the Hostias from Verdi's Requiem plays).
And so on.
The Hostias, like the Cuius Animam from Rossini's Stabat mater, are, of
course, a cheap ploy to seduce an audience. Go it with God all the way to
Sodom. Once or twice, however, Kemp really does use them to suggest
something poignant - that he knows his kind of onnagata is damned but that,
even with Heaven's closed gates in sight, he must still pursue his destiny.
Tripe, but occasionally riveting.
