FT  16 APR 91 / UK Company News: Turriff plans reorganisation after fall to
loss of Pounds 933,000
TURRIFF CORPORATION, the troubled UK construction and plant hire group, is
to reorganise its business following a pre-tax loss of Pounds 933,000 in the
year to end-December.
The company's share price rose from 68p to 82p following the announcement.
The group, as it warned in February, is not paying a final dividend
(10.75p), leaving a total of 4.25p (15p) for the year. In 1989 Turriff made
a pre-tax profit of Pounds 5.82m.
Mr Astley Whittall, chairman, said that he would be disappointed if the
group did not pay at least a final dividend in the current year.
He said the group would be pulling out of housebuilding as part of the
reorganisation. Turriff has already withdrawn from its information and
marketing services business and has sold the Staffwise Employment Agency.
The sale of the agency, which had been bought only a year ago and had
contributed well since, had been essential to reduce the group's debt, Mr
Whittall maintained.
Following the reorganisation, the group would be left with two core
businesses - contracting and plant hire.
At the end of April Turriff's borrowings were Pounds 9.01m, compared with
shareholders' funds of just Pounds 8.84m.
In addition, the group was responsible for Pounds 4.26m of off-balance sheet
borrowings of joint-venture property companies.
Mr Whittall said that the group aimed to have reduced its balance sheet debt
from just over 100 per cent of shareholders' funds to about 50 per cent by
the end of this year.
He said that in the autumn Turriff expected to receive a refund of Pounds
2m, representing surplus on the group's pension fund.
This would be used to reduce borrowings.
The losses incurred in 1990 included provisions of Pounds 2.08m, of which
Pounds 1.65m was to cover possible losses against eight of the group's 15
joint-venture property developments.
A further Pounds 430,000 of provisions were made against the group's housing
operations to cover potential liabilities on equity-sharing deals.
Mr Whittall said that last year the group had sold 65 homes. This left only
53 more houses to sell before it closed the housebuilding operation.
Were it not for the provisions, the construction division would have broken
even.
However, reflecting problems in the construction market, plant hire profits
fell to Pounds 899,000 (Pounds 3.15m).
Losses per share worked through at 5.1p, compared with earnings of 53.6p.
COMMENT
Turriff's shares recovered 14p on the grounds that shareholders now know the
worst and that the company appears to have a strategy to reduce its high
gearing. However debt reduction is heavily dependent on a windfall pension
refund. Gearing will remain high if off-balance sheet loans and hire
purchase agreements are included as debt. The UK construction market is
likely to remain difficult for the rest of this year which will inhibit
contracting and plant hire profits. in the longer term, the prospects look
dull. Contracting and plant hire produce good cash flow, which the group
needs at present, but are low-margin businesses. The group has moved closer
to security and profits this year may recover to Pounds 1m-Pounds 1.5m, but
the shares are hardly a buy at this point.
