FT  15 APR 91 / Thieves dump 20 Van Goghs
TWO armed thieves stole 20 paintings by Vincent Van Gogh from Amsterdam's
Van Gogh Museum yesterday but abandoned their haul - worth more than Dollars
200m (Pounds 112.9m) - less than an hour later near a city railway station.
Police said they had no idea why the two masked thieves had decided to
abandon the paintings and their getaway car after managing to pull off the
biggest art theft in the Netherlands since the Second World War.
The 20 paintings, which were worth at least Dollars 10m each, included such
works as The Potato Eaters, Self-portrait As Painter, and Still Life With
Sunflowers. The museum houses the world's single biggest collection of
paintings by Van Gogh, whose work soared in value on the art market in the
1980s.
Police said they had no trace of the masked thieves, who were described only
as two men who spoke English with American accents.
One of the thieves may have hidden in the museum just before closing time on
Saturday afternoon, according to police. Around 3am, he overpowered two
security guards and forced them to turn off the alarms. He then let the
second man into the building.
About 45 minutes later, the thieves fled after forcing one of the guards to
hand over the keys to his car, a Volkswagen Passat. Shortly thereafter, the
car and the paintings were found near the Amstel train station just outside
the city centre.
Three of the 20 paintings were seriously damaged but they will be restored,
Mr Ronald de Leeuw, the director of the museum, said. A police spokesman
said: 'The robbery seemed to be well thought out but the ending was
amateurish.'
The spectacular robbery is the fourth theft of Van Gogh paintings in The
Netherlands in the past three years. It also comes just a year after the
museum marked the 100th anniversary of Van Gogh's death with a major
exhibition of 135 paintings, including many on loan for four months from
foreign museums and collectors.
The insurance cover for the borrowed works totalled Dollars 3.2bn.
The paintings which were stolen and then recovered yesterday were uninsured,
in line with Dutch government policy of not insuring works of art in order
to free up funds for other spending on the arts.
