FT  20 APR 91 / Iraq admits to chemical warheads for its Scuds
IRAQ has disclosed that it has chemical warheads for its Scud missiles,
although none of them was apparently used during the Gulf war.
In a report to the United Nations, Iraq admits to having more than 50
Scud-type missiles and a large arsenal of chemical weapons  - including Scud
warheads - but claims to have no nuclear arms nor the means to make them.
The report was delivered in response to the Security Council's ceasefire
resolution, which ordered the destruction under UN supervision of all of
Iraq's most dangerous weapons.
Previously, neither western nor Israeli officials knew whether Iraq had
chemical warheads for its Scuds, although it was known to have chemical
bombs and artillery.
Western officials are dissatisfied with Iraq's nuclear accounting, which
also denied the existence of any support and manufacturing facilities for
nuclear weapons. They said last night that the response, including an
assertion that what nuclear materials Iraq possessed were subject to
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, was inadequate.
Baghdad acknowledges having 1,145 mustard gas bombs or artillery shells and
280 tonnes of mustard gas as a finished product, as well as no fewer than
9,420 nerve gas warheads, 200 nerve gas bombs and 725 tonnes of nerve gas of
the Sarin and Tabun types as finished or intermediate material.
But the document attests to the success of allied attacks, admitting that 16
production sites, including research and development laboratories, were
destroyed.
The report says Iraq now possesses one Scud missile in the 50-300km range
and 51 al-Husseins (an upgraded Scud type) with 650km range. Thirty chemical
and five conventional warheads are part of the al-Hussein arsenal.
There are four missile launchers and two mobile missile erectors at the
Rashid camp, according to the report, as well as 32 platforms in the western
zone.
An international commission of at least 20 technical experts will supervise
the destruction of the weapons. Its composition, probably under a Swedish
chairman, is expected to be announced next week.
