FT  08 MAY 91 / Parliament and Politics: Hospital opt-out issue dominates
campaign - Monmouth By-Election
A FIERCE row about two local hospitals, which Labour claimed were under
pressure to opt out and become self-governing trusts, dominated the opening
of the second half of the Monmouth by-election campaign.
The controversy was fuelled by the weekend statement from Mr Roger Evans,
the Tory candidate, that on occasions he used private health care rather
than the NHS.
Mr Huw Edwards, the Labour candidate, accused Mr Evans of advocating
policies 'to break up our NHS', while Ms Frances David, for the Liberal
Democrats, said he was 'egging on' the hospitals to opt out.
The by-election, caused by the death of Tory MP Sir John Stradling Thomas,
is seen as crucial by all three main parties, and health has already emerged
as a key issue.
An unapologetic Mr Evans said that private medicine was 'complementary' to
the NHS, and use of it released resources to the health service.
Expressing his full support for the NHS, and calling Labour's tactics
'spurious' he emphasised that there were no proposals for the Nevill Hall
hospital in Abergavenny and the Royal Gwent hospital to become trusts.
He added, however, that if particular local hospitals concluded that they
could be run more effectively as self-governing trusts, then they would have
his support.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow health secretary, used his visit to the
constituency yesterday to launch Labour's campaign 'to alert every community
in Wales to the threat to their NHS.' Mr Edwards said that opting out would
mean a cut in the standards and range of patient services.
Ms David joined the attack, saying patients were already worried about the
prospects of hospitals opting out. She denied that the importance of health
in the campaign helped Labour, saying the party's commitment to health
spending was 'extremely woolly'.
The Liberal Democrats were committed to make up 'underfunding' and then
increase spending by two per cent more than inflation each year.
They would also end prescription charges, though this pledge was later
glossed with the comment that there was no timescale on its achievement.
The prime minister ruled out changes to Britain's electoral system
yesterday, following remarks by the Liberal Democrats that a system of
proportional representation would be their price for supporting the largest
party in the event of a hung parliament after the next general election.
Proportional representation left 'minority parties determining government
policy, and striking bargains for their support,' said Mr Major.
General election 1987: Sir John Stradling Thomas (C) 22,387; Mrs K Gass (L)
13,037; Mr C Lindley (SDP/All) 11,313; Ms S Meredudd (Plaid Cymru) 363. Con
Maj: 9,350.
