FT  22 APR 91 / The Queen's Awards For Export and Technology 1991: Engine of
entrepreneurial growth - Exploiting the enthusiasm for technology can be
rewarding
IN THE mid-1980s the entrepreneurial high technology start-up was seen as
the engine for Britain's economic growth. Now a clutch of small computing
and telecommunications companies which took advantage of that enthusiasm are
among the 1991 winners for the Queen's Awards for technology, and can stamp
their notepaper with the coveted logo.
'The mid-1980s was a time when the UK was very positive to the formation of
new companies', recalls Mr Geoffrey Manning, Chairman of AMT (Active Memory
Technology), of Reading.
He believes that the ideas enthusiastically propounded in Thatcherite
Britain fostered the establishment of high technology start-ups, such as his
own. 'It requires more than ideas to be successful. It needs people who are
willing to trust small companies without a track record,' he says. 'The
venture capitalists have to invest.'
When Mr Manning took up the post of AMT's chairman in 1986 he was joining a
company in which 60 per cent of the money came from venture capital
companies. A further 20 per cent had been invested by ICL, which also
provided the base technology for the digital array processor  - a computer
system which can process over 4,000 pieces of information simultaneously.
The confidence of the investors has paid off, with deliveries of the AMT
equipment to customers in the US and UK for both defence and commercial
applications.
Shareholders in software company Intelligent Applications, of Livingston
Village, in Scotland's 'silicon glen', can also afford themselves a quiet
smile. The company, which had start-up funding from fund managers Baillie
Gifford, was founded five years ago to develop industrial applications for
expert systems - computer systems which are programmed to emulate human
decision-making.
The company has been profitable for the past two years with over 300
companies in the US and UK using the Amethyst software - which diagnoses
faults in rotating machines by monitoring the vibrations. It is this
widespread use, says managing director Mr Robert Milne, which earned
Intelligent Applications the first Queen's Award for expert system
technology.
Two other 1980s software houses, Synon, of London, which was set up in 1983,
and Systematica, of Bournemouth founded in March 1986, were also among this
year's winners. Systematica was set up with Pounds 1.45m venture capital
funding from Venture Link and Pounds 350,000 from the DTI's grant coffers.
The liberalisation of the telecommunications marketplace, in particular the
licensing of companies to compete with British Telecom, proved a further
spur to Telsis, of Fareham, to develop its Hi-Call telephone system. Anyone
who calls up the latest share information, weather or horoscope phone
services could well be listening to information recorded on the Telsis unit.
The innovations for which Telsis won the Queen's Award are interactive
technology - by pressing certain buttons, certain options or courses can be
followed - and voice response technology. Systems are now available which
can recognise simple words, says Mr John Symes, sales and marketing director
of Telsis, and the company is pursuing further developments in this area.
Although Telsis was only set up in June 1987, it already had a turnover of
Pounds 6.9m last year.
For this year's smaller winners, all eager to make their mark in the 1990s,
there are few better companies to emulate than Quantel, the innovative
television production company. Quantel revolutionised coverage of sporting
events with its 'picture in picture' techniques, enabling two moving images
to be combined in the screen.
Although only in operation since the early 1970s, Quantel this year won its
seventh Queen's Award for technology - it also won an export award in 1980.
Quantel's Mr Dominic Lunney says this string of honours is a reflection on
the company's policy of continuing to innovate. 'This is not the kind of
field where you can rest on your laurels,' he says.
This year's award is for Quantel's Graphic Paintbox, an electronic pre-press
system used in printing and advertising for the manipulation of images.
Although this year's awards have marked the achievement Britain's industrial
heavyweights have also been roundly rewarded with GEC, ICI, and STC all
picking up Queen's Awards.
Telecommunications company GPT Payphones, now owned 60 per cent by GEC and
40 per cent by Siemens of Germany, won its first Queen's Award for
technology for public phone systems which take credit cards instead of cash.
As well as the phones GPT has developed the card validation unit - to check
that the credit card has not been stolen - and the charging unit to ensure
that the call charges are apportioned to the appropriate credit card
company.
'We have been instrumental in moving the payphone from being just a social
service to being a social service and a valuable tool for the businessman,'
says Mr Colin Beardmore, director of engineering at GPT Payphones.
The company's cashless phone systems, manufactured in a high-tech factory
nestling in the suburban area of Chorley, Liverpool, are installed as far
afield as Hong Kong, Moscow, Finland and Mexico, as well as the UK.
Other GEC companies to win technology awards are GEC Alsthom, of Stafford -
for thyristor valves used in power transmission - and the military
communications division of Marconi Communication Systems for its 'Scimitar
H' radio.
ICI scooped two awards, one for its Katalco company's catalysts and
absorbants used in the purification of hydrocarbons and carbon dioxides and
the second for its pharmaceutical division's 'Zoladex' drug, for treating
prostate cancer.
Britain's leading position in the world pharmaceuticals and medical
technology market led to seven other Queen's Awards for technology in the
health arena. The Royal Marsden Hospital in London, together with the
Johnson Matthey Technology Centre and the Royal Cancer Hospital, for
example, won its award for platinum anti-cancer drugs, while the central
research division of Pfizer was honoured for its development of a drug to
treat systemic fungal infections, especially in cancer and Aids patients.
Pharmaceuticals company SmithKline Beecham was singled out for its
development of 'Eminase', the clot-buster. Because the drug can be injected
intravenously to treat heart attack victims quickly - they do not have to
admitted to hospital before it can be administered - SKB believes Eminase
could save up to 10,000 lives a year in the UK alone.
More mundane, perhaps, but bringing considerable quality of life
improvements to patients is a colostomy bag which can be flushed down the
lavatory. It won its developers, Eschmann Bros and Walsh, of West Sussex, a
1991 Queen's award. A sensing device used for recording the movements of
patients over long periods - comprising a flexible stainless steel wire with
a number of sensors attached - brought a similar award to the biometrics
division of Penny and Giles.
Bede Scientific Instruments and a combination of Bio-Rad and the Medical
Research Council both won awards for scientific instruments - in the case of
Bio-Rad for a special laser scanning imaging system which enables scientists
and medical researchers to study the components of cells.
As ever, the Queen's Awards have thrown up a myriad of industrial
developments, from composite aircraft propellers (Dowty Aerospace) and parts
for aircraft gas turbine engines (TI Reynolds) to machinery for textile
producers (Fibreguide) and ceramic inking rolls for the printing industry
(Sandon Flexographic Printing Rollers).
A computer system developed by Foseco, of Tamworth, Staffordshire, to
simulate the processes which take place in the metals casting industry, won
its inventors an award,while Portals, of Basingstoke, won fame for its
metallised plastic strip which provides the windowed thread in bank notes.
Oxford Magnet Technology was honoured for the development of 'active shield'
magnets, to reduce stray magnetic fields; Anson for a swivel joint for use
in steel piping systems for oil and gas fields; and Wood Group Production
Technology for oilwell instrumentation.
Three of the Redland group of companies got together to pick up a technology
award for the development of the Cambrian interlocking slate. Although they
look like traditional roof slates they contain only 65 per cent natural
slate, combined with stone, resin and glass fibre. This makes them lighter
and easier to use, as well as cutting the costs to the home owner.
And although it may not be politic to drink and drive, two companies have
been given Queen's Awards for - separately - doing just that.
Guinness Brewing, of London, has won its award for a canning system which
enabled the company to promise that beer as good as the draught variety
could be made available in cans.
BSH Industries, of Manchester has developed a heating element for a car's
rear window which can also act as a radio aerial system - enabling drivers
to listen to the latest chat show while demisting the windows at the same
time.
