FT  25 APR 91 / Observer: A plea for the motor industry
THERE was a time when a high-powered delegation from the UK-based motor
industry to Downing Street could induce a strong attack of nerves even in
relatively thick-skinned ministers. Not so today. When the gentlemen from
Ford, Vauxhall, Peugeot Talbot and Rover paid a visit yesterday to the
chancellor of the Exchequer, they were clearly anxious not to be seen as one
more lobby group bent on presenting a shopping list. So much so that it is
tempting to wonder whether they may not have undersold their case.
Ostensibly, the visit was made to establish whether there had been an
adverse shift in policy towards the motor industry, following a Budget which
launched a vigorous assault on company car benefits, raised the rate of VAT
and increased fuel tax. Such modest ambition, if that is what it was, looks
entirely realistic. Not only have successive Conservative chancellors
reduced the emphasis upon manufacturing; they have also taken a relaxed view
of balance of payments deficits which are heavily influenced by motor
industry performance and, with obvious exceptions, adopted a robust stance
to-wards special interest groups.
Lamont hostile
Even so, the thrust of the industry's approach hardly looks well directed.
Mr Lamont has already shown himself instinctively hostile to trade
associations that fail to present a strong economic case. And it is hard to
argue with those of his Budget measures that most rankle with the motor
industry, notably the introduction of national insurance contributions for
employers on company cars, together with scale charge increases. For
travelling salesmen, the company car is a genuine business necessity. For
most company executives it is simply a perk and an economically inefficient
perk at that, in that it distorts and diminishes choice. Companies buy more
expensive cars for their employees than those employees would choose to buy
from taxed income. The type of the car may also be dictated by status in the
firm rather than personal preference.
One of the more welcome features of the Thatcher years has been the
reduction in the top marginal rates of income tax that made reliefs for
fringe benefits so attractive in the first place. The system has
progressively moved from one in which people were rewarded with allowances
and reliefs for belonging to particular groups - pensioners, farmers,
parents or senior managers with cars - to one where the rewards are
increasingly granted for the expenditure of productive effort. The real
question is whether the assault on company cars should be extended to other
perks.
Powerful case
So much the better, then, that Mr Lamont told the motor industry leaders
that he would consider doing precisely that. He also indicated that he would
look at the question in the context of the overall tax burden, which makes
equally good sense. And it is here that the motor industry, with support
from the Commons trade and industry committee, has a powerful case to make.
The 10 per cent special car tax, which is charged on the wholesale price of
a car, is unquestionably discriminatory. There is no reason why cars should
be penalised relative to washing machines other than that the exchequer wins
large revenues.
Nor does the tax make wider economic or environmental sense. By choosing to
increase the initial cost rather than impose the burden on fuel consumption
the government simply reinforces the pressure for congestion: once the
purchaser has bought the car at the inflated price, the marginal cost of
road use is insignificant. Shifting the burden on to fuel consumption would
have the additional advantage of encouraging the public to trade up from
older, fuel-inefficient cars to modern vehicles with better environmental
credentials. Ideally such a change should be accompanied by an assault on
industry-restrictive practices that result in retail buyers in Britain
paying up to 30 per cent more than many continental Europeans for their
cars. The opportunity may come when the Monopolies and Mergers Commission
reports on the issues later this year.
