FT  11 MAY 91 / Letter: M and S: recession not behind restructuring
Sir, Following Mr A L Dowding's letter ('Marks and Spencer and a question of
philosophy', 4/5 May), I hope that you will allow me the opportunity to
respond.
The recent redundancies at Marks and Spencer were not motivated by the
current recession. It had been decided some months ago during Lord Rayner's
chairmanship to make an investigation into head office, with a view to
restructuring where it had become unwieldy and pruning management layers
which had become over extended. The intention was to improve efficiency and
stimulate the growth of the company. This investigation was executed with
great care, taking some six months, and was led by Mr David Sieff.
The redundancies in stores were necessitated by the fact that we have not
experienced the normal rate of labour turnover in the past two years.
Therefore, we needed to relieve the congestion at this level as we had too
many trainees to train and too many junior managers for reasonable prospects
of promotion.
I also regret the use of the phrase 'a lot of dead wood' in the press, and
much of the other intemperate language. It was not our phrase; we have never
used it. We are saddened by the number of uninformed comments accusing us of
changing the culture of the company and, in particular, crediting the change
to the new chairman. The board was unanimous, together with the divisional
directors and executives (ie, the top 100 managers of our business) on the
necessity for the structures review.
The majority of the executive board have spent their working lives in this
business. I have served 39 years and am imbued with its culture, which I
have been fortunate to learn first-hand from the great men under whose
chairmanship I have served - Simon Marks, Israel Sieff, Teddy Sieff, Marcus
Sieff and Derek Rayner; and, I should add, Richard Greenbury, who has served
Marks and Spencer since leaving school over 38 years ago, is an integral
part of our culture and takes his rightful place alongside his predecessors.
It would be a mistake to imagine that this is the first time that we have
taken a good look at ourselves and made changes to respond to the needs of
the business. A company with our sustained record of commercial success and
investment in technology and systems could not have managed over the years
without facing the need from time to time to rectify overstaffing. Our
current policy is, in fact, explicitly supported by Lord Sieff, the honorary
president, who some years ago personally took charge of a 'good
housekeeping' exercise.
Our regard for good human relations is demonstrated in the care we have
taken with individuals; the generous compensation to those who are leaving
and the after-care service we have installed to help them to be placed in
new jobs.
Marks and Spencer remains under Richard Greenbury's chairmanship a company
of the highest standards in respect of its customers, its goods, its
suppliers, its staff and the community in which it trades.
Clinton V Silver,
deputy chairman
and managing director,
Marks and Spencer,
Michael House,
Baker Street, W1
