FT  26 APR 91 / International Company News: Compaq shares tumble on
second-quarter warning
COMPAQ Computer's stock price dropped sharply in early trading yesterday
when the company said second-quarter earnings were expected to be below
those of the same period last year, primarily because of the impact of the
strengthening dollar on overseas profits.
Compaq's share price dropped from a Wednesday close of Dollars 61 7/8 to
trade at Dollars 54 at midday yesterday in New York, a fall of over 12 per
cent.
First-quarter earnings, reported yesterday, were Dollars 114m, or Dollars
1.26 a share, up 24 per cent from Dollars 9m, or Dollars 1.06, a year ago.
The earnings were at the low end of analysts' projections. First-quarter
revenues rose 11 per cent to Dollars 971m from Dollars 872m a year ago.
Compaq warned that second-quarter earnings would be below those of the
quarter last year when earnings were Dollars 104.3m, or Dollars 1.18 a
share, on revenues of Dollars 862m.
During the first quarter, international revenues rose 16 per cent, while US
revenues rose by 5 per cent, Compaq said. Foreign sales accounted for 59 per
cent of the company's revenues.
'The rising value of the US dollar may have an adverse effect on revenues
and profits in the second quarter,' said Mr Rod Canion, Compaq president and
chief executive.
He explained that Compaq had been able to hedge currency exchanges to mask
unfavourable exchange rate changes toward the end of the first quarter, but
if the dollar continued to rise against foreign currencies, there would be a
significant impact in the second quarter.
The full impact of US price reductions ranging from 8 per cent to 34 per
cent, implemented earlier this month, will also be felt in the second
quarter, the company said. The price cuts are aimed at increasing Compaq's
share of the US personal computer market, said Mr Canion. He noted, however,
that Compaq's unit shipments in the US increased by 20 per cent in the first
quarter, compared with an industry average of about 5 per cent.
After the close of the first quarter, Compaq announced a Dollars 135m equity
investment in Silicon Graphics, a high performance graphics workstation
manufacturer. The companies also reached a technology exchange agreement
under which Compaq will make license payments to Silicon Graphics. Jointly
developed products will be manufactured and marketed by both companies.
