FT  18 APR 91 / Technology: Cat-scan takes on a new life
In 1971 EMI scientist Godfrey Hounsfield's brain-scanner gave neuro-surgeons
their first glimpses inside a living brain without breaking the skull.
Computer-assisted tomography (Cat) was the invention for which Hounsfield
shared the Nobel prize for medicine in 1979.
In the 1980s Cat-scanning using X-rays was displaced in medical diagnosis by
the safer method of magnetic resonance imaging which uses no radiation. But
Cat-scanning continued to be developed as a non-destructive test process for
peering deep inside complex assemblies, especially when they are encased in
metal.
The essence of Cat-scanning is to take several X-ray images of the object
from different angles, and process the information on image density by
computer. In this way a 3-D simulation is created which can reveal, for
example, the location of a brain tumour.
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, one of the US
Department of Energy's nuclear weapon design centres, has developed novel
scanners for examining specific situations.
With explosives, for example, the technique can find cracks or voids that
would impair the efficiency, can verify its density and ensure that the
substance had been properly mixed. One of several different Cat-scanners
designed at Lawrence Livermore examines the insides of nuclear weapons.
Another collaboration is with the University of California at Davis.
Experiments are under way to determine what substances a Cat-scan might
reveal in soil samples. So far, tests have shown that the scan can detect
cotton seed and locate voids as small as 300 microns across.
Another topical challenge is the rapid inspection of large drums of
radioactive waste before their long-term disposal, to provide assurance on
their radioactivity level. Much of the waste from US sources is incorrectly
identified at present, because the customary means of characterisation
cannot certify that they can be classed as low-level or non-radioactive.
