FT  29 APR 91 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (6): Dollar sent on a
rollercoaster ride - Analysts feel the worst of the slump is over
SAVED from falling too low by the world's central banks in February, only to
be stopped from rising too high by the same central banks four weeks later,
the dollar has been on a giddy rollercoaster ride over the past few months.
On February 11, the dollar hit a new all-time low against the D-Mark of
DM1.44. Seven weeks later it was up at DM1.70, its highest level for eight
months. It has hovered there ever since.
In that short burst - the strongest movement in the dollar since 1985 -
foreign investors bought the dollar for a whole host of reasons.
Financial markets expect the US economy to pull out of recession by
mid-year. In spite of rising unemployment and poor corporate profits, most
analysts feel that the worst of the slump is over, that consumer confidence
will rebound quickly after victory in the Gulf war, and that recovery is
around the corner.
This helped persuade overseas investors that dollar assets were a good buy.
Not only were they cheap, because of low US interest rates, but big gains in
US equity prices attracted a lot of new foreign money into the country.
Concern about political and economic chaos in the Soviet Union and its
former satellites, and the effect this has on European economic interests in
the region also favoured the dollar.
In Germany, the tensions of reunification - apparent in open discord between
government and Bundesbank, and in unrest among east Germans - turned
international investors away from the D-Mark towards the dollar.
Interest rate differentials, which have worked against the dollar for almost
a year, are beginning to swing the other way. The rapid cuts in US interest
rates, engineered by a Federal Reserve anxious to bring the economy out of
its dive as quickly as possible, appear to have run their course.
The spectre of inflation continues to hover over the US economy, and with
the Fed divided over the wisdom of further rate cuts, analysts expect US
borrowing costs to remain steady over the medium-term.
At the same time, the consensus among analysts is that as economic growth in
Germany and Japan slows, interest rates in those two countries will come
down, or at least go no higher. This would narrow the differential between
rates on US and European/Japanese assets, making US assets and dollars more
attractive. Inflation patterns should also work in the dollar's favour, with
medium-term trends pointing to lower US and higher German and Japanese
inflation. Real yield differentials, therefore, would also narrow.
Then there is the issue of purchasing power parity (PPP) and whether the
dollar is a cheap currency.
There is a rare unanimity among currency analysts on the dollar's PPP. The
theory of PPP is that the same basket of goods in two different countries
should have the same relative value, whichever currency is used to price the
basket. Based upon current valuations, the dollar looks cheap in terms of
its PPP. Although estimates differ, most analysts believe the true value of
the dollar is close to DM2 and Y200, the rate which would make a basket of
goods in the US cost the same as in Germany and Japan. This means the dollar
has room to appreciate another 20 per cent against the D-Mark, and nearly 50
per cent against the Yen, before it is correctly valued.
The positive scenario for the dollar is, of course, no guarantee that the
currency will perform according to analysts' predictions.
The US economy could take far longer to come out of recession, with
employment and personal income growth - two key determinants of economic
growth - likely to remain weak. US interest rates, therefore, might have to
come down several more times for both economic and political reasons (1992
is presidential election year) while inflation concerns take a back seat.
Interest rates abroad may also rise. Both Germany and Japan are sensitive to
the inflationary threat and any sign of price pressures could lead to
tighter monetary policy.
Disagreement among the Group of Seven nations over exchange rate policy
could also damage the dollar. Although central bank intervention to aid the
currency when it dropped to DM1.44 in February was relatively successful,
subsequent attempts to stall its rise around the DM. 165 level proved less
effective.
Mr Joe Petri, managing director of government securities and foreign
exchange at Merrill Lynch in New York, explains why: 'The market was not so
sure that the US authorities were as uncomfortable with the dollar's rise as
the European central banks.'
The insouciance of the US monetary authorities in late March when the dollar
was roaring ahead made it clear that this was not an entirely unwelcome
development. Although an appreciating dollar makes US goods less competitive
abroad - and this matters to those who expect export growth to lead the
economy out of recession - it also keeps a lid on inflation, by making
imported goods cheaper.
Similarly, the central banks of Europe and Japan can hardly have been
overjoyed at the prospect of a stronger dollar, because of the negative
inflationary implications for their own economies. Germany in particular is
keen to prevent imported inflation from adding to an already worrying upward
trend in domestic prices.
The stronger dollar does, however, allow room for lower European interest
rates. Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, must have privately welcomed
the opportunity the higher dollar gave him to cut credit costs in the UK
without worrying too much about the consequences for domestic inflation and
sterling.
There has been one politically embarrassing by-product of the recent rise in
the dollar; the fuss over the Dollars 51bn pledged by friendly foreign
powers to the US to help cover the cost of the Gulf war. Germany has already
said it would pay more Deutschemarks than it originally promised to make up
for the D-Mark's depreciation against the dollar. Japan, however, has so far
refused to pay any more than the initial pledge of Dollars 9bn, to the fury
of Americans everywhere.
