FT  22 APR 91 / The Queen's Awards For Export and Technology 1991 (Company
Profiles): Propellers cut a slice of the market - Dowty Aerospace
DOWTY Aerospace Gloucester has won a Queen's Award for Technology for its
advanced composite bladed propellers for aircraft and hovercraft.
All the composite propellers manufactured by Dowty have been exported. They
have operated in commercial airline service for more than 3m hours, and are
in service with more than 300 commercial airliners, including 300 Saab 340
twin engine aircraft made by Saab Scania of Sweden and 100 Dutch Fokker 50
airliners. The propellers are also used on hovercraft landing craft made by
Bell Textron of the US.
The blades are made from carbon and glass fibres injected with resin,
producing a low weight structure which reduces the total weight of a
propeller system by up to 40 per cent compared with more conventional metal
bladed propellers.
Dowty Aerospace Gloucester has automated the production of the blades. This
involves an automated fibre braiding machine, designed and produced in
collaboration with Babcock, the UK engineering company. The braiding machine
weaves the carbon and glass fibre skins for the propellers in three
dimensions simultaneously on a machine which Dowty says is unique.
The blades are of a simple, lightweight construction, with a retention
system to secure them to the hub at the root. This allows very large
diameter propeller blades to be used for improved efficiency at slower
revolution speeds, which in turn helps to reduce noise levels.
Mr David Davis, the managing director of Dowty Aerospace Propellers, part of
Dowty Aerospace Gloucester, says the two four-bladed Dowty composite
propellers on the Saab 340 34-seat commuter airliner save 200lb in weight,
'equivalent to an extra passenger'.
The propellers use a new aerofoil section which is efficient at take-off as
well as when the aircraft is flying at cruising speed, a range of efficiency
which was difficult to achieve with older aerofoils.
The company is exploring new markets for its composite bladed propellers,
including their use on maritime reconnaissance and military transport
aircraft. The propeller has already been tested on the US Lockheed P3 Orion
aircraft.
