FT  24 APR 91 / Survey of China (16): Revival of a 70 year-old dream - Plan
to dam the mighty Yangtse stirs environmental fears
ONE of the most beautiful and romantic stretches of water in the world is
the Yangtse river where it flows through three massive gorges below
Chongqing, in the south-west province of Sichuan.
The misty cliffs which overhang it have figured in many a famous Chinese
painting and the trees and wild life up the side valleys are increasingly
precious in a country near-devastated by industrial pollution.
The Yangtse, or Changjiang, as the Chinese call it, is the third longest
river in the world with a mean annual runoff of 9.8bn cubic metres. Flooding
is a perennial threat to the tens of millions who live downstream, and in a
country short of energy its waters are keenly viewed as a source of
hydropower.
In 1923, Sun Yat Sen, China's first president, proposed a huge dam across
the lowest gorge to control the floods. Since then the project has been
endlessly debated and researched by politicians, engineers and
hydro-electric specialists. The scheme surfaced again last year, though
subject to further approval by the rubber-stamp National People's Congress.
Now Han Hongshu, vice-governor of Hubei province, speaks as if work is about
to begin. Hubei has already done well out of the Gezhouba dam at Yichang,
downstream of the gorges, which created new jobs and now provides power. In
Sichuan, they are not so sure: 'Of course the central government must
decide, but we here think it would be better to spend the money on dams and
hydropower projects upstream on the Yangtse tributaries", says Ma Lin, the
Vice-governor.
Advocates of the dam point to the reduction in flood risks, the 18bn units
of electricity a year that the scheme would generate and the improved
navigability of the river, enabling ocean-going ships to reach Chongqing.
The Ministry of Water Resources and Power set up a committee of 412 experts,
of whom more than 400 supported it, while a detailed Canadian feasibility
study also found in favour.
Opponents stress the enormous cost (yuan 36 bn), the number of people to be
resettled (a million or so), the risk of earthquake or (in the event of a
war) bomb damage and unpredictable environmental consequences. They also
point to illogicalities in the concept: for power generation the reservoir
upstream must be full, for flood retention empty.
In 1989, the year of the Tiananmen demonstrations, the dam became a
political issue. A group of writers led by Dai Qing, later put under house
arrest as a dissident, published a book opposing it as a 'Stalinist folly'.
They accused Li Peng, the premier, a Moscow-trained electrical engineer (and
a one-time head of the ministry in charge of hydro-power) of trying to
bolster his own prestige by linking his name with a project once favoured by
Chairman Mao.
These intellectuals are silenced now, but the questions remain. Where will
the resettled population go? ('Further up the mountains' said Ministry of
Water Resources officials). Could silting gradually fill the 500 km
reservoir behind the dam, leaving Chongqing literally high and dry?
Wouldn't it be better for Peking to spend the money on installing equipment
nationwide to save electricity rather than providing more?
One look at China shows how little care is given to the environment. The
builders of the Gezhouba dam seem not to have known of the existence of the
Yangtse sturgeon (now proudly displayed at the Yichang breeding station )
until they bumped their noses on the new barrier going upstream to spawn.
It seems unlikely enough research has been done on river and marine life,
climatic consequences, loss of land fertility or the greater scouring
effects caused by a less silt-burdened river.
While China seems unlikely on grounds of cost to build the dam in the near
future, it remains a threat as long as a totalitarian government in Peking
can in the last resort overrule opposition.
