FT  11 MAY 91 / Opinion formers - what do they know?: Dominic Lawson wonders
why the professional pollsters are always picking on him
I DON'T know if anyone did actually say that 'opinions are free, but facts
are sacred' but if anyone did he must have died in penury. The market in
opinions is one of the few areas of growth in an otherwise stagnant economy
and those opinions are not free but very expensive.
One of the largest items on any newspaper's budget is the money set aside to
pay for opinion polls by the likes of Gallup, NOP and Mori.
Yesterday's Gallup Poll in the Daily Telegraph showed on the basis of 10,863
'face-to-face' interviews that 23.9 per cent of respondents felt that Paddy
Ashdown is not proving a good leader of the Liberal Democrats and we are
told that this is a 0.3 per cent increase in his disapproval rating.
Does this collection of opinions add up to a fact? And if so, how much is it
worth now that an alchemic transformation has been wrought turning an
aggregation of free and worthless opinions into one sacred marketable
report?
Even worse than to have an opinion, is to be seen as an opinion-former. Then
the collectors of opinions never let you go; because there are not so many
of us, the pollsters can very quickly package these opinions and sell them
to companies on the bogus assumption that these really important opinions
add up to a truly indispensable fact.
But I find it strangely difficult to turn these companies down, even though
I would cross the street to avoid a man with a clipboard, who would probably
waste much less of my time.
It is all to do with vanity. I somehow want to prove to the pollsters that
they are right in supposing that I am an opinion former even though I know
privately that I can barely form my own opinions, let alone those of others.
Naturally, I do not get any money for this display of vanity so the
pollsters keep all the cheques paid to them by their gullible corporate
clients.
I have one such questionnaire in my briefcase at the moment, from the Pan
European Opinion Panel, based in France. 'Dear Madam' it begins (that is
their opinion, not a fact, but they are not interested whether I am (a) very
sure, (b) sure, (c) not at all sure what sex I am).
They wish to know whether, on a scale of one to four, I know very well,
rather well, not very well, or not at all the following companies: Peugeot
SA, Michelin Paribas, Suez, CCF, Wagons-lits, Havas, L'Oreal, Elf Aquitaine,
Rhone Poulenc, Aerospatiale, Alcatel-Alsthom (ex CGE), Saint Gobain,
Pechiney and Lyonnaise des Eaux-Dumez.
I have a problem here, as I had with a similar questionnaire sent out on
behalf of similarly introspective English companies. What do I think I mean
when I say that I think I know a company well?
I once told one of the corporate pollsters when they came round in person to
make sure I answered all their questions, that I would like to answer 'don't
know' to the question 'how well do you know the London Electricity Board?'
The question is, of course, impossible to answer. But 'don't know' is not
allowed to the so-called opinion formers. They must have a confident view on
everything, even their own ignorance.
The penultimate question on the Pan European Panel's latest missive is 'is
Peugeot SA's stock in your opinion (1) over-evaluated (2) under-evaluated or
(3) at its correctly-evaluated price?' I am sure that Peugeot SA will find
to its great relief that 99 per cent of Pan European Opinion formers
believed that the market has got Peugeot SA exactly right. For those who
replied (1) or (2) then have to answer the tedious 'could you please specify
exactly why you feel that this stock is not at its correctly-evaluated
price?'
I am tempted to launch a poll of my own to ask all opinion formers one
simple question: 'do you think that business opinion polls of opinion
formers are: (a) a complete waste of your time and corporate money or (b)
extremely worthwhile and useful.' I wonder whether the polling companies
would regard an overwhelming (a) response as statistically significant.
Dominic Lawson is the editor of the Spectator.
