FT  10 MAY 91 / International Capital Markets: IFC head backs call for
private funding
THE head of the International Finance Corporation, Sir William Ryrie, has
strongly backed recent proposals that international development agencies
channel more of their resources to the private sector and less to public
sector projects.
In a speech given to the Pacific Basin Economic Council held in Guadalajara,
Mexico, Mr Ryrie called for 'a major shift towards market funding and
private investment' in developing countries. He also urged that
international development agencies concentrate less on 'providing large
amounts of capital to governments and more towards facilitating the markets
to provide resources for productive private investment'.
Mr Ryrie's remarks are at odds with the position of the World Bank, which
believes that its money is best spent on public-sector infrastructure
projects, thereby creating an 'enabling environment' for the private sector.
The Guadalajara speech also looks set to rekindle the debate over whether
the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) should start lending more to the
private sector. Chile supports such a change in its lending rules. Mexico,
however, is strongly opposed, believing that the change would damage Latin
America's under-financed public sector, and lead to a fall in the IADB
credit rating.
Mr Ryrie argued that market-orientated economic policies in south-east Asia
and much of Latin America have already helped integrate their countries in
the world economy.
For example, noted Mr Ryrie, foreign direct investment into developing
countries has jumped from a nadir of Dollars 9bn to Dollars 10bn in the
early 1980s to an estimated Dollars 20bn in 1989. Foreign investment in
Thailand and Indonesia has increased tenfold since 1986.
In addition, in the past five years many developing countries for the first
time have been substantial recipients of portfolio investment. Since the IFC
set up the Korea fund in 1984, some 150 other country funds have been
launched, helping fuel emerging markets.
In the past year, private sector companies in Latin America - mainly in
Mexico and Venezuela - have raised over Dollars 800m of debt and equity in
the international markets. Private companies in Korea, Indonesia and
Malaysia have issued securities worth Dollars 1.1bn.
Many of these issues were co-managed by the IFC. Mr Ryrie hopes that other
international agencies will learn from the IFC's 'business-orientated,
risk-taking approach to project financing' and use it as a model for their
own lending.
