FT  19 APR 91 / Letter: The price of placing another tax on property
Sir, I am surprised that such a level-headed newspaper as yours should be
advocating introducing capital gains tax on owner-occupied housing (Leader,
April 16).
Apart from the political unpopularity of such a tax there are other
complications.
Such a tax would be index-linked. It would also have to recognise the total
cost of the property. The price paid to a seller for a property is mostly
not the total ultimate cost of the property to the buyer; it would be
inequitable if the often enormous cost of financing the purchase was not
included. If it was omitted you would be taxing an illusory gain.
At the same time there would have to be allowance made for maintaining the
property's fabric, an escalating cost in the case of old houses.
Since the price of a house may often be affected by the quality of the
decoration and permanent fixtures, any improvements on that side would have
to be allowed also. After all this it is doubtful that much gain would be
left to tax.
But you give the game away when you say that there would have to be
roll-over relief. Of course, without such relief people would stop moving
house which could lead to the owner-occupied market becoming as sticky as
the rented market has become.
On the other hand, roll-over relief would complicate the decision on moving
to a smaller property. Well-off movers would tend to go for smaller houses
at the top end pushing prices there up in order to use up their relief.
Those less well-off seeking, perhaps in their declining years, to release
some equity to fund their retirement by trading down would be penalised by
having to pay CGT and would seek to maximise their sale price in
compensation.
I would suggest that the introduction of CGT on housing, if it was equitably
structured, would raise little, cost a great deal to collect and be
irrelevant.
If the structure was inequitable it might raise a lot of revenue, but it
would be more unpopular than the poll tax and lead to serious distortions in
the housing market, with absolutely no guarantee that it would have any
effect on house price inflation. In short, a poor idea.
BML Coulson,
9 Brodrick Road,
SW17
