FT  04 MAY 91 / Books: After the polar bear . . . - Fiction
THE TERRORS OF ICE AND DARKNESS by Christoph Ransmayr Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson
Pounds 14, 198 pages
A SOLITARY GRIEF by Bernice Rubens Sinclair-Stevenson Pounds 13.95, 240
pages
THE DEATH OF DAVID DEBRIZZI by Paul Micou Bantam Pounds 13.99, 271 pages
NOT THE END OF THE WORLD by Rebecca Stowe Peter Owen Pounds 12.95, 152 pages
PINOCCHIO IN VENICE by Robert Coover Heinemann Pounds 14.99, 330 pages
PICTURE THIS. You're stuck in the ice somewhere up near the North Pole. It
has just got dark and isn't going to get light again for several months. You
have managed to kill and eat a polar bear, but there wasn't anything in its
stomach when you cut it up, and you have no idea where your next polar bear
is coming from. What do you do?
Put a message in a bottle, that's what. Throw it into the sea and hope
someone will find it. They do, but not for another 48 years, which isn't
what you had in mind at all. You have long since succumbed to The Terrors of
Ice and Darkness, to the miseries of scurvy, a slow death by starvation and
numbing, bitter cold.
Not only that, but your story is true as well, dressed up as fiction by
Christoph Ransmayr. He has taken the logbook and private diaries of a
long-forgotten polar journey - the Austro-Hungarian expedition of 1873,
which discovered Franz-Josef Land - and grafted onto them a fictitious
retracing of the Austrians' steps, allegedly undertaken by a young Italian
in 1981.
Mazzini is the Italian's name, a lorry driver and part-time writer, who
since childhood has dreamed of little except exploring. Fired by an account
of the earlier expedition, he abandons home and job and sets off for Oslo,
determined to follow the same route as his predecessors. Well-wishers try to
dissuade him, but Mazzini is adamant. He heads north - the account of his
journey is interspersed with reports of the genuine journey - and
disappears, never to be seen again. The way Ransmayr tells it, he may be out
there still, his frozen corpse just waiting to be discovered.
Gripping stuff, although it has to be said that the novel works best when
the author is dealing with the genuine expedition, quoting verbatim from an
appalling account of privation and despair, rather than with his fictional
additions. But the story is no less interesting for that. It is the sort of
book that will be enjoyed best under a warm blanket, with food on the table,
a cup of cocoa to hand, and the central heating turned up.
Still in sombre mood, A Solitary Grief, by Bernice Rubens, tells the tale of
psychiatrist Alistair Crown, who is reduced to despair when his only child
is born with Down's Syndrome. He reacts, as many parents would, with horror
at first, than with anger and resentment. 'They're very affectionate
children,' the nurse tells him at the hospital, but Alistair doesn't want to
know. He cannot even bring himself to look at his daughter's face, let along
accept responsibility for her. He leaves home instead, has an affair with
another woman, moves in with one of his patients - an abnormally hairy man
named Esau, who has come to terms with his own deformity . . .
Yet Alistair loves the child. He goes in to her at night, spending time
alone with her in the dark, cradling the face he has never seen. He loves
his daughter in secret, unwilling to admit his love even to himself, let
alone his estranged wife. Nobody is more upset than he when the child goes
missing and the police search the area for a body. He concedes at last that
the girl is a part of him, his own flesh and blood.
All of which makes A Solitary Grief sound fairly depressing, which it is, up
to a point. But the author handles a difficult subject very well, without
undue sentimentality, and brings the story to a suitably shattering climax.
It is impossible in the end not to feel great sympathy for Alistair, even
though he is far from being the hero of the piece.
Paul Micou gained a reputation as something of a humorist with his first two
novels, but has gone for a more restrained approach with his third, although
his observation is as sharp as ever. The Death of David Debrizzi purports to
be the biography - by his friend and teacher - of a young French concert
pianist, a child prodigy who was internationally famous from a very early
age. It takes the form of an open letter to a rival for Debrizzi's
friendship, who has published a biography of his own.
The rival's biography was biassed and self-serving in the extreme, an
attempt to steal the credit for Debrizzi's success. Debrizzi's teacher sets
the record straight, in a chapter by chapter rebuttal of the other's
extravagant claims. What emerges between the two of them is a good portrait
of the pianist, and of the concert world in general. The author is clearly a
music buff and lets his enthusiasm shine through, telling a good story with
considerable expertise.
Not the End of the World is a first novel by Rebecca Stowe, a young American
from Port Huron, Michigan. Her heroine is from Michigan too, a bright
12-year-old who wishes she was a boy, but will settle instead for becoming
the first woman governor of the state. The story is one of childhood, of a
rebellious girl with churchgoing parents and problems with teachers and
social workers. It is a spritely tale, engaging enough as far as it goes.
The only drawback is that the heroine's childhood doesn't appear to be any
different from that of millions of other Americans, either in fact or in
fiction.
Last, but not necessarily least, Robert Coover's Pinocchio in Venice is a
reworking of the children's story, with Pinocchio as an old man this time,
returning to Venice after a lifetime in America as a college professor. He
is anxious to complete his final work, a tribute to the Blue-Haired Fairy,
before he turns back into wood again. The idea is an intriguing one, if you
like that sort of thing, but the author's approach is heavily intellectual
and some people may feel baffled by the length of his sentences, which
routinely run to 250 words or more.
