FT  02 MAY 91 / BR will back Channel link to King's Cross
BRITISH RAIL is expected to recommend today the construction of a high-speed
rail route from the Channel tunnel through south-east London to King's Cross
station in north London.
The decision is likely to prompt hostile reaction from local authorities and
other groups in south London which have been fighting the high-speed route
on environmental grounds.
The route chosen is likely to be similar to that proposed last year by
European Rail Link, a joint venture between BR, Trafalgar House and BICC.
The Pounds 2.6bn scheme was rejected by the government after it refused to
provide financial assistance for what would have been a largely privately
funded project.
Mr Roger Freeman, transport minister, however, told the Commons in December
that the government had not ruled out using public money. This could be
provided either in the form of loan financing or capital grants from Network
SouthEast to improve commuter services.
BR's board of directors meets today to finalise its recommendation that a
high speed link should pass through Kent and south-east London.
The board's choice will be conveyed by Sir Bob Reid, BR's chairman, to Mr
Malcolm Rifkind, transport secretary, who will make the final decision on
whether the link goes ahead.
BR was asked by the Transport Department to reconsider the project after the
European Rail Link scheme was abandoned.
The construction of a high-speed line through south-east London is regarded
as politically sensitive because it would pass through densely populated
areas.
The line is unlikely to be completed until the end of the century. Passenger
trains travelling to the capital when the tunnel opens in 1993 will use
existing track to a terminal being constructed at Waterloo station south of
the Thames.
Two of the three other schemes considered by BR would terminate at Stratford
in east London. Another route proposed would pass through it before
proceeding by a tunnel to King's Cross.
