FT  25 APR 91 / UK Company News: Scottish Power boosts options
SCOTTISH POWER, the larger of the two Scottish electricity companies due to
be floated in May, said it had raised its exposure in the electricity
options market with a 77 per cent increase in its option contract with the
12 English regional electricity companies.
It also said that losses of supply contracts to industrial customers in its
own area in the current round were significantly smaller than in last
April's round.
Last year Scottish Power lost 6 per cent of its business with large
industrial customers - which take more than 1MW - measured by volume.
Although that is lower than the losses suffered by the regional companies in
England, Scottish Power emphasised that it was not immune from competition
in Scotland and that has had a 'material' effect on the prices it can
charge.
Scottish Power increased its power sales in volume terms in the past year by
7 per cent through exports to England.
The company has agreed option contracts covering 320MW of power to the
regional companies compared with 180MW last year. This is not a contract to
supply electricity but a financial instrument under which Scottish Power
guarantees a price for power which applies when the price prevailing in the
electricity pool exceeds it. The regional companies pay an initial fee and
Scottish Power still expects to make money if it has to supply the power.
Mr Michael Smith, marketing and distribution director, said Scottish Power
had signed option contracts with industrial users in England in the current
round of contracts which outweigh by three-and-a-half times the contracts
lost.
Scottish Power recently agreed with another supplier an option contract for
well over 200,000 gigawatt hours of power with an unnamed customer,
offsetting option contract losses of 83,000 gigawatt hours.
Mr Smith said that Scottish Power's retail shops had roughly doubled their
share of the south of Scotland white goods market last year to about 25 per
cent, thanks to a large scale reorganisation and upgrading of its shops.
