FT  04 MAY 91 / Gardening: The red roses of Ulster
FOR MORE than a century Northern Ireland has had an influence in the rose
world totally out of proportion to its size. For much of that time this was
due to the Dickson and McGredy families growing and breeding roses there.
Even when Sam McGredy transferred all his rose breeding to New Zealand, the
stream of fine new roses from Northern Ireland continued to flow from Pat
Dickson.
Something about the climate here and maybe also about the soil seems
specially favourable for roses; an equability of temperature combined with
an abundance of atmospheric moisture that seems to give rose blossoms a
little extra quality and clarity of colour. Maybe there is an element of
sentiment in this view but I have heard many rose experts express it.
In 1964 the Rose Society of Northern Ireland was founded as a totally
separate organisation and in 1981 the RSNI was accepted as a member of the
World Federation of Rose Societies. The appropriate reward is that, this
year, the World Federation has chosen Northern Ireland as the country to
host its ninth World Rose Convention and has arranged a very full and
attractive programme of events to be held before, during and after the
Convention under the title Rose Emerald 1991.
The Convention itself will take place in Belfast between Monday July 15 and
Sunday July 21 and will be centred in Queen's University where there will be
lectures and exhibitions. Two rose shows will be staged here exclusively for
new roses exhibited by international rose breeders and two more shows will
be for both new and old roses.
Since 1965 the city of Belfast Rose trials have been held in the Sir Thomas
and Lady Dixon Park and are judged every year by an international panel of
rose experts. Rose Emerald 1991 is timed to coincide with the closing stages
of this year's judging of these ongoing trials and there will be a conducted
tour of them for convention delegates.
Other visits and tours have been arranged for Convention Week: a civic
reception hosted by Belfast City Council at City Hall, Belfast; a Government
Reception at Greenmount College, Antrim; a gala banquet at Europa Hotel,
Belfast; an Irish night in association with the Industrial Development Board
of Northern Ireland, also at the Europa Hotel; and a Gala Concert in
association with Ulster Television.
Among the tours arranged during the convention is one to Mount Stewart House
and Gardens which I would specially recommend for this is a remarkable
place; a fine 18th century mansion with a very large garden much of which
was planned and planted after 1920 by the Seventh Marchioness of
Londonderry. It is highly original in design, very beautiful and contains a
number of unusual plants. July is an excellent month to see it.
It is also a good time to see many other gardens and the organisers of Rose
Emerald 1991 have taken advantage of this to plan three tours, one to take
place the week before the convention and two more the week following it.
The first of these will start in London on Sunday July 7 and travel
northwards visiting the Royal National Rose Society's large display garden
and trial grounds near St Albans and finishing in Glasgow on July 15 in good
time to get to Belfast the following day. Among the gardens to be visited on
the way are Blenheim Palace, Chatsworth House, Harlow Carr, which is the
garden of the Northern Horticultural Society, and the Royal Botanic Garden,
Edinburgh.
After the convention delegates can return for a further four days min
England, starting at Kew Gardens on Monday, July 22 and then spending a
whole day at the Royal National Rose Society's garden at St Albans, another
day in the Royal Horticultural Society's garden at Wisley and then a day in
Oxford with a further opportunity to look at Blenheim Palace and its
strongly contrasted formal and landscape gardens.
The alternative, post-convention tour is in southern Ireland, starting and
finishing in Dublin and lasting a week from July 22 to 28. The gardens to be
visited include the spectacular Powerscourt among the Wicklow Mountains and
also a unique Japanese Garden at Tully House, Kildare.
It also includes much of the finest south western coastal scenery and passes
through Glengarriff from which launches ply to tiny Garinish Island entirely
filled by a superb garden partly in Italian style, and with dramatic scenery
but one that has never acquired the mansion that was originally planned for
it.
Full particulars of all these events can be obtained from Rose Emerald 1991,
31 Spa Road, Ballynahinch, Co Down, Northern Ireland BT24 8PT. Tel:
0238-561993.
