FT  22 APR 91 / The Queen's Awards For Export and Technology 1991 (Company
Profiles): A slate substitute for weather-beaten roofs - Redland
REDLAND, the world's largest tile manufacturer, is best known for its market
leading concrete tiles. It has recently been building on its worldwide
strength to increase output of other types of tiles, notably clay tiles
which command better profit margins.
Last year the group made pre-tax profits of Pounds 245m - only Pounds 5.2m
lower than in 1989 in spite of a deep downturn in UK commercial and
residential construction. The group's strengths lie in its geographical
spread of businesses together with a wide range of roofing products which
enable it to tap different areas of demand when markets are in recession.
The development of new products to keep up with changing tastes is essential
if the group is to sustain its position in the roofing market.
The Queen's Award for technical achievement was made to three Redland
subsidiaries which together developed a high strength, lightweight,
composite tile which looks like slate but is cheaper and easier to use. The
companies have replicated a building product which took the earth millions
of years to make, says Redland.
Redland Roof Tiles, the UK tile manufacturing division, Redland Engineering
and Redland Technology share the award for the Cambrian slate tile, a
combination of 65 per cent natural slate, stone, resin and glass fibre
reinforcement. Redland describes the tile as 'having an authentic appearance
of genuine quarried slate, whilst being lightweight, quick and simple to
use, and offering the cost benefits of precisely controlled high speed
production. The product is approximately half the laid price of Welsh
slate.'
The tile was launched on the British market in 1985 and now holds about 10
per cent of the UK slate market. Its technical performance since the launch
persuaded Redland to give it a 60-year guarantee - at least 10 years longer
than that on any other man-made slate, it says.
The tile comes with a three-point fixing system to cope with high winds.
Demand for the product has been particularly high in areas where strong
winds, heavy rainfall and slate roofs are traditional.
The development of the Cambrian tile dates back to the late 1970s when other
slate 'look-alikes', generally made of fibre cement, started to replace more
costly natural slate. Redland Roof Tiles set out to develop an alternative
and during the early 1980s Redland Engineering came up with the product
prototypes as well as the tooling and plant for its manufacture. Redland
Technology then conducted tests for weather resistance at its wind tunnel in
Horsham, West Sussex.
In 1985 a factory for the Cambrian slates was built at Rassau in south
Wales, which has since added further slate lines and a fittings section.
