FT  13 MAY 91 / S Africa squatter camp attack claims 27 lives
AT LEAST 27 people were killed yesterday in an attack on a squatter camp
near Johannesburg, despite last week's outline agreement between the African
National Congress (ANC) and the South African government on steps to end
violence in the townships.
Squatters said their attackers, Zulu inhabitants of the local hostel in the
township of Kagiso, were armed with spears and other sharp instruments.
At the insistence of Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, spears were omitted
from a list of weapons banned last week by the South African authorities.
The ANC is demanding that the carrying of spears be illegal, and has said it
will pull out of talks on the country's political future unless this demand
is met.
The ANC has given the government until Thursday to comply with this demand,
while its national executive will meet later today to consider the rest of
the outline agreement reached last week with Pretoria.
This involved the banning of all so-called 'traditional weapons' apart from
spears and sticks, the phasing-out of single-sex hostels and the prohibition
of the use of live ammunition by police for crowd control.
That agreement was reached between Mr Nelson Mandela, the ANC deputy
president, and Mr FW de Klerk, the president, assisted by a handful of
advisers.
ANC officials stress that it could still be rejected by the organisation's
national executive, triggering an earlier threat by the ANC to withdraw from
talks.
Mr Mandela said in an interview published in the Johannesburg Sunday Times
that he was 'optimistic that we would be able to save the peace process'.
However, he stressed that they would pull out of talks unless the government
met every demand in its recent seven-point ultimatum, which included the
issues addressed in last week's talks.
Meanwhile, South African police opened fire early on Saturday morning on a
group of right-wing whites who attacked a squatter camp in the western
Transvaal.
It was the first time in decades that police had fired on whites, and two
white farmers were injured.
The whites had attacked a group of blacks who had re-occupied land from
which they were forcibly removed 13 years ago.
Judgment is expected later today in the trial of Mrs Winnie Mandela, on
charges of kidnapping and assault with intent to commit grievous bodily
harm.
Mr Justice Michael Stegmann, the presiding judge, is expected to deliver his
verdict by Wednesday.
