FT  02 MAY 91 / Letter: Realities of Northern Ireland's sectarian divide
Sir, Northern Ireland's unfavourable external image is often greatly
exaggerated and it is important not to contribute damaging impressions even
inadvertently. In their article on Northern Ireland ('A break in the Irish
mist', April 26) Ralph Atkins and Kieran Cooke, gave an impression of
sectarian division which is considerably greater than the true position.
It is not true, for instance, that only the edges have been chipped away
from segregation in jobs. Catholics comprise about 37 per cent of the labour
force and constitute 35 per cent of employees in occupations covered by the
1991 census conducted by the Fair Employment Commission. Excluding security
jobs, for which they tend not to apply, Catholics comprise 36.5 per cent of
employees: females appear to have more than a proportionate share of jobs,
while males are about 2.5 percentage points short of full proportionality.
Within this overall balance there is certainly a degree of segregation. This
is partly due to geography, but goes further than this. Even so, only 5 per
cent of companies have employees of a single denomination and most are
small. Less than 10 per cent of employees are in companies or workplaces
with more than 90 per cent one denomination.
Nor is it true that only 10 schools out of 450 take both Catholic and
Protestant children. The schools referred to are presumably integrated
schools. These multi-denominational Christian schools have increased
significantly in number, but are not the only mixed-intake schools.
The education system in Northern Ireland is the same as that in England in
that Catholic parents often prefer to send their children to Catholic
schools. Other, predominantly non-Catholic, children attend state schools.
However, Northern Ireland has a substantial number of educationally
excellent state grammar schools, and some Catholic parents prefer their
children to attend these. My own children's state school has 20 per cent of
Catholics among its intake.
Graham Gudgin,
Northern Ireland
Economic Research Centre,
48 University Road,
Belfast
