FT  15 APR 91 / Leeds may take tax proposals to European Court
LEEDS PERMANENT Building Society may go to the European Court of Human
Rights to challenge Budget proposals to block repayment of Pounds 57m paid
in double taxation if it is unable to gain legal redress in the UK.
The society says it plans to press ahead with a High Court action against
the Inland Revenue, but its prospects appear to be slim because of
retrospective legislation announced by Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, in
the Budget.
Mr Mike Blackburn, chief executive of Leeds, the UK's fifth-largest building
society, said Mr Lamont's claim in the Budget speech that he was correcting
a defect in the law to prevent building societies from enjoying a windfall
gain was an outrageous use of retrospective legislation to trample over the
rulings of the courts.
Mr Lamont was announcing rules to prevent societies from reclaiming Pounds
250m in double taxation paid in 1985 and 1986. Details will be published in
the Finance Bill on Wednesday.
Mr Blackburn last week wrote what are believed to have been strongly worded
letters to Mr Lamont and to Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Attorney General,
disputing the way in which the Inland Revenue has presented the affair.
The Chancellor's action followed a House of Lords victory for Woolwich
Building Society last October in a test case brought to establish the
societies' right to money paid to the Inland Revenue during the transitional
period in 1985-86 while composite rate tax was applied to building societies
for the first time.
The double taxation arose because the Inland Revenue made no allowance in
its transitional regulations for the societies whose financial years ended
in the autumn rather than coinciding with the tax year.
The Budget statement said building societies that brought actions after
Woolwich would not get their money back.
It was the second government attempt to introduce retrospective legislation
to do so. The first, in 1986, was defeated in the Lords because it was
incorrectly drafted.
Mr Blackburn said: 'The effect of the chancellor's proposal on the Leeds
Permanent would be to perpetuate the confiscation of a substantial sum of
money - Pounds 57m excluding interest since 1986 - that belongs to the
reserves of the society, which in turn belong to its members.'
