FT  14 MAY 91 / Winnie Mandela found guilty of kidnapping
MRS Winnie Mandela, wife of Mr Nelson Mandela, deputy president of the
African National Congress (ANC), was convicted yesterday by a South African
court of kidnapping and being an accessory after the fact to four assaults.
Looking pale and stunned, 72-year-old Mr Mandela listened from the public
gallery as Mr Justice Michael Stegmann told the Rand Supreme Court in
Johannesburg that Mrs Mandela had 'showed herself on a number of occasions
to be a calm, composed, deliberate and unblushing liar'. Mr Mandela was
serving a life sentence for conspiring to overthrow the state when the
crimes took place.
Under South African law kidnapping is a capital offence, although Mrs
Mandela is certain to face a lesser punishment. Sentence will be announced
later today, after evidence in mitigation from the defence. Legal experts
familiar with the case said it seemed likely she would face a period in
jail.
Mr Justice Stegmann said he accepted Mrs Mandela's alibi, that she was on
her way to the town of Brandfort, over 180 miles away, when the kidnapping
and assaults took place. But he found that she and a co-accused, Mrs Xoliswa
Falati, had conspired to kidnap the four activists, including a 14-year-old
boy, Stompie Seipei, who was later found with his throat slit in a Soweto
ditch.
Mrs Mandela, he said, was one of the 'moving spirits' behind the kidnapping.
To imagine that it had taken place without her prior knowledge was like
imagining 'Hamlet without the Prince', he said. He further found Mrs Mandela
guilty of accessory after the fact to the crime of assault with intent to
commit grievous bodily harm against the four boys. This is a less serious
crime that than of the assault itself for which she was originally charged.
The four were seriously assaulted in an outside room at her Soweto home on
December 29 1988, leaving the walls of the room spattered with blood. She
was absent at the time, but on her return two days later, he found that she
must have known of or suspected the assaults and thus had 'assisted' and
'associated herself' with the attackers.
A radiantly smiling Mrs Mandela said outside the court: 'You can see how
delighted I am'.
Clipping her words short, and only barely suppressing her rage, she said:
'As long as you all now know that I did not assault any child, that's all
that matters to me. The rest I leave to my lawyers.'
Her reaction was in marked contrast to that of her husband, who stood by her
side looking grey with shock, his normally erect shoulders bowed beneath his
tightly belted overcoat. Mr Mandela's posture and deeply pained facial
expression raised fears about his health and ability to withstand the
distress of seeing his wife go to jail.
Mrs Mandela's conviction could further strain relations between the ANC, of
which she is a senior leader, and the government at a time when the two
sides are involved in tough negotiations over measures to end township
violence. The ANC has threatened to pull out of talks on the country's
political future unless Pretoria agrees to ban spears from public gatherings
by Thursday.
