FT  02 MAY 91 / Survey of Poland (18): Eyes on west and east - A look at
foreign policy
POLAND is determined never again to be isolated, or to be treated as a mere
buffer zone between prosperous western Europe and a disintegrating Soviet
Union.
Behind its fierce determination to become a fully-fledged member of the
European Community lies the moral conviction that the west owes something,
not only to Poland but to all of central Europe, for the betrayal of Munich
in 1938 and for the Yalta agreements which left Poland and its neighbours
interned for more than 40 years behind the Iron Curtain. It was in this
spirit that Poland joined Czechoslovakia and Hungary at a tripartite summit
meeting in February at Visegrad castle in Slovakia to co-ordinate their
approach to the EC and lend each other mutual assistance in the building of
constitutional democracies in their countries.
But, as President Lech Walesa's recent trips to the United States and
forthcoming visit to Moscow indicate, Poland is also determined to be an
active participator in whatever wider world order emerges from the state of
flux.
Since his election last December, President Walesa, whose presidential
powers remain to be defined in a new constitution, has made clear that he
intends to play an active diplomatic as well as domestic political role. On
his visits to the US, Britain, France and the European Community
headquarters in Brussels, his basic message has been that Poles deserve
special credit for having played the decisive role in the events which led
to the crumbling of Soviet hegemony over eastern Europe and the virtually
bloodless end to the cold war.
His visit to the US, where Polish-Americans form an influential lobby, was
crowned by US support for large-scale debt relief, symbolised by the US
decision to reduce its outstanding debt by 20 per cent over and above the 50
per cent debt reduction agreed by the Paris club of official creditors.
When he goes to Moscow later this month, he will argue forcefully for the
prompt withdrawal of the nearly 50,000 Soviet troops in Poland and seek to
put political and economic relations with Moscow and the individual
republics on a new plane, as befits relations between sovereign states. On
the economic front, Prime Minister Jan Bielecki is leading efforts to
jump-start trade between the two countries, virtually paralysed since the
shift from rouble- to dollar-based trading on January 1.
Much patient work has already been done by the previous government, led by
Mr Tadeusz Mazowiecki, to create the conditions for a new, less strained
relationship between the two sides. This includes recognition by the Soviet
side that the NKVD, precursor of the present KGB, did indeed murder Polish
officers in the Katyn woods and other venues during the war, an admission of
great psychological importance to both sides.
But Poland is the only former Warsaw Pact country not to have signed a
formal troop withdrawal agreement and negotiations with the Soviets became
noticeably stiffer as conservative forces regained ground in Moscow. The
Soviet side have proposed withdrawing all forces by the end of 1993. But
during his election campaign Mr Walesa promised to get them out this year,
although a compromise which allowed a limited Soviet presence to supervise
the transit of Soviet troops from eastern Germany is possible.
Mr Walesa is the big picture man, determined to give a high profile to
Poland's main foreign policy objectives. Significantly, however, Mr
Krzysztof Skubiszewski, the foreign minister, was one of only two ministers
to be retained in the new government formed in January by Mr Bielecki. The
other was Mr Leszek Balcerowicz, the minister of finance. A respected former
academic, Mr Skubiszewski says that co-operation with the president is good
although 'competences are not always clear and defined'.
Much has already been achieved. German reunification means that Poland's
western border now abuts directly on to the European Community. Ratification
of the Polish-German border treaty earlier this year assures international
recognition of western borders. These incorporate former German land given
to Poland by Stalin in recompense for former Polish land incorporated into
the Soviet Union in 1945.
The subsequent agreement lifting visa restrictions between the two countries
on April 8 allows Poles free access not only to Germany but also to France,
Italy and the Benelux countries under the terms of the Schengen agreement on
visa-free travel. Talks on a fully-fledged friendship treaty between the two
countries, however, remain stalled over the rights of ethnic Germans and
other details.
The collapse of Comecon trade, the re-negotiation of foreign debt, the need
to attract foreign investment to breathe life into the privatisation process
and the long-term objective of entry into the European Community by 2000
have all given a substantial economic and financial content to Polish
foreign policy.
Although the foreign ministry is in overall charge of the EC negotiations
Warsaw recently appointed Mr Jacek Saryusz-Wolski as 'plenipotentiary for
European integration and foreign assistance' to harmonise and co-ordinate
the approach to Europe and report to the Council of Ministers. Similarly, Mr
Janusz Sawicki, the deputy finance minister, is in charge of the complex
multilateral and bilateral debt negotiations. Both are prime examples of the
highly-motivated, competent and tough-minded technocrats now at the
forefront of Poland's efforts to create the external conditions for its
transformation to an economically prosperous, politically 'normal'
democracy.
Meanwhile, many ordinary Poles are awaiting the third visit next month from
the Pope, who played such an important role in keeping hope for a brighter
future alive during the dark days of martial law. With unemployment rising
and little chance of greater prosperity for some time to come, many will be
looking for Papal reassurance that their struggles will lead to a better
future.
