FT  16 APR 91 / Testing time for teachers and pupils: Assessments begin for
seven-year-olds
THIS week and next, seven-year-olds in maintained schools in England and
Wales will sit standard assessment tasks (Sats), and will face tests again
when aged 11 and 14.
National testing at those three ages was among the most controversial
aspects of Mr Kenneth Baker's Education Reform Act of 1988, and until last
week the National Union of Teachers seemed poised to boycott their
introduction. Now that support for a boycott appears to have collapsed, Sats
will soon be part of the primary school routine.
Formal pupil assessment of some kind is here to stay, whoever is in power.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's education spokesman, inveighs against the complexity
of Sats, but says: 'There is clearly a role for formal assessment and
testing. It benefits parents, schools and teachers themselves.'
Many educationalists agree. 'In the past we have been far too sloppy about
assessment,' says Professor Peter Mortimore, deputy director of London
University's Institute of Education. 'The new Sats are a great advance on
the old pencil-and-paper tests, and when shorn of the razzmatazz should help
teachers identify and develop the potential of their pupils better than they
do now.'
The complexity of the tests, already a dilution of last year's pilots, is
causing anxiety. Primary school teachers spent much of last term making
their own assessments against 32 attainment targets (mostly in maths and
science). This term they must administer formal Sats to meet nine targets.
notes to teachers on administering Sats runs to 200 pages, and the record
sheets for each seven-year-old look like income tax forms.
Mrs Sue Siefert, head of the 450-pupil Thornhill Primary School, in the
inner London Borough of Islington, points to a stack of Department of
Education and Science booklets received in the past month and says:
'Assessment has become the master, not the servant, of our trade. We are
spending two terms assessing the kids' output when we should have been
teaching.'
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the education secretary, has pledged to review the tests
to meet some of the teachers' concerns. What remains is a pervasive
atmosphere of mistrust.
In Scotland, well over half of all pupils take no part in compulsory primary
school testing, so great is opposition from parents and teachers alike.
'You can't teach without assessment,' Mrs Siefert says. 'But Sats are
nothing to do with children: they're to do with testing teachers and
schools. Tests will be published, schools labelled, and the back door open
to selection.' Ministers deny the last two charges, although tests may be
published in future.
Last week Mr Clarke instructed the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher
Education to conduct an urgent inquiry into the preparation of teachers to
teach reading.
Whether reading standards have really declined is disputed within the
teaching profession. Mr Colin Harrison, president of the United Kingdom
Reading Association, dismisses claims for decline as statistical gibberish.
'To suggest that teachers have totally abandoned tried and trusted methods
is facile,' he writes in the latest issue of the association's journal, 'and
to suggest that this has resulted in almost immediate national decline is to
misunderstand the nature of curriculum development and change.'
Here again, differences between Mr Clarke and the education establishment
are more apparent than real. Recent research by Professor Mortimore and Dr
Pam Sammons, a researcher at the institute, led them to conclude: 'Much of
the variation between primary schools can be accounted for by differences in
school policies and practices within the control of the principal and
teachers.'
Variations in the social background of pupils were found to be of much less
significance.
Among the leading factors they identify to explain disparities between
schools are: purposeful leadership of staff by the head teacher; consistency
among teachers; effective record-keeping; structured lessons; and parental
involvement. The researchers say: 'Where all teachers follow guidelines in
the same way, the impact on students' progress is positive. Variations among
teachers in their use of guidelines has a negative effect.'
Mr Clarke could not have put it better himself.
