FT  17 APR 91 / Loss-making pitfalls lurk in computer technology: Ian
Hamilton Fazey looks at a campaign for better security which will intensify
today
A BUILDERS' merchant turned from healthy profit to loss a year after
computerising its stock controls. With no discrepancy between revenue and
sales, the truth emerged too late to save the business.
The storeman in charge of the trade counter had found he could, when induced
by a bribe, key in low prices for cash sales without anyone noticing,
provided he restored the original prices immediately. As the computer always
matched goods and cash correctly at the instant of sale, no discrepancy was
evident.
Mr Chris Hook, of the National Computer Centre, explains: 'There was no bar
on anyone getting into the software, the computer was not programmed to log
price alterations and there was no audit trail for tracing what had
happened.'
Neither had the management considered using the computer to generate
management accounts. Such a step would have revealed the fraud by showing
poor cash yields for stock being sold at a 'discount'.
Mr Hook runs the NCC's Information Technology Security Awareness Programme
for Business, a Pounds 400,000 campaign paid for by the Department of Trade
and Industry. It is aimed at medium-sized and smaller businesses, but a
measure of general need is that 40 per cent of the 4,500 companies
registered with the NCC for future advice are big.
The campaign has distributed 14,000 free information packs and registration
forms - 4,000 more than it budgeted for. More will go out today, as part of
Crime Prevention Week, from business crime prevention exhibitions in
Bradford, Nottingham and Trafford Park.
Companies registering with the NCC are to be offered a Pounds 95 pack
comprising a manual, a video made by Esso to improve computer security, and
an interactive disk to enable managers to work out risks on their PCs.
Packs will be sold abroad and to non-registered UK businesses at about
Pounds 750 each, with profits ploughed back into the campaign with the aim
of making it self-supporting.
With theft of computers a growing crime, police want all businesses to
improve security, but Mr Hook says loss of data is nearly always more
crippling than theft of hardware.
The NCC was recently called to a pharmaceuticals company where a senior
manager returning from three days' leave found all his PC's files corrupted
by a virus.
Staff had seen a well-dressed, polite stranger sitting at the keyboard the
day before. A personal password to block access to his machine would have
prevented the sabotage.
'If visitors have to sign in, you or a colleague should take them back to
the front door at the end of the visit and witness their checking out,' says
Mr Hook.
Companies also need a policy for the aftermath of disasters, with trained,
authorised staff controlling access during, say, the clear-up after a fire
or robbery, when open doors make further theft a possibility.
In addition, the NCC advises that care should be taken in disposing of old
computer disks and tapes, as most 'delete' commands remove only the first
letter of a file name.
One US company bought old disks and tapes 'for recycling' from
environmentally conscious businesses. It then extracted whatever data -
supposedly deleted - that it found on them and sold them to competitors.
Only honesty between rivals exposed the trade.
Information packs from National Computing Centre, Oxford Road, Manchester M1
7ED. Tel 061-228 6333.
