FT  26 APR 91 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (25): A place in the
shop window - Ways must be found to appeal once again to the private
investor. It will not be easy, but there will be help from savings schemes,
Peps and new rules that permit trusts . . . / Investment trusts
AFTER LONG years on the fringes of the retail investment business,
investment trusts are currently staging a vigorous fight to regain the
central position they commanded decades ago, until upstart financial
products such as unit trusts and personal pension plans came along.
Many of the investment-trust managers have come to the conclusion that they
have little future unless they find ways of appealing once again on a mass
scale to the private investor, or to the intermediaries who advise him.
That was the clear lesson of the takeover of Globe Investment Trust last
summer. The Pounds 1.1bn flagship of the investment trust industry was
mopped up for cash by the pension funds of British Coal, which saw the
mighty fund simply as an easy vehicle for channelling huge sums into the
stock market.
Although Globe attempted to whip up enthusiasm among its private
shareholders, it proved to be fatally weakened by the huge build-up of
institutional holdings over the years. More than 70 per cent of its shares
by the end were owned by institutional investors, chiefly pension funds, and
they were quite happy to get out at something close to underlying asset
value.
For other investment trusts, the demise of Globe has had its compensations.
The removal of some 5 per cent of the sector at a stroke eliminated an
important part of the excess supply; and with demand for equity investments
reviving strongly this spring, the average investment-trust discount has
fallen to some 12 per cent, the narrowest for many years.
But it would have been much better, from the investment-trust sector's point
of view, to have removed the surplus by stimulating demand rather than by
cutting supply. That is the task upon which the industry is now embarked. At
least some 30 new trusts were floated last year, but they were mostly highly
specialised, and often quite small.
In recent years, investment trusts have gained a reputation as the informed
saver's preferred vehicles, while less experienced investors have been
directed towards unit trusts or life assurance policies. Long-term savings
are usually sold rather than bought, and in the noisy environment of retail
investment the voice of investment trusts has only been dimly heard. But now
the publicity drive is being stepped up.
In the past 10 years, the typical investment trust has turned Pounds 1,000
into some Pounds 5,000, including reinvested net income. The average unit
trust would only have produced Pounds 4,000 over the same period. That is a
message that is worth proclaiming.
New opportunities are also arising. The introduction of personal equity
plans, especially in their latest form, has given investment trusts the
chance to sell up to Pounds 3,000 each year per investor with benefit of a
tax shelter. And soon the curbs on selling investment trusts 'off the page',
through clipped coupons, will be largely abandoned, at least in respect of
the savings schemes now operated by most of the investment-trust management
companies.
When the new rules of the Securities and Investments Board come into effect
later this year, it will be possible to sell most investment trusts in
exactly the same way as unit trusts are marketed.
There remain significant differences: investment trusts are more volatile in
their share prices, but offer lower costs and generally higher performance.
It is possible to offer more complex structures than for unit trusts, for
instance split-capital funds, which can offer certain advantages, though
with the risk of confusing amateur investors.
Yet some of the barriers are breaking down. Indeed, most investment trust
managers are heavily involved with unit trusts as well.
From the point of view of the private investor, the significance of these
developments is that he is likely to see increasing promotion of investment
trusts. Traditionally, they have only been available through stockbrokers,
but other outlets, for instance independent financial advisers, are also
opening up. And many investment trusts will now also sell directly to the
public.
But investment trusts have a big mountain to climb. They have total assets
of rather more than Pounds 20bn, but probably only a quarter of that
represents the holdings of private individuals.
In contrast, unit trusts are worth over Pounds 50bn, and although they have
institutional investors too, so that individuals probably own only about
Pounds 30bn worth, that is still five times the effective size of the retail
investment-trust sector.
The dominance of the big, institutional investors has caused a reshaping of
the investment-trust business. Big general funds, like Globe, have tended to
be vulnerable to takeovers, and there has been a growth of smaller,
specialised funds.
But big, general, low-cost and low-risk funds would make much more sense to
the average private investor, so long as ways could be found of stimulating
regular demand, so that sellers could be balanced by buyers. Otherwise,
there would always be a serious risk that the share price could slip back to
a big discount.
Besides savings schemes, which include regular instalment plans, perhaps
under the umbrella of a personal equity plan, there is also the possibility
of linking investment trusts to personal pension plans and life-assurance
contracts. Foreign &amp; Colonial, now the biggest investment trust at just over
Pounds 1bn, is exploring these latter opportunities through a link with
Skandia Life.
Yet there is a paradox in such developments. In competing with rival savings
media, investment trusts run the risk of being forced to adopt similar cost
structures. For example, savings schemes were originally launched as being
cheaper than dealing through stockbrokers, but some of them now charge a 3
per cent front-end fee which goes to intermediaries. This makes them
actually more expensive than going through a stockbroker, though not yet
quite as costly as unit trusts.
In moving from a dimly-lit corner of the bargain basement to the shop
window, investment trusts are gaining sales but are not necessarily offering
better value for money.
