FT  11 MAY 91 / Minding Your Own Business: Trials of integration - Computing
Barbara Conway, the respected City journalist and former member of the
Securities and Investment Board, died last weekend, aged 39, after a long
illness. She contributed to the Weekend FT on the computer industry and
continued working while seriously ill. This is her final article.
HAVING LOOKED, in previous columns, at the merits of computer software
packages designed for specific purposes - word-processors, information
managers, spreadsheets etc - some attention should now be given to a form of
computer program which can give all these features, and more, in a slightly
cut-down form but available together and able to work with each other. These
are known as integrated packages and will normally combine the functions
listed above with communications facilities, for connecting to other
computer systems via the telephone system.
The advantages of using an integrated package may be particularly appealing
to computer users with limited memory in their machines and to those who
need to shift pieces of information between programs easily (for example
addresses between a database and word-processor). But the choice needs to be
carefully made. Some integrated packages make nonsense of the reason for
their existence because exchanges between their different sections are every
bit as unwieldy as those between 'dedicated' programs. Others incorporate
enough features to put some dedicated programs to shame. And, as always,
price is no sure guide to the value of a package.
On the budget side of the market, for example, Lotus has a nifty program
called LotusWorks which, as well as the four basic modules of an integrated
package, can provide reasonable business graphics and includes both a
dictionary and a thesaurus with its word-processor. It allows the user to
have up to nine active 'sessions' running off each of its main functions at
the same time and has a neat and easy-to-use menu system to help the user
with each application. It also needs only 512k to be up and running and
operates at very acceptable speed.
The debit side is that getting the different applications to talk to each
other is unnecessarily complicated, involving several import/export
operations, but at a list price of Pounds 145 it is certainly one of the
best-value packages on the market for those willing to put up with this
inconvenience.
Also worth considering at this end of the market are Microsoft's MS-Works,
at the same price, and Logotron's Eight in One at just Pounds 94 with
limited features but a good user-friendly system and all the basic
essentials.
When it comes to the heavyweight side of the market, nothing is quite as
weighty as Open Access III from Software Products International, either in
terms of physical size, price (Pounds 799) or features. It includes a
programming language, a programmable relational database, all the usual
features and an eminently usable, if somewhat idiosyncratic, system of
switching between functions. It is surprisingly easy to get to grips with
even for first-time users thanks to a well thought out tutorial, but at this
kind of price both the spreadsheet and the word processor look just a little
basic.
In much the same league is Enable, from Enable Software at Pounds 742, which
also has an excellent range of features and good integration but is probably
slightly more geared to networks of computers than stand-alone machines in
small businesses. When it comes to idiosyncratic user interfaces,
Ashton-Tate's Framework III (Pounds 630) is probably an outright winner, but
once you get used to it is an extremely powerful package. A feature is the
included programming language FRED. The Framework III approach of using each
application in a separate window or 'frame' is the kind of system users
either love or hate, and I found myself, slightly to my surprise, quite
enthusiastic about it.
Lotus also does a high-level package, priced as Framework, called Symphony
2.2 which contains all necessary features but which I found considerably
less congenial to use, perhaps because it centres so much on its spreadsheet
facility. There is still room in the field for a readily-usable,
full-featured, reasonably standardised heavyweight integrated package but,
for the moment, if you have the money, then Open Access III looks the
leading contender.
