FT  04 MAY 91 / Government expected to sell all shares in Scots electricity
companies
THE GOVERNMENT is expected to confirm next Wednesday that it will sell 100
per cent of the two Scottish electricity companies when it launches the
flotation pathfinder prospectus. The prospectus is also likely to forecast
dividend increases above inflation for both Scottish Power and Scottish
Hydro-Electric.
The government has so far refused to say if it would sell all the shares in
the two companies, as with the 12 English and Welsh regional electricity
companies, or hold back 40 per cent, as with the generating companies
National Power and PowerGen.
The pathfinder prospectus, to be launched by Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish
secretary, will include all the relevant information except the offer price,
the proportion of shares intended for non-customer investors and the split
of shares between private investors, UK institutions and overseas
institutions. The offer will be launched on May 30.
The Japanese Ministry of Finance has given permission for Daiwa, prospective
lead manager for the Japanese tranche, to participate fully in a tender
process by which it is planned to sell some of the shares on offer. That
follows weeks of negotiations between Daiwa and the ministry aimed at
getting round securities regulations which had been thought to mean that
Japanese intermediaries would have to sell shares bought in an international
tender to investors outside Japan only. Daiwa is expected to disclose
details of the agreement next week.
The agreement should prevent a repeat of the embarrassment that arose during
the flotation of the generators earlier this year. Nomura, lead manager for
the Japanese tranche, bid up the price of the shares after they began
trading on the market, so they appeared to have been underpriced.
As in the generators sale, Barclays de Zoete Wedd, financial adviser to the
float, plans to hold the so-called 'back-end tender' just before dealings
start in London in June. If it goes ahead, underwriters will be asked to
rebid above the fixed offer price for a proportion of the shares.
The Scottish companies are being floated with higher debt-to-equity ratios
than the English regional electricity companies or generating companies,
with Scottish Power expected to have a debt-equity ratio of almost 50 per
cent and Hydro-Electric of about 45 per cent.
Mr John Wakeham, the energy secretary, yesterday announced a competition to
find a financial adviser on the privatisation of the coal industry.
