FT  30 APR 91 / Survey of Singapore (1): Preparing for the next lap -
Singapore's success as an entrepot trading nation has given it a standard of
living that is second only to Japan in Asia. However, many sections of the
island republic'smulti-racial society are seeking changes
ONE of the hottest selling itemsin Singapore's book shops this year is a
hardback called The Next Lap. For justSDollars 9 the government-sponsored
book offers Singaporeans a glimpse of the future that Singapore's government
and intellectual elite has mapped out for them into the next century.
The book's title and content are significant. Last year saw the tiny island
republic celebrate its first 25 years as a sovereign independent nation.
Then at the end of November Singapore witnessed its first change ofprime
minister in 31 years as Mr Lee Kuan Yew stepped aside for a second
generation of groomed leaders led by Mr Goh Chok Tong.
Prime Minister Goh and his team have inherited responsibility for a
multi-racial country of just under 2.7m mainly ethnic Chinese people whose
success, as a entrepot trading nation, has given them a standard of living,
measured by a Dollars 12,000 per capita gross national product, second only
to Japan in Asia and ahead of many European nations. However, they are
increasingly demanding change.
Singapore, and its leaders including Mr Lee Kuan Yew, who remains a powerful
figure as senior minister and secretary-general of the ruling People's
Action Party, can be proud of most of what has been achieved. Even though,
as government critics suggest, it has been at the cost of creatingan
antiseptic and dull society which leaves little room for individual
creativity or imagination and no room for real political opposition - as
those who havedared stick their heads above the political parapet have
discovered.
Even some of the PAP's younger backbenchers such as outspoken Mr Davinder
Singh, a lawyer who probably speaks for many who are dissatisfied with the
style of government, complain in parliament that 'government runs virtually
everyaspect of our lives.'
Singapore is a meritocracy run by a hand-picked, well-paid elite who feel
that the rights of the individual must be subservient to the perceived
greater good of the community. Singaporean-style parliamentary democracy has
been tailored to this end.
Such concerns have their roots in Singapore's relatively recent birth as a
nation. After surviving the trauma of Japanese occupation, Singapore won
independence from Britain only tobe thrown out of the newly-created
Malaysian federation a few years later. Since then, Singapore's older
generation of leaders have mostly succeeded in channeling this sense of
isolation and vulnerability into a powerful driving force for economic
advancement. This is in spite of the substantial number of part-time,
elderly and other poorly paid hourly workers who have not fairly shared in
Singapore's economic rise.
Nevertheless, a panoramic view of the city reveals a bustling port, the
busiest in the world, skyscraper office blocks rivalling those in Tokyo, New
York or London, and smart, clean, streets and highways. There are hefty
fines for littering, smoking in public places, jay-walking and many other
misdemeanors. The mass transit underground system is almost as good, and
much less crowded than Tokyo's, Changi airport, with its new second
terminal,is a symbol of national pride and efficiency.
These achievements, particularly in the field of telecommunications and
information technology, have a longer-term aim. Singapore sees itself as the
Switzerland of Asia, a communications, business and economic hub for the
region.
The list of multinational companies with manufacturing facilities and/or
regional headquarters in Singapore proves the policy has worked. As big
neighbours such as Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand get on the fast track of
development, and Indochina opens up, there will be competitors but, as Prime
Minister Goh says: 'We believe we have many years of head start.'
Singapore's economy, in spite of a few hiccups, including the recession of
the mid-1980s, has thrived. Last year exports roseby almost 10 per cent to a
record SDollars 95.2m - almost half as much again as the country's GNP,
while its foreign exchange reserves, believed to be understated, grew by
SDollars 9.9bn to SDollars 48.5bn.
This year, the government is forecasting GNP growth of between 3 and 6 per
cent, down from 8.3 per cent last year. Based on an impressive first quarter
performance, growth is likely to be at the top end ofthis range or above.
This worries the country's cautious economic planners who are always alert
to the risk of overheating and who believe the maximum sustainable
non-inflationary annual growth rate is about 6 per cent.
Singapore isshort of land, but an even more critical constraint is labour.
Government planners reckon that the country could accommodate 4m people and
has set a target birth rate of 50,000 a year, but in spite of an active
campaign to encourage a higher fertility rate, birth rates are failing to
match the population replacement rate. There are political constraints on
expanding the substantial percentage of imported labour.
To offset these weaknesses the government is encouraginglabour intensive
manufacturing industry to move offshore, particularly to its lower wage cost
'growth triangle' partners, Indonesia's Riau islands, and Malaysia's Johor
state.
However, Singapore recognises that it must maintain a cost competitive
manufacturing base, even if the service sector, and financial services in
particular, continue to account for a growing proportion of GNP. Therefore
it is attempting to move local manufacturing further up the capital
intensive technology ladder identifying and promoting niche high technology
industriessuch as bio-technology.
Continued economic success is important for political reasons. As Prime
Minister Goh says: 'So long as the economy is growing, there is plenty for
everybody, I don't think people will fight over small things. But if the pie
is shrinking, that will be the real test of whether we are cohesive, solid
or whether we are fragile.'
Singapore's new prime minister accepts that gradual changes, to make
Singapore a more gentle, gracious, compassionate and entrepreneurial society
with less government intervention and more privatisation are necessary.
In spite of some immediate changes,there is still some scepticism among some
Singaporeans that Mr Goh will, or can, deliver on all his promises. Critics
point out that many of the most restrictive laws, including the internal
security act, are still on the statute books, and likely to remain so for
some time.
This is probably because while Singapore's new leaders accept that some
changes are inevitable they worry about speed and direction. While it is
said the people trust the government more than their stockbrokers it is
apparent that the government does not believe Singaporeans are mature enough
to make all their own decisions - for example on how they spend or save
their money.
Rapid change in Singapore is therefore unlikely. The government is trying to
foster a Singaporean identity, defined in terms of shared or common values -
most of which would have been readily accepted in the Victorian West - while
emphasising the importance of preserving ethnic roots, be they Chinese,
Malay or Indian.
Perhaps the greatest dilemma Mr Goh's team faces is how to pace the next
lap. If Singapore's rules and regulations are eased too quickly the
government risks losing some central controls. If change is too slow, or
fails to materialise, the expectations Mr Goh has built up among Singapore's
younger citizens in particular, could result in another setback in popular
support for the PAP at the ballot box in general elections due by the end of
1993. The wrong pace might risk Singapore slipping in the economic
sweepstakes of the fastest growing region in the world.
