FT  07 MAY 91 / Survey of South Africa (1): In search of a coalition - The
country is changing beyond recognition as apartheid's pillars are
systematically removed. Violence, however, has delayed talks on a new
constitution. Patti Waldmeir discusses whether a peaceful transition to a
multiracial democracy is still possible
THE first post-apartheid government in South Africa will not be a black one.
By choice or by necessity, white and black political parties will rule by
coalition. After 42 years of domination by a single party - the National
Party (NP), which imposed apartheid to keep blacks out of power - South
Africa is about to enter the era of power sharing.
On the face of it, there seems little evidence that South Africa's
democratic culture is strong enough to support power sharing: since 1984,
nearly 10,000 blacks have been killed in political and tribal rivalry;
displays of political intolerance by both whites and blacks sully the image
of the new South Africa.
But in the 15 months since true multi-party politics became possible in
South Africa - following the legalisation of black political organisations
in February last year - it has become increasingly apparent that no single
political party will be able to govern alone. Even the African National
Congress (ANC), the only organisation with a chance of gaining an overall
majority in non-racial elections, has made clear it would include opposing
political parties in the first post-apartheid government.
'A coalition government is what we're fighting for,' says Mrs Lyndall
Shope-Mafole deputy chairperson of the ANC youth league. Mrs Shope-Mafole
represents South Africa's largest radical constituency: the 400,000-strong
youth league, the 'lost generation' whose youth and education fell victim to
the struggle.
The rhetoric of the liberation struggle demanded a 'transfer of power'. But
the reality is that, while the National Party has given up on apartheid, it
has by no means given up its ambitions to rule. Shocked and traumatised by
the decision to let blacks fully into politics for the first time in 350
years, the National Party one year ago seemed uncertain of its future role.
'One of our problems was to get away from the notion that our future
political function would be to fight a rearguard action to protect minority
rights,' says Mr Gerrit Viljoen, minister of constitutional development the
government's and chief constitutional negotiator.
Now the Nationalists are convinced of a much grander political future: the
past year has allowed them to take the measure of their political opponents,
and they are not impressed. They have found it embarrassingly easy to remain
one step ahead of the ANC on tactical issues: rather than retiring
gracefully to declare victory, the ANC continues to cling to sanctions with
ever less effect; and its threats of mass protest action ring hollow. It is
poorly organised and inefficient, and lacks policies on a range of important
issues.
Government officials now speak openly of forming a 'Christian democrat'
coalition or alliance, to claim the middle ground in South African politics,
and to oppose a 'socialist' coalition led by the ANC and its close ally, the
South African Communist Party (SACP). They believe that most whites, a
potentially large number of the 3m coloured (mixed race) and 1m Indians, and
a significant number of black Africans would support such a grouping. The
Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party - which claims 2.2m members and shares many
policies with the reborn Nationalists - would be a likely member; they argue
a surprisingly large number of moderate blacks might vote for Mr F. W. de
Klerk, the National Party NP leader and President.
'I have no doubt that when the real electoral process is in the offing . . .
there will be a moderate alliance in which the National Party will play an
important part which has more than an even chance to win an election,' Mr de
Klerk told the Financial Times in an interview (see page 6).
No such election is likely until 1993 or 1994, however, and much can happen
before this prediction is tested. For the moment, Pretoria knows it cannot
manage without the ANC. Indeed, senior Nationalists concede that a stable
future government would have to include all three major players: Inkatha,
the National Party, and the ANC.
Yet government appears to prefer a chastened ANC - perhaps on the principle
that it will prove a more realistic negotiating partner. The extraordinary
rapport which existed briefly last year between Afrikaner nationalists and
African nationalists has been put under serious strain by the violence;
senior ANC officials now say openly they do not trust Mr de Klerk.
'It's very hard to accept that this very able police force which purged
every form of resistance to the white man now cannot make arrests to stop
the killing,' says Mr Franklin Sonn, a prominent anti-apartheid politician.
Government rejects ANC allegations that a 'third force' among the police is
responsible for the fighting. It denies any intention to let violence
continue. 'The violence made the point that apartheid failed to make: that
the problem of ethnicity, black ethnicity, is real in South Africa,' one
senior Nationalist says somewhat ingenuously, given that apartheid aimed to
entrench ethnicity. He adds, however: 'It is just harming us now, it is
hurting business confidence and undermining support for a new constitution,
not to mention the human suffering . . .'
It is also undermining the authority of the 72-year-old Mr Mandela, who has
almost single-handedly coaxed the recalcitrant ANC to the negotiating table.
'Ninety per cent of our supporters think we've sold out,' says a leading
member of the ANC's national executive committee. Under these circumstances,
says Mr Zola Skweyiya, another ANC official, 'people can just go wild'.
Economic conditions, too, foster instability: with the economy in recession
and thousands joining jobless queues each week, conditions could hardly be
worse for negotiations.
Almost as a gesture of desperation, the ANC last month issued an ultimatum
to Pretoria on the violence: take steps to end it, or see the ANC boycott
talks on a new constitution. That ultimatum expires on Thursday and there
still seems a fair chance negotiations will indeed be suspended,
notwithstanding last week's initiative by Mr de Klerk, outlining a package
of security measures and offering main opposition parties seats in a broader
based cabinet. But neither side can afford a long interruption: lower-level
talks are likely to continue; and attempts to set up a forum for
constitutional talks should resume soon after the ANC elects new leaders at
its conference in June.
The pace of change could accelerate after those talks, which should
revitalise an ANC national executive dominated by elderly exiles with little
experience of modern South Africa. Younger men and women from trade unions
and civic organisations - veterans of shopfloor and local government
negotiations - are likely to be elected to an expanded national executive.
Sometime after that, the Multi-Party Conference (which must include Inkatha
as well as a wide range of other parties) will be convened to agree on a
mechanism to draw up a constitution - and, it is hoped, to agree basic
constitutional principles. Chances are that the conference will eventually
be transformed into a 'constituent assembly' - meeting the ANC's demand for
such a body, while assuaging the Nationalists' fear of domination.
The conference could also perform a consultative role: gradually, it would
share responsibility for government functions such as education and
security; the national budget would be drawn up with its advice. In short,
South Africa would have a form of interim government - another key demand
made by the ANC, but so far rejected by Pretoria.
The way would then be clear to agree a new constitution; common ground has
recently begun to emerge here as well. Both sides are committed to a system
of checks and balances involving an independent judiciary, a bill of rights,
and a bicameral legislature. Many differences remain: there is likely to be
a fierce battle over the NP's demand for proportional representation in the
executive, and for devolution of power to community level. But in the words
of one ANC negotiators: 'The constitution is the least of our problems.'
The process will be lengthy nonetheless, with South Africa's first
non-racial elections unlikely before the term of the current parliament
expires near the end of 1994. But whether or not the constitution demands
it, the new South Africa is likely to be ruled by coalition for years to
come: a ponderous and unwieldy form of government for a country whose
economic problems require urgent action; but its best hope for peace in the
post-apartheid era.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
KEY FACTS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Area                                          1,233,404 sq km*
Population                              36.5m (1990 estimate)*
Average Exch Rate 1990                 Dollars 1=R2.58 (Rand)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
ECONOMY
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        1989            1990
Total GDP (Dollars bn)                  88.9           102.5
Real GDP growth (%)                      2.1            -0.8
GDP per capita (Dollars )               2945            3317
Consumer price(%change pa)              14.7            14.4
Manufac. prod(%change pa)               +0.4            -1.7
Mining prod(%change pa)                 -1.3            -2.2
Reserves including gold (Dollars bn)     2.0             2.4
Discount rate (% pa,year end)           18.0            18.0
JSE industs index (%change)            +43.7            +8.2
Total external debt (Dollars bn)        20.6            20.0
Current account balance (Dollars bn)     1.2             2.2
Exports (Dollars bn)                    22.2            23.0
Imports (Dollars bn)                    16.9            16.8
Trade balance (Dollars bn)               5.3             6.2
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
* = including 'independent' homelands Source: IMF, Datastream,
Economist Intelligence Unit.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
