FT  30 APR 91 / Taiwan's bridge to the mainland: As Taipei prepares to end
its 42-year-old state of 'war' with China, Peter Wickenden reports on the
challenges facing the tiny island state
As Taiwan's ruling Kuomintang (Chinese Nationalist party, KMT) prepares to
end a 42-year state of 'war' with the communists in Peking, it is bracing
for the first time to fight for its own survival.
Tomorrow, President Lee Teng-hui will announce the end of the 'period of
communist rebellion', declared by Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist government
in 1948, one year before being driven off the mainland by Mao Zedong's
communist forces in 1949.
In one stroke, Mr Lee will set Taiwan rolling towards relative democracy
under a representative government, and also open the door to a new
relationship with Peking.
To bolster their claim to be the real government of China, the Nationalists
suspended the constitution and the president assumed extensive emergency
powers during the 'rebellion'. They also froze in office indefinitely all
mainland-elected members of both the National Assembly, which itself amends
the constitution and elects the president, and the legislative Yuan, or
parliament.
Four decades on, still represented in these two bodies by a minority of
Taiwan-elected members among a sea of ancient, bearded and doddery
mainlanders, the general public rose up in mass protest last year, demanding
rapid and thorough electoral reform.
After more than 200 meetings involving thousands of people, the KMT came up
with a constitutional reform plan that the old cadres in the assembly
reluctantly passed in exchange for party cash. When President Lee tomorrow
ends the state of war with China, the old guards' tenure will be ended. Then
the Taiwanese will elect a new parliament and National Assembly.
The new assembly, to be elected at the end of this year, will go on to
debate further reforms such as direct presidential elections, whether to opt
for a presidential or cabinet system, and the restructuring of electoral and
administrative areas.
The KMT regime will now have to prove its legitimacy at the ballot box, and
in theory it is laying itself open to a fair fight. However, to KMT
conservatives who dream of reconquering China, and to the younger
Taiwan-born cadres who have vested interests in the maintenance of the
status quo, defeat by another party is unthinkable.
Thus one of the most controversial parts of the KMT's reform plan is that
the president will retain his emergency powers. He will also remain directly
in charge of the powerful National Security Council, which co-ordinates
intelligence and anti-subversion activities.
Mr James Chen, deputy secretary-general of the opposition Democratic
Progressive party, says: 'The president will still have dictator-like
powers. The National Security Council falls outside legislative control.'
The DPP fears that the council, and two related bodies, will direct their
activities against the still-outlawed Taiwan independence movement as the
threat from China's communist regime diminishes.
President Lee assured the nation in a speech last week that he would use his
powers prudently.
The new National Assembly and parliament will also uphold the government's
most enduring shibboleth - that it is the sole legitimate government of all
China. About a quarter of the seats in the two bodies will be reserved for
nominal 'mainland' representatives, who will be elected in Taiwan but have
no constituency. This arrangement serves to convince Peking that the island
is not claiming to form a truly independent government, because it retains
an imagined link with the mainland.
The KMT's plan also includes a few seats for representatives of Chinese
communities overseas. The KMT believes ethnic Chinese worldwide should have
a say in the future of their homeland, and that some of them are rich and
powerful enough to lobby foreign governments on Taiwan's behalf. The DPP
wants these seats scrapped, arguing that the loyalty of anyone who holds two
passports and rarely visits Taiwan is questionable.
The DPP's Mr Chen thinks the KMT's continued monopoly of television and
radio will prevent his party getting more than a quarter of the votes in the
new National Assembly, and that this will enable the KMT to dictate the
course of future reforms.
But even with the dice heavily loaded in the KMT's favour, the DPP won a
fifth of the contested seats at a general election in December 1989, held to
fill seats vacated by mainlanders who had died in office.
Under the KMT's scheme, the new legislature will not be elected until late
1992, and although the new National Assembly is to be elected this year, it
will not elect a new president until Mr Lee Teng-hui's six-year term is up
in 1996.
That gives the KMT a breathing space in which to shore up its image in the
public policy areas where it has failed badly: corruption, law and order, a
seriously overloaded infrastructure, appalling pollution, and squalid urban
living conditions.
Conservative KMT premier Mr Hau Pei-tsun has therefore conceived a Six-Year
Plan costing 8.2 trillion New Taiwan dollars (more than Dollars 300bn),
which requires bond issues on an unprecedented scale. It also includes a new
north-south motorway, a high-speed railway, several urban rapid transit
systems, a fourth nuclear power plant, airports, industrial zones, parks,
leisure facilities, and shopping centres.
Starting just weeks after the end of the 'war', the Six-Year Plan is already
helping Taiwan break out of diplomatic isolation, which to its citizens has
often meant embarrassment and inconvenience in foreign travel and business.
Anxious to get a slice of the public works pie, France, Germany and Italy
have all recently broken diplomatic taboos by sending senior officials to
Taipei, while Australia, New Zealand and Canada have ignored Peking's
protests about violation of its 'sovereignty', and negotiated direct air
links. European countries are likely to follow.
From a weak point a year ago when it was ravaged by factionalism and forced
to bend to public pressure, the KMT is beginning to pull itself together. In
gradually strengthening and legitimising its rule by reform, it also hopes
to weaken and supplant growing support for the Taiwan independence movement.
Opinion poll results suggest that rather than outright independence, the
Taiwanese want two things that are contradictory, and are pushing the KMT
towards pursuing them: international recognition and the maintenance of
their de facto independence; and an open policy toward China that gives the
Taiwanese freedom to go there and make money.
Taking this into account, the KMT's long-term goal, with no timetable
attached, seems to be a kind of superficial unification with the mainland
that would leave Taiwan with its government, its system and its own
international connections intact. Anything remotely similar to the Hong Kong
arrangement, where Peking ultimately acquires control, would be regarded as
an unacceptable sell out, which the KMT would not risk attempting.
Jumping the gun that ends the war with a confidence born of investment
dollars and economic clout, the government on Sunday sent a semi-official
delegation to talk to Peking for the first time in 40 years.
Nominally private but mainly government funded, the Straits Exchange
Foundation is headed by top KMT politburo members, and takes its orders
directly from the cabinet's Mainland Affairs Commission.
Top KMT mainland policy architect Ma Ying-jiu says that unification, and
even direct trade and transport across the Taiwan Straits, are a long way
off. The SEF's first job is to facilitate 'people-to-people contacts', in
order to eliminate hostility and build up mutual trust and recognition.
When the SEF group returns from its week-long 'courtesy visit' to Peking,
Taiwan will have recognised the existence, though not the legitimacy, of the
enemy regime. How fast Taiwan continues to open up will depend on the warmth
or otherwise of Peking's reaction.
