FT  23 APR 91 / Technology: At the sharp end of a supply chain - Dave Madden
explains how United Stationers has turned the distribution of its goods into
a fine art
Distribution is one of the duller business ghettos - dusty warehouses,
broken pallets and diesel oil. But the image, and the reality, are beginning
to change.
As Fiat shows off its robot-controlled inventory stacks in glossy
advertisements and IBM switches off the lights in its automated warehouse in
Greenock, it is clear that this Cinderella operation has a new set of
high-tech glad rags.
Britain's high street retailer Marks and Spencer has long appreciated that
sophisticated distribution processes are an important part of supply chain
management. They influence customer loyalty, product differentiation and
profit margins. According to Lee Iacocca, chairman of Chrysler: 'The company
with the best distribution systems and service level will win all the
marbles.'
In short, advanced logistics is no longer a luxury. One consequence of this
shift is the emergence of a new type of wholesale service company where
distribution is just as important as the product that is shipped.
Take paper clips. If you are an office products wholesaler, how do you get
retailers to buy such a simple, undifferentiated item from you, rather than
from any number of your competitors?
The answer, in the US at least, is 'value-added' distribution. United
Stationers, the country's biggest office products distributor, can sell and
ship a single pencil or one box of paper clips and still make a profit.
The same is true on all 25,000 items in its catalogue, from pens to filing
cabinets. And if a customer places an order by 6.00 pm it will be delivered
by 9.00 am the next morning to any location in the US.
Not surprisingly, this demands an extensive physical operation. United
Stationers, based near Chicago, sells products from around 400 manufacturers
to some 10,000 retailers across the US, via 14 regional distribution
centres.
This physical network is entirely dependent on a complex computing and
telecommunications infrastructure: Amdahl 5995 and IBM 3090 mainframes
supported by robotic storage devices from Storage Technology as well as
telephone and satellite communications networks. In all an incremental
investment of some Dollars 200m (Pounds 115m).
United's customers obtain information on the company's inventory via a
computer network which connects their machines to United's system of 1,400
PCs. This automates the ordering process and allows clients to see whether
United has a particular product in stock.
'Our customers enter upwards of 70 per cent of our orders for us,' says
Patrick Murray, IT vice president. 'We do it in lots of different ways. We
talk to everybody's computer. We do it in batch mode, we do it online -
however a customer requires it.'
Ultimately, Murray expects United's terminals to be on the desks of his
customers' customers too, and he intends to apply the same technology to
links with his own suppliers.
Ordering is only part of the value-added process. The sooner the retailer
knows that United has shipped goods, the sooner he can bill his customer and
collect his money, says Murray. Similarly United uses the system to get the
latest manufacturers' pricing information to these retailers, so that they
can manage their prices too.
Giving retailers such access to and control over the ordering and inventory
process, and the imperative to turn orders around in hours, has had serious
implications for United's warehousing operation.
Items are not stored in pre-defined areas. Rather, they are put in the next
available bin, as dictated by United's disparate product range: boxes of
pencils and desks do not take up the same shaped space. The warehouse map is
computer-controlled and the system tracks every individual batch of items.
Surprisingly, this random binning is not completely arbitrary. The system is
able to analyse the inventory and track 'hot' products - high moving items -
and guide them to where they are most accessible.
When a piece of inventory is manually put into store, staff use radio
frequency data entry terminals, complete with bar-coded reading guns, to
update the control system directly on line.
The logical extension of all this, says Murray, is to use similar tools and
the same bar code in the transportation and delivery process so that a
driver can verify that the right carton has been dropped at the right door,
and give proof of delivery. United hopes to introduce such an innovation
this year.
The same integrated technology feeds United's sales and marketing effort.
Its primary marketing tool is a catalogue of products, and United publishes
and distributes some 4m copies a year.
But because the catalogue becomes out of date almost immediately after it is
issued (with products being added or dropped), Murray has to provide regular
updates. He is hoping in the near future, however, to produce an electronic
catalogue, with colour pictures, dimension data and moving price
information.
At the hub of United's operation is a central IT development and operations
staff. Typically this is pared to the bone - 40 people to manage data and
voice communications, systems operations and a help desk (there is no
computer expertise in the regional centres). In addition, Murray has 100
staff in applications development and product introduction.
The effect of this technological commitment is two fold, Murray says. First,
United has grown significantly - it is now a Dollars 1bn company, and one of
just four national office products distributors in the US. Second, its
technology culture has enabled United to set pioneering service levels.
For example, Murray explains: 'We are doing lots of small orders. About 80
per cent of what we sell is not in the same packaging that it came to us in.
We don't sell a whole carton of paper - we'll sell one ream. Now the service
we provide for our reseller says you go out to each of your customers and
you take the orders the way they want them.
'You send the orders to us and we'll package them in such a way that they
can be delivered directly to the end user and you don't have to add labour.
When we put the label on the box the label says it came from you not from
us. Our dealer doesn't have to handle the merchandise at all. The most
profitable dealer is the guy who never sees the merchandise, absolutely
never sees it at all.'
The downside is that higher expectations become institutionalised. Because
United delivers anywhere in the US by the following day, and guarantees to
be in stock on all of its inventory, that has become the service norm.
Similarly United cannot afford to let up on its technical innovation. Murray
claims that the company currently has a lead of six to 12 months, but 'the
competition is pretty good at copying - so we better have the next thing
coming up to keep the gap open. To get the order we've got to be the easiest
company to do business with,' he says.
