FT  27 APR 91 / Higher band considered for council tax
THE GOVERNMENT acknow-ledged yesterday that it may make changes to elements
of its proposed council tax which could lead to higher bills for the
wealthiest households.
The Department of the Environment has asked valuation officers at the Inland
Revenue to look at extending the number of bands from seven to nine -
including an extra category for properties worth more than Pounds 200,000.
There may also be relief for the least wealthy families. Mr Michael
Heseltine, environment secretary, last night confirmed the statistical
exercise was taking place but said it would be wrong to assume it was 'an
instruction to ministers' to change the seven-band system.
At the same time, officials confirmed that Mr Heseltine is to review how the
system will work for the 5,500 residents in the City of London.
That could mean changes to take account of the City's small population and
high property values.
The disclosures - just four days after Mr Heseltine published his proposals
 -followed the publication by the Labour party of leaked documents from the
National Valuation Office.
These set out details of a valuation exercise, planned for completion by May
10, across England and Wales.
Whitehall officials insist a system with seven bands remains the
government's 'prefered option' but admit that changes could follow the
current consultation exercise promised by Mr Heseltine.
Mr David Blunkett, Labour's local government spokesman, said the
government's 'hidden agenda' suggested 'they need a fallback position
because they expect the existing proposal to be attacked for its essential
unfairness'.
According to the leaked documents, valuation officers have been asked to
look at a system with a new band for properties in England worth up to
Pounds 30,000. They also envisage a band for properties worth Pounds 200,000
or more.
That would insert another band above the Pounds 160,000 or more upper band
set out on Tuesday.
Mr Blunkett said valuation officers had been asked to conduct the survey in
complete secrecy, keeping no records and making no contact with the
occupiers of the properties being valued.
Mr Neil Kinnock, Labour leader, last night wrote to the prime minster asking
when 'we shall have the definitive Conservative alternative to the poll
tax?'
Debate on local tax dominates poll battle Page 4
From one bright idea to another Page 7
Council Tax unveiled Wkd III
How much is yours worth? Wkd IV
