FT  19 APR 91 / Survey of the Canary Islands (3): Pressures of integration -
Canarios are wary of full EC membership
WHEN Spain joined the European Community in 1986, the Canaries specifically
excluded themselves from some of the community's more important agreements,
including the common policies on agriculture, fishing, value added tax and
customs relations - exclusions designed to protect and preserve the islands'
free-trade status. If local sentiment were asked to consider which it
distrusts more, Madrid or Brussels, it would have a tough time deciding.
But last December, the autonomous parliament approved legislation calling
for full membership of the EC; the issue is now being being debated in
Brussels and is a subject of considerable lobbying, report-writing and
discussion.
The European Commission has drafted a set of proposals which will allow the
Canaries a 10-year transition period into full membership.
In spite of the apparently successful three-way negotiations between the
commission, Madrid and the Canarian autonomous government, some local
businessmen have called for a referendum on the issue, which could - if ever
staged and if it secured an anti-Euro majority - scotch the whole process.
But as it has been almost a year since the first such calls were made,
without any real sign of such a vote happening, the chances of the Canaries
not becoming fully integrated into the EC are slim.
The changes which are likely to follow and which are likely to cost Madrid
some Pta40bn (Dollars 38.46m) - less than half of what the Canaries'
autonomous government has requested - as compensation for the supposedly
deleterious effects they will have on the islands' economy include:
free access for Canarian agricultural produce to the EC market, but
controlled imports of EC origin;
partial membership only of the customs union, with a 10-year staged
integration with the common tariffs;
special tariff norms for imports of products and goods defined as being of
either basic or special necessity (including those from developing
countries);
transport subsidies.
The proposal to tie the islands into a closer relation with the EC caused a
political furore in early 1989, as a tax revolt on the islands proved a
source of deep political embarrassment for Madrid during its first six-month
stint in the EC presidency.
The revolt centred on the Canaries' local town councils (Cabildos) refusal
to support a 15 per cent reduction in import tariffs in line with the
reductions on the Spanish mainland, as required of Spain following its
admission to the EC on January 1 1986.
Although the Canaries were exempt from many of the Treaty of Rome's
requirements, they were nevertheless obliged to reduce import tariffs in
order to meet EC regulations.
Nor was the islands' autonomous government, under President Lorenzo Olarte
of the Centro Democratico y Social (CDS) party, prepared to back down and
see the tariffs - on which the Cabildos depended for about 60 per cent of
their income - substantially cut, causing an estimated Pta11bn loss of local
government income in 1988.
Canarios were already wary of the impact of full EC membership; local
independent studies conducted in 1987 put the potential loss following from
full EC membership at anything between Pta73.5bn and Pta100.8bn.
The fiscal fight between the Canaries and Madrid has eased, but it has given
way to complex discussions on reform of the islands' special economic and
fiscal status, the so-called Regimen Economico y Fiscal (REF). These debates
are still proceeding and their outcome will determine the future economic
course of the islands.
One of the most important proposed changes is the creation of a Canarian
General Indirect Tax (Impuesto General Indirecto Canario), similar to the
EC's VAT structures, but which would operate at a lower rate and at zero for
a number of items affecting small businesses and consumers of basic food and
other necessities.
The Canaries' accession to full EC membership will be accompanied by an
EC-directed economic support programme, the 'Programa de Opciones
Especificas de la Lejania e Insularidad de las Islas Canarias', or POSEICAN,
which is designed to take account of the islands' distance and isolation
from the rest of the community.
Despite the fears of many Canarios that full EC membership would lead to the
end of many of their special tax privileges, the end of their successful
banana export programme to a captive Spanish market and a subjugation to
Madrid's dictates over local fiscal authority, it is now clear that by June
 -when the European Commission is likely to pronounce on the precise terms
of the islands' new status within the EC  - a suitable compromise will have
been reached. The islands' special tax regime will be suitably re-worded and
subtly tinkered with, and yet another crack in the supposedly 'common'
market will have been papered over.
As a sweetener to ease the growing pains, the director-general of economy
and planning in the Canaries' government, Mr Jose Cristobal, announced on
April 10 that up until 1993 the islands will receive a total of Pta268.796bn
from EC support grants - enough, perhaps, to sugar even the bitterest pill.
