FT  08 MAY 91 / Arts: The Brighton Festival's opening events
The Brighton Festival is here again - a gaudy, striped umbrella covering all
sorts of things, mixed by Gavin Henderson, the artistic director, with a
flair which eludes most festivals trying to be genuinely popular as well as
genuinely cultural. The programme deserves and indeed requires a beady
search for quieter pleasures half-hidden among the jumble of comics, pop
art, jazz, dance and drama.
Evening recitals in the Pavilion, chamber concerts at All Saints Church in
Hove during which the Chilingirian Quartet play three of Mozart's superb
String Quintets, a much better way of celebrating the bicentenary than going
on and on doing the usual operas, are among the safe havens. In the final
week Brighton incorporates the Charleston Festival, commemorating the 50th
anniversary of Virginia Woolf's death. The enterprising New Sussex Opera
will give the European premiere of Kurt Weill's Lost in the Stars, one of
his American works.
Through most of this there runs an American thread: Ives, Ruggles, Copland,
Barber and MacDowell occur in concerts programmes. At the first big musical
event in the Dome on Sunday, a Europe Day Concert with the BBC Symphony
Orchestra under Alexander Lazarev from the Bolshoi in Moscow, gave the place
of honour to Ives's Second Symphony. They preceded it with a performance of
the Academic Festival Overture of Brahms of such muscular attack (for once
the work sounded more festive than academic) that the presumable intention
of showing how the two composers made different use of popular tunes
misfired. In the event Ives's homespun scoring in this work made even sober
Brahms sound like Rimsky-Korsakov. The meditative movements, like deeply
felt gropings towards as yet unwritten works of Vaughan Williams, came off
best. The free-for-all ending was fun when it came.
This was two concerts in one, the second half consisting of three excerpts
from Gotterdammerung with Lazarev, a conductor of distinctive talent,
demonstrating why Wagner wanted, and got, a sunken orchestra pit at
Bayreuth. In the Dome orchestral colours come at you hot and strong without
blending. To the broad-river view of Wagner, Lazarev prefers abrupt phrasing
and short paragraphs. Conductor and orchestra were not kind to the soprano
soloist, Anne Evans. On stage and with a sunken orchestra, this experienced
Brunnhilde doubtless makes a very different impression. Here, though the
grasp of music and words was unmistakable, the voice barely rode the
orchestra and at the end was almost submerged.
Since the sleazy Dome plays an important role in the Festival, can't they do
something about the interior? It looked a little less depressing this year,
but can there be any major European city with Brighton's pretensions where
the appalling vulgarity of the skimpy false-proscenium curtains and ironwork
screen at the back of the stage, swearing vilely with the biscuit-brown
seating, would be tolerated? There is much to be said for riotous bad taste,
nothing for ignorance, indifference, and no taste at all.
The virtues (decoration apart) of the wide open stage and friendly enclosing
circle were shown on the opening night when the National Theatre, on a rare
visit to the South Coast, brought Tony Harrison's version of what has been
recovered of the Sophoclean satyr-play here called The Trackers of
Oxyrhynchus. Neither Sophocles nor Harrison are this reviewer's business,
yet I must say that, aided by a score for two amplified percussion players
by Stephen Edwards which provided no more and no less than was required and
by the rhythmic verse-chanting and clog-dancing of the satyr-chorus this
made an unexpectedly stimulating evening of opera-ballet.
That the clogs were hellish loud (like those equally insufferable
tormentors, castanets, they are meant to be heard out of doors) was a minor
inconvenience. But the evening was too long. Mozart would have had the
cutting scissors out in no time - and of course, he would have felt
perfectly at home with the four-letter words which Harrison uses to the
point of diminishing returns. But the show took one a great deal further
than most designedly 'music theatre' occasions.
