FT  08 MAY 91 / International Company News: PWA warns of bad year after loss
for quarter
PWA, parent company of Canadian Airlines International, has warned that it
does not expect to show a profit in 1991. It says the recession continues to
hold down recovery in air travel.
Canadian Airlines is the country's largest airline after Air Canada. Both
airlines have reduced their staffing by several thousand. Operations have
been cut severely, and March traffic results showed declines of around 20
per cent year-to-year in domestic and international travel.
The airlines are selling delivery positions for new fuel-efficient equipment
in their struggle to conserve cash resources into 1992.
PWA suffered an overall first-quarter loss of CDollars 63.8m (USDollars
55.5m), or CDollars 1.70 a common share, against a loss of CDollars 34.2m,
or CDollars 1.09, a year earlier.
Operating revenues were CDollars 661m against CDollars 662m and operating
expenses CDollars 742m against CDollars 704m. The operating loss was
CDollars 80.9m, against CDollars 41.7m.
Mr Rhys Eaton, PWA president, said the airline was ready to co-operate with
Air Canada on certain routes, with government approval. 'We could feed each
other traffic as Canadian carriers rather than turn traffic over to foreign
carriers,' he said.
Britain and the US are the only markets large enough to sustain two Canadian
carriers, he added, but a merger between the two airlines was unlikely.
Plans for an alliance between Canadian Airlines and a big US carrier are on
hold until 'open skies' talks to liberalise the Canada-US air treaty are
concluded.
DLT, the feeder subsidiary of Lufthansa, is prepared to back fully
Bombardier's plans to stretch its 50-passenger Regional Jet to 68-75
passengers.
'We could become lead customer for the bigger version as we did for the
50-passenger aircraft being test-flown this spring,' said Mr Gerhard Schmid,
DLT managing director.
Canadair, Bombardier's aerospace division, rolled out its 50-passenger
aircraft at the Montreal assembly plant this week.
