FT  20 APR 91 / International Company News: Fletcher Challenge issues profit
warning
NEW ZEALAND'S Fletcher Challenge has warned that earnings for the present
fiscal year will be about 10 per cent lower than 1990, partly due to losses
suffered by its Canadian forest products business.
Fletcher, New Zealand's biggest company, reported a 9.4 per cent rise in net
earnings for the half-year to last December. But 72 per cent-owned Fletcher
Challenge Canada slid to a CDollars 10.7m (USDollars 9.22m) loss (18 cents a
share) in the first three months of 1991, from earnings of CDollars 15.7m
(26 cents a share) a year earlier.
Mr Hugh Fletcher, chief executive officer, said the Canadian results were a
reflection of 'difficult' trading conditions in many of the group's
businesses.
Fletcher owns 100 per cent of another large western Canadian forest products
company, Crown Forest. Crown does not disclose details of its financial
performance, but all North American forestry companies have taken a hard
knock from over-capacity in the pulp and newsprint sectors, and a slump in
lumber demand as a result of the weak housing market.
Fletcher Canada blamed a slide in pulp prices of almost USDollars 200 a
tonne in the past year, coupled with soft markets for newsprint and
lightweight coated papers, for much of the first-quarter loss. It said a
further curtailment of newsprint production will probably be necessary to
cope with over-supplied markets.
The company recently said it was looking for an equity partner for its
Crofton mill in British Columbia, one of the world's biggest pulp and paper
complexes. It also plans to dispose of some of its wood manufacturing
businesses as part of efforts to raise capital to modernise other
facilities.
Mr Ian Donald, Fletcher Challenge Canada's chief executive, complained that
stricter environmental regulations, 'some arbitrarily imposed without
sufficient scientific proof that they are necessary,' have greatly raised
operating and capital costs.
Noranda Forest, whose interests include a controlling stake in MacMillan
Bloedel of Vancouver, plunged into the red in the first quarter with a loss
of CDollars 38m (USDollars 32m) (41 cents a share), against net earnings of
CDollars 6m (1 cent) a year earlier. Sales dropped by 14 per cent to
CDollars 1.03bn. Noranda does not expect to be profitable in the second
quarter, despite signs of revival in North American housing.
