FT  15 APR 91 / Soviet anti-crisis plan skirts controversy: Important
concessions are now being made to the republics
THE SOVIET government's proposed revised anti-crisis programme, aimed at
halting 'economic chaos and collapse', comes against the grim backdrop of a
12 per cent fall in national income for the first quarter of this year.
In a significant concession to the increasingly independence-minded
republics, the programme, distributed to deputies ahead of a full debate
next Monday, makes no mention of a need to sign the proposed Union Treaty,
merely suggesting republics sign agreements securing a unified economic
policy and a single market.
The programme makes key concessions to the republics. It offers to withdraw
recent central government restrictions on exports as well as swingeing taxes
on foreign currency earnings of Soviet enterprises. It limits central
government responsibilities foreseen by initial drafts of the Union Treaty,
but requires in return that republican leaders ban strikes for a year and
share a common financial and social policy, as well as responsibility for
paying off the country's foreign debt.
The programme envisages radical measures to attract foreign investment,
including concessions to foreigners (to be agreed with republics over the
next two months), and legislation, to be presented by June 1, allowing
repatriation of profits in hard currency. In a move of particular
significance to the former Comecon countries, hit by the switch from rouble
to dollar trading, it also relaxes a ban on foreign barter deals. It will
allow barter deals which bring essential foodstuffs and consumer goods into
the country, and allows a resumption of payments to eastern Europe on a
clearing basis and in national currencies.
By stressing the need for foreign investment and enhanced co-operation with
international organisations such as the IMF, the text also retreats from
earlier xenophobic comments by Mr Valentin Pavlov, the Soviet prime
minister.
It is proposed in the programme to stabilise the rouble by moving to
internal convertibility of the currency and expanding the domestic hard
currency market while banning foreign currency deals between enterprises. It
intends to support the ailing Soviet currency through tough fiscal policy
and raising the supply of goods, partly by selling off housing, plant and
equipment.
The anti-crisis programme, however, skirts around controversial areas which
helped account for last year's rejection by conservatives of the radical
500-Day economic reform Programme. It makes no mention for instance of
breaking up collective farms and rapidly rationalising and privatising heavy
industry proposed in the plan drawn up by economists under Professor
Stanislav Shatalin.
Without explicitly endorsing private land ownership, it does, however,
encourage republics to continue the privatisation of agriculture (Russia and
other republics have already adopted legislation allowing the sale of land
to peasants). In an attempt to avoid a repeat of last year's problems in
collecting the harvest, it also provides for the use of of troops to
collect, process, and transport this year's crops.
The programme provides for the privatisation of small businesses with
emphasis on food trade and services, saying two-thirds of such enterprises
should be out of state hands by the end of 1992. But it sets no targets for
privatisation of big and medium-sized enterprises, saying this should be
pursued jointly by the centre and the republics.
At the same time, it provides for an emergency regime of centralised food
and grain distribution, and the maintenance of centrally-planned contracts
for industrial enterprises for a one-year-period.
This means that small businesses will be hard pressed to get hold of goods
to sell in a privatised retail network.
While the programme provides for achieving the liberalisation of most prices
by October 1992, by gradually eliminating administrative controls, it is not
clear how the government will cope with hyper-inflationary pressures.
