FT  30 APR 91 / US may accept compromise on Antarctic mining moratorium
THE US is considering making a significant foreign policy reversal after
agreeing yesterday to study a plan that could prevent mining in the
Antarctic indefinitely.
The US appeared to soften its opposition to a total ban after Spain and
Norway presented a last-minute compromise to a consultative conference
ofAntarctic Treaty members in Madrid.
The new draft protocol centres on agreeing a 50-year mining moratorium which
could be lifted by agreement of a 75 per cent majority of the treaty's
consultative members, whose numbers are likely to have increased by then
from the present 26 countries.
That, crucially to US sensitivities, would break the treaty's 30-year
tradition of decision-making by consensus. But, in order to satisfy
Australia and France, which support an eternal mining ban, the draft
protocol also says all current 26 consultative members would have to be
included in the 75 per cent.
As thingsstand now, that would give any one of the countries opposed to
mining - by farthe majority in Madrid  - a veto on lifting the moratorium.
But Mr Curtis Bohlen, the chief US delegate, insisted that, if accepted by
all delegations, Washington might accept it 'because it is clearly not a
permanent ban. It does not foreclose the option of a future generation
deciding for itself, which is what we have wanted.'
Mr Bohlen, said the proposals represented 'a major step' by all 26 countries
involved in the consultative process. He said he had passed the draft on to
Washington for study, implying that he had seen sufficient signsof movement
from Australia to prompt a shift in the US position. 'We were at atotal
deadlock on Friday,' Mr Bohlen said.
Mr John McCarthy, head of the Australian delegation, which came to Madrid
last week determined to defend an eternal ban on mining, said after hearing
the proposals: 'I think one can now look forward to the conclusion of (an)
agreement before the end of the year with a lot more optimism."
The delegation from the UK, which supports the US position, was not
commenting on the new proposals, but is also expected to take them back to
London for consultation.
The Madrid meeting is the second session of a consultative conference begun
last year in Chile and Mr Bohlen said a third session could be called
quickly, perhaps in June, to ratify a new agreement.
The US, however, appears to have won an important concession of its own as
the draft protocol suggests that a key environmental protection committee
being established under the treaty not be given decision-making powers.
Washington and London had feared that the committee would become quickly
politicised.
The draft protocol to the treaty says the committee should act only in an
advisory capacity to the consultative members, who would have the final
sayon any environmental matters.
Apart from mining, the draft protocol says decisions in future could be
taken by a simple majority.
This is seen as a further concession to US frustration at the treaty's
consensus tradition.
