FT  29 APR 91 / Group of Seven: Global interdependence underscored -
Communique from G7 meeting in Washington
Following is an edited version of the statement issued last night by the
finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven nations
meeting in Washington.
The Ministers and Governors underscored that their countries are part of a
highly interdependent global economy in which economic power and
responsibility is shared. Accordingly, they reiterated that the pursuit of
international economic policy co-ordination is essential to achieving their
common objective of sustained growth with price stability and reaffirmed
their support for the policy co-ordination process.
With this in mind, the Ministers and Governors reviewed the global economic
situation and prospects in the aftermath of the Gulf War. They noted the
signs of prospective economic recovery and lower inflation in those
countries which are in recession. They also noted the persistence of high
real interest rates and the slowing of economic activity in those countries
which until recently had been experiencing strong expansion.
Against this background, Ministers and Governors emphasised the importance
of monetary and fiscal policies which provide the basis for lower real
interest rates and a sustained global economic recovery with price
stability. They believed that such a medium-term strategy was the best way
of reducing potential risks and uncertainties in the current outlook. They
reiterated the importance of policies aimed at increasing global savings.
They agreed to monitor the situation closely and to take actions as needed
within the co-ordination process with a view to achieving a sound recovery
and a growing world economy.
Given the close linkage between trade and growth, the Ministers and
Governors also emphasised the importance of bringing the Uruguay Round (of
trade talks under Gatt) to a successful conclusion.
The Ministers and Governors also reviewed developments in international
financial markets and reaffirmed their commitment to co-operate closely on
exchange markets.
The Ministers and Governors welcomed the reform efforts under way in Central
and Eastern Europe, and in Latin America, Africa, and Asia.
They agreed that a strong global economic recovery and open markets in the
major industrial countries will provide necessary support for these efforts.
. .
The Ministers and Governors encouraged developing countries to continue the
pursuit of market-oriented reforms, and underscored the importance of active
IMF and World Bank support for this effort, both through conditionality and
financing. In this connection, they reaffirmed their commitment to implement
the increase in IMF quotas by the end of the year.
