FT  26 APR 91 / Lifestyle treatment to cure the nation's ills: The healing
process between government and doctors
DEVELOPMENT of a programme to raise health standards in Britain will
dominate discussions between Mr John Major, the prime minister, and medical
leaders at Chequers on Saturday.
Mr William Waldegrave, the health secretary, last month announced his
intention to set specific targets for reducing the death toll from the main
killer diseases. Saturday's meeting will examine ways of achieving the
targets and encouraging healthier lifestyles.
Relations between the government and medical profession developed into
outright hostility during the battles over the government's National Health
Service reforms, which took effect this month. The atmosphere has improved
since Mr Major became prime minister, and his decision to invite leading
doctors and other health specialists to the Chequers meeting is further
evidence of that.
The proposed health targets will contribute to a World Health Organisation
international programme designed to reduce health inequalities within and
between nations by the year 2000. Initiatives are running in Wales and some
English cities, but until now there has been no overall programme.
Debates about the causes of health inequalities - which many health
promotion specialists believe are strongly linked to economic circumstances
 -have proved politically controversial in the past. There were indications
yesterday that the arguments would be revived by the government's latest
plans.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow health secretary, yesterday circulated a draft of the
government's proposals and said they contained no commitment to action by
ministers to achieve the targets.
'This document barely acknowledges that people who are poor are more likely
to be in poor health, and offers not a single target to reduce the health
gap between rich and poor,' he said.
The government hopes that its NHS reforms, which have separated the
financing of health care from its provision, will encourage purchasing
health authorities to determine their populations' health priorities and
allocate resources accordingly.
Many of the lifestyle issues covered by the government's proposed health
targets are related to factors such as diet and smoking habits. Mr Michael
O'Connor, director of the Coronary Prevention Group, said the government
would be countering its own aims of improving the nation's health if it
continued to oppose EC proposals to ban cigarette advertising.
The overall health of the British population, measured in terms of mortality
rates, is improving but there are still big regional and local variations.
Health shortcomings are frequently associated with other social factors such
as poor housing and consequently economic circumstances. Although the
explanations for health variations are complex, a number of recent studies
have argued that there is a powerful link between the quality of health and
deprivation. One of them, a study of London in the 1980s, showed that death
rates among middle-aged men in the capital's inner-city boroughs were double
those of the more affluent outer districts.
