FT  25 APR 91 / Survey of Greece (1): Awkward, but essential - After a year
in office, the Mitsotakis government is still trying to restructure the
economy and modernise public institutions. The challenge it faces is to keep
up the pace of reform without endangering the prevailing political consensus
AT AN age when most politicians are putting the finishing touches to their
memoirs, Mr Constantine Mitsotakis, the 72-year-old Greek prime minister,
has undertaken the awkward task of making Greece more like other European
Community countries.
To succeed, he will need all the tenacity acquired during a career in which
the highest office always seemed to remain just beyond his grasp.
Though the socialists who ran Greece during the 1980s were mired in scandal
and clearly running out of steam, it was only after three elections and
almost a year of political uncertainty that the conservative New Democracy
party managed to scrape a one-seat parliamentary majority last April.
Mr Mitsotakis' chances of heading a stable government improved soon
afterwards when Mr Constantine Karamanlis, the veteran conservative
statesman who led Greece into the European Community a decade ago, was
elected president by parliament.
Mr Karamanlis has no executive powers as president - they were abolished by
the socialists - but as the founder of New Democracy, he wields considerable
influence in the party, especially among potential contenders for the
leadership.
He would almost certainly try to dissuade anyone who felt tempted to lead a
party rebellion aimed at forcing Mr Mitsotakis to retire and provoking a
fresh election. But given the magnitude of the country's economic problems
and the unpopular choices necessary to solve them, this is not likely to
happen in the near future.
Nor are the socialists putting up any serious opposition to the government's
three-year stabilisation programme. Indeed, Mr Andreas Papandreou, the
former prime minister, who was a keen advocate of state ownership while in
office, complained recently that the government was dragging its heels over
privatisation.
Mr Papandreou, also 72 and in uncertain health, has had some ups and downs
with his Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) in recent months as would-be
successors started manoeuvring for position. There are several strong
candidates but, like their conservative counterparts, they seem prepared to
play a waiting game.
In any case, the start of Mr Papandreou's long-awaited trial, together with
three former cabinet ministers, on charges of involvement in the Dollars
200m Bank of Crete embezzlement scandal rallied the party behind him. Mr
Papandreou's refusal to take part in the proceedings, which he claims are
the outcome of a political conspiracy against him, have taken much of the
drama out of the case.
The vengeful mood of two summers ago, when the conservatives joined forces
with the communist-led Left Alliance in a short-lived coalition government
for the exclusive purpose of prosecuting Mr Papandreou and his closest
associates, has faded away. Mr Mitsotakis has nothing to gain from reviving
past bitterness if he wants to keep austerity on track and at the same time
project an image abroad of responsible leadership.
Were it not for a recent shake-up in the Left Alliance, Greek political life
would almost be dull. After a contentious Communist Party congress where he
helped the Stalinist old guard re-establish control, Mr Harilaos Florakis,
the elderly communist leader, finally stepped down. Even more surprising in
a country with only a handful of female politicians, both Communists and the
Left Alliance elected women leaders who have scarcely turned 40. However,
continuing internal battles suggest the Alliance is now more likely to split
than to play a more significant role.
In foreign policy, relations with the United States, always unpredictable in
the Papandreou era, have shown a marked improvement. The signing of new
agreement for the US military bases, once a focus for acrimonious political
debate, was barely commented on. After contributing a frigate to the
multinational force in the Gulf war, Greece is participating for the first
time in a UN peacekeeping force, on the Iraq-Kuwait border.
But Turkey's increased regional importance following the war is causing
concern, while long-buried Balkan issues have resurfaced amid increasing
instability along Greece's northern borders.
Criticism of the government's performance during its first year in office
centres on the sluggish pace of reform. At the political level, Mr
Mitsotakis had little difficulty in obtaining a special European Community
loan to avert an impending balance of payments crisis and also provide some
seed money for long-overdue infrastructure projects.
But fulfilling the terms of the EC loan, essential if Greece is to
participate in the next stage of European economic and monetary union, does
not just mean improving the economic indicators - though this is hard enough
after a decade marked by stagnating industrial output, runaway deficit
growth and a growing black economy.
As a former economy minister, Mr Mitsotakis knows that cutting civil service
payrolls, being less generous with state pensions, broadening the tax base
and curbing tax evasion will require a radical overhaul of the public
administration - and of attitudes among its employees.
The price of failure, the government is beginning to fear, could be Greece's
relegation to satellite status within the Community.
Mr Mitsotakis says: 'We have to apply these policies. I'm prepared to lose
the next election if I have to, but this is the only way forward.'
In fact, the fiercest opposition to change comes from within the
conservative party. New Democracy supporters, together with a number of MPs
and party officials, feel resentful that their leader is trying to break
with the traditional rousfeti system by which public sector positions, from
cleaners to bank governors, were redistributed by the winning party after
each election. After eight years in opposition, and with unemployment
rising, they want a share of the cake.
But if Greece is to bring the economy in line with single market
requirements, let alone catch up with Portugal and Ireland, old habits will
have to be cast aside. A new class of efficient, non-partisan administrators
must be found.
Improving the state education system is crucial: state schools are
ill-equipped and badly-paid teachers take out their grievances in prolonged
strikes. Last winter high school students around the country staged a
three-week sit-in. The protests flared into disturbingly violent street
protests in Athens after a teacher was killed in a riot.
As a short-term solution, the government is trying to attract younger Greek
bankers and economists back from abroad with a fair degree of success. But
only a limited number of talented diaspora Greeks can be expected to put
their careers on hold for the sake of helping out at home.
It will be much harder, for example, to train several thousand tax
inspectors and motivate them to remain honest in a system where superiors
often turn a blind eye to corruption.
And just in the year since the conservatives took over, a new generation of
kareklokentavroi, administrators who cling to their jobs at all costs, has
sprung up among the temporary managers appointed to oversee the
privatisation programme.
Still, Greek businessmen are feeling more cheerful. There is persistent
grumbling about interest rates that hover just below 30 per cent, but the
more efficient companies in the private sector are busy positioning
themselves for an expected surge in growth after 1992. Deregulation of the
labour market, with the introduction of flexible hours and part-time work is
also making life easier.
'There are problems in co-ordinating policy, between the public sector, the
private sector and local government for instance. The government lacks
management skills. But it's moving in the right direction,' says Mr Stelios
Argyros, president of the Federation of Greek Industries.
