FT  22 APR 91 / The Queen's Awards For Export and Technology 1991: The
export experts line up - From marmalade to mites, Andrew Jack surveys some
of the winners
THE Queen's Award crest of cogs intertwined with arrows has not become a
logo that exporters increasingly quest after. There were 849 applications
for the 1991 awards, down from 969 in 1990. Applications have been fairly
static since the awards were launched in 1966, when 734 companies were
scrutinised.
The activities of this year's 118 export achievement award winners do not
accurately reflect the contributions of their sectors towards the balance of
payments: traditional manufacturing companies, exporting physical goods in
crates, still dominate at the expense of services.
The 1991 list contains a number of 'invisible' exporters, including Baring
Securities, the only stockbroking firm to win an award, which generates 98
per cent of its earnings overseas and 70 per cent from Japan alone. Another
winner, London-based Industrial Markets Research, carries out work for
clients in Europe, the US and Japan.
Most of the University of Surrey's foreign earnings come from fees charged
to overseas undergraduate students, with the rest from technology transfer
contracts and post-graduate courses.
Other winners' products are more tangible: B&amp;H Exchangers builds heat
exchangers for marine and industrial use, and Lee Steel Strip, a Sheffield
forge founded in 1888, produces stainless and carbon steel strip.
Some exporters capitalise on British crafts, such as Elsenham Quality Foods,
purveyors of marmalades and preserves, and the Ballantyne Cashmere Company,
which has marketing subsidiaries in the US and Japan for its hand-finished
cashmere garments.
Other companies export goods that they do not actually produce. ICL's
Workstations Product Group designs and distributes personal computers which
are partly assembled overseas; B. A. Peters distributes sports yachts and
cruisers; and Designers Guild designs and markets furnishing fabrics, but
production is sub-contracted.
Some large, well-known names are among the recipients: Formica, which
produces decorative laminate sheets; Weetabix, the breakfast cereal
manufacturer; Cadbury Schweppes Overseas, the chocolate maker; and British
Aerospace, which has a military aircraft division building Harriers, Hawks
and Tornados.
Most awards have gone to small and medium-sized companies with less than 200
employees: 67 per cent compared with 57 per cent last year. Wayfarers, based
in Cumbria, employs just seven staff to arrange walking holidays in the UK
for overseas visitors while JPW Loudspeakers from Plymouth, with eight
employees, exports 70 per cent of its hi-fi speakers. It has overseas
markets in 30 countries, including the Far East.
All winners can demonstrate a rapid growth in exports. The awards are judged
on the increase in volume going abroad over the previous three years
compared with the performance of competitors and general market trends.
Many of the businesses have trebled overseas earnings during the period.
Burn Stewart Distillers of Glasgow, under new ownership and management since
1988, has an intensive overseas programme to sell whisky to Europe, the Fast
East and South Africa. Carrs of Sheffield, the largest UK manufacturer of
silver and silver-plated photograph frames, has also trebled exports and
they now comprise one-third of total production. The company points to the
importance of frequent visits by senior staff and joint participation in
overseas trade fairs to help win foreign contracts.
Even a large, established company such as Leyland Daf, which makes vans and
trucks, has more than doubled export earnings in the past three years while
Synon, a software house, has increased the contribution of overseas earnings
13-fold during the period.
There has been some concern in the past that many of the export award
winners were foreign owned. That proportion is down slightly this year to 23
(or one-fifth of award holders), compared with 27 in 1990. Bechtel, the
engineering contractor, Motorola, the manufacturer of cellular telephones,
and Sun Valley, which processes chickens and turkeys, are all owned by US
corporations. ComDev Europe, which manufactures parts for satellites is
owned by a Canadian company while Komatsu UK, which makes earth moving
equipment, is owned by a Japanese company.
Some home-grown UK businesses have performed sufficiently well to attract
creditors from abroad. Technophone, a cellular phone producer, won export
awards in each of the last three years as well as a technology award in 1988
and has recently been acquired by Nokia of Finland.
The age of companies varies tremendously. Key Organics, which produces
agro-chemical and pharmaceutical screening products, was formed in 1986. At
the other end of the scale, the Old Bushmills Distillery Company in Northern
Ireland has been producing whiskey since 1608. Oxford University Press, the
academic publisher, also began operating in the 17th century.
A handful of winners export 'green' products: Combustion Developments of
Bakewell, Derbyshire, produces pollution monitoring equipment; and Bunting
Biological Control, which exports chiefly to North America and Europe, rears
'beneficial' insects and mites which reduce agricultural damage without the
use of pesticides. Constance Carroll Holdings, based in Skelmersdale,
Lancashire, produces cosmetics which are not tested on animals.
The products of the winning companies often reflect changing global demand.
Securon, a seat belt manufacturer, has responded rapidly to new legislations
in foreign countries making seat belts compulsory. Cabletime, part of
Carlton Communications, has grown rapidly by supplying cable television
equipment across Europe and capturing nearly half of the UK market.
Dunlopillo, the latex bedding and seating producer, highlights its use of
natural materials in contrast to the synthetics used by other manufacturers.
L. A. Rumbold is in a niche of its own, making internal fittings, such as
galleys and seats, for aircraft. It recently won a contract to install
lavatories on Boeing 737 aircraft.
The changes in eastern Europe and the Soviet Union are beginning to be
reflected in order books. The special projects division of A. P. V. Baker
spent months in the Soviet Union during 1988 and 1989 negotiating to supply
machinery for 10 cereal making plants. Payment has been arranged in Ecus and
the Soviet Union's first sugar-coated cornflakes are already being produced.
Several of the winning companies stress their export role in the developing
world. Allmakes sells automotive spare parts and has a large contract to
refurbish Soviet-built trucks in Angola. It has opened local offices with
multilingual staff to help generate business.
The most mobile business operation is Steiner Group. Its hairdressing and
beauty salons hold concessions on 30 cruise liners, including the QE2. Staff
are trained in London, where they sleep in dormitories and work long hours
to ensure that they can cope with the rigours of life on board ship, where
the salons are open from 8am to 8pm every day.
Three companies won both technology and export awards this year: Fibreguide,
which makes units for textile machinery; Bede scientific Instruments, which
produces X-ray analytical equipment; and Synon, which has now won awards for
four consecutive years. A dozen of this year's winners have previously
received the export award within the last five years. Josiah Wedgwood, the
ceramic company, receives its fourth export award this year, the 11th for
the Wedgwood group as a whole since 1966.
When asked about the tangible benefits of a Queen's Award, some executives
mention staff morale and international prestige. While entries each year
seem to be static and unrepresentative of UK exports, many award holders
obviously consider it worth re-applying year after year.
