FT  09 MAY 91 / Bush praises Gorbachev as summit speculation grows
PRESIDENT George Bush yesterday praised his Soviet counterpart for his
'enormous accomplishments' and said he did not want a breach in the
US-Soviet relationship.
Speaking amid speculation in Washington about a summit with Mr Mikhail
Gorbachev in July, Mr Bush for the first time hinted at a sympathetic
attitude to the Soviet request for an extension of Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds
887m) in US export credits, mainly to buy farm products.
He said that, while the Agriculture Department had to make representations,
he had always felt 'when people are hungry, or in need of support, as it
relates to food and nourishment, that we ought to try to help.'
Mr Bush stressed his 'strong and good' relationship with Mr Gorbachev. 'The
Soviet Union is fighting difficult economic times but I am not about to
forget history and what he did in terms of eastern Europe; what he's done in
terms of perestroika and glasnost has my respect. I don't want to see a
breach in a relationship that is very strong, that has served us
extraordinarily well in recent times.'
He was speaking before meeting leaders of the three Baltic republics of
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia. While stressing that the US had never
recognised their incorporation into the Soviet Union, he argued that 'fair
and constructive negotiations' were the only way to resolve their problems
with Moscow, urging that all parties should be 'flexible and pragmatic'.
The US is keen to avoid high visibility protests, and Mr Ivars Godmanis,
Latvia's premier, said later that Mr James Baker, the US secretary of state,
had urged them to 'find some mechanism for independence which would save
face for the Soviet Union.'
No date has been set for the Bush-Gorbachev summit, but there is speculation
that it could take place just before the annual meeting of the Group of
Seven in London in July.
A stumbling block is the dispute over the interpretation of the treaty to
reduce conventional arms in Europe, which was signed last November. Marshal
Mikhail Moiseyev, chief of staff of the armed forces, will visit Washington
next week to try to resolve the remaining problems.
