FT  25 APR 91 / Survey of the Electricity Industry (3): Flotation not
without headaches - The UK's privatisation process puts it at the forefront
of changes in the industry: FT writers look at aspects of the new structure
'LIKE A system of outdoor relief for the City,' is how Mr Frank Dobson,
shadow energy secretary, has scornfully described the long list of advisers
involved in the complex privatisation of the electricity industry.
Certainly the number of people who have been drafted in is large. Last
autumn, one estimate put the total on the government's side at about 700,
and that was excluding those working on the Scottish sale.
Yet the merchant bankers, solicitors, accountants, stockbrokers and printers
involved in the privatisation process hotly deny they are overly rewarded.
'It has tied up lots of our people and frankly we could have made more money
out of doing something else.' said one merchant banker.
It is not surprising that advisers have found it irksome. The telephone
directory-sized prospectus for the 12 regional electricity companies (Recs)
had advisers working a seven-day week from last August to the start of
November.
But while in the run-up to the Recs' Pounds 5.2bn flotation there were no
conflicts of interest between government advisers and those looking after
the companies, during negotiations over the generators, relations between
the Department of Energy and Lazard, representing National Power and SG
Warburg for PowerGen, became ever more fraught.
This was partly because the government kept changing its mind about how to
sell the companies, before they were eventually floated jointly on the
market in February.
Mr John Wakeham, energy secretary, sprung a nasty surprise on PowerGen last
summer when he flirted with the idea of selling it in a trade auction,
underwritten by Hanson, the industrial conglomerate.
SG Warburg had found itself in the complicated position of being told to
erect a Chinese wall inside its corporate finance department, between those
people advising the independent directors of PowerGen and those advising the
managers on a mooted MBO. Then in August Mr Wakeham executed an about-turn
and reverted to the idea of floating the company.
Another surprise came in January when the Department of Energy decided to
sell 60 per cent instead of 100 per cent of the shares in the companies'
combined flotation.
The companies' advisers complained that they had not been properly consulted
on the decision. Many felt the decision had been taken against the advice of
Kleinwort, the government's financial adviser.
But despite all the bitterness that had arisen, the department still
believed it could congratulate itself on its handling of the City during the
sale
because it managed to introduced a number of unusual features into the
flotation structure.
These altered the relationship between the government and the underwriting
institutions, marking a departure from the traditional underwriting method,
whereby investors were allocated shares simply in relation to their
weighting in the London equity market.
However, this would not encourage institutions - who know they would get a
certain amount whatever ludicrous level they suggested - to be forthcoming
in discussions about how the shares ought to be priced. Instead, Kleinwort
carried out a bookbuilding operation based on practice in the Euro-equity
market. Here, institutions were asked to say precisely how much stock they
would take within a range of prices. Those prepared to buy at the keenest
prices were favoured when allocations were made.
There was a further reshuffling of shares between underwriters, just before
stock market dealings started. This so-called 'back-end tender' was designed
to ensure that at least part of the sale - 16 per cent - would be sold at a
price reflecting that at which the shares would start trading, some two
weeks after the 100p partly-paid issue price had been struck.
In the tender, underwriters were invited to rebid for shares at levels above
100p, being required to pay the price they bid. The tender added Pounds 42m
to the Pounds 2.16bn flotation proceeds.
Despite initial concerns that the City would not stomach these ideas, Mr
Wakeham was sufficiently encouraged by the results to declare the flotation
a 'text-book exercise'.
But another surprise was to come. Nomura, the Japanese securities house,
which had not bid aggressively in the back-end tender, began buying large
amounts of stock in the market. This for a short time, pushed the shares to
premiums as high as 140p compared with their 100p partly-paid price - just
what the department and Kleinwort had gone to such trouble to avoid.
Nomura's reasons are still not entirely clear, but it has said it was unable
to bid heavily in the tender to satisfy strong demand at home because of a
Ministry of Finance rule covering offers for sale - the method by which the
shares were being distributed in Japan while the tender was going on. This
would have prevented Nomura offloading shares acquired in the tender at
prices above 100p.
Daiwa, lead manager for Japan in the Scottish companies' sale, is currently
in discussions with the Ministry of Finance to find a way round this
problem.
