FT  27 APR 91 / Fall in US output indicates recession is growing worse
TOTAL US output fell at an annual rate of 2.8 per cent in the first quarter
of this year, confirming a worsening of the recession since Christmas, the
Commerce Department reported yesterday.
The fall in inflation-adjusted gross national product was larger than many
economists expected and will provide further ammunition for the White House,
which is pressing the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates.
Earlier this week, news of a 6 per cent decline in durable goods orders last
month dampened hopes of an early recovery from recession. Most forecasters,
however, still expect the recession to bottom out sometime during the
summer.
The 2.8 per cent annual rate of decline in real GNP in the first quarter
follows an annual rate of decline of 1.6 per cent in the fourth quarter of
last year. Two successive quarterly declines in GNP - the conventional
yardstick of a recession - were last registered during the 1981-82 downturn.
This week, the National Bureau of Economic Research, a group of prominent
American economists, formally dated the onset of recession to last July.
It said the business cycle peak of that month ended an expansion lasting 92
months, the longest since the 1960s and the second longest since 1854.
The bureau's pronouncements carry considerable weight. However, its timing
of the onset of recession clashes with that of the White House and Federal
Reserve. Both have argued that Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August - and the
subsequent rise in oil prices and collapse of consumer confidence -
triggered the recession.
The first-quarter figures indicate that the profile of the recession is
changing. Personal consumption spending, which accounts for about two thirds
of economic activity, declined at an annual rate of only 1.4 per cent,
compared with 3.4 per cent in the final quarter of last year.
But the positive impact of this slowing in the decline of consumption was
offset by a sharp downturn in capital spending and a stalling of export
growth.
Non-residential fixed investment declined at an annual rate of 14 per cent
in the first quarter compared with growth of 0.1 per cent in the fourth
quarter of last year.
