FT  10 MAY 91 / Arts: Elisa Monte - Gardner Centre, Brighton
We have, in the past , been much indebted to the imaginative choice of dance
offered by the Brighton Festival. This year three American modern dancers
have been invited - Bebe Miller, Molissa Fenley, and the Elisa Monte troupe
whom I saw on Wednesday night.
Miss Monte performed with Martha Graham; more significantly she also danced
with Pilobolus and Lar Lubovich, and her work has some clear links with
these latter enterprises. The four works on show on this Brighton visit are
vexatious in the extreme, not least because their scores are of the most
miserable and deafening, ranging from the mindless clangings of Glenn Branca
to Steve Reich churnings. And true to her accompaniments, Miss Monte
produces choreography - if that is not too high-falutin' a word - that
matches an uninspiring sound-track with the nicest judgment of flat movement
ideas.
Miss Monte's procedures - across the past decade in which these pieces were
made - are eminently clear. She is an advocate of the 'follow my leader'
style of creativity, in which one slender idea is repeated, facing one way
then another, then set off against another little movement thought, with the
dreariest of results. She produces dance for the simple-minded, in which the
predictable is sought and unerringly found. In her numbing Dextra Dei, four
men pass enfeebled steps amongst each other in semi-darkness, and
occasionally strike supportive attitudes. It has the sentimental air of yet
another 'Buddy ballet' in which chaps are called upon to face up to the
concept of losing one of their number while being tremendously understanding
and compassionate.
Two other pieces , under the inexplicable titles of Pigs and Fishes and
Dreamtime, are the aerobic classes in hell. The dancers jiggle and wrench
their torsos, writhe and slouch their way about the stage, while mindless
noise is played far too loudly, and though this may seem suitable as a
system of calisthenics, it is nowhere to be accepted as serious
choreography, save by those for whom choreography is the obvious,
ceaselessly re-stated.
Miss Monte's Pilobolus experience is evident in Treading, a dull duet in
which Danita Ridout and David Brown show us that they have control over
their muscles in slow-motion extensions of their limbs. Nothing much else
happens. But nothing happens on any serious level during the evening: this
is posturing thinking itself art, choreography as doodling.
