FT  10 MAY 91 / A spreading saffron sea: The rise of Hindu revivalism in the
run-up to India's general election
As welcoming garlands of marigolds are placed around his neck, he looks -
with his smiling, smooth-skinned face and balding head - the very symbol of
benign, avuncular rule. At this small town meeting at Panna in the central
Indian province of Madhya Pradesh, the message of Mr L K Advani, leader of
the Hindu revivalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), is the same one that he
has been carrying across India.
In previous elections, Mr Advani tells his audience, the party sought votes
merely to increase its political bargaining power. But in the coming general
election - polling takes place May 20-26 - every vote is critical because
the BJP is now within reach of helping to form the next government.
The rapid growth of Hindu revivalism has been the main phenomenon of Indian
politics over the past two years; it is a dominant election issue in many
parts of the country. In the 1984 general election, the BJP won only two
seats in the lower house; today it is challenging Congress to become the
largest single party in the next parliament.
The BJP is the only party still gaining ground in the run-up to the election
 -spreading a sea of saffron (the Hindu colour) as it makes inroads into its
political opponents' key states, such as Uttar Pradesh in the north and
Gujarat in the west.
Mr Advani hopes to keep the momentum going. But many Indians view with alarm
the prospect of a Hindu rashtra - a government dominated by the revivalist
movement, which could spark a confrontation with Moslems.
An experienced parliamentarian known for his courtesy, Mr Advani, 63, is a
reassuring voice for a Hindu community that feels unnerved by a sense of
national failure. He offers an appealing vision of resurgent nationalism to
people weakened by caste and regional conflicts, threatened by the
assertiveness of India's 100m Moslems - some 12 per cent of the population -
and disgusted by the corruption of political life.
While Mr Advani applies soothing words, he allows his radical followers to
use the cruder language of religious hatred. 'Moslems are like a lemon
dropped into cream. They turn it sour,' Sadhvi Ritambhara, a Hindu preacher,
and member of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, a sister organisation of the BJP,
tells her audiences. 'What do we do with the lemon?' she asks. 'We cut it
up, squeeze out the pips and throw them away.'
Hindu-Moslem riots over the past year - most stemming from the controversy
over plans by Hindu militants to build a temple at Ayodhya on the site of an
existing mosque - have been the worst since independence in 1947, resulting
in the death of more than 2,000 people. The BJP is using the Ayodhya affair
as the main plank in its election campaign.
Although the BJP will fall well short of obtaining a majority of seats in
the new parliament, it could double its existing strength to about 150 seats
 -thus giving it a powerful role in a divided lower house and leaving it
well-positioned to take power at a later date.
The Hindu revivalists' success could also increase the leverage on other
parties, such as the Congress, to bow to BJP pressure over the 'privileged'
treatment of Moslems. India's secular tradition could thus be under threat.
'We are living in times which may witness secularism in its last throes,'
says Professor S Gopal, a distinguished historian.
The BJP seems to have benefited from the unexpected coalescence of four main
factors that have their roots in the competition for scare resources in a
country with a huge population.
First, there is growing Hindu hostility towards Moslems. Moslems are seen to
be more loyal to Islam than to India, refusing to be assimilated, and
insisting on their own cultural identity. 'The ghetto mentality has gripped
the Moslem masses,' says Mr Gobind Acharya, the BJP secretary-general.
Many Hindus have never forgiven Moslems for dividing the Indian subcontinent
at the time of independence to form the state of Pakistan. Jawaharlal Nehru,
India's first prime minister, believed that to remove the fears of the
Moslem minority that remained, and to achieve a secular state in which the
communities lived in harmony, a policy of positive discrimination towards
Moslems was necessary.
Forty years on such concessions - allowing Moslems their own marriage law
and their own educational institutions, plus special status for the
Moslem-dominated state of Kashmir, - are seen by the BJP as 'pampering
Moslems' and being part of a policy of 'pseudo-secularism' that makes Hindus
'second-class citizens in their own country'.
Second, the BJP has benefited from a backlash among the upper castes against
former Prime Minister V P Singh's programme of job reservation in central
government for the lower castes. This caused widespread violence and
unwittingly launched a caste war. In contrast, the BJP's appeal to Hindu
unity has struck a sympathetic chord with Brahmins and other upper castes
who would be most hit by the programme.
Third, the BJP with its populist ideology of national reconstruction is seen
to have filled a vacuum left by the intellectual bankruptcy of the Congress
party and the collapse of marxism in India. Finally, the BJP appeals to
voters disenchanted by politicians and the corruption of political life. As
a party laying claim to ideals of national resurgence, the BJP has a
relatively clean reputation.
As Hindu revivalism has spread, so it has drawn recruits from castes,
classes and regions that once spurned it. Traditionally, its base has been
among the urban poor and trading classes - those most affected by the
strains of modernisation and by Hindu-Moslem tensions.
But of late it has made substantial gains among the wealthier middle and
business classes, in rural areas, in the southern states and even among
Harijans (untouchables), for whom the appeal of the BJP is that it rejects
the doctrine of untouchability.
This growth in support has enabled the party to field a broader choice of
candidates. Mr T N Chatuverdi, the former auditor-general, has been drawn
in, as well as Mr Victor Bannerjee, the actor from the film A Passage to
India.
In previous elections the BJP was forced to ally with other parties. Now, Mr
Advani is convinced that it can make a single-handed bid for power. His
decision has been backed by the leaders of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
(RSS), the militant Hindu organisation that fathered the BJP.
For the first time, the RSS is committing its full strength and that of its
organisations - including youth and labour wings - towards winning an
election. Because these are disciplined movements, they give the BJP an edge
over other looser-organised parties.
India's Moslems have never felt so threatened.
