FT  14 MAY 91 / International Company News: Astra jumps 45% before tax
ASTRA, the Swedish pharma-ceutical company, yesterday exceeded market
expectations by posting a 45 per cent jump in pre-tax profits to SKr757m
(Dollars 122.4m) for the first quarter of 1991 as sales of its stomach ulcer
drug Losec doubled.
Analysts had predicted a 35 per cent growth in earnings for Astra, which was
the best performer on the Stockholm bourse last year. The company, headed by
Mr Hakan Mogren, had revised upward its forecast for the year, saying
profits would climb by 30 per cent to SKr3.3bn. Its previous forecast had
estimated growth at 25 per cent.
Operating profits increased by 22 per cent to SKr598m. Improved net interest
income from Astra's large cash reserves, which totalled SKr5bn at the end of
March, and favourable exchange rates for income from its foreign
subsidiaries contributed to the buoyant pre-tax earnings.
Sales during the period increased by 27 per cent to SKr2.74bn, with turnover
from Losec, Astra's largest-selling product, increasing to SKr577m from
SKr284m a year ago.
Marketing of Losec by licensees, primarily Merck in the US, raised the
drug's total sales to SKr880m from SKr360m.
Losec suffered a setback in the US in January when the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) refused to approve the drug for first-line treatment of
all ulcers. Astra said yesterday that it is holding talks with the FDA on
widening its approval of Losec usage and it predicted that the FDA will make
a decision in the near future.
Losec was also introduced last month in Japan, potentially the biggest
national market for the drug after the US.
Drugs for the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases, dominated by Losec,
had total sales of SKr626m, a 88 per cent increase. Drugs for respiratory
diseases, however, remain Astra's largest product group, with sales climbing
to SKr643m, a 26 per cent rise.
The Turbohaler, an inhaler which delivers medication for asthma patients,
has boosted sales for two asthma drugs. Sales of the new asthma agent
Pulmicort increased by 57 per cent to SKr264m, while sales for the older
bronchial drug Bricanyl rose by 19 per cent to SKr182m.
