FT  13 MAY 91 / Survey of Cardiff (12): Nothing at the top level, but still
a good choice - Restaurants / Anthony Moreton studies the menu
WHEN DE Courcey's restaurant burnt to the ground last month, a pall darker
than the smoke from the fire hung over the business community. De Courcey's
had, within a very short time, become one of the favourite places in which
to talk shop.
The restaurant was the brain-child of Thilo and Pat Thielmann. He had been
manager of the Holiday Inn, and the two of them decided to open a top-drawer
restaurant, to which they eventually hoped to add a number of bedrooms, to
create the sort of restaurant with rooms that is so common in France.
The wooden building had an unusual history. It had been brought over from
Scandinavia in 1892, by a Nordic businessman who had settled in Cardiff and
wanted to live somewhere that reminded him of home. It was not only built of
wood, but the rooms were panelled. These the Thielmanns had carefully
restored, by stripping off layers of paint.
Within its short three-year life, the Thielmanns had turned the place, an
out-of-town restaurant deep in Cardiff's green belt, into one of the best
restaurants in Wales. In three hours in the early hours of an April morning,
the fire that consumed it left just the four brick chimney-stacks.
The Thielmanns will no doubt create another restaurant. In the meantime
diners, as well as business lunchers in Cardiff, are not starved for choice.
Good restaurants have grown with the city over the last decade, and if none
has reached the very top level Cardiff is not unique in this respect. It is
a curious fact that the Good Food Guide names 32 top-rated restaurants in
Britain, but only four in cities outside London - in Norwich, Plymouth
Bradford and Bristol.
One of the growing favourites in Cardiff is Trillium, which at first glance
looks like a club library whose back part changes into a conservatory. Welsh
Water's main Cardiff office is around the corner, and many of its
executives, including the chairman, Mr John Elfed Jones, are to be seen
there.
Slightly further out of the city centre is La Chaumiere, where Karen Duncan
and Rory Garvey took over some 18 months ago. The restaurant sits in the
shadow of Llandaff cathedral, but it gets rather more of its clientele from
the nearby BBC headquarters than from ecclesisatical patronage.
An innovative in-town restaurant is the Armless Dragon, where the
proprietor, David Richards, is also one of the two chefs. Although the basis
of the cuisine is European, there are touches of far-distant places and an
emphasis on pure foods. Diners include a good sprinkling of mandarins from
the Welsh Office.
One who has made a notable mark is Meirion Dally who, with his wife Ann, has
created a Welsh ambience at Blas ar Gymru, or A Taste of Wales. Wales has
never had a particularly strong tradition of native dishes, but the Dallys
have attempted to get as close to a Welsh cuisine as possible. They even
offer Welsh wine, produced just outside Cardiff.
The waiters and waitresses at Blas ar Gymru are dressed in traditional Welsh
outfits, including the stove-pipe hats, and the piped music is Welsh. Dishes
include laver bread (a processed seaweed), cockles, Welsh cakes and Lady
Llanover duck, a traditional Welsh way of preparing the bird.
Not far away, and in direct competition, is Yr Ystafell Gymreig - The Welsh
Room. Although the name is Welsh, the emphasis is more mainstream European
with fillet steak Lloyd George offered as a touch of Wales. It also has
laver bread on the menu.
Among ethnic places, the Indian Ocean is a transplant from the people who
gave London the Red Fort; and a recent Chinese addition is the Orient
Rendezvous, from which a dum sum could be dropped-kicked into the Arms Park,
the great rugby ground, across the road. In a previous incarnation, this
restaurant was called Spangherro's - after the famous French rugby forward.
Nearby is the Noble House, where lovers of Chinese are frequently serenaded
by a harpist.
The restaurant most characteristic of its homeland is Le Cassoulet, where
the emphasis is on the dishes of the south of France. Cassoulet Toulousain
is always on the menu, and is a must for those who want to savour the
flavours of Provence.
Two restaurants that have undergone something of a sea change are Gibsons
and Le Gourmet Enchante. Gibsons is the doyen of Cardiff dining places, its
chef-owner, Mrs Irene Caning, being virtually the first to bring innovative
French cuisine to the city. Le Gourmet Enchante was a more recent addition
in the same vein.
Both have, in the past few months, taken on a new identity, with new menus
placing them more firmly in the mainstream of French-style cooking. Gibsons
has changed into Quayles, with Mrs Caning still in charge; while Le Gourmet
Enchante is now merely Le Gourmet, and describes itself as a brasserie. For
music-lovers, the Celebrity restaurant, in the St David's Hall, offers not
just reasonably-priced food but an attractive wine list at tempting prices.
 --------------------------------------------------------
                 WHERE THEY ARE
 --------------------------------------------------------
IN TOWN
Le Gourmet, Wesley Lane. Tel 394767
Celebrity restaurant, St David's Hall. 227211
Noble House, Wood Street. 388430
Orient Rendezvous, Westgate St. 226901
 --------------------------------------------------------
SLIGHTLY FARTHER AFIELD
Armless Dragon, 97 Wyvern Road. 382357
Blas ar Gymru, 48 Crwys Road. 382132
Le Cassoulet, 5 Romilly Crescent. 221905
Quayles, 8 Romilly Crescent. 341264
Yr Ystafell Gymreig, 74 Whitchurch Road. 342317
Trillium, 40 City Road. 463665
 --------------------------------------------------------
IN THE SUBURBS
La Chaumiere, 44 Cardiff Road, Llandaff. 555319
Indian Ocean, 290 North Road, Gabalfa. 621152
 --------------------------------------------------------
