FT  07 MAY 91 / No room for new faces at the top: In the first of a series
on women in management, Diane Summers looks at the challenges facing UK
companies
The best man for that senior management job may well be a woman: few
organisations these days can afford to deny that possibility.
It is no longer acceptable - with the perceptible build-up of internal and
external social and commercial pressures - for organisations in many sectors
in the UK to present an all-male management line-up.
Self-interest is driving fierce debate in several organisations about
women's promotion to senior jobs. A series of reports in past months,
including an extensive study by the National Economic Development Office
(Nedo) on women in management, and the Hansard Society Commission on Women
at the Top, has prompted companies to think about strategies for the
promotion of women.
But these same organisations are finding that it may not prove easy to take
the issue beyond the point of tokenism. Good intentions by themselves are
failing to produce results, and women in senior management jobs remain a
rarity. On occasions a mirage of equality appears, partly because
organisations are quick to seize on senior female appointments for their
full publicity value.
On a single day last week for example, the FT reported that the BBC had
appointed Ms Jane Drabble as assistant managing director of BBC Network
Television and Ms Catherine Bell had been appointed head of competition
policy at the Department of Trade and Industry. In public life, five female
life peers figured in the list of new recruits to the House of Lords. And in
the City, top female appointments at County NatWest Investment Management,
and Schroder Unit Trusts, were announced.
Some might even be tempted to think that the 'glass ceiling' - that
invisible barrier which seems to block women from achieving the heights  -
while not shattered, has at least been cracked by the ascent of so many.
However, the fact remains that very few organisations will be able to come
anywhere near meeting a challenge issued by the Industrial Society earlier
this year for half of management posts to be filled by women by 2000.
The number of women in management jobs is growing, but so slowly that it
will be well into the next century before a female manager will be able to
look around her and see convincing numbers of her own sex in positions of
authority.
Currently she will see well-qualified women entering employment in similar
numbers to men. But at every hurdle on the way to the top she will see
female colleagues falling in greater numbers than her male counterparts.
Only one in four junior managers in Britain is a woman and, by senior
management levels, the number of women remaining in the race is down to just
one or two per 100 managers, as the Nedo study pointed out.
There is no evidence from underlying trends that, by the turn of the
century, senior managers are very much more likely to be women than they are
now - unless, that is, some positive strategies are pursued.
There are three principal reasons why some organisations are now
contemplating such strategies:
An increase in the supply of able female candidates on the job market.
Employers need to ensure they are not cutting themselves off from half the
available pool of talent;
The decline of traditional manufacturing industries, development of the
service sector, and the search for new markets, including those that are
able to exploit women's increased financial independence. Companies able to
draw on female management experience could gain a competitive edge; External
social changes. Organisations wishing to be viewed as responsible, equitable
and progressive need to pay attention to their image in relation to women's
employment.
Mr Alan Drinkwater, manager at IBM with responsibility for equal
opportunities, outlines the first and most important of these factors: the
search for talent. 'We want outstanding employees wherever they are. We want
both to attract them into the business and retain them. Some of those
employees will be women, so there's a business need to examine women's
aspirations.'
The same concern is expressed by Mr Mike Heron, Unilever's director of
personnel worldwide: 'We need as much talent as we can get and it's a scarce
commodity.' Organisations need to seek women out, ensure that they stay and
their full potential is developed, says Mr Heron. 'If you take the other
route, then you've got to have twice your share of the talented men. In a
market economy that's going to cost a lot of money.'
Other companies are driven by the second of these factors - the need to
understand their markets and spot new opportunities. Sectors such as
retailing, for example, have long recognised that the input of female
managers is a competitive necessity.
Ms Judith Byrne-Whyte, Equal Opportunities Commission assistant chief
executive, is cautious about stereotyping the contribution women have to
make within organisations. She agrees, though, that female managers may be
in a position to respond more quickly than men to consumer demand. 'Given
that so many purchases are made by women, surely women must get a feel for
what's going on much faster than someone who may be from a technical
background and who may not even buy his own clothes,' she says.
Retail groups were quick to realise that a positive image in relation to
women would attract customers, both male and female, says Ms Byrne-Whyte. 'I
really think that has to come from the inside. A proper equal opportunities
policy will shine through.'
Textiles, as a sector, heads the list of industries employing women
managers, according to the latest British Institute of Management salary
survey - one of the few rough guides to the position of women, by sector, in
management. Mr John Billing, Courtaulds Textiles director in charge of
management services, points to the company's increasing involvement in
clothing: Courtaulds supplies underwear to retailers such as Marks and
Spencer for sale under shops' own labels. The design and selling of these
products requires at all levels 'good representation of women in the
business', says Mr Billing.
Half the company's graduate intake is female: about 10 per cent of the top
250 posts are occupied by women, although the percentage at middle
management level is higher.
In financial services, women's increased participation in the labour market,
the introduction of independent taxation and the growth of personal
pensions, have all opened up new product possibilities.
The last and perhaps least tangible of the three main factors increasing
pressure on organisations to review their recruitment and promotion of women
is the change in the social climate. There has been a sharp increase over
the past decade in the proportion of women who are economically active, from
63 per cent in 1979 to 71 per cent last year. Senior male managers,
particularly those in the younger age group, are increasingly likely to be
influenced, both at home and at work, by women who have career expectations.
So what strategies are being adopted? Responses are as varied as the nature
of organisations themselves, the extent of perceived pressure for change and
the sectors in which they operate. Some organisations are in more of a hurry
than others.
The bravest are setting themselves targets: the BBC, for example, has said
publicly that it wants to see 40 per cent of middle management and 30 per
cent of senior management jobs occupied by women by 1996. Last year, when
these targets were announced, 10 per cent of senior BBC managers and 18 per
cent of middle managers were women.
For most organisations, though, target-setting would be seen as forcing the
pace of change. Targets are abhorrent to most employers, particularly in the
private sector: they are seen as dangerously close to quotas, and quotas are
thought to lead inevitably to discrimination in favour of women.
The more conservative companies are relying principally on increasing the
intake of women with management potential and hoping, somehow, that these
women will gradually feed through the ranks. But companies such as Unilever
are finding that it is not that simple.
Unilever is now recruiting almost equal numbers of young men and women,
purely on merit, to its widely-acclaimed graduate management trainee
programme. But three years ago senior personnel managers realised a shocking
fact: within five years 75 per cent of this elite female intake had left
Unilever for a variety of reasons, both domestic and linked to the culture
of the organisation.
The attrition rate for male trainees, at 50 per cent, was bad enough, but
the particularly high female departure rate led to a special investigation,
a working party report and a set of recommendations, many of which have now
been implemented.
Mr Heron expects to see gradual improvements following the introduction of,
among other measures, career breaks, a women's network within the
organisation, and the recognition of the pressures exerted on dual-career
families, particularly when it comes to the need to move people around the
world for their work.
The loss of half or more of a graduate intake is not unusual. One survey
quoted recently by the Institute of Personnel Management found that about
half of graduates starting training courses did not expect to stay with
their employer for more than three years.
Mr Peter Hawkins, who has just completed a study at Liverpool University of
graduate recruitment in the engineering industry, said that employers
commonly underestimated the costs of losing trainees.
'Some companies just look at the initial salary costs. But the real cost is
likely to be about four times that figure after two years, once you count
recruitment, training, administration connected with leaving and the
recruitment of a new person. Also uncounted is, for example, the lack of
performance of other employees as they cope with the disruption. One figure
commonly used is that it costs Pounds 250,000 to develop a graduate recruit
up to middle management level.'
One big employer, too embarrassed to own up to the fact publicly, lost all
its general management graduate recruits in one section before the end of
their training period - every one happened to be a woman. 'No one can tell
me why it happened,' says a senior manager. 'But if it had been a new
investment, or the loss of a piece of plant or equipment, there would have
been a major outcry.'
The Civil Service remains concerned about its female resignation rates at
all grades, although the differences in the rates between men and women has
narrowed in recent years: in 1982-83 74 per cent of all resignations were by
women, compared with 61 per cent in 1988-89. This narrowing follows the
introduction of policies aimed to help staff combine work and domestic
responsibilities.
A cost-benefit analysis of measures to make organisations the types of place
where women wish to work, therefore, will in many cases, yield strong
reasons for action.
Indeed, focusing on retention may be the key to meeting the Industrial
Society's challenge. Currently women are simply not there to promote: they
have fallen through a trapdoor long before the point at which they might
have met the glass ceiling.
