FT  04 MAY 91 / Collecting: A Left Bank rite of spring / Anticipate an
annual celebration by Paris galleries
EVERY YEAR in May the 120 antique dealers who work in the picturesque block
of seven Parisian streets known as the Carre Rive Gauche, just upstream of
the Orsay Museum, indulge in a collective commercial rite of spring. For
five days they set out their best art amid lavish window decorations, stay
open all day and late into the evening and lay on a lot of champagne
(Pommery is among this year's sponsors) in the hope of befriending old and
new customers alike.
The district, which was known for its antiques in Balzac's day, has the
biggest concentration of high quality art galleries in the world. With the
arrival over recent years of contemporary art dealers, the Carre now covers
every fine art speciality from 18th century French furniture  - particularly
well represented - to Directoire, Empire and 19th century furnishings. The
area includes international names in eastern art, medieval and Renaissance
sculpture and furniture, ceramics, Flemish and Dutch masters, carpets and
tapestries, pewter and silver. This year they have been forced to lower
prices because of the state of the market.
The five days of the Carre Rive Gauche are a social occasion and an outing
at which art tends to take second place. Last year Louvre and Orsay museum
curators along with conspicuous Paris socialites such as choreographer
Rudolph Nureyev, actors Alain Delon and Jane Birkin, couturier Karl
Lagerfeld, various Rothschilds and members of the Academie Francaise from
down the street, all turned up to the first night. The partying went on
until after midnight and virtually nothing was sold.
This year's festivities last from May 22 to 26 and 30,000 invitations are
going out for the opening night at which Jacques Chirac, Mayor of Paris,
will be guest of honour. Galleries on the quai Voltaire facing the river
Seine will be adorned with awnings and potted greenery. Traffic will be
banned on rue de Beaune and rue de Lille, behind the quai. And even if
little serious buying takes place, dealers say an event which attracts even
a handful of serious clients is worth the outlay.
This year, as usual, each dealer on the block will display an 'objet
extraordinaire' in his or her front window, a piece of art deemed
outstanding for its rarity, its quality or its sheer oddness - last year
Denis Dervieux on rue de Beaune displayed an 18th century model of the human
nervous system made out of seaweed.
This year, the aptly named Cabinet de Curiosites on the same street, is
offering a 7 1/2 oz (210 gm) bladder stone mounted in silver in 1781 by a
French architect who was blissfully grateful to have got rid of it. St
John's College in Oxford has a similar piece and Samuel Pepys records having
one made to hold his bladder stone for 24 shillings in 1658.
As if to offset any image of frivolity created by the free champagne, many
Carre Rive Gauche dealers are studiously exhibiting details and photos of
works they have sold to museums. Jean-Max Tassel, who houses one of the best
selections of Old Master paintings in Paris in small premises on the quai
Voltaire, is proudly confident that his prize object, a monochrome Vanity by
17th century Dutch artist Simon Luttichuys, featuring human bones and a
skull reflected in a mirror, is unsellable to a private collector - he has
an interested curator in mind.
Neighbouring carpet specialist Galerie Chevalier, meanwhile, also has a
French museum interested in two very rare and very large Brussels tapestries
it is showing from a series of eight entitled 'Fructus Belli' made in 1545.
One is in the Brussels Musees Royaux and three others in the Edward James
Foundation in Chichester.
Galerie Charles et Andre Bailly is showing no fewer than 400 sculptures,
paintings and drawings by one of the lesser known Nabi painters, Georges
Lacombe; Lorraine Norre on rue de Beaune is exhibiting ceramics made by
Lacombe's colleague and tutor, Paul Gauguin, after his first trip to Tahiti
in 1893-95.
Pottery and ceramics are well represented this year: the gallery Back Street
on rue du Bac has a rare group of six Chinese Tang period earthenware geese.
Along the street, Lefebvre et fils is exhibiting an 18th century 'Negro's
Head' wig stand in Nevers faience - the only one of its kind known. Nicolier
on quai Voltaire has picked out two very rare harlequin and Colombine
figures in polychrome Delft, circa 1700.
Exceptional pieces of furniture are thinner on the ground. But Galerie de
Beaune has an extravagant early 19th century Russian sofa decorated with
carved mahogany swans' heads and Galerie Fremontier is showing an
astonishing neo-classical Italian one upholstered in canvas and painted all
over with scenes from Greek mythology.
