FT  23 APR 91 / Survey of The Computer Industry (21): Computer virus is the
biggest threat to companies - Security, or confidentiality, integrity and
availability
WHEN computer systems were monolithic machines in air-cooled offices, locked
away from most of the employees, the security of the data was relatively
easy to guarantee. But the pervasiveness of personal computing and computer
networking now means that almost every employee in many large companies has
access to the main computer. Ensuring the data is not maliciously altered or
misappropriated is therefore increasingly difficult to achieve.
Most organisations are beginning to realise the importance of sound security
measures. According to accountants Price Waterhouse, security accounts for 9
per cent of expenditure on new computer systems, up from 5 per cent, five
years ago. Today only 5 per cent of companies spend nothing on it compared
to 25 per cent in the mid-1980s.
One difficulty for commercial organisations is that there is no single
source of risk: instead companies have to secure what is known as the 'CIA'
of computer data:
'Confidentiality' - so that only those who are authorised to see or alter
the information can do so.
'Integrity' - to ensure the information is not changed.
'Availability' - to guarantee the computer is operating correctly when
required.
One of the biggest threats to companies is the computer virus, says Mr Peter
Jenner, business manager of PA Consulting's security consultancy centre. In
the UK, both Rolls-Royce and British Rail, for example, have experienced
viruses this year.
Viruses, computer codes which replicate themselves from one computer to
another and destroy the integrity of the data, come in a wide variety of
forms, many with exotic names. With the 'cascade' virus, for example, all
the characters fall from the top of the screen into a pile at the bottom.
While with the 'Italian' virus a ping-pong ball bounces across the computer
screen.
Virus checking software is available from companies such as Sophos, of
Abingdon, SS International, of Berkhamsted, and International Data Security,
of London. It works by checking for the individual pattern that every virus
leaves in the program.
However, virus developers see the increasing sophistication of anti-virus
software as a challenge to develop ever more complex viruses, says Mr Chris
Frost, senior manager in the European data security division of Price
Waterhouse, making it increasingly difficult to spot the interloper. The
latest stealth viruses change their identification code every time the
program is loaded - so the detection system cannot look for a specific
string of code.
Other viruses are armoured to prevent detection. When they latch on to a
program they encrypt it entirely, making it difficult for the scanning
software to detect where the virus code begins and ends. Other viruses have
even been developed that remove themselves altogether from the program when
the detection software is run.
As often as not, viruses are introduced into a company by an employee
bringing in his or her own floppy disk to play computer games at lunchtime.
Far more sinister is the hacker who breaks into the computer system by
imitating the sign-on procedure of a company employee - by using his or her
computer password.
The biggest problem with computer passwords is that employees often do not
take them seriously - they are likely to use the name of their spouse,
children or pet dog as the password, all of which can be easily guessed by
the would-be hacker. Or they use series of easily guessed numbers, or even
the word 'password' itself.
To overcome this the latest software packages contain lists of unacceptable
passwords - up to 20,000 words of them in some cases. More secure means of
preventing unauthorised access to computer systems are on the market or
under development. One is biometric devices, such as retina scanners,
thumbprint recognition machines and sign-on machines where users have to
sign their name.
While somebody can change their password into a computer system easily
enough, it is impossible to change a thumb print, or a retina, but this can
bring drawbacks. Once a hacker has taken a thumbprint, for example, they can
gain access to the computer system repeatedly without anyone noticing.
More complex are combinations of hardware and software. Dynamic password
tokens, for example, use devices about the size of a credit card which
produce a new numeric password every few seconds. This change is controlled
by an algorithm, or mathematical formula, which is synchronised with the
mainframe's software. To use the system the user types in a name and
password, and then types in the password that is displayed at that moment on
the token.
Once a hacker gets into a computer system the results can be horrendous. The
widespread use of computer systems in financial applications - payroll,
funds transfer or bill payment - has offered organised crime a lucrative
opportunity for replacing the security van robbery with split-second
electronic fraud.
Most frauds are discovered by regular checks, but expert computer systems
are helping to minimise the cost of these. In the case of a bank, for
example, the expert system would be programmed to know that a Pounds 1,000
transaction at an exclusive clothes shop would probably be genuine, whereas
a transaction of the same amount from the local supermarket would not.
There is a growing awareness among computer companies that their operating
systems software must be made more difficult to crack. ICL, for example, now
offers a high-security version of its VME operating system for commercial
use which incorporates mandatory controls: files cannot be moved from one
section of the computer to another - from accounts, say, to manufacturing.
Such security measures have also been adopted for the Unix operating system,
with the latest version of Posix - which interfaces between Unix and the
applications software - having the capability to create these mandatory
controls.
Last but not least, computer manufacturers and consultants are selling their
wares as disaster recovery companies. Back-up sites and mobile computer
units are there to ensure that even if your computer room is flooded or
struck by lightning, your business is not destroyed as well.
