FT  20 APR 91 / How to Spend It: Bath - A civilised place to take your
pleasures / Lucia van der Post browses, shops, eats and samples the glory
that was Rome in an English city
IT IS hard to imagine a better city than Bath for a weekend jaunt. It seems
just the right size for a city - offering enough bustle to make one feel
interesting things are happening but not so much as to jangle the nerves.
It is large enough to offer civilised pleasures such as fine food, art,
theatre and galleries, yet it is small enough for even the idle visitor to
encompass most of it on foot.
In these tough times, with hotels hustling for custom, there are special
'leisure break' terms to be had but, long before the marketing departments
dreamed up the phrase, Queen Victoria, Admiral Nelson, Charles Dickens, Jane
Austen and William Wordsworth, knew it was a better place than most to
visit.
Its architecture and its beautiful yellow stone combine to lend the city a
particularly mellow air - where are town planners such as John Wood the
elder and John Wood the younger today? - so go and have a good look at it.
Marvel (or marvel again) at the Royal Crescent, the Roman remains, drink in
Mr Pickwick's pub and track down the home of Chaucer's Wyf of Bath. After an
hour or two of taking in the sights a curious thing begins to happen - the
happy visitor begins to notice that le shopping, whether of the real or the
window variety, begins to seem like the agreeable past-time it used to be
and not the hassle it usually is.
Appetite and enthusiasm is regained. It all begins to seem like fun again.
This is partly because of the nature of the shops, for Bath is rich in
one-off speciality shops, places like Walcot Reclamation and Papyrus, Walcot
Woollies and Ironart, all of which seem to be run by people who care in a
personal and attentive way. It is also related to the scale of the buildings
and the streets. Many of the most welcoming parts have been turned into
pedestrian areas so that wandering around never seems too daunting and
nothing much is out of reach.
Whether you start from the outer edge (as we did with a group of antique
shops in London Road) and work your way in or head for the centre (around
the Roman Baths and the Abbey) and work your way out makes little
difference. Wherever you turn there are streets and alleyways to be explored
and shops that seem to offer much more than the standard chainstorefare that
is all most city centres can boast.
Walcot Street is not to be missed. It does not have the classical beauty of
some of the most famous streets and crescents but it has to be the main
haunt for all those who love to rummage and browse. Camden Books is one of
those secondhand bookshops that you could lose yourself in for days.
Ironart of Bath, at no 61, specialises in ornamental ironwork and, although
the range is limited - mainly seats and benches for gardens or
conservatories - it is exceedingly elegant.
Illuminated Objects, at 78, is the place to visit if you have despaired of
finding the lighting of your dreams - a mix of old and new, there are new
glitzy chandeliers and delicate glass ones from the time of Napoleon. There
are desk lamps and torcheres, table lamps and sconces.
Walcot Reclamation, at 108, is where you go for a grand marble fire
surround, or a pair of giant stone lions, or a stained glass window rescued
from a decaying country mansion.
A vast yard is filled with reclaimed pieces snatched from every part of
house and garden from the destructive hands of the so-called restorers and
the modernisers. Not too difficult to rummage around as garden furnishings,
doors, windows, fireplaces etc are well-labelled and separately stored.
Antiques:
The problem here is one of choice - you could spend weeks browsing in the
shops, arcades and surrounding areas if your feet and purse could stand it.
If you love nothing more than ferreting round in antique shops you might
like to note that from May 16 to 18 the Bath and Badford-on-Avon Antique
Dealers Association will be holding its second Decorative and Antiques Fair
at The Pavilion, North Parade Road. It is open from 11am to 8pm on May 16
and 17 and on May 18 from 11am to 6pm. It is a marvellous opportunity to see
a wide range of antiques under one roof gathered from dealers in the
surrounding areas as well as from the city.
Here, though, are a few suggestions of where to start in Bath itself:
There is a market every Wednesday at Guinea Lane where you can root around
for old jewellery, silver, shawls and quilts. Every Saturday stallholders
fill the old cattle market with their wares, offering everything from junky
old costume jewellery to nearly-new sweaters and bits of pine. The Great
Western Antique Centre in Bartlett Street is open every day except Sunday
and there are specialists in almost everything from pine furniture, silver,
pictures and jewellery to old linens and ceramics.
Pennard House Antiques, 3/4 Piccadilly, London Road has a good selection of
French provincial fruitwood furniture. In the same building are Robin &amp; Jan
Coleman's antiques where you can find more decorative pieces. Pennard House
will put together round tables to order from old bases and tops made from
local elm or pine.
Anthony Emm, York Street, is where the serious buyer with serious bucks
should head. Here you will find museum quality furniture at competitive
prices.
Collectable Costume, at 6 Bladud Buildings, is for all those who love old
costumes, textiles, linen and lace. There are beautiful plain white quilted
18th century bedspreads - made from cotton as tough as any you find today -
lace-edged bedspreads and tablecloths, embroidered pillowslips all at
reasonably friendly prices. It is also the place that film-makers head for
in search of authentic period clothing. And, if you have a grand fancy-dress
party coming up, Collectable Costume could provide you with the right
outfit.
Penny Philip, 5 London Street, specialises in antique textiles ranging from
toile de jouy to bedlinens or fine pieces of tapestry.
D. &amp; B. Dickinson in New Bond Street, is the place for antique silver of
every kind.
Those looking for something a little more contemporary should aim for Milsom
Street where the beautiful once privately-owned houses house some of the
smartest shops as well as Jolly's, the department store.
Shire's Yard is a sensitively done new development, filled with chic shops.
In all the streets and alleyways around the cathedral there are lots of tiny
shops selling everything from special fudge to contemporary ceramics and
jewellery which shopaholics should enjoy exploring on their own.
Papyrus, in Broad Street, is tiny but filled with paper as beguiling as
anything that comes out of Florence. Lovely writing paper as well as files
and cards, boxes and other delights.
Caroline Smiley, 9 Green Street, sells sumptuous baskets and urns filled
with her own dried flowers. Bright blue delphiniums, hydrangeas and lavender
were there in abundance - she'll do arrangements in your own container to
order and in from time to time she also runs courses on dried flower
arranging for those longing to make their own.
Global Village, 4/5 Green Street - do not be put off by the name - is an
eclectic mix of enchanting things for the house. Here a tribal rug from
Afghanistan, there a wrought-iron chair, here a lawn green bench for the
garden, there a lantern-shaped lamp. All goods are clearly chosen by a very
clever eye and seemed fairly priced.
Rowlands of Bath, Green Street, is where the pukka country set obtain their
kit - shooting stockings, cord knickerbockers, loden coats and waxed cotton
jackets.
What to see:
You will need more than a weekend to see everything that is worth seeing - a
good excuse to go back - but here are just a few suggestions:
You shouldn't miss the Roman Baths (why else, after all, is the city there
at all?), the Pump Room, the Abbey and Sally Lunns' House (the oldest house
in Bath but take my advice, unless you're reed thin, give the famous bun a
miss - not worth the calories.) Then there is the theatre. There are
pre-London productions as well as touring companies but you usually need to
book ahead (tel: 0225-448844).
No serious walker could miss Pulteney's Bridge, designed by Robert Adam in
1770 and named after William Pulteney, 1st Earl of Bath.
The Museum of Costume, housed in the Assembly Rooms, is one of the largest
of its kind while the Museum of English Naive Art is a 'must' for all fans
of folk art. The American Museum at Claverton Manor is as good as a visit to
Washington. The official guide to the city is well worth the 75p it costs
and gives addresses, opening times, two excellent 'walks' and lots more
besides.
Where to Stay
The Bath Spa Hotel, Sydney Road, Bath, Avon BA2 6JF (Tel. 0225-444424) has
the great advantage of having the air of a country house hotel while
actually being within easy walking distance of the town.
Acquired by Trusthouse Forte when they took over Anchor Hotels it has
emerged after a Pounds 22m, 3 1/2 year face-lift, with all the hallmarks
essential to membership of the country house hotel set - the four-poster
beds, the swagged chintz, the antiques and flowers dotted about, the bowls
of fruit and lush dressing-gowns, the tennis court and leisure centre, the
starry chef straight from Hong Kong's Mandarin Hotel.
It is very comfortable, the food is very good and if you take a leisure
Break (ie any two consecutive nights over the weekend) you pay just Pounds
99 per person per night for the room, table d'hote dinner, breakfast and VAT
instead of Pounds 150 per night for the room only (but no breakfast, dinner
etc).
If you want to be really out in the country (as opposed to just feeling as
if you were) then Lucknam Park Hotel at Colerne, Wiltshire, (tel:
0225-448276) would be hard to beat. Set in just under 300 acres, it is a
beautiful Palladian house, serenaded by beech trees with four-poster beds,
swagged chintz . . .
Where to eat:
Lots of wine bars and small restaurants for light lunches and snacks during
the day. At night you will probably want something a little more
celebratory. Popjoy's, next door to the theatre, in Beau Nash's old house,
Sawclose (0225-460494), brings an agreeable sense of occasion to the
business of dining out (Popjoy's, I'm sure you'd like to know, celebrates
Beau Nash's much-discussed romance with a certain Juliana Popjoy). Theatre
buffs can eat either before or after the show.
The rooms are rather grandly proportioned, with fires in the grates and, as
for the food, that is pretty good, with an interesting, carefully-prepared
menu that makes the Pounds 22.50 table d'hote seem fair. If you like to eat
grand hotel style, with all the attendant comfort, grandeur, space and
service, then the Bath Spa Hotel and The Dower House Restaurant at the Royal
Crescent Hotel offer interesting menus - at a price. If you like something a
little more intime, try Garlands, 7 Edgar Buildings, George Street,
(0225-442283) which specialises in fish and is slightly less expensive.
Guides and tours
Guide Friday, which has its head office in Stratford-on-Avon (0225-444102),
runs excellent tours of Bath. But, if you hate groups of any kind, you could
see if Caroline PJ de Estradas is free - she did a splendid job for us and
seems to know everything there is about Bath and the surrounding area. She
charges Pounds 65 for a half-day hour - 24 South Avenue Oldfield Park, Bath
BA2 3PY. (0225-421465). There is a bus that runs around the city and you can
buy a ticket which allows you to get on or off at any point.
