FT  19 APR 91 / Iraq provides list of ballistic and chemical weapons arsenal
IRAQ last night met the first of the deadlines set in a timetable imposed by
the UN Security Council in the ceasefire resolution, submitting details
about the locations, amounts and types of the most dangerous weapons in its
arsenal that must be destroyed under international supervision.
The report made clear that Iraq still has ballistic missiles and chemical
weapons, Iraqi UN ambassador Abdul Amir Al-Anbari said. He did not think it
had any biological weapons.
Mr Anbari was unable to give details of the types and numbers of weapons.
UN officials said the 15-page report, in Arabic, was being translated into
the other official languages and it was uncertain if or when it would be
published.
Mr al-Anbari told reporters the information supplied was 'very thorough and
detailed'. He confirmed Baghdad's agreement to accept international
oversight when the material - chemical and biological weapons and Scud and
other ballistic missiles - is destroyed.
The Iraqi government was required to deliver details at the same time - 15
days after ceasefire terms were approved - to the International Atomic
Energy Agency in Vienna about any nuclear weapons material in its
possession.
Reuter reported that Iraqi Foreign Minister Ahmed Hussein assured the agency
his country had no nuclear weapons or material usable for such weapons.
It knew of no subsystems or components related to nuclear weapons
manufacture and had no research and development facilities related to the
production of nuclear weapons.
The extent of compliance with the resolution is expected to influence the
council's sanctions committee when it considers an Iraqi request for
permission to sell more than Dollars 942m (Pounds 526m) of oil in order to
obtain funds to purchase food and goods to meet the ravaged country's basic
humanitarian needs.
Granting that request would require relaxing the mandatory trade embargo
imposed last August. The committee was expected to meet on the matter later
yesterday.
