FT  24 APR 91 / The Middle East: Baker seeks Soviet help on peace process
MR JAMES BAKER, the US secretary of state, is to make an unscheduled visit
to the Soviet Union today to seek closer co-ordination in his efforts to
revive the stalled Middle East peace process.
Washington is looking to Moscow to help it build momentum for the peace
effort. A US plan envisages Soviet co-sponsorship of a regional peace
conference as an opening to direct talks between Israel and the Arabs.
Mr Baker, currently in Damascus, flies to the Caucusus spa town of
Kislovodsk today for a meeting tomorrow with Mr Alexander Bessmertnykh, his
Soviet counterpart. Mr Baker is expected to discuss under what circumstances
Moscow would be prepared to normalise relations with Israel, suspended
during the 1967 six-day war.
Mr Baker has been pushing for 'confidence-building' measures on both the
Arab and Israeli sides pending a formal resumption of peace efforts. Moscow
says it will resume full diplomatic ties with Israel once the Israelis agree
to participate in an international conference on the Middle East. A
spokesman for Mr Yitzhak Shamir, the Israeli prime minister, said Mr Baker
had advised that he would follow up his Soviet discussions at a meeting with
Mr Shamir on Friday.
Mr Baker, whose latest Middle East peace shuttle - his third in six weeks -
is aimed at drawing Israel and the Arabs into direct talks, has not made
conspicuous progress. But neither the Arabs, including the Palestinians, nor
Israel has rejected his peace conference proposal. The Arab side is urging
the US to exert real pressure on Israel to co-operate in a genuine peace
effort.
Mr Baker has been careful to avoid publicly criticising Israel, but there
may come a point in the next few weeks when Washington will be obliged to
use additional leverage with the Israelis.
Mr Baker is also likely to discuss the problems surrounding the holding of a
US-Soviet summit - - a summit which the Nato countries have said will not be
held until the Soviet Union agrees to observe clauses in the conventional
forces reduction (CFE) treaty which Nato says it is presently flouting,
writes John Lloyd in Moscow.
This includes the redesignation of army divisions as marines to escape the
terms of the treaty, and moving tanks east of the Urals.
However, Mr Vitaly Churkin, the foreign ministry spokesman, said yesterday
that 'the CFE problems are ones that we both want resolved before the summit
will take place. A solution can be found and I don't think it is far away.
As far as we are concerned a summit should be held by June.'
