FT  04 MAY 91 / Cyclone may claim more victims in long wait for relief
THOUSANDS of people ma-rooned in Bangladesh's coastal areas could die in the
next few days because of inadequate relief operations following the cyclone
which struck the country on Monday.
About 10m people were yesterday waiting for urgently needed supplies of
food, drinking water and medicines as a token relief effort was initiated by
countries including the US, Britain, India and Saudi Arabia.
Relief is difficult to arrange as Chittagong port and airport are not fully
operational. Chittagong itself is a ghost city. Millions of trees that gave
it its famed green canopy have been swept away. A few are now just stilts,
devoid of branches.
The hinterland of Chittagong and Cox's Bazar - the area most seriously
affected by the cyclone - are inaccessible by both sea and road. Millions of
people are stranded in these areas. Eyewitnesses say thousands of naked
survivors are frantically waving at passing helicopters.
Other reports trickling into Dhaka, the capital, suggest that hundreds of
thousands of hectares of land in the coastal regions and nearby islands have
been devastated by the six-hour cyclone. As many as 100,000 people are
estimated to have died.
The cyclone destroyed thousands of dwellings, engulfed all wells and
drinking water supplies, and destroyed crops ready to be harvested. In many
areas there is no sign whatever of any habitation.
Vast stretches of land are under six or seven feet of saline water, in which
thousands of corpses and carcasses of cattle are putrifying, adding to the
danger of disease. The stench is overpowering.
As the Bangladesh government launched its own relief operation, appeals went
out for an international effort if further disaster is to be averted.
Six helicopters are dropping drinking water and medicines which will reach
just one-tenth of the people seeking help. These people are threatened by
epidemics, and diarrhoea has already claimed several hundred lives.
In a special parliamentary debate yesterday on the disaster, Mrs Khaleda
Zia, Bangladesh's prime minister, admitted that transport problems and
continuing bad weather were hampering relief operations.
She declared 'a day of mourning' for today and appealed to all political
parties to jointly work for the victims.
Many members, including Sherikh Hasina, the opposition leader, were critical
of the government's efforts to help the victims.
