FT  26 APR 91 / A break in the Irish mist: Ulster's tribal enemies are about
to discuss their shared problems for the first time in 15 years
The whole map of Europe has been changed . . . But as the deluge subsides
and the waters fall short, we see the dreary steeples of Fermanagh and
Tyrone emerging once again. The integrity of their quarrels is one of the
few institutions that has been unaltered in the cataclysm which has swept
the world.' - Winston Churchill, after the first world war in 1922.
John O'Hara, a 42-year-old Roman Catholic taxi driver, did not know he was
part of a grotesque overture to historic talks on Northern Ireland's future
as he drove to collect a fare in south Belfast last week.
Hours earlier loyalist paramilitaries had announced the suspension of
'operational hostilities' once talks started. There was a whiff of hope in
the province, as if light had crept beneath the smog of deep sectarian
hatred which has engulfed Northern Ireland for generations.
But as Mr O'Hara slowed near the Lisburn Road, masked gunmen opened fire. He
had become the fifth taxi driver to be murdered in the province in six
months, another grim statistic from more than 20 years of the 'Troubles'.
Next Tuesday, Mr Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland secretary, opens a
series of round-table talks involving the province's political parties, the
Irish and UK governments. Just reaching agreement to talk took more than a
year. It will be prefaced with a meeting of British and Irish ministers in
London today.
For the first time in at least 15 years, political leaders are to sit down
and discuss shared problems. The killing will not stop. Men with guns still
walk the streets. But given the tortured politics of Northern Ireland, the
very fact that political leaders are talking is an achievement in itself.
Over the next 10 weeks, conflicting pre-conditions and aspirations will be
juggled and rejuggled in the hope that enough of them can be reconciled to
secure a lasting settlement. Mr Brooke himself admits the possibility of
failure, saying the obstacles to be overcome may be too great 'to be scaled
in the limited time-frame we have given ourselves'.
He has addressed, in the lexicon of the province's politicians, 'the
totality of relationships' within the British Isles. That covers a devolved
government in the province itself, relations with the south, and between
London and Dublin. Talks will start with bilateral meetings, then move to
internal government in the province, before turning to the wider
relationships such as the Anglo-Irish axis.
At the crux are two basic questions. How, and by whom, is Northern Ireland
to be run? And what is its relationship with the rest of the British Isles?
Ultimately the test will be whether shared disillusionment across the two
communities, allied with political intransigence, will be sufficient to
overcome decades of mistrust.
But how the agenda will unfold is as clear as Irish mist. Diametrically
opposed views have to be accommodated. Many old quarrels have to be
forgotten. Northern Ireland remains a black spot of terrorism and
unrepresentative government in an increasingly barrier-free Europe.
Mr John Hume, leader of the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and
Labour party, the Rev Ian Paisley and Mr James Molyneaux, the unionist
leaders, have been sparring partners for more than 20 years. Some in
Northern Ireland feel progress will come only when the old guard has been
replaced.
Sinn Fein, the Irish Republican Army's political wing, along with loyalist
paramilitaries, has been excluded from the talks - partly because the
government is adamant that no concession must be given to terrorists, partly
because the main political parties could never be persuaded to sit at the
same table.
Yet, despite the justifiable qualifications, the latest initiative has,
perhaps, a better chance of success than the many plans littering Northern
Ireland's recent history. Signs of a change of mood are evident.
At least in part, it reflects weariness. In 22 years of 'the Troubles',
2,872 people have been killed in Northern Ireland, the overwhelming majority
of them civilians.
Dominating the province's recent politics has been the 1985 Anglo-Irish
agreement - a pact which, when signed, led to fiery protests by unionists at
the prominent role it allotted Dublin in the affairs of the province.
Effigies of Mrs Margaret Thatcher were burned outside Belfast City Hall.
Unionists refused to meet government ministers.
Now unionists are prepared to negotiate. Mr Molyneaux and Mr Paisley have
responded to a change of mood among their followers. They realise that many
 -particularly the young  - no longer accept the old battle cries of 'no
surrender' and 'Dublin rule is Rome rule'.
There is an urgency among all parties to solve at least some of Northern
Ireland's problems against the backdrop of a Europe striving for greater
convergence. The province cannot afford to become fossilised in its ancient
quarrels. There must be proper political representation.
Attitudes in London, too, are changing. Mr John Major does not have the same
convictions about Ulster as Mrs Thatcher, who helped forge the 1985
agreement, only to be taken aback at the scale of protest from unionists -
including her own supporters. Subsequently, Mrs Thatcher appeared frustrated
with the whole issue, seeing Northern Ireland in terms of security. Mr
Major's relative ignorance is almost an asset. His instinct, according to
one senior official is, as on Europe, 'to get in there and negotiate'. He is
prepared to listen.
Although the government in London hopes the talks will help break the cycle
of violence, the security dilemma will still exist. There are now more than
16,000 army troops in the province. Army action, including house-to-house
searches, alienates munity. Some youths join the paramilitaries just 'to get
their own back' on the army. So the roundabout of violence is given another
spin.
UK government policy is to seek a settlement acceptable to the majority of
people. Finances and energies have been directed, since the 1985 agreement,
at strengthening community relations and breaking the sectarian divide.
Most prominent have been the promotion of integrated schools and
highly-interventionist legislation to end discriminatory employment
practices. The economy of the province, where unemployment reaches 50 per
cent in some pockets, has been pump-primed with billions of Treasury funds -
the Northern Ireland Office expects to spend Pounds 6.4bn this financial
year.
Some successes have been palpable. Ten schools, out of 450 in the province,
take both Protestant and Catholic children - compared with just one a decade
ago. Jobs have been created in the worst ghettos of Belfast and Londonderry.
The new Fair Employment Commission has exposed companies where Protestants
or Catholics have a disproportionate share of jobs. But, given the starkness
of sectarian division only the edges have been chipped away.
Mr Charles Haughey, the Irish Republic's prime minister, has talked of the
need 'to chart a new path which will soften and eventually eliminate the
divisions of the past on this island'. Dublin is willing to contemplate a
new arrangement that would 'transcend' the 1985 pact and, possibly, remove
articles two and three from the Irish constitution which lay claim to
Northern Ireland.
Dublin is aware of changes in its own politics. Half the Irish population is
under 28 and does not carry the emotional baggage associated with a united
Ireland. A visitor to the republic might be surprised at the public
indifference to these talks or to the wider problems of Northern Ireland.
But the sub-text of Irish policy is still the achievement of some form of
unitary state. Mr Haughey has spoken of the need to persuade 'our unionist
countrymen that their future lies with us'. This view is shared by the SDLP.
Again, the unionists are seen as the main problem. 'In the SDLP view, the
central relationship, the one that goes to the heart of the matter, is the
unionist people's relationship with the rest of this island, or rather their
distrust of the rest of this island,' says Mr Hume.
During her election campaign last year Mrs Mary Robinson, Ireland's
president, talked of the need for the republic to 'reach out' to unionists.
But while Mrs Robinson might talk of reconciliation, she has few
constitutional powers and very little influence on the direction of policy.
For their part, the unionists have not rushed to embrace Mrs Robinson.
Underlying the unionists' position is an assumption that the Irish
Republic's claim on Northern Ireland has to be dropped. From Mr Brooke, they
have won an assurance that the province will remain part of the UK as long
as a majority of its population want it.
After that, unionists seek as top priority renegotiation of the Anglo-Irish
agreement, a pact which forced the majority community to realise it could
not take sympathetic government from Westminster for granted.
Unionists are prepared to contemplate a replacement agreement, insisting
that they are committed to good relations with the south. But they argue
Ireland's influence must be no more than that of any other 'foreign
government'.
That leaves scope for textual barter. Giving Dublin the right to be
consulted on the affairs of the province would not be acceptable. Dublin
currently has the right to put forward its views through the Maryfield
secretariat outside Belfast. A right to make representations the British
government, with a consulate in Belfast, might succeed.
On the question of a devolved government there is more of a muddle. Mr
Molyneaux favours a devolved administration fitting 'snugly' into the
British parliamentary system - suggesting he wants little more than a
enhanced 'county council' system.
Mr Paisley backs full-blown legislative devolution along the lines of the
former Stormont parliament. He rejects the concept of a 'power-sharing
executive', believing it did not work under the 1973 Sunningdale agreement,
an early attempt to give the Roman Catholic community a voice in government,
and would give disproportionate power to the minority community.
But, perhaps influenced by the younger generation within the party, most
noticeably Mr Peter Robinson, deputy leader, Mr Paisley's Democratic
Unionist party is anxious to look for new schemes for sharing executive
responsibility. There is no expectation of a return to strict majority rule.
What shape then, in an ideal world, might an agreement take if talks were to
succeed? There would almost certainly be a new Northern Ireland
'government', subordinate to Westminster and Dublin, in which the voices of
unionism and nationalism were carefully proportioned.
The replacement Anglo-Irish agreement would build on a willingness among the
peoples of north and south to be 'good neighbours' while accommodating both
nationalist and unionist aspirations.
It is a tall order indeed. Most critically, any deal will depend on mutual
understanding - a sparse commodity in the province. There is no guide to how
the talks will evolve over coming weeks. Northern Ireland officials describe
them as 'organic'.
All parties know they have an opportunity to show progress can be achieved
by discussion and not, as the IRA and the loyalist paramilitaries would have
it, by violence. It is a high-risk business. If there is no success then the
grim and utterly predictable likelihood is more violence.
