FT  24 APR 91 / Survey of China (14): Where the papers come three days late
 -Wuhan is China's natural crossroads, but is cut off by poor communications
IF WUHAN, the capital of Hubei province, is set to become one of China's
main communications hubs - as local officials claim, and a glimpse at any
map would endorse - how is it that Peking newspapers take three or four days
to arrive?
'We are the Chicago of the Orient,' Zhao Baojiang, the mayor of Wuhan,
claims in a grand hyperbolic sweep.
Wuhan is also at a critical midpoint on the Yangtze river, and sits abreast
China's main north-south railway, linking Hong Kong and Guangdong in the
south with Peking and the land-bridge to Europe in the north.
In a country with normal communications, Wuhan's pivotal location would
project it to the commercial and industrial centre-stage. Peking papers
would be available on the day of publication. But in China, it stands as a
monument to the awful impoverishment of the nation's communications.
The city's time may indeed come. But it will take considerable improvements
in the national transport infrastructure to transform its prospects. It will
also require the creation in China of a true national market. At present, a
labyrinth of bureaucratic obstacles to trade across provincial boundaries -
which amount to nothing less than provincial protectionism - make Wuhan's
central location in China a commercial irrelevance.
This perhaps explains why Hubei province has slipped in the past five years
from China's ninth most important exporter to its 13th.
It also explains why a province that is among the best endowed in China in
terms of agricultural and mineral resources, and in terms of industrial and
commercial capacity, has failed to make a more powerful mark among the
country's magnets for foreign investment.
Hubei's endowments are prolific: the Jianghan plain which straddles the
Yangtze in the heart of the province is among the most fertile in China. Its
red alluvial soils grow about one fifth of the country's cotton and makes
Hubei China's fifth largest grain producer.
Lakes spread across the south of the province - some of them more like
inland seas - provide a living for almost a quarter of a million fish
farmers, and underpin an industry in aquatic products that ranks third in
China.
These together make Hubei one of China's leading textile manufacturers and a
leader in food processing.
Rich supplies of iron, copper and an array of rarer minerals mainly in the
east of the province around Huangshi supply one of China's largest steel
complexes and a leading special steels manufacturer. These in turn underpin
the country's second largest automotive manufacturer, in Shiyan in Hubei's
north-west.
A combination of these resource-riches, and Hubei's pivotal location at the
heart of China, make it clear that few provinces would stand to gain so much
from the dismantling of centralised controls over China's economy, and the
loosening of the domestic market.
Local officials may not yet be fully aware of the riches liberalisation can
bring but in the meanwhile are committed to infrastructural improvements
over the decade ahead that will be of significant help when the virtues of
Hubei's prime location at the heart of China's market are allowed to come
into play.
A new RMB Yuan 600m international airport will be opening in 1993. A second
Yangtze road bridge joining Hankou and Wuchang will enhance north-south
communications in the province and ease traffic congestion in Wuhan itself.
Railway electrification is planned. A new 50,000-line telephone exchange is
being installed. Massive investment in both thermal and hydro power stations
is being made.
Economic zones are being established in Wuhan and in Yichang and Huangshi
along the banks of the Yangtze. They are intended to capitalise on the
creation of Shanghai's Pudong special economic zone over the coming decade.
This development underlies one of the most exciting changes now underway:
the re-establishment of the Yangtze, after half a century of neglect, as a
critically important commercial artery in central China.
A new foreign trade port is under construction, a companion to Baihushan
completed just east of Wuhan six years ago. New local shippers like Datong
and Qingchuan are vying with former state monopolies and the fast-growing
private shipper, Minsheng, to provide competitive services along the length
of the Yangtze for the first time since 1949.
While Hubei has until recently had only modest success in attracting foreign
investment, lagging in particular behind coastal provinces, recent deals
provide encouraging signs. A joint venture with Citroen, agreed last year,
will lead to the production of 300,000 cars a year in Wuhan and Shiyan,
further enhancing the province's importance as a supplier to the national
automobile market.
An optical fibre plant, to be built with help from Philips, will also be
important in enhancing China's domestic telecommunications capacity.
Foreign capital used for new equipment at the Wuhan Iron and Steel works is
intended to boost annual output from 5m tonnes of rolled steel to 7m tonnes
by the year 2000, boosting the company's role as one of China's four main
suppliers of high-quality steel.
If approval is given to the environmentally controversial Sanxia
hydroelectric project, which would be built across the Yangtze in the Three
Gorges on Hubei's western border with Sichuan, Hubei would become a critical
supplier of power to all of central China. The 13,000MW generated by Sanxia
would dwarf the recently-completed Gezhouba dam in Yichang, which generates
2,700MW and is already a critically important supplier to the Yangtze
region.
All these developments point to Wuhan's preparedness for the larger role
which would result from the creation of a nationwide market economy.
Local leaders pay lip service to the need for less central control of the
economy and more market freedoms.
But behind the brave rhetoric, the provincial authorities are not yet
willing to end subsidies to bankrupt factories.
In Wuhan, the leadership appears to have taken the first significant steps
towards unleashing market forces, and lifting the burden of company
subsidies from the shoulders of the government. Mayor Zhao Baojiang, who
estimates that one in 10 Wuhan workers is employed in a loss-making factory,
says: 'We are asking workers to move into the individual enterprise sector
if their factory is a 'losing money factory'.'
Chinese historians say that Wuhan has often been fortunate - but only in
unfortunate times.
With the ground now being well laid, a significant opening up of China's
economy to market forces could bring fortune in fortunate times. Yet Wuhan
would still have a long haul to become Mayor Zhao's 'Chicago of the Orient'.
