FT  25 APR 91 / International Company News: Authorities seize stocks of P&amp;G
orange juice
EVIDENCE that the US authorities are determined to get tougher on food
labelling standards emerged yesterday as the Food and Drug Administration
moved to seize stockpiles of orange juice produced by Procter &amp; Gamble
(P&amp;G), the large US consumer products group.
The action by the FDA is unusual, and comes in the wake of heavy political
debate over food labelling in the United States.
The FDA said yesterday it had warned manufacturers in February that, while
new regulations are being drawn up, it was prepared to bring enforcement
actions.
In this case, the FDA's action stemmed from controversy over the labelling
of P&amp;G's 'Citrus Hill Fresh Choice' brand. The FDA, in a complaint filed in
the Minneapolis courts, said the use of terms like 'fresh choice', 'pure
squeezed', '100 per cent orange juice', '100 per cent pure', and 'fresh'
were false and misleading on orange juice products made from concentrate.
This, however, is denied by P&amp;G. The consumer products company yesterday
insisted its Citrus Hill packages were 'properly labelled', and claimed to
have 'strong consumer evidence to support this'. P&amp;G also said that, apart
from the stockpiles subject to the enforcement action, it did not expect
production and supplies of the juice to be disrupted.
Neither the FDA nor the company had any immediate information about the
amount of juice which is subject to seizure. It is believed to be stored in
a warehouse in suburban Minneapolis, and will be held off the market until
the labelling issue is resolved.
P&amp;G claimed there 'has been lack of clarity' on the use of the term 'fresh'
on food packaging, and said it had expected this issue to be addressed
through new and clearer rules.
FDA officials, however, suggested that its established position was that
heated or chemically processed products should not be described as fresh. It
said that it hoped new draft regulations, defining some of the contentious
terms like 'fresh' or 'light", should be ready by November.
P&amp;G yesterday reported a 5 per cent increase in net profits in its third
quarter to the end of March, at Dollars 424m after tax. Sales rose by 11 per
cent to Dollars 6.8bn, but fully-diluted earnings per share gained only 0.9
per cent, at Dollars 1.09.
