FT  27 APR 91 / Finance &amp; The Family: ICI's private army still keeps the
faith - The Bottom Line
IMPERIAL Chemical Industries is one company that retains a loyal army of
private shareholders in an age of institutional investment.
The 350,000 ICI shareholders - 40 per cent of whom own fewer than 250 shares
 -have seen a steady decline in the value of their holdings, relative to the
London market, since the shares hit Pounds 16 in 1987.
Yet there is no shortage of private individuals wanting to buy ICI stock.
Sir Denys Henderson, the chairman, told the annual general meeting yesterday
that the company had already received 30,000 inquiries about its corporate
Personal Equity Plan, announced in February.
The company in which they are planning to invest is still the largest
manufacturing group based in the UK, judged by turnover.
Sir John Harvey-Jones and then Sir Denys have led ICI through an enormous
restructuring exercise over the last decade - halving the UK workforce,
expanding rapidly overseas (particularly in the US) and shifting the balance
away from cyclical commodity chemicals.
But the combined strategy of 'globalisation' and concentration on more
specialised, higher added-value products has not had the desired effect of
insulating ICI from the impact of a recession. The 1990 pre-tax profits,
announced two months ago, were down 36 per cent at Pounds 977m, and the
result for the first three months of 1991, reported on Thursday, was a 52
per cent fall to Pounds 198m.
Stockbrokers' analysts had talked themselves into forecasting an even worse
outcome for the first quarter, so ICI shares managed to rise by 3p on
Thursday. But the chairman had little cheerful news about current trading at
yesterday's AGM: 'We are still in the grip of recession in many markets',
Sir Denys said. 'We do not yet see signs of the significant improvement in
demand which is essential for a sustained recovery.'
So analysts were reluctant to upgrade their profits forecasts for the whole
year. The consensus figure is still around Pounds 800m pre-tax for 1991.
The market believes that ICI's 55p dividend - giving the shares a 6.9 per
cent yield - will be safe unless there is a wholly unforeseen collapse in
trading. The company is extremely reluctant to risk repeating the damage its
reputation in the City suffered when it cut the dividend in the last
recession 10 years ago. And ICI's balance sheet is much stronger today than
it was in 1981.
Looking further ahead, most analysts see ICI profits recovering from the end
of this year, as the world economy picks up. BZW, for example, is going for
Pounds 1bn in 1992 and Pounds 1.2bn in 1993 (with Pounds 1.5bn as a 'best
case' outcome). But it is worth remembering, when looking at such forecasts,
that this time last year some people were expecting ICI to make Pounds 1.6bn
in 1991, rather than Pounds 800m.
Breaking ICI down into different business activities, it is clear that
pharmaceuticals prevented the group's performance last year from being a
complete disgrace. Drawing on the strength of the recession-proof medicines
market - and making the most of some innovative drugs of its own,
particularly for cancer and heart disease - ICI Pharmaceuticals contributed
47 per cent of the whole company's profits on just 11 per cent of its
turnover.
Although ICI has promising new drugs in the research and development
pipeline, the pharmaceuticals business is unlikely to grow as fast and as
profitably in the 1990s as it did in the 1980s. As a global player in the
pharmaceuticals industry, ICI may not be large enough on its own to compete
in the long run with giants such as SmithKline Beecham and Glaxo of the UK
or Merck and Bristol-Myers Squibb of the US. The company may therefore be
forced to form an alliance - possibly involving a merger - with another
pharmaceutical company; Upjohn of the US has been mentioned as a possible
partner.
Indeed, it is difficult to see any source of long-term growth that could
propel ICI into the 21st century as a larger and more profitable company in
relation to the world economy than it is today - though the board is, to its
credit, steadily increasing spending on research and development.
ICI Seeds is one business which the company is fond of quoting as a possible
multi-billion pound enterprise for the next century. This will use
biotechnology to create and sell new crops to the the world's farmers - for
example drought-resistant cereals with in-built pesticide genes to protect
themselves against attack by insects.
But even if ICI Seeds lives up to its highest hopes, it will not be able to
compensate for the continued decline in the group's industrial chemical
businesses. The outlook for plastics and petrochemicals, which still
represent 18 per cent of ICI turnover, is especially bleak, with worldwide
overcapacity in petrochemical facilities likely to persist for many years.
