FT  23 APR 91 / Survey of The Computer Industry (5): New generation
challenges leaders - The view from the US, Louise Kehoe in San Francisco
assesses changing market strategies and unveils a palmtop
THE US computer industry is in the midst of a broad restructuring driven by
technology advances that have changed the economics of computer
manufacturing.
Some of the largest companies in the industry are being forced to make
painful adjustments, while a new generation of computer makers is growing
rapidly. Making these changes more difficult for all computer companies are
the triple troubles of a recessionary domestic economy, European economic
ills and the interruption of normal purchasing patterns created by the Gulf
War.
The effects of these problems are being keenly felt by many US computer
companies, creating an industry downturn in which revenue growth has been
stalled and earnings are expected to decline in the short term. While these
economic problems are expected to be short lived, the fundamental changes
under way in computer technology could reshape the industry in the 1990s,
analysts predict.
The most important technology trend is the rising power of the
microprocessor - the 'computer on a chip'. The initial impact of the
microprocessor was to create the personal computer, spawning a new
generation of computer companies in the 1980s such as Apple Computer, which
has annual revenues of Dollars 5.5bn, and Compaq Computer with Dollars
3.6bn.
Networking technology, which enables large numbers of PCs to be tied
together so that they can share data, transformed the PC from a stand-alone
single user machine into an important element of office automation systems.
The PC has had a large impact upon the way computers are used in offices.
They have greatly expanded the use of desktop computers and to a significant
extent displaced the minicomputer and computer terminals as standard office
automation equipment. The computer workstation, also based upon
microprocessors, has had a similar impact upon the technical computing
field.
Engineering workstations running computer-aided design programs, for
example, have usurped the role of mid-range computers in thousands of
laboratories and product development departments. Sun Microsystems, the
workstation market leader, has established a Dollars 2.5bn market for
high-powered desktop computers based upon Reduced Instruction Set Computing
(RISC) microprocessors, largely at the expense of traditional computer
companies such as Digital Equipment and Hewlett-Packard.
However, the inroads of the microprocessor have just begun. High-powered
computer systems that rival the system performance of mainframes and
minicomputers are being built using multiple microprocessors. Companies such
as Sequent Computer can offer mainframe-class computers built around Intel
microprocessors at a fraction of the cost of IBM mainframes.
Stratus Computer Systems is challenging IBM and Tandem Computers in the
market for fault tolerant computers for mission critical applications using
computers built around Motorola and MIPS Computers microprocessors. This
phenomenon, known as downsizing, has had an impact on the entire computer
industry.
'The microprocessor has turned hardware computer economics upside down,'
says Mr Steven Milunovich of Solomon Brothers, in a recent report on the
discontinuities in the computer industry. 'Multiprocessor systems will
directly threaten mainframe and minicomputer solutions,' he says.
'Relational data bases can transform data into information. Object-oriented
programming will reduce the applications backlogs that plague every level of
computing. And sophisticated networks will allow users to access data
seamlessly across the enterprise. Those vendors that can bridge these
discontinuities to aid customers in adopting new technologies, while
protecting prior investments, will benefit the most,' he says. However,
hardware is only one side of the computer industry. Software and services
are growing faster and have higher profit margins.
Companies such as Electronic Data Systems are riding the wave of the
computer services rise, providing computer users with solutions to their
increasingly complex information technology needs.
Another driving force behind the reshaping of the computer industry is the
trend toward open-systems standards that enable different types and brands
of computers to work more efficiently together. With majority of computer
companies are pursuing open systems, with varying degrees of enthusiasm.
For many, open systems represent an opportunity to infiltrate the customer
bases of industry leaders such as IBM and Digital Equipment, HP and Unisys.
The industry leaders have adopted open systems in part as a defensive move.
They view open systems as a means of providing customers with complete
solutions to their computing needs.
One of the critical needs of the 1990s among computer users, is to find a
way to tie together their inventories of computers, which have typically
been acquired in a rather haphazard fashion.
During the 1980s, distributed computing was in vogue. Departments of large
corporations frequently installed their own computer networks or systems
often with little reference to the corporate data processing centre. Now,
companies are trying to tie these computers together to create
enterprise-wide networks.
Enthusiasm for open systems and the trend toward lower-cost computer power
leads some to conclude that the large US computer hardware companies are
dinosaurs. This is to ignore several factors. While the mainframe computer
is challenged by new technologies, it remains a dominant sector of the
computer industry providing, for example, about half of IBM's Dollars 69bn
annual revenues.
Open systems, based upon the Unix operating system, are certainly becoming
more popular, but they represent only 12 per cent of annual computer sales.
The ability of established industry leaders to adjust to rapid changes in
the computer industry is frequently brought into question, but IBM is
turning itself slowly but surely to address the issues of the computer
market head on.
IBM is focusing upon solution selling, reorganising its business units to
more directly address the problems of its customers. Perhaps the best
measure of IBM's success comes from the large systems integrators, who
regard IBM as a direct competitor.
IBM has long been the market leader in the PC sector, which it quickly
recognised as a big new market opportunity in the early 1980s. In the
computer workstation market, IBM has made a late, but remarkably successful
entry. Last year, the company sold Dollars 1bn-worth of its RS/60000
workstations, leaping from nowhere to become the fifth largest workstation
supplier. This year, IBM is expected to climb to number two or three in the
workstation market and by 1993 will be neck and neck with Sun Microsystems,
the market leader, according to industry analysts.
Digital Equipment is undergoing a painful metamorphosis. After suffering a
period of internal strife between supporters of open systems and
traditionalists, Digital is putting together a coherent strategy. Digital
maintains that open systems must incorporate proprietary software if the
promise of the open systems movement - inter-operability among dissimilar
computers - is to be fulfilled.
Standard proprietary systems which adhere to standards that allow
inter-operability, represent the way of the future, many in the industry
believe. Computers such as Digital's VAX would retain their distinct
features, but acquire the ability to work with other types or brands of
computers. HP, the third largest US computer company, has overhauled its
computer product line to take advantage of microprocessor power and to
respond to the open systems trend.
Similarly, NCR and Data General have developed aggressive open systems
strategies. Unisys, in spite of financial woes, is pursuing open systems. It
is too soon to count out the US computer industry leaders of the 1970s, but
it seems certain that they will be forced to concede a bigger share of the
market to the companies that emerged in the 1980s.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                Leading worldwide computer companies
                     1984 vs 1989 (dollarbn)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                Data proc.                    Data proc.     Change
1984            revenues      1989            revenues       in rank
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
IBM               42.6        IBM               57.3            -
DEC                6.3        DEC               12.9            -
Burroughs          4.5        Fujitsu           12.3            +2
Sperry             4.0        NEC               11.5            +5
Fujitsu            3.7        Unisys             9.3            -2
Control Data       3.7        Hitachi            9.3            +6
NCR                3.6        HP                 8.2            +1
HP                 3.4        Groupe Bull        6.5            +9
NEC                3.3        Apple              5.4            +5
Siemens            2.8        NCR                5.2            -3
Wang               2.4        Olivetti           4.9            +2
Hitachi            2.2        Siemens            4.7            -2
Olivetti           2.1        Toshiba            4.6            +12
Apple              1.9        Compaq             2.9            New
Honeywell          1.8        Matsushita         2.8            New
ICL                1.6        Philips            2.8            +3
Groupe Bull        1.6        Nixdorf            2.8            +6
Data Gen.          1.3        Wang               2.7            -7
Philips            1.2        ICL                2.7            -3
Commodore          1.2        EDS                2.4            New
TRW                1.2        Canon              2.3            New
Xerox              1.2        Xerox              2.2            -
Nixdorf            1.2        TRW                2.1            -2
LM Ericsson        1.1        Amdahl             2.1            New
Toshiba            1.1        Sun                2.1            New
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Datamation; McKinsey analysis
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
