FT  02 MAY 91 / Japan's Socialists cave in on themselves: Robert Thomson
charts the free fall of a party whose rise seems like yesterday
LITTLE MORE than a year ago, Miss Takako Doi and the Japan Socialist Party
were basking in the glow of electoral success and thinking about the
prospect of government. This week, JSP officials have retreated to a
mountain resort to contemplate the collapse of the party's popularity.
The fall has been as dramatic as the rise. Miss Doi, the once brilliant Iron
Butterfly, is under pressure to resign as party leader from newer MPs who
owe their election to her now-faded charisma. Meanwhile, the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party (LDP) is again indulging itself in factional farce without
fear of condemnation from a fragile opposition.
Miss Doi's party was humiliated at a recent Tokyo gubernatorial election,
where the JSP candidate lost his deposit, and has been crushed in other
local government contests. An opinion poll released this week showed the
JSP's support to be lower than the meagre level of three years ago.
The party's failing is clear. Having been catapulted into popularity by the
scandal-ridden LDP's ineptitude, the JSP, heavy on ideology and light on
policy, had the challenge of turning itself into the party of choice for
Middle Japan. Instead, the party's factions multiplied and only a thin layer
of policy was brushed over an immovable ideology.
One change highlights the contradictions of a party still grappling with
'class struggle' - it now likes to be known in English as the Social
Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), though the name in Japanese remains the
same. The name change was a small victory for more cosmopolitan MPs, though
Mr Shigeru Ito, chairman of the party's policy board, thinks it 'bizarre'.
'I think it's pretty stupid. There is a Socialist Party in France that has
no problem with the name. It is far more important for us to change our
policies. We have to recognise that we are at a turning point. The great
expectations of our party have become a great despair.'
Mr Ito is seen by some MPs as the individual most capable of orchestrating
reform. He puts himself among the 70 per cent of the party that is 'to the
right of the left wing', but laments that the other 30 per cent are
particularly influential and that Miss Doi herself has shown an unfortunate
resistance to change.
'After our big election victory in 1989 she was standing on the diving board
getting ready to jump. She is still standing on the diving board. The time
has come for us to give her a push.'
The plunge contemplated by Miss Doi was the reform of outdated policies on
the Japanese military, a security treaty with the US, and South Korea.
Superficial changes have been made, but the party still enthusiastically
supports the authoritarian regime in North Korea and hints that the defence
forces would be disbanded.
Ordinary Japanese disapproved of the LDP's bungling during the Gulf crisis,
yet saw nothing in the JSP's performance to inspire confidence. It was
unable to cope with complex foreign policy issues, and firmly established
itself as the party that can say no and not much else.
'We are the No Party,' Mr Ito said. 'We are always dealing in the negative.
We have to make more positive statements. Unfortunately, it should have been
easier for us to change when we had the tail wind of success. Now it will
not be so easy.'
The LDP is confident that the socialists are no longer a potent force.
Elderly LDP factional leaders, tainted by the Recruit stocks-for-favours
scandal, are forming a new queue to take a turn as prime minister. And last
week, Mr Yasuhiro Nakasone, the disgraced former prime minister, returned to
the LDP with the blessing of factional heads and to the apparent
bewilderment of Mr Toshiki Kaifu, the present prime minister.
Meanwhile, JSP officials are concentrating on their own party's problems.
Newer MPs have formed groups such as New Wave and New Power, which want an
end to the influence of Marxist intellectuals and trade union leaders. The
left wing has established its own internal lobby group called A Committee to
Make a New Socialist Party, and the staunchest guardians of the faith have
formed The Socialism Association.
Mr Ito sympathises with the aims of impatient, young MPs but thinks they do
not pay due respect to the party's political traditions.
'We have a dogma problem, but they have no dogma at all. Half of the
freshmen are in the New Wave and half in the New Power - five people
couldn't decide and joined both groups. They have to understand that we
believed in a socialist revolution and Marxism and we are trying to overcome
that. They have nothing.'
Unless the party can settle its internal differences in coming months, Mr
Ito and others fear that it will be crushed at an upper house election next
year. Opposition parties still hold the balance of power in the upper house,
the weaker of Japan's two houses, though the JSP has failed to establish a
firm coalition against the LDP.
Miss Doi is likely to hold the JSP leadership, but the admiring audiences
have gone. When appointed in 1986, she had weak links to entrenched factions
and took a job which nobody else wanted. Her rise was a source of
inspiration for Japanese women and seen as a sign of profound structural
change within Japan.
Now, she is regarded as a representative of the old order and is mocked by
her party's younger MPs. They criticise her expanding wardrobe of expensive
dresses and, in describing her lack of political power, are fond of
referring to her as the 'Naked Empress'.
