FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: Drawn to Van Dyck - Homan Potterton is fascinated by
an unexpected group of sketches
THE FLAGS outside the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York announce an
exhibition of Van Dyck drawings and inside, occupying pride of place in the
lobby, is a showcase containing a small bound volume. The burgundy
crushed-velvet covers are laid open and there, on one of the hundred or so
leaves that make up the book, is an awkward drawing of a picture by Raphael.
This is the so-called 'Antwerp Sketchbook'.
Although it is the first item in the exhibition, the book is a
much-discussed work that is not necessarily by Van Dyck. It was brought to
light in 1959 by Professor Michael Jaffe, at Chatsworth, where it had been,
together with Van Dyck's 'Italian Sketchbook', since about 1900. It is an
odd little tome containing recipes for mixing painting materials, childish
arithmetic, drawings - some quite amateur - that are mainly copied from old
prints, and a transcription of a lost pocket-book that belonged to Rubens.
If it is by Van Dyck, it would have been assembled when he was about 16.
When Jaffe first published it, the Van Dyck attribution was immediately
refuted by the foremost authority on the artist's drawings, Horst Vey; but
since then different scholars have come to regard it as the artist's work.
The Morgan exhibition catalogue is inconclusive on the subject: 'puzzling',
it says, while pointing out that 'its inclusion presents an opportunity to
examine it alongside drawings that are indisputedly by Van Dyck'. This is a
bit of 'scholarly' nonsense. As the book is firmly secured beneath its
perspex dome, the chances that anyone will be able to examine more than the
single drawing which is shown are fairly remote.
Taking into account such practical considerations, the British Museum, which
owns Van Dyck's 'Italian Sketchbook', was quite right to refuse to lend it
to the exhibition. 'Too fragile' was its response when the loan was
requested. More to the point, why send 122 pages of drawings across the
Atlantic when no more than two of them are going to be seen?
The 'Italian Sketchbook', the authorship of which is above dispute, is a
pictorial record of the artist's travels in Italy between 1621-27 and it is
a fascinating document: very few Van Dyck drawings from those years survive.
There are five in the exhibition, including a very fine compositional study
for the altarpiece with St Rosalie in Palermo and an unusual sheet with a
cottage on fire sketched in wash on the back of another more finished
drawing.
Many of the works in the exhibition, in fact almost half the entire show of
91 items, are from the artist's early years in Antwerp, between 1617-21,
when he associated with the studio of Rubens. These drawings are studies, in
many cases groups of studies, for several of his most important pictures:
'The Brazen Serpent' and 'The Mystic Marriage of St Catherine', both in the
Prado; 'The Carrying of the Cross' in the Dominican church in Antwerp; and
'The Taking of Christ', a subject which he worked and re-worked in as many
as three different paintings. The sheets document an evolutionary process as
the young Van Dyck attempted to resolve his compositions while still
experimenting with various styles in painting. From one study to another a
figure is moved, a grouping tightened, or a gesture changed: several of the
drawings are finished modelli on which a grid of ruled lines has been
superimposed to facilitate the transfer of the design to canvas. In some
drawings the composition is broadly suggested with blocks of wash. Others
are composed of scratchy pen lines. Bolder studies are actually drawn with
wash while the more finished works may be executed in chalk strengthened
with pen and ink and dashes of body colour. Single figure studies are in
black chalk.
Fascinating though these early compositional drawings are, they are not Van
Dyck's most outstanding achievement and they are greatly surpassed in
quality by the superb portrait drawings included in the exhibition. This is
as one would expect from an artist whose portraits have, justifiably, always
been more prized than his subject pictures. Eleven of these drawings, black
chalk studies of famous contemporaries, were engraved as a series and
published between 1636-41 as The Iconography. Apart from the elegance of the
lines used to depict costumes and gestures and the skilful compositional
variations that the artist achieved within the narrow confines of a
head-and-shoulders study, The Iconography drawings are brilliant studies in
expression: disdain, worry, geniality, kindliness and wisdom are
marvellously conveyed.
Other drawings, free black chalk studies for later portraits - some with
white highlights - are also particularly fine. Several are related to the
artist's most famous compositions: a full-length figure of Henrietta Maria
in rustling silk with the dwarf Jeffrey Hudson as just a suggestion by her
side; a horse and rider, conveyed by a few spare lines, is unmistakeably a
composition sketch for 'Charles I on horseback with Monsieur de Saint
Antoine'; and a sheet with two studies of a seated greyhound is instantly
recognisable as related to the portrait of James Stuart, fourth Duke of
Lennox.
It comes as no surprise that Van Dyck could draw like this. One would expect
that he, the most elegant of painters, would be a refined draughtsman. The
surprises in the exhibition are provided by other drawings, an altogether
unexpected group of landscape sketches and plant studies that date from the
1630s. Two of these, almost like etchings in their precision, depict the
town of Rye: one is actually dated August 27, 1633, in the artist's own
writing and probably records his passing through the town on his way to
crossing the Channel. Among the other drawings in this group one is a formal
plant study with an inscription in Flemish, possibly by Van Dyck, that
identifies the various species; but the most arresting of all are three
unfinished watercolours with trees in a landscape that must have been
painted out of doors. As such, they are forerunners of the great English
watercolours of more than a century later.
Although several landscape paintings by Van Dyck are recorded in the
inventories of early collections, none is known today. But the existence of
these exquisite watercolours makes one wonder, had the artist survived
beyond the age of 42, might not landscape rather than subject painting have
been - next to portraiture - his greatest forte? Something else to puzzle
about.
The exhibition, which ends tomorrow, moves to the Kimbell Museum, Fort
Worth, Texas, from June 1 - August 11.
