FT  14 MAY 91 / FT Law Report: Japanese formulae do not disclose patent
method
RE ASAHI KASEI KOGYO KABUSHIKI KAISHA House of Lords (Lord Keith of Kinkel,
Lord Brandon of Oakbrook, Lord Ackner, Lord Oliver of Aylmerton and Lord
Jauncey of Tullichettle): May 9 1991
A GENETIC engineering patent claim is not deprived of novelty at its
priority date by an earlier application on another patent published before
or after that date disclosing the formulae by which the relevant chemical
compounds are created, if the earlier application makes no enabling
disclosure in that it fails to disclose the method by which the formulae are
to be applied in producing the compounds.
The House of Lords so held when allowing an appeal by Asahi Kasei Kogyo
Kabushiki Kaisha, from a Court of Appeal decision upholding a determination
of the comptroller of patents that a patent application by Asahi lacked
novelty at its priority date.
Section 2 of the Patents Act 1977 provides: '(1) An invention shall be taken
to be new if it does not form part of the state of the art.
(2) The state of the art in the case of an invention shall be taken to
comprise all matter . . . which has at any time before the priority date of
that invention been made available to the public.
(3) The state of the art in the case of an invention . . . shall be taken
also to comprise matter contained in an application for another patent which
was published on or after the priority date of that invention, if . . . (a)
that matter was contained in the application for that other patent . . . and
(b) the priority date of that matter is earlier than that of the invention'.
LORD OLIVER said that the appeal arose from competing applications for
patents for chemical inventions in the field of genetic engineering.
A Japanese company, Dainippon, filed application JP 617 in Japan on March 6
1984. On April 6 1984 Asahi filed an application in the US. On February 26
1985 Dainippon filed application EP 549 in the European Patents Office
claiming priority from JP 617. Asahi filed UK 864 on April 4 1985 claiming
priority from the US application of April 6 1984. For the purposes of the
appeal it was assumed that the subject matter of claims 2 and 3 of UK 864
was matter disclosed in EP 549, and that EP 549 adequately described a
method of preparing the products of those claims.
It was also assumed that the earliest EP 549 priority document (ie, JP 617)
disclosed the products of claims 2 and 3 of UK 864, but did not describe any
preparation methods.
The question, on those assumptions, was whether, having regard to the JP 617
disclosure, the subject matter of claims 2 and 3 of UK 864 formed part of
the state of the art under section 2 of the Patents Act 1977 at the UK 864
priority date, so as to deprive those claims of novelty.
The question arose between Asahi and the comptroller of patents on
examination of the application in suit, the UK 864 application.
On February 16 1988 the superintending examiner determined that EP 549
formed part of the state of the art at the UK 864 priority date and thus
anticipated claims 2 and 3.
EP 549 was not published until September 1985, after the UK 864 priority
date, so the examiner's decision was based on section 2(3) of the act and JP
617 priority.
Asahi argued that for disclosure in an application to form part of the state
of the art under section 2(3), it had to disclose the method of working the
invention, ie, it had to be an 'enabling disclosure'. It said mere
disclosure of a formula for a compound claimed was not sufficient.
That argument was rejected by the superintending examiner. Mr Justice
Falconer dismissed Asahi's appeal. The Court of Appeal upheld that
dismissal. Asahi now appealed.
The first question was, what material in EP 549 was entitled to the priority
date of JP 617? The second question was whether that material anticipated
the claims of the application in suit, having regard to the provisions of
section 2.
Section 5(2)(a) of the act provided that if an invention to which an
application related was 'supported by matter disclosed' in an earlier
application, the invention priority date should be the date of filing the
earlier application. By section 5(2)(b) the priority date of 'any matter
contained in the application in suit' was to be the date of filing the
earlier application in which 'that matter was disclosed'.
The act did not contain any definition of 'supported', but some assistance
could be obtained from section 14(5) which required the claim in an
application to be 'supported' by the description.
That must involve the conclusion that if the specification description did
not enable the claim to be established, it could not be said to 'support'
it, for the act could hardly have contemplated a complete application for a
patent lacking some of the material necessary to sustain the claims made.
It followed that a description in an earlier application which contained no
enabling disclosure would not 'support' the invention so as to enable it to
claim priority from the date of that application under section 5(2)(a),
although the description would be entitled to a priority as 'matter
contained' in the application in suit under section 5(2)(b).
What was claimed was a chemical compound formula produced in accordance
with, and identified by reference to, the formula disclosed.
The invention was not the formula itself but the thing identified and
described in terms of chemical building blocks by reference to the formula
of its compositions.
There might of course be cases where the means of producing the thing would
be self-evident to the man skilled in the art from the mere recital of the
formula or its composition, but it was not suggested that this was such a
case.
It had, therefore, to be assumed for present purposes that the man skilled
in the art, if he was to produce the invention claimed, would need to know,
not simply the formula, but a method by which it could be produced in
accordance with that formula. The invention, as a patentable concept,
involved the combination of formula and means.
It followed, Asahi argued, that EP 549 could not claim under section 5(2)(a)
priority from JP 617 for the totality of the invention claimed, but it could
claim priority from that application under section 5(2)(b) for the formulae
disclosed. So far as the means of making the invention was concerned, it
could claim priority only from the date of its own filing under section
5(1).
The logic of that argument seemed unassailable.
None of the relevant material had at priority date been published. The
critical provision was section 2(3).
In Genentech (1989) RPC 613 Mr Justice Falconer concluded that to constitute
anticipation to a claim to a new chemical compound, disclosure in a prior
document must be an enabling disclosure. In reaching that conclusion he
necessarily disapproved a contrary decision in GKI (1958) RPC 51.
For an anticipation under section 2(2) Genentech was to be preferred to GKI.
Asahi contended that the test was the same for section 2(3).
Section 2(3) deemed to be part of the state of the art nothing more than
matter entitled to priority under section 5.
Thus, the formula disclosed in JP 617 was deemed to be part of the state of
the art, but it did not follow that the invention claimed in that
application, ie, the compound produced by application of the formula, was
part of the state of the art so as to anticipate the claims made in UK 864.
The only 'matter' disclosed was the bare claim that a compound could be
prepared of the specified composition.
The appeal was allowed. The application was remitted to the Patent Office.
Their lordships agreed. Lord Jauncey gave a concurring judgment.
For Asahi: Simon Thorley QC and Guy Burkhill (Taylor Joynson Garrett
For the comptroller: Nicholas Pumphrey QC (Treasury solicitor)
