FT  30 APR 91 / Commodities and Agriculture: New York markets decide today
on future facilities
NEW YORK'S five commodities exchanges are to decide today whether they will
movetogether to a new, larger trading floor or go separate ways.
The choicesare to remain together in New York at a new site or separate,
with the New YorkMercantile Exchange (Nymex), the largest exchange, moving
across the Hudson River to New Jersey.
Proposals for both locations were presented several months ago and the New
York siting was overwhelmingly favoured. But the Nymex, theprosperous energy
exchange and the third largest US exchange after the two Chicago markets,
chose to re-examine the possibility of a New Jersey proposal beforefinally
making a commitment to New York.
The reasons for Nymex backing away from the joint move are unclear. Many
speculate, however, that at bottom itis because of poor relations between Mr
Lou Guttman, the chairman of Nymex, andMr Martin Greenberg, the chairman of
the New York Commodities Exchange (Comex).
Long-running merger talks between the two exchanges were once again scuttled
at the beginning of the year.
The New York exchanges are due to sign a letter of intent today with New
York on the deal, and Nymex's board was scheduled to decide the issue at a
special meeting that began yesterday and was expected to perhaps last
through the night into today.
The New York proposalis for a Dollars 260m project, of which New York City
would provide Dollars 145m, with Dollars 100m of that in cash. Besides Nymex
and Comex, which is principally a metals market, the other three exchanges
involved in the deal are the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchanges, the New York
Cotton Exchange and the New York Futures Exchange.
The relocation decision is expected to have a big impact not only on the
exchanges themselves, but on the futures commissions merchants (FCMs) who do
their business there.
The FCMs do not want to have to divide their staffs and duplicate their
costs in two facilities. The Futures Industry Association (FIA), which
represents the FCMs, says it strongly supports a unified relocation in the
city of New York.
It also would like to see the consolidation of clearingand processing to
increase cost savings for the FCMs.
The FIA, which represents 80 per cent of all futures and options activity on
US exchanges, is a powerful voice for the Nymex to ignore.
Should Nymex decide against its membership's wishes - the vote was 80 per
cent in favour of staying in New York - some believe there could be a revolt
by referendum to overturn the decision.
