FT  05 FEB 92 / World Trade News: Pact opponents claim secret negotiations
OPPONENTS of the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) yesterday
accused the administration of trying to limit 'negative coverage' of Nafta
negotiations by operating in an atmosphere of secrecy.
The US trade representative's office is refusing to disclose the venue of
the next Nafta ministerial talks. The meeting between the trade ministers of
the US, Canada and Mexico is believed to be scheduled for Sunday and Monday
somewhere in the Washington area. Previous Nafta negotiations in Seattle and
Mexico led to big protests. Opponents believe the administration is trying
to avoid a repetition this weekend.
Mr Craig Merrilees, co-director of the Fair Trade Campaign, a coalition of
Nafta opponents, said: 'Citizen groups, even if they don't command much
respect in Washington, have a right to know what their government is doing.
The administration is trying to keep this out of the public eye by
controlling the media and providing as few details as possible.'
The Fair Trade Campaign represents consumer, environment, labour, church and
family farm groups opposing the trade pact out of concern about job losses
and possible environmental damage from new industrialisation in Mexico.
Congressman Jim Kolbe (Republican, Arizona), said the present negotiating
text contained hundreds of brackets, indicating disagreement among the
countries, which still must be reduced before presentation to Congress.
He described a negotiation with 'no deal-breakers' but still lacking
dramatic incentives to overcome the obstacles of recession and election-year
politics in Congress. Mexico would like changes in the US dumping and
countervailing duties laws which Congress will not grant. The US would like
concessions on energy, but will not push for anything requiring changes in
the Mexican constitution.
Congressman Robert Matsui (Democrat, California), who has supported Nafta,
is urging the administration not to send it to Congress this year.
'The president runs the risk of turning this into a partisan issue and
ultimately losing it,' he declared. 'The mood in Washington is more
protectionist than I've seen in my 13 years here.'
