FT  06 FEB 92 / Five die in Belfast shooting: Wave of sectarian killings
leads to unionist calls for internment
PRESSURE on ministers to take decisive action over the handling of Northern
Ireland intensified last night after the killing of five Catholics in a
Belfast betting shop.
The attack was described as 'murder madness' by Sir Hugh Annesley, chief
constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary. The prime minister called it a
horrific attack which would be repudiated throughout the UK.
Loyalist paramilitaries burst into the betting shop in Ormeau Road, south
Belfast and fired indiscriminately. Almost every person in the crowded shop
was hit. Five men were killed and at least 12 others were taken to hospital.
Last night the outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters, the illegal military wing
of the Ulster Defence Association, claimed responsibility.
The killings brought to 26 the number of deaths so far this year through
terrorist violence in Northern Ireland - a rate reminiscent of the worst
years in the 1970s. All of those killed have been civilians. The number of
civilian deaths last year was 94.
The wave of sectarian killings has intensified pressure on the government to
increase still further the efforts of UK security forces in the province.
Sir Hugh insisted that the situation was under control, saying security
forces were stopping 85 per cent of terrorist attacks before they happened.
The suspension last month by the government of its efforts to start
'round-table' talks on the province's future has added to the atmosphere of
gloom and drift.
Unionists are demanding internment of both loyalist and republican terrorist
suspects - a measure not ruled out definitively by Mr Peter Brooke, Northern
Ireland secretary, but one that would bring bitter criticism from the Irish
government.
Mr Brooke will make a statement to the Commons today. Last night he said:
'It is critically important at a time like this for the community to keep
its nerve.'
Yesterday's killings came 24 hours after a policeman shot dead three men at
the advice centre of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, in Belfast. He
later committed suicide.
Three weeks ago, eight Protestant civilians working for the security forces
were killed in an IRA attack at Teebane Cross, County Tyrone.
The UFF's statement claiming responsibility for yesterday's attack was
headed 'Remember Teebane'.
Earlier, an Ulster Defence Regiment soldier shot dead a gunman who attacked
him near Northern Ireland's border with the Irish republic.
The part-time soldier, who was off-duty at the time, was wounded in the
incident.
Archbishop Robin Eames, head of the Church of Ireland, said that the
province was now witnessing 'unbridled madness'. He went on to say: 'If the
killing does not stop, everyone will be sucked into the morass of violence.'
At Westminster, however, the demands of nationalist and Unionist MPs for a
government statement were tempered by a realisation that there was little
prospect of the government offering more than a renewed determination to
defeat terrorism and offer sympathy for the victims.
Mr Ken Maginnis, the Ulster Unionist party's security spokesman, asked how
many more people had to die before internment was reintroduced - regarded by
many Unionist MPs as the only alternative which is left to the government.
