FT  07 MAY 92 / International Company News: Renault, Volvo closer to merger
deal
RENAULT, the French state-owned carmaker, and Volvo, its Swedish partner,
have confirmed they are exploring ways to deepen their successful
two-year-old alliance - possibly through a merger.
The pair would not comment on Swedish television reports, sourced to Volvo,
that a deal - under which a majority French government-owned holding company
would control both groups - would be in place before the summer. However,
they carefully avoided denials.
Mr Raymond Levy, Renault chairman, said in Manchester yesterday: 'We are
getting closer and closer to each other. We definitely share a strong will
to go on tightening the alliance by any means. A merger is one possible
means. I don't say there will be a merger, but I don't say there won't be.'
Volvo has repeatedly underlined its eagerness to get closer to Renault,
though it said yesterday it would not comment on speculation. Only last
week, Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, Volvo's chairman, hinted strongly at a
shareholders' meeting that Volvo would accept a minority stake in a merged
car and truck making group.
Volvo agreed to take 20 per cent of Renault in February 1990, in exchange
for which the French group took a 10 per cent stake in its Swedish partner's
parent. They declared then they would act as one company. A full merger
would create the world's fourth largest automotive industry grouping after
General Motors, Ford and Toyota, and the world's biggest bus and truck
maker.
Whatever the actual state of talks between the partners, the ground is ready
for them to deepen their alliance for several reasons.
Politically, the French government has switched from scepticism about the
alliance to support, with the recent change of prime minister to Mr Pierre
Beregovoy making the difference. Unlike Mrs Edith Cresson, his predecessor,
he does not believe in intervening in the decisions of state-owned
companies' professional management.
The Swedish government has also become less interventionist. It scrapped the
obligation for foreign mergers to seek official clearance at the beginning
of the year, and confirmed yesterday it would not interfere.
The French government, which owns 80 per cent of Renault, now looks likely
to allow Mr Levy, due to retire on May 22, to hand over to his preferred
successor, Mr Louis Schweitzer, managing director and one of the main
architects of the alliance with Volvo. A French ministerial meeting is due
to name the new Renault chairman on May 27, said Mr Levy, who thought Mr
Schweitzer had a 'fair chance'.
Renault has the government's consent, under the original accord, to sell
only another 5 per cent of its shares to Volvo, giving the Swedish car group
a maximum 25 per cent stake.
Any more would require an act of parliament, since Renault's statutes are
governed by its own individual law, dating back to its 1945 privatisation.
Renault, then, will have to ask the government's support before it can stage
a merger with Volvo or make any big change to its ownership. According to
Renault officials, no decision has yet been taken.
Industrially, both sides are ready to go further, in that they are pleased
with the alliance, which has permitted greater-than-expected cost savings
from joint component purchasing and exchanges of engines and gearboxes.
Renault executives, basking in last year's net profits recovery, privately
say they would love to be privatised.
The partners agree at the same time that their brand identities must be kept
separate, otherwise they would both lose market share. Volvo now has its
hands free, following its settlement with the Swedish state over the future
of Procordia, the Swedish food and pharmaceuticals conglomerate earlier this
week.
