FT  20 NOV 92 / Thai investors protest after shares plunge
THAI investors staged noisy protests outside the Stock Exchange of Thailand
(SET) for the second day running yesterday as share prices continued to
plunge in response to government moves to control speculators.
The SET index fell 3.9 per cent, or 33.87 points, to close at 834.17
yesterday, making a cumulative decline of more than 13 per cent since it
peaked two weeks ago.
Foreign stockbrokers believe rising corporate profits and an economy growing
at about 8 per cent a year will soon push share prices up again, but many
Thai investors fear the once lively market has been weakened by official
moves to curb speculation.
On Wednesday, the six-month-old Securities and Exchange Commission filed
charges against Mr Song Watcharasriroj, a 35-year-old speculator known as
Sia Song, for allegedly manipulating the price of shares in Bangkok Bank of
Commerce in collaboration with a group of associates.
Mr Song, who could face a fine or imprisonment for up to two years, denied
the charges. He also said that before being arrested and released on bail he
had agreed to a request by Mr Tarrin Nimmanahaeminda, the finance minister,
to stop trading for a week.
'It's unfair to arrest me after I've already agreed to stop,' he said.
Investors were apparently unimpressed by official announcements that the
government-controlled Krung Thai Bank and a group of stockbrokers had been
directed to inject a total of Bt15bn (Pounds 39m) into a fund to buy shares
and stabilise the market.
'I think it will take a few days before they can mobilise such a large
amount of money,' said one stockbroker yesterday.
Angry speculators and investors exchanged facsimile messages attacking the
finance ministry and the managements of the SEC and the SET.
Demonstrators outside the SET in central Bangkok called for the resignation
of Mr Seri Chintanaseri, SET president.
On a busy day Bangkok brokerage houses resemble British bookmakers on the
day of the Grand National, with everyone from housewives to executives
crowding round the screens to watch their favourites and place their bets.
In an attempt to stop the market overheating, the central bank and the
finance ministry have forced brokers to restrict the credit they extend to
their clients to buy shares.
World stock markets, Page 37
