FT  28 MAR 92 / A case of wine on the rocks: French stocks are too high at a
time when demand is falling
This weekend concludes an historic event in Burgundy. In the past week this
traditionally introverted French wine region has for the first time ever
ceremonially opened its cellar doors for the world's wine writers and wine
buyers. But this is a sign not of hospitality - it is one of anxiety.
Next week many of Burgundy's guests will troop off to Bordeaux for the
launch of that region's latest vintage. For the past few years the Bordeaux
chateaux have had to fend off a wine world impatient to taste their new
wares. This year they have been trying to persuade the key palates to sample
the 1991 vintage at all.
Bordeaux and Burgundy, like most of the French wine industry, are in
financial difficulty. The combination of three years of bumper crops,
over-ambitious pricing and the recession has created a cycle of rising
stocks and falling demand. These problems are aggravated by the longer-term
trends of growing competition from other countries and changes in consumer
tastes which could lead to big alterations in the scale and structure of the
industry.
The current crisis is all the more acute for following a decade of
prosperity. French wine flourished in the 1980s thanks to a blend of
wonderful weather and buoyant demand, notably from newer markets like the US
and Japan. By the end of the decade France's wine producers and the
negociants, which distribute their products, revelled in three glorious
vintages - 1988, 1989 and 1990. By 1990 the French wine industry generated
record exports of FFr23.2bn (Pounds 2.4bn) with a workforce of 330,000.
This prosperity created its own problems. The negociants paid higher prices
to the producers for the prime vintages of 1988 and 1989. They then found it
difficult to pass these prices on to their own customers, the wine
merchants, because so much wine had been produced in those years and demand
was already weakening in recession-struck markets such as the US and UK.
Demand declined further as the recession deepened. Since last autumn,
consignments from the US and Belgium have been flooding back to France. One
importer in the US, where the effect of the recession was until recently
reinforced by the weak dollar, reputedly returned a cargo of 48,000 cases.
Some of these returns have resurfaced in the French supermarkets, which had
started selling crus classes, the very best Bordeaux wines, when the
much-vaunted vintages of 1988 and 1989 depressed sales of the much less
successful 1987 vintage. Meanwhile some negociants have been forced to sell
off stocks cheaply. Some of the finest French wines, Chateau d'Yquem and
Chateau Cheval Blanc, are being sold in supermarkets sometimes for less than
the negociant prices.
'It's purgatory,' says Mr John Kolasa, commercial director of Ulysse
Cazabonne, Chateau Latour's negociant. 'Supermarket prices have got
completely out of hand. Crus classes are being used as loss leaders to sell
packets of biscuits and cans of peas.'
While the fine wine trade has been disrupted by the incursion of the
supermarkets, the market for French table wine at the bottom end of the
quality spectrum is described as 'catastrophic' by Roger Piquet, owner of
Chateau de Gourgazaud. These are the products that have been worst affected
by the recession in the export sector, and production still exceeds demand.
Even Bordeaux, France's most famous fine wine region, is showing signs of
financial strain. Two small merchants have closed and some of the grandest
chateaux are up for sale. Suez, the giant French industrial group, hopes to
sell Cordier, a large negociant which also owns Chateau Gruaud-Larose, as
part of its restructuring. Chateau Rausan-Segla, part of a trust belonging
to Mr George Walker, the British businessman recently ousted as chairman of
the stricken Brent Walker leisure group, is also said to be on the market.
The difficulties are likely to intensify this year. The 1991 grape harvest
was a disaster thanks to severe frost in April and a poor summer, which
produced a vintage of erratic quality. On one level this is what the wine
industry needed - the low volume of 1991s should help to clear the high
stocks of 1988s, 1989s and 1990s. But low volume also means low turnover for
the negociants, which could cause cashflow problems this spring.
There are some positive signs. The dollar's recent rise, coupled with signs
of economic recovery in the US, should stimulate sales to that market.
Moreover the influx of investment into the industry in the 1980s - there
were 17 foreign acquisitions in Bordeaux alone between 1983 and 1991,
notably from global drinks groups such as the UK's Allied-Lyons - has helped
to stabilise the industry: these investors often take a longer-term view
than the old family owners.
Some companies have been taking radical action to tackle their problems.
Louis Latour, a leading Burgundy negociant, slashed the prices of its 1989
whites by 25 per cent late last year. Others followed suit and have since
experienced a slight improvement in sales.
But the industry's difficulties go beyond the immediate economic problems.
International competition from Australasia, Spain, South Africa, eastern
Europe and South America is increasing. These regions, with their aggressive
export strategies, represent a growing threat to French wines.
French attempts to battle back will be hampered by the changes in consumer
taste, most of which are unfavourable to France. The bulk of French wines,
for instance, are reds, but the strongest demand worldwide is still for
whites.
'This is a difficult time,' says Mr Jean-Marc Dulong, commercial director of
Dulong Freres, a Bordeaux negociant. 'Our customers outside France want easy
wines with lots of fruit, which is different from the traditional French
style.'
In France itself there is a discernible shift, particularly among younger
consumers, away from the 'classic' French wines from Bordeaux, Burgundy and
Beaujolais towards more adventurous southern wines, such as Corbieres,
Minervois and the better-made vin de pays.
Moreover, French wine, like the rest of the international drinks industry,
faces the challenge of the swing against alcohol. Wine consumption continues
to fall in France, where per capita consumption has declined by almost a
third, albeit to a heady 73 litres a year, in the past decade.
The logical consequence of these pressures will be concentration of
ownership within the industry into a smaller number of larger companies. 'We
have to be realistic,' says Mr Philippe Hernandez, director of Societe de
Distribution des Vins Fins in Bordeaux. 'Eventually there may be as few as
20 negociants left in this region compared with 300 today.'
The structure of the market is also likely to alter. Traditionally the wine
producers, the viticulteurs, have been independent of the distributors, the
negociants. This is changing. Some top Bordeaux chateaux - Lafite, Latour
and Mouton-Rothschild - already own negociants that handle part of their
distribution.
Producers are reluctant to discuss the issue for fear of upsetting their
negociants, but most admit privately that they plan to expand their
distribution activities. Conversely, some negociants are increasing their
investment in viticulture and in marketing initiatives such as brand
development.
As for the wines themselves, the drive towards higher quality that started
in the 1980s is certain to continue. Lower-grade producers, notably the
subsidised smallholders and co-operatives producing plonk in the south, may
be forced out of business. These peasant producers are the main French
targets of a European Commission initiative to reduce Europe's wine-growing
area by 500,000 hectares - five times the size of Bordeaux - over the next
five years.
In the meantime the industry is waiting to see how the 1991 vintage is
received and what sort of harvest it reaps this year. 'Everything depends on
1992,' says Mr David Orr, president of Chateau Latour. 'What we all want is
a small harvest of super quality. If we get it, the market will be much
better. If we don't, life will get even tougher.'
