FT  05 NOV 92 / US Election (World reaction): Leap into unknown for nervous
EC leaders
EUROPE will miss President George Bush. However unpopular he was in the US,
Mr Bush was viewed by his fellow European leaders as a predictable ally.
President-elect Bill Clinton represents a leap into the unknown. This at
least was the initial assessment in Brussels yesterday.
The Clinton campaign has sent signals about its desire for continuity in US
foreign policy; but questions remain about how a 46-year-old governor from
Arkansas, with next to no experience in foreign affairs, will approach
Europe, especially now that relations between the US and the EC have turned
decidedly sticky.
The tensions between the two in the Gatt trade talks are symptomatic of a
wider lack of transatlantic co-operation. The sense of drift has grown as
the global recession has deepened and national leaders have gone their own
way.
'We're in the middle of a hurricane, but we're still trying to do business,'
said a senior White House official just before the November 3 election, 'and
you people in Europe are worrying about the French farmers in elections six
months down the road.'
For Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president, the Gatt talks have
turned into a trial of strength in which no side can afford to lose face. As
Mr Clinton will discover, Mr Delors is reflexively anti-American on some
issues. He believes the EC should resist US pressure on farm subsidies
because 'it is important for an adolescent Europe to say No to Big Brother
(America)'.
This view is widely held among Europhiles in Brussels who fret about US
claims to world leadership and hanker after a partnership of equals: but at
the same time, officials worry that the US may decide to go home, leaving a
security vacuum in Europe.
In a speech in Boston in 1989, President Bush recognised European
aspirations for a greater political voice and gave an unequivocal welcome to
European economic integration.
Subsequently, he awarded the EC a co-ordinating role in eastern Europe,
invited Mr Delors to Washington as a quasi head of state, and gave an
enthusiastic welcome to the Maastricht treaty on European union. Behind the
scenes, however, frustrations continued to build as European aspirations
foundered, first in its dilatory response to the Gulf crisis and then in its
ill-conceived rush, under German pressure, to recognise Croatia and Slovenia
 -thereby exacerbating the Yugoslav civil war.
The US was also alarmed about Franco-German plans to form a new Euro-corps,
the potential nucleus of a future European army sketched in the Maastricht
treaty. US diplomats privately denounced the corps as a challenge to the
primacy of Nato as guarantor of European security.
Enter Mr Clinton, the man who declares it is time to rebuild America, who
puts the restoration of US economic strength as top priority. Two questions
arise: will his 'America first' rhetoric lead to a more confrontational and
protectionist trade policy; and will his interest in domestic affairs
accelerate the trend toward US disengagement in Europe?
Mr Manfred Worner, Nato secretary-general, attempted to dispel concerns
yesterday, describing Mr Clinton as a 'fervent supporter of the Atlantic
alliance'. But some senior EC officials are not entirely reassured by the
Clinton camp's answers. (The EC delegation in Washington only received
official biographies of Mr Clinton and his running-mate Senator Al Gore on
election day; more seriously, officials in Brussels are awaiting the first
senior foreign policy appointments).
Economic questions remain paramount. Will Mr Clinton pursue his plan to
increase taxation of foreign-owned companies to help reduce the budget
deficit, even at the expense of job-creating inward investment? What steps
will he take to spur a US recovery?
In the last resort, however, much will ride on the Gatt talks which have now
become a litmus test for whether the US and EC can balance the need for
political co-operation with economic rivalry.
For this reason, many officials in Brussels believe Mr Clinton would be
secretly delighted if Mr Bush could pull off a deal because it would avoid a
damaging row with the allies just as he takes office in January.
