FT  06 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Raine to acquire Walter Lawrence
RAINE INDUSTRIES yesterday announced it had agreed to acquire Walter
Lawrence in an all-share offer valuing the company at Pounds 28.5m. A
takeover would create the UK's 10th largest house builder, producing about
2,000 homes a year.
The offer was accompanied by an announcement of a 2-for-7 rights issue,
priced at 95p a share, to raise Pounds 33.5m.
The rights issue cash will be used to reduce Walter Lawrence's high
borrowings of Pounds 74m, said Mr Peter Parkin, Raine's chief executive.
If the bid succeeds Raine will be left with net debt of about Pounds 45m,
including acquisition costs, equivalent to 33 per cent of combined
shareholders' funds of Pounds 133m.
Preference shareholders are being offered 100p cash for each share or can
elect to accept a share offer.
Newarthill, which operates Robert McAlpine, the private construction company
and owns almost 18 per cent of Walter Lawrence's ordinary shares and 11 per
cent of the preference, has indicated that it will accept Raine's offer.
Raine's share price yesterday fell 15 1/2 p to 108 1/2 p valuing Walter
Lawrence's ordinary shares at 54p each. Lawrence's shares which were trading
at 23p before the announcement jumped to 46p.
Mr Parkin also revealed that Raine's pre-tax profits had fallen by more than
a quarter from Pounds 8.2m to Pounds 5.8 during the six months to
end-December.
He said the group would be paying a maintained interim dividend of 2p
covered 1.5 times by earnings of 3p (4p). Raine said it intended to pay a
same-again final dividend of 4p for year ending June 30.
Raine said that it had looked at several acquisition opportunities before
alighting on Walter Lawrence. These are understood to have included YJ
Lovell in which Raine acquired a 2.8 per cent stake last year at a price of
about 140p a share.
Lovell's share price has since collapsed, closing last night at 24p. Raine's
interim results include a Pounds 3.4m provision to cover the writing down of
the value of its holdings in Lovell.
The acquisition will increase the geographical spread of Raine's housing
operations to cover most areas of England. Walter Lawrence also has a
Californian housing business taking Raine into the US housing market on the
back of Walter for the first time.
COMMENT
Raine in doing its sums has written down the book value of Walter Lawrence
from Pounds 51m to Pounds 25.5m equivalent to about 50p a share - not far
short of the bid price itself. It will have a combined UK landbank of about
6,000 plots at an average book value of Pounds 12,500. This should produce
gross margins of about 25 per cent and net margins of 10 per cent even if
the market does not improve. There should, according to Raine, be no
dilution of earnings despite the issue of large amounts of paper. It can
always sell the Californian business if things do not go as well as
expected. Walter Lawrence shareholders meanwhile will get a substantial
premium above the Lawrence's recently lack-lustre share price. Raine should
be capable of making Pounds 15m this year producing earnings of 8p with the
prospect of a housing recovery some stage in the future. The rights and the
offer on this basis should be supported.
