FT  22 JAN 92 / FT Law Report: Jersey company must pay liquidator
RE SHOE LACE LTD Chancery Division: Mr Justice Hoffmann: December 20 1992
A DEBENTURE creating an all-monies floating charge, executed by a company
two months before presentation of an insolvency petition in consideration of
advances already made to it by its parent in anticipation of the debenture,
is invalid in that the charge was not created before or 'at the same time
as' the payments were made, having regard to the ordinary meaning of those
words in a commercial and regulatory context.
Mr Justice Hoffmann so held when granting an application under RSC Order 29
rule 10 by Mr Dermot Justin Power, liquidator of Shoe Lace Ltd, for an
interim payment in respect of his claim for return of company funds paid to
the first respondent, Sharp Investments Ltd, a company allegedly controlled
by the second respondent, Mr Chandru Mahtani.
Section 245 of the Insolvency Act 1986 provides: '(2) . . . a floating
charge on the company's undertaking or property created at the relevant time
is invalid except to the extent of . . . (a) the value . . . of the
consideration for the creation of the charge . . . paid . . . to the company
at the same time as, or after the creation of the charge . . .
(3) . . . the time . . . is a relevant time . . . if the charge is created -
(a) . . . in favour of a person who is connected with the company . . .
within . . . two years ending with the onset of insolvency . . .'
HIS LORDSHIP said Sharp was a Jersey company which held 80 per cent of Shoe
Lace's issued share capital. Mr Mahtani was a business man who lived in
Ratigen in Germany. He was alleged to control Sharp through a Jersey trust,
and to have acted as a shadow director of Shoe Lace.
Shoe Lace operated a number of shops in Lancashire and Yorkshire which sold
cheap footwear.
The original directors were Mr Sam Nolan, a Jersey accountant who was also a
director of Sharp, and Mr Barry Fox who was alloted 20 per cent of the share
capital.
A copy of an accountant's report commissioned by Mr Nolan in August 1990
showed that Shoe Lace was hopelessly insolvent in April 1990 and that its
position became steadily worse.
Minutes of directors' meetings showed that in February 1990 Shoe Lace had
exhausted its banking facilities and decided to apply to its parent company,
Sharp, for support.
On March 20 the directors resolved to grant Sharp a debenture to secure past
and future advances, in consideration of further short-term finance.
According to the evidence of Sharp's solicitor, it advanced Pounds 300,000
to Shoe Lace on April 3, Pounds 50,000 in May, Pounds 75,000 in June, and a
final payment of Pounds 11,500 on July 16.
The debenture was not executed until July 24.
It created a charge to secure the payment of 'all monies . . . hereby
covenanted to be paid'. The document contained no covenant to pay anything,
but the registered particulars described it as an all-monies charge and the
court would assume that it could be rectified to correspond with that
description.
There was a fixed charge over immoveable assets and goodwill, and a floating
charge over the whole of the assets and undertaking.
A petition for compulsory winding-up was presented on September 4 and served
at the trading address the same day. It was served at the registered office
on September 11.
On September 13 Shoe Lace entered into a sale of business agreement by which
it sold all its assets to a company called Shoe Hut Ltd, another Channel
Island company, for Pounds 211,000.
By direction of Shoe Lace, Pounds 180,710 of the purchase price was paid by
Shoe Hut direct to Sharp as debenture-holder. The rest was retained against
the outcome of a claim of retained title to stock made by a supplier.
Shoe Lace was compulsorily wound up on November 20. The Pounds 180,710 was
frozen in Sharp's bank account by court order on February 15 1991.
The liquidator said Sharp was not entitled to that money. He said that
Sharp, Shoe Lace and Shoe Hut were all controlled by Mr Mahtani.
There was a high probability that Shoe Hut was a phoenix company, but the
present court did not need to decide the question, because the principal
ground on which the liquidator founded his application was that the floating
charge created by the debenture was invalidated by section 245 of the
Insolvency Act 1986.
Section 245 provided that a floating charge created within two years before
the onset of insolvency in favour of a person connected with the company,
was invalid, except to the extent of consideration paid for creation of the
charge 'at the same time as, or after, the creation of the charge'.
By subsection (5) the onset of insolvency was the date of presentation of
the petition.
The floating charge was created within two months before the onset of
insolvency. Also, Sharp controlled Shoe Lace and so was a connected person.
The charge was therefore void except to the extent that Sharp paid money to
Shoe Lace 'at the same time as, or after, the creation of the charge'.
There was no authority on the meaning of 'at the same time as' in section
245.
The degree of contemporaneity which such words connoted must depend on the
context.
It might not be unreasonable to say that two species of dinosaur became
extinct 'at the same time' when millions of years separated their last known
representatives. On the other hand, one would not say the winner of a race
crossed the tape at the same time as the runner-up, though separated by less
than a tenth of second.
In section 245 the context was commercial and regulatory.
For example, it formed part of a scheme which included the requirement that
particulars of a floating charge must be delivered to the Registrar of
Companies within 21 days of its creation.
The question was whether a businessman having knowledge of the kind of time
limits imposed by the Insolvency and Companies Acts, and using ordinary
language, would say that the payments had been made at the same time as
execution of the debenture.
No businessman would use such language of the payments made in the present
case.
He would say that the parties had agreed in March that a debenture should be
granted, that a number of payments were made in consideration of that
promise, but that they did not get around to executing the debenture until
afterwards.
The respondents' solicitor said it was not executed because Mr Nolan was
dilatory. He thought that as Shoe Lace had agreed to grant the debenture
there was no urgency about execution.
The court was referred to authorities on earlier sections invalidating
floating charges, which resembled section 245. None was binding because the
language of the current section was different.
No principle was derived from them for present purposes except that stated
by the Court of Appeal in Columbian Fireproofing (1910) 1 Ch 758, that
contemporaneity was a question of fact. In section 245 the words 'at the
same time as' only emphasised that contemporaneity was an objective matter.
If that was wrong and it was necessary to look at the reasons for the delay,
it seemed that Sharp, through Mr Nolan, acquiesced in the delay of Shoe
Lace, through Mr Nolan, in executing the debenture.
To obtain an interim payment under RSC Order 29 rule 10, the liquidator must
show a case of such strength as would justify judgment under RSC Order 14.
That was subject to Order 14A, which enabled the court to decide a question
of law if it appeared suitable for determination without full trial and if
such determination would finally dispose of an issue in the cause.
Construction of section 245 could be decided without full trial of the
liquidator's summons, and the determination would finally dispose of the
question of validity of the floating charge, because it meant that even on
the respondents' own evidence, the charge must be invalid.
Of the Pounds 180,710 paid under the sale agreement, Pounds 41,000 was
allocated to immoveable property and Pounds 5,000 to goodwill. Both were
subject to fixed charges which, although possibly voidable on other grounds,
did not fall within section 245.
That meant that for the purposes of an interim payment, it would be just to
order that Pounds 134,710 be paid out of the frozen funds to the liquidator.
For the liquidator: Daniel Serota QC and Paul Lowenstein (Fruhman, Davies &amp;
Co).
For the respondents: John Briggs (McKenna &amp; Co).
