FT  21 NOV 92 / Books: Polish king who lost his castle and his country -
Elected royalty had its problems
THE LAST KING OF POLAND by Adam Zamoyski Jonathan Cape Pounds 25, 550 pages
THIS is a remarkable book, not only for the story it tells; even more
impressive is the skill with which it is told. The complexities of Polish
history are immense, as entangling as the Amazon delta and could so easily
be too daunting for the average reader. Poland was not just Poland. As well
as the Kingdom it contained a Commonwealth - indeed the territory loosely
called Poland stretched from the Black Sea to the Baltic embracing, among a
conglomeration of many semi-sovereign princes, the Ukraine and a far vaster
Lithuania than the one we know.
The constitutions of this vast empire were bewildering, but none more so
than Poland's, which elected - or at least tried to elect - its own king in
an age-old parliamentary institution called the Seym. This was dominated by
the great aristocratic families, probably the richest aristocracy of any
European country in the 18th century. The Poniatowskis, Radziwills, Potockis
and Czartoryskis were all immensely powerful, usually suspicious of each
other and often scheming amongst the great powers - Russia, Prussia, Austria
and France - who bribed and seduced many with promises to keep the pot of
anarchy gently boiling. I cannot think of a task more difficult for an
author than to thread his way through this morass of diplomacy and politics.
Fortunately Zamoyski is amazingly skilful. He knows instinctively just how
much detail is necessary to present a comprehensible picture of the world in
which his hero, Stanislaw, lived and stroved to realise his ideals of
kinship. His chapters are short and illuminating. Against this beautifully
controlled background he tells the story of Stanislaw; his biographical
narrative brings a firm structure to his book and gives it impetus, so that
550 pages pass swiftly.
Stanislaw was a complex character. As a young man with his vast family
connections and drop of royal blood, he was regarded as electable. His
parents educated him as if destined for the throne - a Grand Tour took him
to Paris and London, which he adored. He developed a strong belief in the
liberality of Britain and its land-owning democracy.
In Paris he had been converted to the ideas of the Enlightenment. Entering
the diplomatic service, he fell in love and into bed with Catherine, the
future Czarina. Both took incredible risks. It had to end, and with luck
Stanislaw got back alive to Warsaw. Catherine, who murdered her husband, did
all she could to get Stanislaw elected king. That accomplished a new, if
dangerous, world opened for him.
Fortunately Poland was enjoying a prosperity it had never known before and
Stanislaw set about making Warsaw a city of beauty and sophistication -
rebuilding old palaces, bringing in the Italians, French, Germans and even
English architects, sculptors and painters who decorated his exquisite
palaces with the heavy symbolism of Freemasonry and of the Enlightenment. He
created a perfect setting for the greatest art of the 18th century:
conversation. He played with ideas with skill, welcomed the revolution in
America, even drew up, after the French revolution got into its stride, a
splendidly liberal constitution for Poland itself; but, alas, he was out of
touch with the cruel reality of his position.
Within nine years of his election, Russia, Austria and Prussia, fearing that
each might pounce upon so delectable an opportunity, clubbed together and
did a deal to slice portions off the Polish conglomeration. Their judgment
in seizing enough to worry, but not to stir France and Britain into action,
was excellent. Of course, Stanislaw was totally impotent to defend his
kingdom. He had built beautiful palaces, restored much of the crown lands
and income but he had failed, indeed scarcely tried, to provide the
essential institutions of a modern state: no national army, no strong
bureaucratic class. Anarchy still prevailed; later in life he endured a
second partition and died in the marble palace at St Petersburg. A few years
later Poland was wiped off the map.
A tragic tale beautifully told. Zamoyski's prose does not dazzle, nothing is
strained, it is cool and pellucid. He is a great writer and his biography is
very readable and instructive. The only blot on this book are the
illustrations, dreadfully small, often meaningless and smudged pictures; in
fact awful. But they do not matter. Please, Mr Zamoyski, turn your eye on
Catherine the Great: the greatest female monarch in Europe's history and so
ripe for your talents.
