FT  19 MAR 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Old Joe is giving doctors
the hump - Controversy over Camel
Is Old Joe Camel, the suave cartoon dromedary who has been credited with
reviving a cigarette brand, about to become a victim of his own success?
The US medical profession certainly hopes so. It hates him with a vengeance
 -so much so, that the US Surgeon General called this month for a voluntary
withdrawal of all 'Old Joe' advertising for Camel cigarettes. Old Joe's
problem, according to the medical lobby, is that children like him too much.
The furore says a lot about the tobacco advertising controversy in the US.
While Europe flirts with a comprehensive ban on tobacco ads, anti-smoking
campaigners on the other side of the Atlantic have settled down to a war of
attrition.
In some areas, particularly at state level, there have been well-publicised
successes. Californians, for example, voted in 1988 to increase tobacco
taxes and devote some of these revenues to anti-smoking promotions,
including advertising. More generally, US cigarette consumption has been in
steady decline - about 2 per cent a year - a trend which is usually
attributed to better publicity of the health issues.
But if there is one area where the industry and the anti-smoking lobbyists
still clash with particular passion, it is over promotions which allegedly
target 'vulnerable' consumers - ethnic groups and adolescents, in
particular.
No campaign has been more controversial than 'Old Joe'. The Camel trademark
is owned by RJ Reynolds, the number two tobacco manufacturer. Like many
full-priced brands, it had been losing ground both to aggressive rivals and
cheaper cigarettes. According to RJR, Camel's domestic market share in the
mid-1980s stood at about 4.4 per cent.
In 1987, however, the company decided to revamp a highly-stylised Camel
campaign which was originally devised in France a decade earlier. It had
featured a cartoon camel and preached a 'smooth character' message.
Soon, Joe with his protruding snout - suspiciously phallic, said the critics
 -appeared on a massive billboard in New York's Times Square. The cartoon
camel began to feature in print ads and on other promotional material. He
was seen in the company of other partying camels or in suitably luxurious
surroundings. He invariably commanded the scene in cool, macho style.
Last December, the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA)
published research which suggested that the 'Old Joe' ads were widely
recognised by children, even those as young as three years old. Moreover,
Old Joe was 'far more successful at marketing Camel cigarettes to children
than adults'.
According to JAMA, Joe's influence was evidenced by a sharp rise in the
percentage of children who picked Camel as their preferred brand - 32.8 per
cent in these new samples, compared with 0.5 per cent in surveys completed
before the Old Joe campaign began.
R. J. Reynolds' response was speedy and emphatic. It claimed that its own
studies (backed up by Office of Smoking and Health data) showed that 98 per
cent of Camel sales went to smokers of 18-plus.
It denied any interest in encouraging 'youth' smoking - not least, because
of the potential backlash which this could provoke. And it noted that while
the 'Old Joe' campaign had successfully stabilised Camel's overall market
share, it had done little to increase it. But it may not be the only US
tobacco company affected by the controversy. Brown &amp; Williamson, which is
owned by Britain's BAT Industries, is currently test-marketing two new
campaigns for its Kool brand.
The Ohio tests are said to involve traditional 'life-style' type
advertising, while the Virginia tests centre on Willie, a savvy cartoon
penguin. B&amp;W says the Virginia results are 'very positive, with the penguin
considered an adult symbol'. Nevertheless, after Old Joe's bumpy experience,
Willie's owners must at least pause for thought.
Nor are tobacco companies the only targets within the Surgeon General's and
American Medical Association's sights. Lonnie Bristow, an AMA trustee,
concedes that pleas for voluntary withdrawal of the cartoon camel are also
aimed at providers of advertising space and at cigarette retailers who use
promotional material.
Whether the anti-smoking lobby will prevail is equally debatable. RJ
Reynolds, not surprisingly, denies any backlash and suggests that most space
suppliers are firmly wedded to 'free speech' principles. Some evidence seems
to back this up.
New York Telephone, whose booths house 'Old Joe' posters, says that so long
as material is legal and in good taste, it would not discriminate against
any advertiser.
Meanwhile, out on Manhattan's streets, an unscientific straw poll suggests
that, while retailers know all about the 'Old Joe' controversy, keeping a
business afloat weighs more heavily.
'Ninety per cent of kids can recognise Joe Camel, but how many associate him
with cigarettes?' says the man operating a booth on 59th Street. 'Educating
kids about cigarettes is just not our job,' remarked a drugstore manager.
