FT  15 JUN 92 / The Earth Summit: Leaders shy away from cash pledges
MONEY proved to be one of the toughest nuts to crack at Rio, and the results
were disappointing. The industrial countries offered relatively little new
aid to clean up the Third World environment, citing budget stringency, and
were reluctant to commit themselves to large increases in the future.
The chunkiest contribution came from Japan which offered to raise its
environmental aid from Dollars 5bn (Pounds 2.7bn) over the last five years
to Dollars 7-Dollars 7.7bn over the next five.
No other country even came up with a firm figure for Overseas Development
Assistance (ODA). However several, including the UK, Germany and France,
offered to help refinance the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the fund
administered by the World Bank and the UN to help Third World countries
finance projects which help the global environment.
It now seems certain that the Dollars 1.3bn GEF will be more than doubled by
the end of next year.
There was also support for a replenishment of the International Development
Association, the World Bank facility for poorest countries.
The US focused its aid efforts on forestry, the one area for which it has
shown enthusiasm at Rio, with a contribution of Dollars 150m. The EC
attracted attention with a proposal for Ecu3bn (Pounds 2.1bn) of
environmental aid - until it transpired that this was merely the total which
had already been committed by member states.
The biggest battle came over attempts to get industrial countries to raise
their aid as a proportion of GNP to 0.7 per cent by the end of the century.
Only France (currently at 5.6 per cent) among the G7 was willing to make
this pledge.
The final conference text on finance was a wordy compromise which said that
developed countries would try to increase their ODA to 0.7 per cent to help
finance Agenda 21, and 'some countries agree or have agreed to reach the
target by the year 2000'.
Many other measures to aid Third World countries were discussed but their
financial value was not quantified. Overall, it is estimated that industrial
countries committed Dollars 2.5bn a year in new money, compared to the
Dollars 70bn the UN says is needed.
The Inter-American Development Bank will lend Mexico Dollars 100m towards a
Dollars 200m programme to reforest the country and clean up Mexico City's
air, Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari said in Rio.
