FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement - Analysis: Spending rises but NHS
faces tough times - Health
THE National Health service, after three years of relatively generous
financial settlements in the run-up to last year's health reforms, faces a
tougher time next year.
Spending in England will rise from a forecast outturn of Pounds 28bn in
1992-93 to Pounds 29bn in 1993-94. Under last year's plans for 1993-94,
spending would have increased to Pounds 29.7bn.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, said this meant that in an
exceptionally difficult year, the service would receive a real terms
increase of 1 per cent over forecast outturn - rising to 1.8 per cent after
taking account of the public sector pay restraint proposals.
The health secretary said the settlement would enable the NHS to increase
the number of patients treated by more than 2.5 per cent. But the
achievement of this target, and the other expectations of the health
settlement, will depend on the NHS continuing to make about Pounds
390m-worth of savings from improved efficiency.
Leaders of nurses and other health workers were sharply critical of the
proposed pay curbs at a meeting with Mrs Bottomley yesterday, and the effect
on morale, which may make efficiency savings difficult to secure.
The impact of health settlements, good or bad, are not felt in an immediate
or uniform way. Yesterday's global figure has yet to be divided and
allocated to the health service at local level, before the start of the
financial year.
It will be for health authorities and hospital managements to decide how
they are going to handle the tighter financial circumstances in which they
will find themselves.
But one of the consequences of the contract-based system of financing
hospital care, introduced under last year's health reforms, is that the
impact of funding pressures is more visible than in the past. If the
financial settlement proved insufficient - which it almost certainly would
if the pay restraint measures were not adhered to - it would soon show.
While pay is by far the biggest single item of NHS expenditure, it is not
the only source of inflationary pressure. Health service inflation tends to
run ahead of price rises in the general economy for several reasons - the
costs of medical advances, research and the increasing number of elderly
people.
The settlement was received with guarded optimism by the National
Association of Health Authorities and Trusts, the NHS Trust Federation, and
the Healthcare Financial Management Association. The British Medical
Association warned that, even with pay restraint, the settlement might not
be sufficient to maintain clinical services, while the Labour Party said the
package disguised 'real and damaging cuts'.
In an bid to contain rising drug costs - the NHS drugs bill is expected to
grow by 11 1/2 per cent in cash terms this year - the government plans to
renegotiate the voluntary pharmaceutical price regulation scheme and extend
the use of acceptable lower-cost drugs. The Association of the British
Pharmaceutical Industry said the proposals would affect research, exports
and employment.
Next year will also see the beginning of a new source of expenditure for the
NHS - the implementation of the Tomlinson report's proposals for the
reorganisation of London's healthcare.
Ministers are expected to agree in January to a restructuring programme
involving hospital closures and the improvement of family doctor and
community services in the capital. Mrs Bottomley said that some of
yesterday's package would be earmarked to finance these developments.
