FT  01 MAY 92 / Survey of Building For Asia's Future (2): A difficult
balancing act - Regional economic prospects
WHILE industrialised economies have been dawdling or going backwards in the
past year, Asia's have continued to motor ahead. Developing Asia as a whole
produced a growth rate of 5.8 per cent in 1991, and the pace in China,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand was above
the average.
The prospect is for accelerating growth, according to the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), which is forecasting a moderation in some countries but an
average growth of 6.5 per cent this year and 6.7 per cent in 1993.
The forecast is principally based on expectations of a recovery in the world
economy and trade, with exports continuing to provide impetus to Asian
growth. But a strong stimulus will come from government spending to ease
infrastructural bottlenecks.
All of the main Asian developing countries except Hong Kong and Taiwan did
suffer a slowdown in growth last year. But they showed greater resilience
than they might have hoped. There are several reasons for this.
First, they have mostly diversified their export markets considerably so
that they are far less dependent on the US than they were. According to the
Amex Bank Review, the share of exports going to the US has dropped from
about one third in 1985 to one fifth in 1991.
Meanwhile, the proportion of trade which Asian countries do with each other
has grown sharply. Intra-Asian trade accounts for 48 per cent of Malaysia's
exports, 32 per cent of Singapore's, and 26 per cent of Taiwan's, according
to the Review.
The growth of trade within Asia raises the prospect that the region can to
some extent develop endogenously, independently of broader economic trends
in the rest of the world.
The idea becomes exciting on examination of several growing economic zones
in which complementary capacities - finance, management, technology and
cheap labour - are put together across borders. The most striking of these
is centred around Hong Kong and combines investment and management from Hong
Kong and Taiwan, labour in southern China and the export facilities of Hong
Kong.
Such zones generate not only export potential but also growing prosperity
and demand domestically.
However, the present sobering reality is still that Asian countries depend
heavily on exports to the US and Europe and that they remain vulnerable to
continued sluggishness in the industrialised world - including Japan, now
undergoing a significant economic slowdown. Moreover, they face a number of
domestic constraints to growth.
The need for infrastructural spending, while providing the opportunity to
take up the slack of weak exports, poses a considerable risk that economies
will overheat.
Taiwan, for example, argues that its massive building programme can be
funded because substantial excess private savings can be mobilised, through
the purchase of government bonds, to finance the growth. The government will
need to keep a close watch on inflationary pressures, with money supply
already growing rapidly.
Korea has already run into economic problems, with surging domestic demand,
a large trade deficit, higher inflation and rising wages. Its need to invest
substantially in technology and infrastructure in order to boost export
competitiveness may not sit easily with the need for tight policy to rein in
the overheating economy.
The constraint on budgets will increasingly lead governments to seek
alternative ways to finance necessary infrastructural growth, involving the
private sector as much as possible. But, as the ADB notes: 'Physical
infrastructure is generally capital-intensive and most of it is in the
public sector domain.'
In Hong Kong, which has grown with the least direct government intervention,
the role of the state is growing because of the massive airport project. In
Korea and Taiwan, a shrinking government participation in manufacturing
production (due to privatisation) is being balanced by the rapid rise in
spending to overcome infrastructural bottlenecks, as well as on housing and
other social spending.
There is also the risk that public sector infrastructural projects could
crowd out other demands on capital and labour and also, at least
temporarily, restrict the development of export potential.
The justification for heavy spending on infrastructure will be the provision
of a platform for further efficient, export-driven growth. There is no room
for white elephants providing employment, said Jardine Fleming, the
investment bank, in a review of infrastructure: 'Virtually all the projects
cited generally meet tests with respect to an acceptable marginal return on
the investment. Consequently, all but the most controversial are likely to
go ahead.'
On the way, however, governments will need to be extremely watchful that
they do not allow their economies to become overheated by domestic demand
while export demand is flagging. The risk is that they will have spanking
infrastructural facilities, but that the export-driving foreign investment
has headed for cheaper homes, that the investment in higher technology,
higher value-added industry has been crowded out, and that economic growth
suddenly plummets while inflation rises. It will be a difficult balancing
act.
