FT  26 FEB 92 / ECC launches Pounds 209m cash call
ECC Group, the world's largest supplier of china clay, yesterday announced
plans to raise Pounds 209m from a rights issue. The money is to be used by
ECC to redeem Dollars 350m (Pounds 200m) of US auction market preferred
shares (Amps).
The group is the second British company to announce plans to redeem a large
tranche of Amps. The move will increase nervousness in a controversial
sector of the bond market.
Several large UK companies, some of which are heavily borrowed and have
fallen on hard times due to the recession, have issued Amps. The stock has
been classified as equity although the shares have many characteristics of
debt.
Some of the issues made by UK companies during the late 1980s have run into
trouble recently. Ratner, the UK jewellery retailer, last month announced it
was suspending payments of all preference dividends including those on
Dollars 250m of Amps. Previous auctions of Ratner preferred shares in the US
had failed to attract bidders.
Rank Organisation, the UK leisure group, last March redeemed Dollars 200m of
Amps after its US credit rating was downgraded by Standard &amp; Poor's.
Mr Andrew Teare, ECC's chief executive, said yesterday there was no danger
of ECC's credit rating being downgraded. Nevertheless general concern about
the Amps market had pushed dividends above the cost of other forms of US
commercial paper.
'The directors have come to the view that auction preference shares are no
longer a satisfactory long-term source of shareholders' funds and that
permanent ordinary share capital is a more secure platform for further
development of the group.'
The company is offering six of its shares, priced at 415p each, for every 25
already held. They also announced that pre-tax profits for the year to the
end of December were estimated to be Pounds 115.4m, more than 50 per cent
higher than the Pounds 73.3m earned in 1990. Excluding exceptional items the
rise was 7.5 per cent.
The group's share price rose 7p to 528p.
It forecast a final dividend for 1991 of 13.4p making a total of 20p for the
year. This compared with an annualised figure of 19.6p for the previous
year. Earnings per share rose from 15.5p to 32.5p.
Directors expected to at least maintain dividends in the current year.
Lex, Page 18
