FT  06 AUG 92 / International Company News: Losses force Lufthansa to trim
LUFTHANSA is planning further staff reductions, cost cuts, and a slimming
down of its route network after a sharp rise in the German airline's loss
for the first half of 1992.
In spite of higher revenues and passenger volumes, Lufthansa, 51 per cent
state-owned, made a pre-tax loss of DM550m (Dollars 367m) in the
January-June period, 66 per cent higher than in the same period of last
year. It has said it expects to remain in the red this year.
Prompted by the severity of Lufthansa's problems, Mr Jurgen Weber, the chief
executive who took over last September from the expansion-minded Mr Heinz
Ruhnau, has called for more drastic measures to stem the losses. Like other
German industrial companies, its cost base is much higher than that of its
competitors.
Details of the programme are still being worked out and may be announced
next month. The airline's freedom of manoeuvre is limited, however, by
pensions available to long-serving staff; these would be costly to buy out.
This year, it is shedding 1,000 employees and has stopped hiring. It
employed about 50,000 people last year, a rise of 3,200 on the previous
year.
Like other airlines, Lufthansa has been hit by the slack pace of world
economic growth which has led to tougher competition.
The pay strike called earlier this year by the public sector workers' union
also affected German airports, notably Frankfurt, and inflicted a loss of
some DM60m on Lufthansa.
Tourist traffic to Thailand suffered from the recent political troubles
there, while Lufthansa's results have been further hit by the steady
increase in traffic fees at German airports. The recent slide in the US
currency has added to Lufthansa's difficulties by cutting the D-Mark value
of dollar earnings.
Lufthansa has long been pressing for a change in the German air agreement
with the US which, it says, puts it at a considerable disadvantage against
other European airlines operating across the north Atlantic. Some 30 per
cent of Lufthansa's revenues emanate from the route, but it is losing
heavily there.
Mr Weber has criticised the US government for 'blocking us totally' on
attempts to have the bilateral accord made more favourable for Germany.
'They are not willing to budge even a millimetre,' he said in April.
Lufthansa is limited to 10 cities in the US, while US airlines have wide
access to airports in Germany and the rest of Europe.
Lufthansa, which will produce its half-yearly report next week, said traffic
revenues rose by 9 per cent to DM7bn in the first half, with passenger
numbers up by 19 per cent to 13.4m.
