FT  03 JAN 92 / Leigh-Pemberton seeks to ease fear of sterling crisis: Bank
rules out early rise in interest rates
FEARS of a sterling crisis receded yesterday after Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton,
governor of the Bank of England, ruled out any immediate move to increase UK
interest rates and insisted that the pound would not be devalued within the
European exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
Mr Leigh-Pemberton's comments helped the pound to gain strength against a
weaker D-Mark, although in both London and New York the recent rally in
share prices showed signs of fizzling out.
The governor's remarks appear to be part of a concerted effort by the
government to convince the world that the pound will stay within its ERM
bands, damping pressure by currency investors to sell the unit.
Last night in London the pound closed against a weaker D-Mark at DM2.8550,
up 1 3/4 pfennigs on Tuesday's close and roughly 2 1/2 pfennigs above its
effective lower limit in the ERM. In New York it closed at DM2.8533.
The support for sterling by foreign-exchange investors had little influence
on the London stock market, where the FT-SE 100 index shed an early 37-point
gain to finish 0.3 down on Tuesday's close at 2,492.8.
Much of the decline was in reaction to a weak opening on Wall Street,
although the Dow Jones Industrial Average later rallied, closing up 3.58 at
3,172.41.
In thin trading, many big UK institutions failed to provide the buying
pressure necessary for the London market to continue its 4 per cent rise
over the past two weeks, during which prices on Wall Street have increased
by 8 per cent.
In his comments on Channel 4 television, Mr Leigh-Pemberton said sterling
had a 'better tone', and repeated the message earlier this week from Mr John
Major, prime minister, and Mr Norman Lamont, chancellor, that devaluation
was not an option. Such a move would be a 'knee-jerk' reaction that could
damage confidence and ruin efforts to stabilise the pound following ERM
entry 15 months ago, he said.
The governor also insisted that the economy was on course to recover. 'We
must keep our nerve,' he said.
The pound has been under pressure since just before Christmas when all the
other ERM members increased interest rates, following Germany's lead. That
has led to speculation that Mr Lamont might be forced to take the
politically unpopular step of increasing borrowing rates in the run-up to
the election and while the economy is still flagging.
Mr Lamont's policies received support yesterday from Mr Terence Higgins,
Tory MP for Worthing and chairman of the Commons Treasury and civil service
select committee. He said the chancellor was right to resist a rise in
interest rates and any realignment of sterling within the ERM.
On currency markets, meanwhile, many dealers remain wary about the prospects
for sterling. While the pound has failed to drift close enough to its lower
limit in the ERM during the past two weeks to ring alarm bells in the
Treasury, more investors might be tempted to sell the unit in favour of
other currencies once trading picks up after the holiday break.
Labour says tax figures suppressed
The government suppressed figures which show how the poll tax has increased
the burden of taxation on families, Labour said last night. Page 10
German and Japanese economic forecasts Page 9
Gilts Page 13
Currencies Page 15
London stocks Page 24
