FT  21 MAY 92 / Survey of Turkey (17): The neighbours are suspicious - The
biggest project in the Mediterranean
THE FIRST kilowatt of electricity is expected to be generated later this
year as engineers open the flood gates onto the first of the eight
Swiss-built turbines installed on the massive USDollars 4bn Ataturk dam
complex in southern Turkey.
This dazzling engineering achievement has become a symbol of Turkey's
industrial self-reliance and long-term planning. It has also engendered the
suspicion of Turkey's neighbours downstream on the Euphrates.
The south-east Anatolian project or Gap, as it sometimes better known, is
currently the largest development project in the Mediterranean. When fully
implemented, it will comprise 22 dams and 19 power stations, providing a
third of Turkey's projected energy needs. It will account for half of the
country's irrigated land, with around 1.7m hectares under irrigation. The
project and the services attracted to the area in its wake will create jobs
for some 5m people.
Since the foundation stones were laid in 1981 the Gap project has absorbed
USDollars 9bn. By 2005 Turkey is set to spend a further Dollars 23bn while
another Dollars 10bn will be needed to complete the project sometime in the
next century.
The burden on the Turkish economy has been enormous. To date, almost all of
the funds have been raised by the budget without the assistance of donors
wary of touching a project which involves a riparian dispute.
Indeed, many economists believe it has been the single largest factor behind
Turkey's 70 per cent rate of inflation. Every year, the Gap absorbs 10 per
cent of total government outlays, which does not include the subsidies and
investment incentives given to private business to move to the area. 'What
we would like to see is all the power stations complete by 2005,' says Mr
Olcay Unver, president of the Gap authority in Ankara.
The politicians also have few doubts. Both Turgut Ozal, the president and Mr
Suleyman Demirel, the prime minister, are engineers. As a young electrical
engineer, Mr Ozal cut his teeth working on the Keban dam. For this reason,
the project seems destined to be finished.
When Gap was first conceived, it was seen primarily as a way of providing
alternative sources of energy in the wake of the 1972 oil crisis. The
project was also set to transform this dry south-eastern corner of Turkey.
Today, the environmental effects are less clear. The social and political
benefits have still to be demonstrated, but Turkey's large construction
groups have gained invaluable experience. This is now paying dividends in
former Soviet republics and other regions.
The centrepiece of the project is the Ataturk dam, the fifth largest in the
world. It is close to completion. 'We need two or three average years and
the reservoir will be full,' says Mr Mustafa Buke of the state hydraulic
corporation DSI.
Engineers estimate, given the unusually heavy snow fall this winter, that
the water level could reach the required 513 metres by November and the
first turbines could then be brought into action. The current level is
around 503 metres. When it reaches 526 metres, the twin Urfa tunnels will
start to irrigate some 250,000 hectares on the Haran plain close to the
Syrian border.
Officials no longer hold out great hopes that it will contribute much to
resolving the crisis for the region's Kurdish-speaking population. They seem
increasingly disenchanted with the politicians in Ankara and now provide
growing support for the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), fighting for a separate
state in south-east Turkey.
The social benefits are also being reassessed. Officials say they hope only
to be able to stabilise the current population and stem the trend of urban
migration which has had such a devastating effect on city services in
Istanbul and Izmir in recent years. It is not even certain that the project
will help hasten the redistribution of land. Many officials concede that as
the areas move to more intensive farming methods and the need for greater
scale economies, there may be a case for the concentration of land holdings,
giving the aghas or hereditary feudal landlords even more control over the
area.
Internationally, the Gap project has also met with criticism. In 1987 Turkey
and Syria signed a protocol which guaranteed that 500 cubic metres a second
would pass across the shared border. The agreement stipulates that the deal
will last for as long as the reservoir is being filled 'or until a permanent
sharing of the water can be agreed'. The sides have not met since July 1990,
before the Gulf War, the last occasion for the trilateral technical meeting
between Turkey, Syria and Iraq. Iraq in theory is due to host the next
meeting in Baghdad but, while its international isolation continues, that
may be some way off.
The Syrians' concern is that Turkey's plans could jeopardise the efficiency
of their own hydro-electric dams which provide 75 per cent of the country's
power generation. Damascus also worries about the downstream effects of
pollution if Turkey uses pesticides and fertilisers in its irrigated land.
It argues that the Ataturk dam will take all the rich silt from the water
and thus make it less useful for downstream irrigation.
However, Turkish officials point out with some justification that the
Syrians started work on their own Taqba dam some 10 years before the
foundations were laid for the Ataturk, with similar effects. The Syrians'
long-term fear is that water could be used as a political and strategic
weapon. This explains their reluctance to attend last year's planned
international water conference to have been held in Istanbul which was
consequently cancelled.
Because of Syrian misgivings, many of the prospective international donors
have fought shy of the Gap project. The World Bank extends close to Dollars
1bn to Turkey every year, but has rules which exclude it from lending on a
project involving a water dispute between riparian neighbours. Japan
withdrew a Dollars 600m irrigation proposal. A Japanese official confirmed
that Tokyo would be unable to extend financing until a solution was achieved
over the water issue.
'This water is not a present of nature. We have to import equipment to clear
the snow. This means spare parts. We have to employee people,' says Mr
Ferruh Anik, the director general of DSI. 'Every Turkish citizen has a tax
on his water. This is not free water. What the Syrians and Iraqis are
getting now: that's free water.'
