FT  17 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Supergun sparks more questions
THE widening of the terms of reference for the arms-to-Iraq inquiry to
include the supergun project and other dual-use machinery sales provokes the
question of who knew what and when.
The supergun or Project Babylon involved an attempt by Saddam Hussein in the
late 1980s to produce several giant guns, theoretically capable of
delivering short-range nuclear or chemical warheads.
In the summer of 1988 two British companies - Sheffield Forgemasters and
Walter Somers - applied for export licences to supply steel tubes supposedly
for an Iraqi petrochemical project.
Without consulting the Ministry of Defence, the Department of Trade and
Industry decided that Sheffield Forgemasters did not require an export
licence. The Walter Somers contract was referred by the DTI to a specialist
in the MoD who subsequently reported that he could establish no definite
military purpose for the tubes.
In the autumn of 1989, the MoD and UK intelligence services received
separate tip-offs about the Iraqi project from the then directors of Astra
Holdings, the British defence group. Astra had recently acquired PRB, a
Belgium munitions company, and discovered it was supplying propellants to
Iraq for a very large gun.
A report was then circulated within the DTI and the MoD, but it was not
until April 1990 that British intelligence tipped off Customs officials who
in turn ordered the seizure at Teesport of tubes made by Sheffield
Forgemasters.
The only two legal cases in connection with the supergun - against Dr
Christopher Cowley, the project manager, and Mr Peter Mitchell, managing
director Walter Somers - were dropped on the grounds of insufficient
evidence.
Involvement of DTI officials provides a central thread to the cases. In June
1988 Dr Rex Bayliss, managing director of Walter Somers, contacted Sir Hal
Miller, then Conservative MP for Bromsgrove, and told him of his concerns
about a prospective order from Space Research Corporation, a company owned
by Dr Gerald Bull, the Canadian ballistics scientist.
Dr Bayliss had noticed that the specification from a steel tubes order,
later discovered to be part of the supergun project, was constantly
increasing, approaching the pressures associated with gun steels.
DTI evidence to the Commons trade and industry committee revealed that Sir
Hal contacted the DTI's export licensing unit. The same day Mr Tony
Steadman, director of the export licencing unit, contacted Dr Bayliss and
the MoD.
A Mr Bill Weir, described to the committee only as a metallurgist, handled
the MoD enquiries, and though he decided the tubes were some kind of
pressure vessels he could not form an opinion about what their use might be.
A key area of the Scott enquiry covering the supergun case will be the depth
of liaison between the DTI and the MoD given the growing knowledge about
Iraqi procurement.
Mr Steadman's own prominent role in the interpretation of export policy on
the Matrix Churchill case is highlighted in government documents released to
the defence during the trial.
An important question in any examination of the extent of government
knowledge about secret projects in Iraq is when exactly the intelligence
services discovered about the Iraqi supergun programme.
The intelligence services were certainly aware of a project Babylon in mid
1989 when Mr Paul Henderson, the former managing director of Matrix
Churchill, recalls being asked by an intelligence officer if he knew about
the project.
