FT  28 JUL 92 / Blueprint for HK likely by autumn
MR Chris Patten, Hong Kong's new governor, is expected to place
comprehensive plans for the colony's future political development before the
British cabinet in the autumn, Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, said
yesterday.
At the end of a two-day visit to the colony, Mr Hurd promised speedy
government deliberation of Mr Patten's blueprint.
He said Britain would consult China 'as necessary'.
He stressed that Britain wanted to ensure the 'continuity' of Hong Kong's
political system beyond 1997, when sovereignty reverts to China.
The foreign secretary also announced yesterday that negotiations between
Britain and China over Hong Kong's multi-billion dollar airport would resume
on Thursday. He said it was in the shared interests of Hong Kong and China
that they settle outstanding issues.
Mr Hurd said Mr Patten's review of the political structure in Hong Kong
would include the issue of more democratically elected seats for the local
legislature.
It would also include arrangements for the colony's 1995 elections - the
last to be held under British rule.
Mr Hurd promised consultation with China on both issues.
The review is expected to incorporate Mr Patten's views and recommendations
on the role and composition of the Executive Council, or cabinet, and its
relationship to the local legislature.
It may also include a recommendation that he institute a local version of
'prime minister's question time'.
It was unclear yesterday whether Mr Patten would make his recommendations to
the British cabinet in person. Mr Patten is due to open the autumn session
of the local legislature on October 7. Officials are uncertain whether the
government will have completed all work on the review of the political
structure by that time.
China's market-oriented reforms are likely to fuel the country's export
drive, widening its trade imbalance with the US and other trade partners,
the Central Intelligence Agency said yesterday, Reuter reports from
Washington.
