FT  09 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Government quits arbitration agreement
for civil servants
THE GOVERNMENT yester-day angered the Civil Service unions by announcing
that it was withdrawing from a 66-year-old Civil Service arbitration
agreement and sending details of the continuing negotiations over pay
restructuring direct to the 500,000 civil servants who will be affected.
Withdrawal from the agreement will make little practical difference as the
government has not participated in the voluntary system since 1982.
But Mr Peter Jones, secretary of the Council of Civil Service Unions, said
the decision was 'part of a piece' with the government's more aggressive
stance on making Civil Service pay more flexible.
'The government appears determined to remove any element of fairness from
the settlement of Civil Service pay and other matters which have
traditionally been settled against the background of access to arbitration
being available,' he said.
Negotiations over increasing the performance element in Civil Service pay
and delegating pay bargaining to departments or executive agencies were not
proceeding well, he added. Unions were 'very annoyed' at the Treasury's
decision to release their 'confidential proposals' to civil servants.
The most controversial aspect of the proposals is abolition of the current
system of automatic progression up a pay scale with progress based on
performance. 'The principal change in these proposals will be to create a
regular and direct link between your performance and your pay,' the briefing
note to civil servants says. 'For those of you with management
responsibilities your judgment of your staff's performance will have a
direct impact on their pay in every case.'
There are also plans to dismantle the system of grading, and introduce more
pay bands. This will be 'an administrative nightmare', according to Mr Bill
Brett, general secretary of of the IPMS specialist Civil Service union.
The briefing says that for professional, scientific and technical grades,
the current pay 'spine' would remain, but the scale and range of each grade
would be replaced by a pay band. It continues: 'Each band would have a
number of steps usually equal to a quarter of a spine point. Annual
increments up to the scale maximum and progression beyond and up to the
current range maximum would be replaced by performance-related progression
throughout the pay band.'
For executive and clerical grades, the present automatic progression up a
pay scale followed by access to 'range points' for those who had reached the
maximum would be replaced by progression dependent on performance within a
range for the grade.
The move would not mean that civil servants who had not been performing well
would receive no annual pay rise, but they would not automatically move into
new pay bands.
But the note adds: 'In addition to performance-related pay, provision is
being made for departments and agencies to seek approval to develop their
own pay and grading systems. Such new systems, in addition to central
approval, will have to be negotiated with the unions concerned.'
