FT  09 SEP 92 / Waigel sets out plan to aid industry: Germany's finance
minister gives details of enterprise tax reform
MR Theo Waigel, the German finance minister, yesterday spelt out details of
an enterprise tax reform designed to improve the competitiveness of German
industry, while giving a gloomy prognosis of economic prospects.
He announced plans to cut the rate of corporate income tax from 53 to 44 per
cent, and of corporation tax from 50 to 44 per cent, to be financed by
reducing depreciation allowances. Although neutral in its effect on state
revenues, the move was welcomed by German industry yesterday as the one
piece of good news in an otherwise downbeat budget, relying on strict
savings in state spending to finance the continuing subsidy needs of the
east German economy.
For the first time in the past two years, Mr Waigel refused to give any
assurances on future tax increases, declaring that any open-ended commitment
to a tax freeze would be unrealistic, and limit his room for manoeuvre.
Despite his insistence that the government's austerity measures, limiting
budget spending growth to just 2.5 per cent next year, 'correspond to the
expectations of our partners,' Mr Waigel was attacked by the opposition
Social Democrats for failing to make adequate allowances for eastern
Germany, and failing to curb the growth in the state debt.
The finance minister warned of the continuing gloomy international economic
outlook, with no sign of a lasting upturn in the US, and no significant
improvement in Britain, France or Italy. While sticking to his forecast of a
1.5 per cent real growth rate in the west German economy, and 2 per cent for
the whole country, he said it would be wrong to base tax revenue forecasts
on any possible improvement.
He also warned that any further weakening of the dollar would have adverse
effects on Germany's exports, hitherto seen as the principal motor of
economic recovery.
The enterprise taxation reform Mr Waigel announced has been long awaited and
will help to bring basic German enterprise taxation down towards the levels
of other European Community member states. He said the cost of the
concession would be some DM8.8bn, (Pounds 3.2bn) which would be financed by
reductions in depreciation allowances on movable assets (down from 30 to 25
per cent), and on fixed property.
The main focus of the budget debate, however, remains on the cost of
financing German unification, and in particular the burden of debt on the
state in the coming years.
Mr Waigel suggested that a special fund be established to repay the debts
inherited from the former East Germany, including some DM100bn in state
debts, and an estimated DM250bn from the Treuhand privatisation agency.
Ms Ingrid Matthaus-Maier, the deputy leader of the opposition Social
Democrats, said the budget glossed over chaos in the planning of state
finances. The public sector debt currently stood at DM1.6bn, and would rise
to DM2.3bn by 1996, the end of the minister's medium-term plan.
She accused Mr Waigel of being 'the greatest creator of debt in the history
of the republic'.
