FT  24 DEC 92 / Palestinian leader calls for someone to save peace talks
MR Faisal Husseini, the senior Palestinian leader in the occupied
territories, yesterday appealed for 'someone to do something' to save Middle
East peace talks. He did so as Israeli troops shot dead two Palestinians and
wounded 42 in the Gaza Strip during protests against the deportation last
week of 415 alleged Islamic fundamentalist militants.
The Palestine Liberation Organisation will today call on Syria, Lebanon and
Jordan to join it in suspending negotiations with Israel until the deportees
are allowed to return - something which Israel has flatly refused to
consider - at a special meeting on the expulsions hosted by Egypt in Cairo.
Mr Husseini warned that the PLO would consider a renewed commitment to armed
struggle if Israel did not move to restore an atmosphere conducive to
'productive negotiations'. Mrs Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian spokeswoman,
repeated at a Jerusalem press conference that the deportations had dealt a
'death blow' to the talks.
But Mr Husseini made it clear his colleagues in the Palestinian delegation
were anxious not to see the 14-month-old negotiations collapse.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister, was urged by several ministers
yesterday to balance the deportations by opening a direct dialogue with the
PLO. At present, formal participation in negotiations by the PLO is barred
by Israel. Ministers quoted Mr Rabin as saying: 'There is no change in
Israeli's policies vis-a-vis the PLO.'
The despairing tone of local pro-PLO leaders was underscored by the death of
two brothers in Gaza, shot dead at their home in Khan Younis refugee camp.
Their deaths brought to 11 the number of Palestinians killed, including at
least two children, in protest riots since the expulsions, ordered last
Wednesday after a spate of violence by Islamic militants in which six
Israeli soldiers were killed.
Fierce clashes erupted in Gaza after it was opened to Israel for the first
time in more than two weeks.
The deportees said yesterday they were running short of food and water as
they remained trapped for the sixth day in freezing conditions in a Lebanese
no-man's land between Lebanese and Israeli forces where Israel dumped them
last Thursday.
