FT  29 AUG 92 / Rostock violence promptsstate to set up inquiry
THE STATE government of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern yesterday set up a special
committee to look into the causes of the attacks on foreign asylum seekers
in Rostock.
However, at the same time the state parliament voted in support of the
interior minister, Mr Lothar Kupfer, who had been strongly criticised by the
Social Democrats and left wing opposition over his handling of the crisis.
It voted to keep Mr Kupfer in office after Mr Berndt Seite, the state prime
minister of the east German state, had refused opposition demands that he
should be sacked.
Although the Rostock suburb of Lichtenhagen, where the attacks occurred
among rows of grim modern apartment blocks, was quiet last night, police and
officials have braced themselves for fresh outbreaks of protest and possible
violence this weekend.
Around 2,000 police are ready to stave off any clashes between right wing
demonstrators and the up to 10,000 left wingers expected to descend on the
Rostock suburb, some way out of the town centre, to express revulsion at the
riots.
Organisers of the anti-right wing demonstration - under the slogan 'Stop the
Pogrom' - said they wanted no incidents. Those joining the march will
include trade unionists, members of the Berlin Social Democrats (SPD) and
other left wingers.
Apart from a few skinheads and youths lounging round the scene of this
week's violence, Lichtenhagen was quiet last night. The walls of the
apartment block section which had housed asylum seekers are blackened from
Molotov Cocktails, windows are broken and burnt grass patches show where
police cars were set on fire.
Last night, around 1,500 police waited in side-streets in case of violence.
Someone had spray-painted the words 'Against Racism' on the wall of the
building from where asylum seekers were evacuated a few days ago.
Showing that attacks on foreigners are not confined to east Germany, where
social and economic pressures are acute, two asylum hostels in the west
German state of Lower Saxony were stormed on Thursday night. In one, a
fire-bomb was thrown and put out by the inhabitants.
