FT  27 APR 92 / Growth in staffing targets for women
BRITISH companies are starting to set targets for the number of women being
hired and promoted within their organisations, as part of a general move to
improve the lot of women at work.
The finding came from interviews conducted by the Financial Times with
companies participating in Opportunity 2000, the campaign designed to help
working women, which was lauched six months ago tomorrow by Mr John Major,
the prime minister.
More than 60 organisations signed up to the initiative in October and a
further 350 contacted Business in the Community, the voluntary organisation
behind the campaign, in the first month.
The issue of numerical targets for the employment and promotion of women has
been been controversial among employers, and split the launch committee of
Opportunity 2000.
Many companies fear numerical targets might be seen as tantamount to quotas.
They argue that that would imply positive discrimination and might lead to
the 'male backlash' seen in the US.
Of the 16 large organisations interviewed, seven have introduced targets and
a further six could not rule out introducing them in the future. British
Airways, British Rail, IBM, Lucas, Littlewoods, the National Health Service
and Rank Xerox already had, or planned to have, some form of numerical
goals.
The six that said they would consider such a step if existing policies did
not increase the numbers of women in management included Wellcome
Foundation, Barclays Bank, Digital, Grand Metropolitan and ICI.
ICI and GrandMet said it was not appropriate to bring in targets at the
moment because of the recession.
The companies that put targets in place argued that they were essential if
the companies were to ensure that their equal-opportunities policies
succeeded.
All companies in the initiative have taken some action to improve the lot of
women since they signed up. The male-dominated Metropolitan Police pointed
to a growing acceptance of equal-opportunities policies. Superintendent
Peter Brandt, the Met's former head of equal opportunities, said: 'Officers
today have wives and daughters with professional careers so they understand
the issues better.'
Some companies, including BR, GrandMet, Rank Xerox and Barclays Bank,
expressed concern that Opportunity 2000 might lead employees to think
women's interests were being pursued over those of the disabled or ethnic
groups.
Management, Page 10
