FT  18 FEB 92 / International Capital Markets: Clearing banks delay plans to
join Taurus
THE UK's big clearing banks have dropped plans to be among the first into
the planned paperless settlement system, Taurus, despite having earlier been
among those most eager to join.
The banks' change of heart indicates the difficulties the the UK authorities
will have in bringing leading British companies into the system, which is
due to be launched in April 1993.
The banks - particularly Barclays, National Westminster and Lloyds, which
between them control around 90 per cent of the share registration business
in the UK - had earlier been intent on being the first into Taurus. Some
believed that being in the first wave would have helped prove to their share
registration customers they were prepared for the transition.
Yet none of these three, nor Midland Bank, is preparing to ask its
shareholders for approval to join Taurus at their forthcoming annual
meetings, ruling them out from the launch. The problems they have
encountered are common to many other UK companies.
Barclays and NatWest believe it will be difficult to obtain shareholder
approval under the Taurus regulations as they currently stand. Like many
British companies, they have more than one class of share in issue. Under
their articles of association, this leaves both banks needing one-third of
their shareholders to vote in a special 'class meeting' of shareholders.
Yet neither feels confident of getting the support, given the inertia of
their institutional shareholders, many of whom do not vote even by proxy at
general meetings. Some investment managers would also need to get the
support of the beneficial owners of shares they manage.
According to an internal memorandum produced at Barclays: 'This will be both
time-consuming and expensive for all concerned, with no guarantee that the
necessary quorum will be achieved in time for the meeting.'
One possible answer, according to Barclays, is to seek a capital
reorganisation to do away its second class of shares (staff shares). The
bank concludes this is expensive and troublesome, and adds: 'For many public
companies, such a course of action would not even be within contemplation.'
The London Stock Exchange said around two-thirds of the UK's top 600
companies had more than one class of share in issue and so would need to
call separate class meetings in this way. However, it said this did not need
to cause difficulties, since class meetings could be convened with little
difficulty.
The exchange also played down another concern of the banks - that full
Taurus regulations would not be available until May, when the exchange plans
to publish its own draft Taurus rule book. The exchange said companies did
not need to wait for the publication of these details before putting a
proposal to their shareholders that they should move on to Taurus.
