FT  27 JUN 92 / Books: An archaeology of myth and language
THE ORIGINS OF THE SACRED
by Dudley Young
Little, Brown Pounds 16.99, 378 pages
DANCING and poetry, religion and science, all are attempts at interpretation
of the world and our place in it. By telling ourselves stories we lay claim
to a place in the otherwise limitless seas of time and darkness that
surround us.
Our species has forgotten much as it has grown remoter from the natural
world which gave these myths their point; and it has learned much which has
nothing to do with ancient realities, but instead concerns new facts of life
forged by urban civilisation and its intricate technologies. What we have
learned has not always replaced what we have forgotten, so although
humankind has grown cleverer over time, it has not grown wiser.
Dudley Young's book is an attempt to recapture some of what has been
forgotten. There is need for just such a study of our self-interpretations
through history, especially of myth because of its peculiar power to
encapsulate universals of experience. Myth resonates in popular literature
and, inarticulately, in general consciousness; Superman is Heracles with
Hermes' sandals, and when we struggle with anxiety we are Theseus in the
Minotaur's maze. A synoptic study of these origins, drawing also on
linguistics, anthropology and evolutionary theory, would shed extraordinary
light, and give us the insight into our beginnings which is essential to
self-knowledge.
It is a bold scholar, and one possessing an unusual apparatus of skills, who
would risk the attempt to traverse and unite academic specialisms in this
way. Young has taken that risk. His central thesis is that humankind is in
spiritual confusion because it has lost touch with the sacred, which itself
originated in our need to manage dangerous instincts of sex and violence.
The resulting damage is everywhere apparent, Young says, and stems chiefly
from science, which has suppressed our religious nature and polluted the
world. And he proposes (following Freud) that the founding experience of our
now-lost sacredness was a violent patricidal episode which occurred in a
dance; the alpha male was killed and eaten by the troop, and in consequence
'lawlines' of ritual had to be evolved to contain and interpret this horrid
originating act. Young ranges wide through many fields of enquiry to
elaborate this theory.
What Young attempts - a conceptual archaeology of myth and language in
search of our earliest self-interpretations as humans - is a valuable task.
But both his attempt and his results are profoundly unsatisfactory. There is
an interesting thin book, and a more circumspect one, trying to get out of
this fat one; but Young is too intoxicated by verbal pyrotechnics, clever
phrases and slick generalisations to stop himself from overflowing
constantly into absurd claims, so the book begins in self-indulgence and
grows more fanciful. It contains much ignorant hostility to science, and
much dubious and sometimes ridiculous play with etymologies. Young is out of
his depth in several seas at once; and thereby shows that if one tries the
intellectual equivalent of walking on water, one only succeeds in skimming
the surface.
One of Young's main problems is his premiss that sex and violence are
essentially connected. He even makes the serious mistake of equating 'sex
and violence' with 'love and war'. It is uniquely human to connect some
aspects of love with sex; since nothing elsewhere in nature parallels it we
can learn nothing from nature about it. Yet Young succumbs to the mistaken
cliche of modelling human behaviour in these respects on monkey and ape
reproduction. And war is not the cognate, simply writ large, of violence
perpetrated by individual animals on occasions of mating, feeding or general
irritation, but something far more calculated and social.
But his worst mistake is to connect sex with violence at all.
'Sex-and-violence' is a film-censor's artefact of the 20th century. Sex is
not intrinsically violent, except in certain aberrant cases, and there is
nothing intrinsically sexy about violence, except for some aberrant
individuals. Fear of starving seems a more likely explanation for man's
elaborate appeasements of the gods than the implausible claim that sexual
coupling is analogised by the violent act of stabbing. Why 'stabbing'? Why
not meeting, fitting, joining, blending? In certain African languages the
euphemism for sexual intercourse is 'laughing together'. This hardly
contains the murderous suggestions Young finds attractive. Macho images of
thrusting and spearing seem more like adolescent masturbatory frustrations
than reflections of genuine sexual experience, and therefore constitute a
poor basis for a theory of human development. Here, as in too many places
elsewhere, Young carries himself away.
The book - judicious, careful and imaginative - which effects an archaeology
of our myths and paroles, and so helps to tell us who we truly are, still
waits to be written. Young has shown us that it remains overdue.
