FT  12 NOV 92 / International Company News: Takeovers bring Solvay out of
the shadows - The chemicals group has identified five core sectors for
growth
SOLVAY, the big Belgian chemicals group, is emerging from the shadows.
Traditionally discrete, it has been thrust centre stage over the past 18
months with the completion of three strategic takeovers.
The deals, aimed at repositioning Solvay, included a marketing agreement
with Upjohn, the US group, for its anti-depressant Fluvoxamine: the Dollars
500m acquisition of the soda ash business of Tenneco of the US: and the
purchase of the 50 per cent it did not own of Interox, a hydrogen peroxide
joint-venture with Laporte, the UK chemical group.
Baron Janssen, chairman, says the deals were designed to focus group efforts
in areas in which it could excel and become a world leader. 'We need to find
areas with high added value and margins which are less cyclical than our
traditional core areas,' he says.
Solvay, whose sales of BFr254bn (Dollars 7.76bn) last year made it number 18
in the world chemicals league, has identified five core sectors in which it
wants to grow: health, soda ash, peroxygens, plastics and processing.
The first three areas - the sectors where Baron Janssen has concluded his
deals - have been chosen for expansion because they are less vulnerable than
the highly cyclical basic chemical industry.
Brokers Wertheim Schroder believe the growth areas of health and peroxygens
represent 27 per cent of Solvay turnover. Soda ash, salt and processing are
stable businesses with 28 per cent.
The remaining operations, which are cyclical, represent 45 per cent.
Solvay's most significant move was the acquisition of an 80 per cent stake
in Tenneco's Wyoming soda ash plant. The deal added 1.8m tonnes of low-cost
production to Solvay's capacity and confirmed its position as the world's
largest soda ash manufacturer. It already dominated the European market with
4m tonnes of the region's 7m tonnes annual capacity.
The group is cementing its position in European soda ash by investing in a
540,000 tonnes-a-year plant at Bernburg in the former East Germany. Baron
Janssen says the factory made a small but unexpected profit in the first
four months to December 1991. Solvay has promised to spend DM200m (Dollars
125m) on the site over the next five years.
Baron Janssen also stresses the importance of the Interox acquisition. He
says the hydrogen peroxide market is growing rapidly. The substance, which
is used in the paper, water and gas industries, is viewed as environmentally
friendly because it can be used in chemical reactions without creating toxic
by-products. Margins have traditionally also been high in spite of its
commodity status.
Solvay's main problem in this sector is that other groups have also
identified hydrogen peroxide as a growth area. Additional capacity has been
added at the same time that demand has slowed.
Healthcare is the final counter-cyclical sector that Baron Janssen has
chosen for expansion. The pharmaceuticals industry is highly profitable and
expanding rapidly, but Solvay's performance has so far been disappointing.
Operating margins were only 6.1 per cent last year, compared with 31.4 per
cent at Glaxo of the UK, for example.
The tale of Fluvoxamine, the group's anti-depressant, illustrates the
problems facing small pharmaceuticals groups such as Solvay.
Fluvoxamine was the world's first of a new generation of drugs called
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRI).
The drug was first launched in Switzerland in 1983. Small drugs companies,
such as Solvay, with little experience of dealing with regulatory
authorities, tend to have difficulty demonstrating their drugs' safety and
efficacy. It took eight years before Fluvoxamine had approval throughout
Europe.
Although the medicine was one of the first in its class, Fluvoxamine still
lacks approval in the US, the world's largest market. In 1989, Eli Lilly,
the big US group, launched Prozac, a similar product. Last year this
medicine generated revenues of Dollars 910m. Fluvoxamine, pushed by Solvay's
limited sales force, had sales last year of only Dollars 40m.
'We failed to market effectively what was a good product,' admits Baron
Janssen. 'We are new in the business. We only started 12 years ago and we
are still on a learning curve.'
A review two years ago was followed by the decision to remedy the group's
lack of regulatory and marketing expertise by setting up development and
joint-marketing agreements.
The most significant consequence was a marketing alliance with Upjohn, the
US group, to co-market Fluvoxamine and Xanax, one of the American company's
central nervous system products.
Baron Janssen hopes that with Upjohn's help, Fluvoxamine will receive
approval in the US and be commercialised in 1994.
He does not exclude the possibility of medium-sized acquisitions to help the
division gain critical mass.
Meanwhile, Baron Janssen has no intention of switching out of the highly
cyclical commodity plastics business. He says he sees this as a core
business with good growth which is sometimes highly profitable.
Operating earnings last year from plastics fell 81 per cent to BFr1.7m. The
group will continue to look for niche markets, such as polypropylene car
petrol tanks.
Although Solvay group earnings fell 14 per cent during the first half of
1992, Baron Janssen believes his efforts will ensure full-year results will
match last year's pre-tax profits of BFr12.9bn.
Baron Janssen expects to ride out the recessionary storm. He hopes his three
strategic moves will then ensure the group is better placed to take
advantage of clearer economic waters.
