FT  02 DEC 92 / Foreign Exchanges: D-Mark gains at expense of Dollars
COMMENTS from the Bundesbank, stressing its commitment to current German
interest rates, put pressure on several European currencies. They also
overshadowed positive economic data in the US which might have been expected
to boost the dollar, writes Peter John.
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the president of the German central bank had said in
an interview reported yesterday that there was no room for any easing of
monetary policy in the near term.
Asked whether the German bank was coming under pressure to change its
policy, Mr Schlesinger was quoted as saying: 'As the position now stands,
with such strong monetary growth and price increases, we cannot at present
act on such wishes.'
However, he added; 'We do not have to maintain a certain interest rate level
ad infinitum. If we see that our tasks have been eased by economic
developments, then we can take this into account.'
The currency to suffer most was the French franc which has been languishing
near the bottom of the exchange rate mechanism and has become the focus of
devaluation worries.
The Bank of France bought francs in an apparent effort to hold the franc
above FFr3.41 against the mark several currency dealers said. One said the
central bank had bought FFr30m (Pounds 3.64m) from him at FFr3.4095.
Another trader commented; 'There was fairly heavy and fairly continuous
buying by the French central bank although it was nothing like the
intervention we saw in September.'
He added that as the whole credibility of the ERM comes under scrutiny weak
points are being tested across the whole range. Because Belgium and the
Netherlands are so closely linked to the D-Mark, France is the key indicator
and many are beginning to feel that if it drops through the ERM floor the
mechanism could crumble.
Dealers said the French central bank dipped in to the market throughout the
late morning and early afternoon, but it had not been clear it was trying to
influence prices until its purchases in the afternoon. The franc fell to
DM3.412 from DM3.396.
The US currency also suffered despite better than hoped for figures from the
National Association of Purchasing Managers, construction spending and the
October leading economic indicators.
The dollar closed at DM1.580 in London against DM1.594 previously and
continued weak after the European markets closed. However, it was firmer
against the Yen at Y124.5 against Y124.4.
There was consistent buying of the D-Mark which was generally firmer against
most currencies.
In fact, the only currency to hold out was sterling which surprised the
market by its resilience and lifted to DM2.427 against DM2.412.
Dealers said there was a strong rumour that a big institutional fund had
been a heavy buyer of sterling.
