FT  18 JUN 92 / It's not over yet, says hostage negotiator
A TALL Italian diplomat, visibly fatigued by his efforts of the last 36
hours, stood behind Mr Heinrich Strubig and Mr Thomas Kemptner as they were
freed in Beirut yesterday.
In just one year, United Nations envoy Mr Giandomenico Picco has obtained
the liberation of 11 Britons, Americans and Germans in Lebanon, as well as
the freeing last autumn of 90 Lebanese held by the Israelis and their
militia allies.
As he accompanied the two German aid workers in Beirut yesterday, Mr Picco
stressed that his work was not yet completed. He has committed himself to
working for the freedom of all people held without due process of law in the
Middle East.
These include some 200 Lebanese held by Israel's proxy militia, the South
Lebanon Army (SLA), at Khiam prison in southern Lebanon; 30 others, mostly
Lebanese, held inside Israel; four Israelis still missing in Lebanon; and at
least eight SLA militiamen.
Lebanese hostages in Israel include Sheikh Abdul-Karim Obeid, kidnapped from
his home by Israeli troops in 1989. Of the missing Israelis, only airman Ron
Arad is believed still to be alive. Mr Picco is also attempting to achieve
the return of the remains of hostages who died in captivity.
Mr Picco's success to date can be attributed to great personal courage, his
respect of the kidnappers' demands for security and anonymity, and a perhaps
utopian belief that his interlocutors will see that 'violence against the
individual does not work.'
This week, Mr Picco repeatedly met the kidnappers of the two German hostages
to resolve last-minute hitches in their release. He is accustomed to working
alone and behind the scenes, and the presence of a German delegation in
Beirut with constant media coverage made his task more difficult.
'They (the kidnappers) come out more credible, because they have been part
of negotiations in which they have kept their word,' he said. 'They can join
in politics. If it can be proven that things can be done through
negotiations, then the appeal of violence will diminish.'
Mr Picco's efforts over the past year built a fragile chain that was in
danger of breaking if any one party failed to keep its word. Amazingly, he
has been able to persuade Lebanese kidnappers to free their hostages without
fulfilment of their demands.
The morning after American hostage Mr Terry Anderson was released in
December, Mr Picco flew to Bonn to meet the German foreign and justice
ministers regarding Mr Strubig and Mr Kemptner. His words then - and again
yesterday in Beirut - were: 'It's not over yet.'
He added: 'This began not as a story about just 10 or 11 westerners, but
about several hundred people. It is a serious moral and political
commitment. There are a lot of things left to do.'
