FT  12 AUG 92 / Shake-up for the big sell-off: Haig Simonian on changes to
Italy's public sector companies
Milan's merchant bankers have been using words such as 'revolution' and
'earthquake' to describe the government's plans, announced last Friday, to
shake up Italy's four biggest public sector companies.
The plans, announced by the prime minister, Mr Giuliano Amato, include
cutting the boards of the four, recently transformed into joint stock
companies, to three members, and handing over decision-making to the
government.
The bankers' comments contrast with the cautious optimism with which they
earlier greeted the programme to privatise the four groups: IRI, the
industrial holding company; Eni, the energy and chemicals group; ENEL the
electricity generating authority; and INA, the insurance concern.
The latest changes involve the abolition of the committees and boards
composed of up to 15 political placemen, chosen to reflect the balance of
power between the governing parties. Instead, the new slimline boards
comprise the existing, politically appointed, chairmen, with reduced
executive power, a new post of managing director (to be filled internally)
and a senior civil servant.
Future acquisitions, disposals or flotations will be decided by
shareholders' meetings. This means the treasury, now the four groups' single
shareholder, will have the ultimate say.
The groups now have the legal and management frameworks to prepare for
flotation. Mr Amato said he wanted to create a 'big Italian national
industry' open to foreign participation. Once floated, the companies would
close the gap between a few big public-sector groups and a handful of quoted
private-sector counterparts. However, it could be some time before the
government starts to dispose of the assets over which it now has control.
This month the treasury appointed a committee of six economists and bankers
to report on the scale and timing of sell-offs. Their findings are not due
before the end of next month.
Mr Amato has already said the move towards the market will affect the four
groups differently. IRI and Eni face the biggest changes. Unlike ENEL and
INA, which are single product companies, they comprise huge conglomerates.
An imminent reorganisation is planned leaving 'some parts stronger and
disposing of others', said Mr Amato.
IRI, which accounts for about 5 per cent of Italy's gross national product
and employs almost 410,000, is set for major surgery. It controls offshoots
such as the Ilva steel group or Alitalia, the state airline, while
subsidiaries such as STET in telecoms and SME in foods are substantial
sub-holdings in their own right.
Some IRI subsidiaries, for example Banca Commerciale Italiana (BCI) and
Credito Italiano, two leading banks, are already quoted, as are its
telecommunications interests. IRI planned to dispose of assets and cut its
stake in others prior to last week's announcement. With consolidated debts
of around L60,000bn, (Pounds 28bn) it has been facing a growing financial
crisis.
Direct grants from the treasury, IRI's traditional source of funds, have
dried up under the government's attempts to cut the huge budget deficit and
tighter European Commission supervision. Meanwhile, interest charges have
surged, while IRI has been reluctant to axe subsidiaries' investment
programmes.
Earlier this year, the group raised L480bn by selling its 52 per cent stake
in its Cementir cement unit. Funds have been raised by reducing stakes in
its bank and telecommunications units. And in November, Finmeccanica, the
sub-holding controlling IRI's engineering and aerospace interests, will make
its stock market debut.
IRI's most obvious disposals under accelerated privatisation are likely to
be jewels such as BCI, Credito Italiano and parts of SME, with further
reductions in telecoms and the disposal of Finsiel, its big software arm.
A big placement, notably of IRI's shares in either bank, would send a
powerful signal to the markets of the government's determination to
privatise.
Eni is in better financial shape than IRI. Agip, its oil and gas exploration
business, and Snam, its gas pipeline subsidiaries, are profitable and
destined for flotation early next year. Other parts of Eni could also be
sold relatively fast. First to go could be its remaining stake in Italgas,
its retail gas distribution operation, which is already quoted and followed
abroad.
Floating Eni is less appealing. Not all its empire is in the black. The
EniChem chemicals operation lost L742bn after minority interests last year
and is still suffering from the sectoral downtrend. Among Eni's activities
are a loss-making Milan newspaper and a big property portfolio.
Merchant bankers see ENEL as an obvious privatisation candidate, although
not for a few years. A key to ENEL's appeal will be government willingness
to liberalise tariffs, which will determine profitability.
Liberalisation could also be important for INA, which may be the easiest to
privatise. The company, one of Italy's biggest insurers, also controls the
quoted Assitalia insurance group and owns stakes in state-sector companies
including Banca Nazionale del Lavoro and Istituto Mobiliare Italiano.
With the government winding down this week for a brief holiday and the
treasury awaiting the privatisation committee's report, bankers are not
expecting any action in a hurry.
Mr Piero Barucci, treasury minister, has delayed meeting merchant bankers
until the report is ready.
The group may be looking at more innovative solutions than straight
disposals, including issuing bonds, convertible into the shares of
state-owned companies due for privatisation. That would boost receipts from
the start without forcing the government to rush sales or overwhelm the
relatively limited domestic equity market.
Some bankers are betting on a cautious programme, based on deals in the
pipeline, perhaps with one spectacular placing, like the full-privatisation
of BCI or Credito Italiano.
'We want to make sure we create the right atmosphere for future sales,' says
a senior official.
 ---------------------------------------------------------
IRI                                Eni
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Sales        *L79,901bn            Sales         L50,883bn
Profits         -L312bn            Profits        L1,081bn
Debt          L60,330bn            Debt          L23,000bn
Investment    L17,805bn            Investment     L9,327bn
Employees       408,000            Employees       130,000
 ---------------------------------------------------------
ENEL                               INA
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Sales         L27,221bn            Premiums       L5,353bn
Profits          L229bn            Profits       **L19.9bn
Debt          L32,170bn            Debt                nil
Investment    L10,897bn            Investment     L5,300bn
Employees       109,860            Employees        10,650
 ---------------------------------------------------------
