FT  04 SEP 92 / Sections of NUM consider buy-out
A SIGNIFICANT move away from the National Union of Mineworkers' rejection of
all forms of privatisation of British Coal appears to have developed. Two
sections of the union have joined a consortium to consider taking a stake in
the smokeless fuels Coal Products Division.
The cokemen's section of the NUM and the Cosa white-collar section have
linked up with three other unions - BACMS, the colliery managers union, and
the two general unions GMB and TGWU, to ask the union-backed bank Unity
Trust to investigate the possible role of employees in a buy-out.
Mr John Meads, general secretary of BACMS, said that all five unions or
union sections were involved in asking Unity Trust to 'represent the
interests of employees within the framework of a possible
management/employee buy-out'.
British Coal's coal productions division employs only about 600 people and
made an operating profit of Pounds 2m for the year ended March 28. Last year
it had debts of Pounds 50m. It has not yet filed its separate accounts for
this year.
The business is seen as having good potential to generate cash given British
Coal's recent decision to close the loss-making Avenue Coke and Chemical
plant near Chesterfield, Derbyshire, which produces Sunbright fuel for the
domestic closed-fire market.
The NUM's refusal to countenance any co-operation with coal privatisation
has contrasted with the stance of the break-away Union of Democratic
Mineworkers which has prepared an employee buy-out bid backed by Lloyds
Merchant Bank.
However, an earlier deviation from the union headquarters' hard line
occurred when the Scottish NUM expressed interest in an employee buy-out for
Longannet pit, Fife.
The latest move by the cokemen and Cosa could signal the start of a revolt
against Mr Arthur Scargill, the NUM leader, by union officials arguing as
the UDM does. The UDM view is that privatisation is not desirable, but that
if it cannot be stopped it is sensible to win as much influence as possible
over the organisations that emerge after it.
British Coal has already announced that it is discussing the sale of Coal
Products with two rival management buy-out groups and Anglo-United, owner of
Coalite smokeless fuel.
The two rival MBOs are led by Mr Steve O'Donoghue, the former finance
director of Coal Products, and Mr David Foster, Coal Products' operations
director.
While Mr O'Donoghue appears to have the backing of the majority of Coal
Products managers, the emergence of two rival MBOs could put the British
Association of Colliery Management in a difficult position. It has been
promised funds to help draw up an employee buy-out bid.
BC has said that it would back the bid offering the 'best value' for its
business. This week it said it was inclined to sell Coal Products piecemeal.
Anglo has said that it is confident of putting together an attractive
financial package. If it acquired Coal Products it would be expected to
close some of the plants.
