FT  30 DEC 92 / Moi resentful as Kenyans vote: Polling stations overwhelmed
as voters queue for hours
IN an isolated mountain retreat deep in Kenya's Rift Valley, President
Daniel arap Moi let off steam.
Standing in the shady gardens of the Kabernet Hotel, Mr Moi was perhaps
recovering from a nasty new experience: voting in a multiparty election
clearly still anathema to him.
The 68 year-old president painted himself as an isolated and helpless victim
of hostile western governments.
'I have been mistreated by . . . the western world purporting to be fighting
for democracy when they have been fighting against me.'
'Violence has been introduced. People are talking about civil war,' he said.
Thumping his fist into his palm the president, who has ruled Kenya
autocratically for 14 years, said violence had erupted because Kenya had not
been allowed to develop its democracy naturally. Instead it had been forced
into rapid change by foreign governments who kept telling him 'Do This. Do
that. Do this.'
Mr Moi, speaking to western reporters for the first time in 10 months, made
his bitter attack shortly after casting his vote. He voted shortly after
dawn in his Baringo Central constituency in the heart of the mountains and
gorges of the Rift Valley, home to Mr Moi's Kalenjin tribe.
Mr Moi is unopposed in Baringo Central, as are 14 other candidates of the
ruling party, Kanu, in other constituencies in the Rift valley, Kanu's
heartland and a province still run like a medieval fiefdom. At a primary
school polling station, queues of voters formed silently on a scrubbed
playing field. Inside voters were only issued one ballot paper with the
names of the eight presidential candidates.
Mr Kegan Chebii, a civil servant, said: 'Opposition parties did not come
here. They don't have any supporters. We are Kanu by blood.'
Voting was calm in Baringo Central but in some parts of the country polling
was marred by inefficiency and chaotic organisation. National Electoral
Commission (NEC) Chairman Zaccheous Chesoni said there was widespread
irregularities in mainly opposition areas and was investigating reports of
rigging.
In the opposition stronghold of Kisumu, a humid industrial town on the
shores of Lake Victoria, angry supporters of Ford-Kenya alleged Kanu agents
had been distributing money inside the polling station. A number of stations
opened late and long queues of voters waited impatiently.
In the tense central town of Nakuru election observers said there was a
shortage of ballot papers. At another urban polling centre voters allegedly
bussed in by Kanu had to be escorted out after an unruly crowd threatened to
stone them.
Despite the confusion many voters were determined to vote. In Kikuyu, Mr
David Kariuki looked back at the seemingly interminable queue that had been
growing since dawn. How long had he been waiting? Four hours, perhaps, or
possibly five? 'No, 26 years,' chuckled the middle-aged farmer.
