FT  10 AUG 92 / Arts: Formality over personality - Serious Fun
SERIOUS FUN is the annual festival that brings contemporary dance, music,
and performance art to Alice Tully Hall at Lincoln Centre - alternative
summer fare to the Mostly Mozart concerts in Avery Fisher Hall.
This sixth season began with Robert Wilson's production of Gertrude Stein's
Dr Faustus Lights the Lights from the Hebbel-Theater in Berlin. Like all
Wilson's work, it was visually striking and the actors' movement and make-up
were stylised to a fare-thee-well. That was the problem - the piece lacked
any spontaneity.
Returning towards the end of the festival, I caught the two clowns, or New
Vaudevillians, David Shiner and Bill Irwin, in a show whose spontaneity was
infectious. Shiner is a star of the Canadian Cirque du Soleil, while Irwin
is the only baggy-pants comedian to have received a MacArthur Fellowship,
sometimes called 'genius' award. Irwin is in continual danger of being
dragged into the wings by an unseen force; Shiner, for his part, seems on
the point of being carried into the air by his umbrella, like Alain in
Ashton's La Fille mal gardaae.
The festival usually culminates in an evening called 'Megadance'. This year,
in tacit recognition, perhaps, of the fact that only a handful of American
choreographers are making work that would justify such a prefix, the concert
consisted of revivals of avant-garde works of the fifties, sixties, and
seventies, assembled by the dance historian Sally Banes. Dancemakers of that
generation wanted to wipe the slate clean: in the words of Yvonne Rainer's
famous manifesto, they said: 'No to spectacle, no to virtuosity . . . no to
the glamour and transcendency of the star image.'
Rainer's almost legendary Trio A (1966) exemplified her injunction. But,
paradoxically, its original performers, Rainer herself, David Gordon and
Steve Paxton, had a kind of authority that undeniably added up to star
quality. Here, Clarinda Mac Low went through the motions, though with proper
clarity and sense of weight.
Paul Taylor's first concert in 1957 had an experimental audacity that he
soon deliberately abandoned. Deadpan, wearing a business suit, he assumed a
series of nonchalant poses, accompanied by the telephone time signal, in a
solo called Epic. Restaged as a duet what was once audacious now seemed
harmless enough.
The programme proved that, in experimental dance, just as in ballet, works
with strong formal content have a better chance of survival than those that
depend on the personality of the performers. Formal values were strongest in
James Waring's Rose and Lucinda Childs's Interior Drama. Rose, made for a
student company at the University of Maryland, in Baltimore County, just
before Waring died in 1975, does not call for virtuosity, but it does call
for conviction. The present group realised the dance in all its grave
austerity.
Interior Drama (1977) marks a transition between the extreme minimalism of
Childs's previous work and the greater theatricality of Dance two years
later. At that, there are only four steps in it, and one marvels at the
dancers' ability to keep variations and permutations in their heads.
Simone Forti was among those who replaced formal structure with game- or
task-based instructions to the performers. Slantboard/Huddle (1961), in
which they clamber up a sloping board or over each other, is possibly more
fun to do than it is to watch. Meredith Monk's solo Break (1964) must have
depended to a great extent on her personality; Lutz Forster, from Pina
Bausch's company, gave it a sinister edge that was surely quite different
but still powerful. Gus Solomons Jr's solo Kinesia No. 5 (1967), which he
performed himself, has some fascinating movement.
Rudy Perez's solo Countdown (1965), in which he slowly smokes a cigarette to
two of the 'Songs of the Auvergne,' reminds us that experimentalism is no
guarantee against sentimentality.
