FT  01 APR 92 / Upset in Europe's construction equipment market
GERMAN reunification and recession elsewhere in Europe have transformed the
Dollars 12bn-Dollars 15bn western European construction equipment market
over the past two years, with far-reaching implications for manufacturers
and component suppliers.
Germany has more than doubled its share of the market from 18 per cent in
1989, before reunification, to 37 per cent last year, largely at the expense
of the UK, whose share has plummeted from 21 per cent to 9 per cent.
The figures come from a review by the Corporate Intelligence Group, the
London-based analyst.
In spite of a 47 per cent surge in German unit sales, overall demand in west
Europe fell 3 per cent last year to 97,358 units, confounding the group's
forecast that 1991 would be a 'watershed' with demand beginning to pick up
by the middle of the year.
A further 5 per cent decline is expected this year, and it unlikely that
demand will recover until 1993-94, says the review. Even then, sales are
expected to be 6-7 per cent lower than in the late 1980s.
The forecast provides a gloomy backdrop for next week's Bauma construction
equipment exhibition in Munich, the world's largest this year.
Demand in Germany, described by the review as 'a shining beacon of
prosperity,' is being spurred by construction activity linked to
reunification. Building activity in the west expanded slightly last year, in
spite of a second-half slowdown, while in the east the growth rate may have
reached 20 per cent.
A further 20 per cent growth in building activity is foreseen for the east
this year, but in the west the housing boom is finished, says the review.
Overall, the German construction equipment is forecast to fall to 33,510
units this year from 35,666 last year, and to 30,420 by 1996.
Even then, however, the German market will still be more than twice the size
of its three nearest rivals, France Italy and the UK.
The implications of this geographical shift in demand are fundamental, says
the review. German end-users traditionally prefer domestically-produced
equipment, and will pay a premium for the perceived additional quality.
German manufacturers have therefore been sustained by domestic demand, and
cushioned to a large extent from the severe decline in export markets.
'Unless a company has a manufacturing base, or at least an exceptionally
sound distribution network, in Germany, then manufacturers will have little
opportunity to participate in the only European market which currently
offers good volumes at acceptable margins. The result should be a much
stronger manufacturing base in Germany over the long term,' it says.
Elsewhere, the sharpest decline last year was in the 'perfectly ghastly' UK
market, where unit sales fell 38 per cent to 9,212, the lowest for at least
a decade.
The study blames 'a combination of a government fumbling its way to economic
stability, high interest rates, and too many good machines looking for too
little work.'
