FT  20 MAR 92 / Germany's companies register their unease
COMPANIES in west Germany have a worse opinion of their country's qualities
as an industrial base than they did three years ago and more than a quarter
of them have reacted by cutting domestic employment, a study by the Ifo
economic research institute showed.
Surprisingly, they are also less happy about the quality of German labour.
But Ifo said this view - mainly expressed by smaller companies - seemed to
reflect improvements in countries competing for German industrial
investment, like Spain, France, and Ireland, rather than any deterioration
of the German workforce's qualifications.
The findings of Munich-based Ifo will add fuel to the debate about the
future of Standort Deutschland (Germany as an industrial base) at a time
when employers are faced with high wage demands and intensifying foreign
competition.
As negative factors, companies cited high wage and social security costs,
short working weeks, high corporate taxes and tough environmental rules. The
main positive factors were the lack of industrial strife and fairly
consistent government policies.
Ifo said 27 per cent of companies had reduced employment at their German
plants, with 8 per cent more planning to do so. In the capital goods
industry, where Germany is strong in world markets, 34 per cent had laid off
workers and 13 per cent had plans to do so.
The study, carried out in December, was based on the views of 500 companies.
Ifo said they had a less positive view about Standort Deutschland than
during the last enquiry at the end of 1988.
It cautioned about dramatising the results but they are in line with the
actions of many German companies which have recently announced poorer
profits, job cuts and the shift of production abroad.
Ifo said 20 per cent of companies had moved some output from Germany, with 8
per cent having such plans. Again, the capital goods industry was to the
fore, with figures of 35 per cent and 10 per cent respectively. At the
biggest companies, with more than 500 employees, 29 per cent had cut jobs
and 36 per cent shifted production.
