FT  06 MAR 92 / Kerrey pulls out of presidential race
THE field of contenders for the Democratic presidential nomination narrowed
yesterday when Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska said he was ending his
campaign.
Mr Kerrey had been widely expected to be a popular candidate when he
announced last September that he would seek the presidency. But he has won
only a single state primary, and has failed to raise enough money to
continue campaigning.
'We had plenty of enthusiasm. Unfortunately we didn't have plenty of money,'
he said.
His withdrawal leaves the Democratic campaign as, in all likelihood, a duel
between former Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts and Governor Bill
Clinton of Arkansas.
One other campaign, that of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, appears in danger.
Also short of money, Mr Harkin has yet to win a primary, but hopes to keep
his presidential bid alive at least until the Illinois and Michigan
primaries of March 17, where his trade union support could help him.
In the Republican race, President George Bush yesterday flew to campaign in
South Carolina against Mr Patrick Buchanan, his right wing challenger, for
tomorrow's vote.
He attacked Mr Buchanan, who has embarrassed him by repeatedly winning 30 to
40 per cent of the votes in Republican primaries, for demagoguery.
'Anyone can demagogue but the president must make decisions. Sometimes you
have to make the tough call. The presidency is not a popularity contest,' he
said.
Mr Kerrey yesterday apologised for his recent attacks on the two Democratic
frontrunners.
'I have exercised political hyperbole on occasion and called them
unelectable, but with each passing day it is clear to me that the only
unelectable politician running for President of the US is George Bush,' he
said.
Mr Kerrey has in recent weeks bitterly attacked Mr Clinton for escaping the
Vietnam war draft, and said that Mr Bush would use this issue to 'open him
up like a soft peanut' in the presidential election.
Yesterday, however, he said that, if Mr Clinton won the Democratic
nomination, he would 'campaign feverishly to make certain he wins the
election in November'.
Enthusiastically supported by many of his colleagues in Congress, Mr Kerrey
brought to the race a gallant war record, a touch of film star glamour, a
reputation for standing up for his principles, and a biting tongue.
In addition, his principal policy plank - a proposal for a national health
insurance scheme - appeared to be high among voters' preoccupations.
But Mr Kerrey has seemed unable to move beyond health care and his war
record to articulate a vision of why he wanted to become the country's next
president.
His only victory came in South Dakota, next door to his native Nebraska. In
the seven states which held primaries or caucuses on Tuesday, his best
performance came in Colorado, where he won 12 per cent of the vote ' still
leaving him in fourth place behind former Governor Jerry Brown of
California, Governor Clinton and Mr Tsongas.
Nor were his prospects any better for next week's Super Tuesday contest; the
11 states which vote then seem likely to be split between Mr Tsongas and Mr
Clinton.
Mr Clinton is expected to dominate Super Tuesday because of his greater
appeal in the seven southern states voting that day.
But Mr Tsongas should win Rhode Island and his home state of Massachusetts,
and could gain a significant boost by upsetting Mr Clinton in Florida.
