FT  05 AUG 92 / GA launches cover for property values
BUYERS OF new homes will be able to insure themselves against plummeting
property prices under a scheme launched this week.
The scheme, provided by General Accident Property Services, which operates a
chain of 400 estate agents and is part of the General Accident insurance
group, will be provided initially in the Thames Valley area, west of London,
and will spread nationally during the next two months.
It comes as the government is under pressure to stimulate the depressed
housing market. The Thames Valley has seen some of the biggest reductions in
house prices, which in south-east England have fallen on average by a
quarter since 1988-89.
GA is offering to cover owners forced to sell their home within three years
of a purchase against losses of up to 10 per cent of the original price - up
to a ceiling of Pounds 15,000.
Mr David Wright, national operations manager of the property services
division, said the scheme would be sold through housebuilders, which would
be able to offer the loss-of-value insurance as a sales incentive. It is not
planned to offer the scheme generally to the public.
The cost to builders would be a flat fee of less than Pounds 300 a house
which would cover purchasers for three years. Letters detailing the offer
have been sent this week to companies in the Thames Valley region, including
most of the national housebuilders.
Mr Wright said the insurance policies would be written by a Lloyd's
insurance syndicate rather than by GA. 'The aim is not to generate insurance
business but to try to stimulate the housing market out of the worst slump
for more than half a century,' he said.
GA already offers mortgage protection insurance against redundancy.
It said that to qualify for the new scheme purchasers must be forced to sell
their home by the loss of a job or a forced job move, a divorce or
separation, or by the withdrawal of equity by a joint mortgagee.
'Unemployment and the fear of homes losing their value are the two biggest
concerns holding back the housing market,' Mr Wright said.
Abbey National, the country's second largest mortgage lender, this week
urged the government to provide a once-only tax credit of up to Pounds
10,000 to people making a loss on selling their property.
