FT  13 NOV 92 / International Capital Markets: Foreign banks' claims on
Latin America fall 23%
THE AMOUNT owed by the eight biggest Latin American countries to their
foreign bank creditors has fallen by around a quarter since the mid-1980s as
a result of debt reduction, buy-back and conversion policies.
In a report published today the Bank for International Settlements, the
grouping of central banks from the leading industrial countries, reports
that foreign banks' claims on these countries fell by Dollars 57bn, or 23
per cent, in the five years to the end of 1991.
'The multiplication of instruments and techniques aimed at reducing existing
exposures was a major factor contributing to the decline in banks' claims
after 1985,' it says. Debt conversions and buy-backs became common in
1987-1988, while debt reduction has followed more recently from the Brady
initiative of 1989.
This process has left the eight - Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela - with debts to foreign banks which
account for only 52 per cent of their total foreign debts, down by nearly 20
percentage points from the end of 1983 - in part a result of the upsurge of
securities from Latin American issuers on the international markets.
The debt reduction has not been evenly spread across all bank creditors. In
1983, European banks were owed 33 per cent of the outstanding claims. By the
end of last year, that had jumped to 44 per cent. The reason, according to
BIS figures, is a reduction in the exposures of US banks, whose share of
claims on the region dropped from 40 per cent to 28 per cent over the same
period.
This largely reflects a reduction in claims of regional and smaller banks in
the US. The BIS also notes that UK banks 'cut back their exposure markedly,
whereas most other banking groups maintained their outstanding positions'.
While bank exposure to the region has shrunk, portfolio investors have
committed substantial sums - around Dollars 25bn in 1991, the BIS says.
These have tended to take the form of longer-term borrowings or the sale of
equity.
'From the wider international financial system, such sounder forms of
capital inflow also imply less risk of systemic weakness of the kind which
suddenly emerged in 1982,' the BIS says.
