FT  14 MAR 92 / Books: Lively mind behind an easel
OSKAR KOKOSCHKA LETTERS 1905-1976 selected by Olda Kokoschka and Alfred
Marnau Thames &amp; Hudson Pounds 24.95, 320 pages
THE AUSTRIAN-born painter Oskar Kokoschka, a selection of whose letters is
now published in English translation, lived in Britain from 1938 until 1953.
He had friends who helped him settle in a country where his work was little
known at that time and, if known, not particularly well liked. Kokoschka
grew up in Vienna, during the last era of Franz Joseph's Austro-Hungarian
Empire. His father, who had once owned a jewellery business, was reduced to
making a precarious livelihood as a commercial traveller. Yet the boy was
able to develop his creative gifts within the educational system and enrol
at the School of Arts and Crafts. After a period as a young blood in
Viennese cafe society, he moved to Prague where he met his wife Olda. His
Czech visa saved him in the UK from internment on the Isle of Man when war
broke out. Thanks to his friend Edward Beddington-Behrens, Kokoschka was
given a studio in Park Lane - then deserted because of the blitz - and he
began to earn enough from painting to rent a flat in Swiss Cottage.
Eventually he moved out of London to Polperro and then to the Highlands of
Scotland. Yet whatever the circumstances he retained, as this book shows, a
remarkable vigour of mind. Long letters written to his friends when the war
was over deplore the post-war carve-up of Europe, its ideologies and its
idols. 'Picasso' he writes 'dresses beautiful windows giving onto a future
paradise as only a window-dresser can.' By contrast Kokoschka turned to
Hades for a subject and worked on a vast Rubensian triptych embracing
Persephone, Prometheus and the Apocalypse, designed for the ceiling of a
house in Exhibition Road, Kensington. The owner, Count Antoine Seilern,
bequeathed this stupendous work to the Courtauld Institute, where it is
currently on show in Somerset House.
In 1953 Kokoschka and Olda became residents in Villeneuve, Switzerland, and
in 1980 aged 93 he died there. In his vigorous old age Kokoschka remained
restlessly eager for new experience. He travelled widely in Europe and made
regular visits to Salzburg where he designed sets for Furtwangler's Magic
Flute and presided over his own Summer School in painting.
'Don't weaken even by half] Life is so unfathomable that we have to survive
the test with patience, like Job.' he wrote to the conductor who was now
terminally ill. Kokoschka recalled the time when, as a dragoon in the
Imperial Austrian Army on the battlefield of Galicia in 1915, he had his
lung pierced by a bayonet. 'Only my dying horse, kicking me in its death
throes from time to time, woke me from a lethargy that could have ended in
my death.'
A celebratory sense of resurrection, which may be traced back to this
Dosteovsky-like episode, is the distinguishing feature of Kokoschka's
vibrantly alive paintings. There is an urgency in all his work that was
mirrored in his life. It is as marked in his panoramic cityscapes as it is
in his portraits of world statesmen or of society women like Nancy Cunard or
his friend Kathleen, Countess of Drogheda. These portraits, of which he did
a great many, show the painter's depth of insight into the sitter's nature.
Kokoschka's early paintings revealed a debt to Van Gogh while his mature
work was frequently compared with El Greco. In the reference books he is
always classified as an Expressionist. He became irritated by these
labellings and claimed that, if it was to be pinned down in this way, his
work enshrined the spirit of Baroque, its dramatic sense, its continuity
with the spirit of mediaeval Europe.
The early letters were written at a turbulent time of cultural life in
Vienna when many young artists were kicking against the by now restrictive
Secession. This mood echoes through letters to men who were powerful in
forming taste and values during the pre-Anschluss period - the architect
Adolf Loos, the editors Karl Kraus and Herwarth Walden. But Kokoschka was
more interested then in women than in art-politics. There are many
passionate love-letters, highly possessive in tone, to Alma Mahler, widow of
the composer, who turned him down for the architect Walter Gropius.
In the absence of a full biography the book is welcome for the intimate
picture it gives of Kokoschka's ceaseless questing and questioning; his
lifelong interest in, for example, a universal thinker like Comenius. The
translation from the often idiomatic German by Mary Whittall is good; the
editing rather minimal, involving the reader in a lot of tiresome
back-tracking to find out who everyone is. There is surprisingly little
about individual paintings. When he wrote a letter, as he frequently did,
Kokoschka looked beyond the easel to the world.
