FT  07 DEC 92 / History offers bad omen for Edinburgh summit: The city's mix
of pride and fear
THE British public may not find the European Community particularly exciting
and in Edinburgh emotions are usually understated. But the city is secretly
agog as the European summit, being held here on Friday and Saturday, draws
near.
There are dark blue European flags along the streets, and roads have been
resurfaced. The serenity of the royal palace of Holyrood, where the leaders
will meet, has been defiled by the security men's Portacabins on its lawns.
When Mr John Major announced in May 1991 that the European Council of
Britain's presidency would be held in Edinburgh, no one appears to have
worked out where in the city it might be held. Edinburgh Castle, an obvious
first choice, has no space large enough to accommodate all and participants
would have had to use a single narrow entrance - a security nightmare.
Eventually the Queen agreed (with reluctance, it is said) to allow the
meeting to be held in her official residence in Edinburgh. But making
Holyrood into a conference location has meant turning the 16th century
palace inside out.
Eighty of the 100 third-floor bedrooms have been converted into offices,
with the remainder used for storing furniture and paintings displaced to
make way for desks, fax machines and photocopiers.
The council meeting will take place in the panelled long gallery under
pictures of Scottish kings and queens. The arches around the main courtyards
have been enclosed with glass to provide a warm cloister for the 800
officials.
There will be no room at Holyrood for the 2,000 people from the media
covering the summit - they will be herded a mile away into a press centre
set up in Meadowbank stadium. Few will be allowed into the conference centre
itself.
Most Edinburgh residents will see little more than the cavalcades of cars
and outriders sweeping from the hotels to Holyrood, and down to the port of
Leith where the Queen is giving a banquet on the royal yacht Britannia on
Friday night. Many streets are to be closed for the duration of the summit,
and authorities admit traffic problems will be appalling.
Mr Major's purpose in bringing the summit to Scotland (at a cost of Pounds
6.4m) was to emphasise to Scots that not everything happens in London and
demonstrate the benefits of Scotland being in a union with England. But
opponents are taking the opportunity to state they want Scotland either to
be independent or to have its own parliament, and there is to be a
demonstration on Saturday.
Edinburgh is looking to the summit with a mixture of pride and apprehension;
pride because it is the capital of a separate nation which once had its own
links with the continent, and because it is probably Britain's most
architecturally splendid city.
But there are enormous security risks posed by a city like Edinburgh. The
streets between the hotels and Holyrood are narrow, and the palace is
overlooked by Arthur's Seat, a hill where the army has set up posts to
protect against terrorist snipers.
The other fear for Edinburgh is that the city's name will be linked to a
summit which goes down in history as a failure.
Holyrood is no stranger to political conflict of the most lethal kind. It
was there that in 1566 a group of Scottish nobles stabbed to death David
Rizzio, the Italian secretary of Mary Queen of Scots. That is not a good
omen.
