FT  22 JAN 92 / Arts: London International Mime Festival
If the London Mime Festival raises one issue par excellence, it is the
inadequacy of existing categorisation of the performing arts, which not only
affects what an audience chooses to see but what it expects to find. The
dominant reaction to the first night of the Belgian Compagnie Mossoux-Bonte
at the ICA was a rather bored reluctance to dismiss anything so obviously
foreign and arty. Equally predictable was the pocket of initiates heard
sounding off in high indignation about the philistine English.
The festival, the venue, even the company's own sales pitch conspired
against The Last Hallucinations of Lucas Cranach the Elder, which struck me
as a brilliantly lucid and surprisingly unpretentious subversion of an
artist's work and his times. Cranach (1472-1553) was a German painter and
woodcut designer who was court artist to the Elector of Saxony at Wittenberg
and also worked for Luther.
His 'Adam and Eve' is one of the prizes of the Courtauld Collection, while
one of his portraits of Luther is owned by Bristol's City Art Gallery.
The combination of sacred and secular in his work provides Patrick Bonte and
Nicole Mossoux with a fascinating lever for a pictorial fantasy based on the
early protestant mind. The lights go up on an array of frames in which, with
jewel-like definition, a collection of pictures are set. In one, a pompous
young man confronts a stuffed fish; in another, the torso of a woman sits
fingering a book; in a third is the head of a sensuous but rather plain
young woman.
The young man, one notices, has bejewelled, spider-like hands. He reappears
in a second scene of court portraiture, as an effete noble in gaudy finery
caressing a blowsy wench.
Adam and Eve make their entrance as sleekly muscled nude torsos flirting
over a bright green apple: their heads and legs are cut off by the picture
frame, focusing the eye on the eroticism of the allegory and distorting it
by making the covert appear overt. This, one imagines, is how Cranach might
have seen the Courtauld painting in his wildest dreams.
Most revealing of all is the image of the recumbent nude, a skinny, twisted
figure not beautiful in either face or form, but with a dignity which
insists that she belongs to a different aesthetic to our own. Immediately
one is reminded of all those etiolated bodies, with breasts stuck on like
mud pies and necks at unnatural angles, which make Cranach's work seem so
strange. There is plenty of time for such thoughts in a show which proceeds
at a processional pace from frame to frame. For those who went expecting
performance fireworks, it undoubtedly seemed a damp squib; take it on its
own terms, as work that feeds on the visual arts, and its cracked visions
crawl from every canvas.
Philipe Genty, who brought his new show to the Queen Elizabeth Hall for
three nights last week, offers a very different package: here is mime as
sleight of hand and foot, accomplished, magical and ultimately mundane. A
figure wrestles with a quilt which gets smaller and smaller until it
self-destructs into feathers of polythene from the snowy depths of which a
slender puppet emerges. A second puppet wrestles with a deck chair which
gets bigger and bigger until it becomes a tumbling apparatus for 'real'
actors.
Genty's two stocks-in-trade, or so it would appear from this show, are his
mastery of changing scale and his style of puppetry, which enables teams of
bowler-hatted puppeteers to move in and out of focus without destroying the
illusion of the puppets on the ends of their sticks. His work is charming
and clever, but gave no indication of being more than a series of variations
on these two themes.
And so to the Black Mime Theatre, one of the home contributors to the
festival, which offers a piece about women and alcoholism that is endearing
in its earnestness. Three women re-enact the stories of their alcoholism as
a warning to ordinary mortals about the evils of drink. The acting is raw,
wholehearted and infuriatingly inaccurate if you look for the sort of detail
in which mime is supposed to specialise (what waiter ever poured wine out
over the back of his hand?). It uses dialogue and singing and has a
following of its own at the Young Vic (until Saturday). But I cannot help
wondering what the French or the Belgians would make of its rough readiness.
