FT  02 SEP 92 / Survey of Aerospace (14): Softly, softly on EC fares -
Europe shrinks from open skies
THE European air transport industry faces the era of the Single European
Market from next January 1 with doubts as to whether it will produce early
and substantial reductions in fares.
The EC Transport Ministers' complex agreement last June on the third phase
of deregulation measures effectively covered three major aspects of air
transport operations.
On airline licensing, it was agreed that subject to meeting the necessary
technical and financial standards, airline operating licences would be
granted on the basis of Community criteria, rather than individual national
rules as hitherto, making it possible for citizens (or airlines) of one
Community country to establish airlines in other Community countries.
On fares and rates, the agreement gave complete pricing freedom to
intra-Community cargo and charter air services. For scheduled international
passenger services, pricing freedom was approved, subject to governments
having the power to disallow any fares regarded as either too high, or too
consistently low as to be unfairly 'predatory'. In the case of disputes, the
Commission itself would have an arbitration role.
Probably the most far-reaching aspect of the package, however, was the
introduction from next year of 'consecutive cabotage', effectively meaning
that any Community airline serving a foreign destination will have the right
to pick up traffic there and carry it on to a second destination in that
country - for example, British Airways flying from London to Frankfurt will
be able to pick up traffic in Frankfurt and carry it on to Berlin, and
vice-versa.
But the agreement fell short of what many protagonists of total 'open skies'
had sought. The 'consecutive cabotage' was restricted, with traffic picked
up at foreign points being limited to only 50 per cent of the overall
seasonal capacity on that sector, until April 1, 1997. Full cabotage, or the
right of any airline to fly freely inside another EC country, was also
delayed until April 1, 1997.
Other restrictions include a ban on foreign carriers flying certain 'public
service routes' in another country, for example to and from islands.
More controversial is the rule that member-states, under Commission control,
may limit foreign-carrier access to their domestic routes for serious
congestion or environmental reasons, particularly where other forms of
transport, such as high-speed trains, are already deemed to provide
satisfactory levels of service.
The overall response to the agreement from the airlines was lukewarm. Some
did not like it at all, preferring to maintain the principle of total
national sovereignty over their airspace. Others, more eager to see 'open
skies' , felt that while it was a step in the right direction, it did not go
far enough. Interpreting the safeguards - for example, determining whether
trains provide enough service between two points to justify denying foreign
airlines rights to fly the same sector - could lead to some difficult
situations.
Moreover, since most of the big Community airlines, such as Air France,
Alitalia, British Airways, Iberia, KLM and Lufthansa, already effectively
serve most major cities within the Community with direct flights, the
'consecutive cabotage' rights now permitted do not seem likely to result in
a significant immediate spread of additional services, and thus more
competition, on Community air routes, although that may come eventually.
Even unfettered cabotage - the right of a Community airline to fly without
restriction between two domestic points in any other EC country  - when it
does come in 1997 seems more likely to be covered by smaller regional
airlines, rather than the bigger flag carriers (although the latter may seek
to buy existing, or establish new, regional operators).
In what is already a densely-served European air transport arena, faced with
the threat of worsening congestion because of air traffic control and ground
infrastructure limitations, the scope for an increase in the number of air
services is much smaller than many outside the industry may believe
possible.
Furthermore, in the light of the airlines' current financial situation -
collectively they lost some Dollars 6.7bn on scheduled international
operations world-wide over the past two years as a result of the traffic
collapse caused by the Gulf War and the recession - they will find it
difficult to finance a large number of new routes in the immediate future.
Setting up new routes can be expensive - in terms of personnel, aircraft
procurement and marketing costs - a factor that more than one European
airline has discovered in recent years resulting in bankruptcy through
over-commitment.
The 24-member Association of European Airlines has already expressed its
distaste for use of the word 'deregulation', regarding it as 'wholly
inappropriate to describe the stream of packages, plans and proposals on air
transport topics emerging from the European Commission' - a number of which
it believes have negative implications for the airlines' overall cost
structure and traffic base.
The AEA has warned about what it believes could be 'over competition', with
163 scheduled airlines and some 65 specialist charter operators already in
Europe - more than in the US - and it has pointed out that even on scheduled
services many passengers already benefit from discounted fares.
It estimates that some 77 per cent of all international passengers in Europe
already benefit from low fares, so that the scope for further cuts is
limited.
Moreover, the AEA stresses that while its members are not afraid of
competition, in that they already compete across the whole spectrum of their
businesses as well as with a dense surface transport system of roads and
railways, the European airline industry could well be weakened 'by
politically sponsored duplication of effort based on the arbitrary
assumption that three airlines on a route compete, while two conspire'.
But the AEA's real fear is that the European Commission is trying - probably
without really realising it - to generate competition with one hand, whilst
throttling the airlines' financial ability to compete with the other.
It points out that the Commission is planning to introduce Value Added Tax
on intra-Community airline tickets, probably at around 9 or 10 per cent,
which could add Dollars 1bn to their costs over a full year.
Mr Giovanni Bisignani, chairman of the AEA and managing director of
Alitalia, says that would raise air fares considerably, whilst adding an
expensive heavy administrative burden on the airlines.
The proposed abolition of intra-EC duty-free concessions for airlines and
airports, now delayed until 1996, is also likely directly to reduce the
airlines' own income, whilst adding to their costs if airports pass their
own losses of duty-free income on to the airlines.
There are other European airline concerns. It is felt that not enough is
really being done to solve the problems of congestion on the ground and in
the air.
The airlines are also worried about the Commission's plans for a Dollars 3 a
barrel carbon tax, which, especially if it rises as planned to Dollars 10 a
barrel by the year 2000, will add further heavy costs to already battered
airline balance sheets.
The airlines recognise that the Community is changing the entire scope and
structure of intra-European air transport.
They are not afraid of the new era of increased competition, but they feel
that instead of approaching it with euphoric notions of much cheaper fares,
the European Commission as the policy maker, and the politicians and the
public at large, must recognise that the scope for such cuts is limited, and
that they will come only slowly, as the airlines themselves recover from the
ravages of the recess ion and digest the full long-term implications of
so-called 'open skies'.
