FT  30 SEP 92 / Survey of Personal Computers and Software (6): Distinctions
begin to blur - The handheld market is characterised by a confusion of names
CLASSIFICATION of handheld computers seems almost as difficult as that of
Darwin's beetles. Some differentiate between handhelds and portables, on the
grounds that portables may be held by the hand but genuine handhelds are
held in the hand. Certainly, as prices for these machines range from Pounds
60 to Pounds 6,000, there must be several different species involved.
Portable computers started to appear in the early 1980s and soon branched
into two - palmtops, consumer electronics products such as sophisticated
pocket calculators and notebooks, business equipment for the travelling
manager.
But this distinction is shaky and these two lines could soon converge again.
Palmtops include, or overlap with, personal organisers and personal digital
assistants. Notebooks can be divided by size into laptops, true notebooks
and subnotebooks.
The confusion of names shows how young the market is. Even in the US market
research on the subject is still thin and in Europe even thinner.
The market for portables is growing much faster than that for desktop
computers, even though the price of the miniaturised systems is higher.
Mr Bruce Stephen, an analyst at IDC, says the palmtop-handheld sector more
than doubled in the US between 1990 and 1992 to 670,000 units, or Dollars
242m of shipments, at an average price of Dollars 360.
In the US, the Japanese company Sharp is the dominant supplier of palmtops.
In the UK it claims to have half of the market for organisers priced between
Pounds 60 and Pounds 260. It puts the current market at 350,000 units and
forecasts growth to 450,000 in the next two years.
The UK company Psion is a big vendor in Britain but its small size means it
will struggle to maintain its position in the global market.
The recent entry of Hewlett-Packard into this sector with its HP95LX, priced
at around Pounds 350 and compatible with the industry standard PC operating
system DOS, has created a stir and is expected to lead to a spate of clones
from the Pacific countries.
Apple has put its reputation at stake with a big publicity campaign for its
forthcoming Newton machine, to be manufactured by Sharp and due to be
introduced in the US early next year at a price probably lower than Pounds
400.
It will run on the British-designed Advanced Risc Machine (Arm) 610 chip.
Described as a notepad rather than a notebook, it will not have a keyboard
or a mouse - input will be by a pen. It will provide one of the first tests
for the concept of pen-based computing, which is seen as the future medium
for many form-filling applications.
Apple's claims that the machine will learn to recognise the owner's
handwriting in just an hour and that future versions will also be able to
recognise speech have met some scepticism in the industry. It risks a strong
adverse reaction if it fails to deliver what has been promised.
Apple will be challenged by an alliance of Tandy and Casio, Olivetti's
Quaderno, and no doubt many others. But some leading manufacturers believe
the technology is still not mature and have decided to wait for it to
develop further before entering the field.
The palmtops sector is one of the few in the industry where prices are
rising, as more functions are added. But given their low price they should
be selling better, says Mr Stephen of IDC.
'They are too complex and have too many buttons. Many people have been put
theirs away,' he says.
Palmtops remain unstandardised and the question of what standards are needed
if any is being debated. Sharp and Apple have both adopted proprietary
designs.
Ms Rosemary Eccles, Sharp's UK product manager, argues that users want
simplicity above all, so there is no likelihood that personal organisers
will evolve towards more complex PC-based standards.
However, other vendors think that users will prefer systems which are
compatible with desktop PC standards including DOS.
The notebook sector - larger machines, but still able to be carried in a
briefcase - is growing even faster. It trebled in worldwide sales to 3.3m
units in 1990-92 and in the UK sales shot up to around 90,000 last year.
Some experts are forecasting 300,000 sold in the UK by 1996.
The increase is being driven by a rapid fall in prices, in line with those
of desktop personal computers. Many are now in the Pounds l,000- Pounds
l,500 bracket.
Notebooks may weigh around 6lb, their little cousins the subnotebooks only
half that. They usually conform to desktop PC standards, running on Intel
386 or 486 32-bit chips, with a DOS operating system, Windows user
interface, 2-4 megabytes of RAM, 40-120 megabytes of hard disk and VGA
colour screens.
Mr Mike Lunch, UK director of PCs for Toshiba, which has around 30 per cent
of the world market for notebooks and larger handhelds, says they are now
starting to replace desktop PCs for many functions and sales will overtake
those of desktop PCs in the mid-1990s.
The storage medium for these machines remains an issue. Reducing the power
needed for memory is important because their batteries tend to run out after
a few hours.
Intel claims that its new 'flash' solid state memory erasable chips will use
less power and be cheaper, faster and lighter than rotating hard disk
drives.
It says flash memory will replace hard disks in handheld computers in the
next couple of years. Apple's Newton will use flash memory on cards the size
of bank credit cards. But some experts dispute Intel's claims and argue that
very small hard drives will prove more successful.
Wireless communications is another area of controversy. The popularity of
these new devices will depend heavily on the ability to send faxes, exchange
electronic mail messages, receive news by satellite and send data back to
head office. Until suitable communications standards emerge it remains
uncertain how effective these functions will be.
Palmtops and notebooks are to a great extent creating a new market of users
who have not had PCs before, such as sales people, financial services
representatives and the general public.
As palmtops become more expensive and notebooks become cheaper, the two
sub-sectors may before long come together again. That development would
probably bring even tougher competition in the market.
