FT  07 JUL 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Stop selling yourself
short - Fees that professional advisers charge clients can lead friction.
Charles Batchelor offers a word of of advice
Ask a professional adviser what the price of his service is and, too often,
he will not give a straight answer.
There are at least 15 ways to describe the cost of a professional service,
from the barrister's 'honorarium' to the consultant's 'retainer', but price
is not a term which readily passes the professional's lips, says Aubrey
Wilson, a marketing consultant.
'Firms play down the price element quite substantially,' notes David Keeble,
a Cambridge researcher and author of a recent study of the business services
sector. 'What we don't know is if that view is shared by their clients.'
Anecdotal evidence suggests that many clients of the traditional professions
such as lawyers, accountants, surveyors, and of the burgeoning growth areas
of business services such as management consultancy, market research and
public relations, do not share this view.
Clients frequently complain that they do not know in advance what a service
will cost; they have no way of judging whether the fee charged is fair in
relation to the work done; and the final bill invariably comes out far
higher than they had expected.
Professional firms, and to a lesser extent the new business services firms,
advance professional ethics as a reason not to take too close an interest in
price. A Law Society booklet* explaining how firms should calculate costings
notes that professionalism 'transcends the profit motive'.
Some clients, confronted with a larger-than-expected bill, might question
whether these sentiments are any more than a cloak for self-interest.
Whichever view is correct, in the long-term this uncertainty works against
the providers of professional services. 'Very often the client will pay up
but go away disenchanted,' says Wilson. 'The unhappy client always tells
more people than the does the satisfied one.'
Emboldened by the pressure on their own profits in the current recession,
clients have been taking a tougher stand. They have become far less willing
to pay large fees and are quick to demand that the professional explains how
many hours have been worked. Clients then expect to pay on a time-related
basis, says Christopher Honeyman-Brown, a partner at accountants BDO Binder
Hamlyn.
'We are moving more to a time basis for charging from a transaction basis,'
says Tim Manning, managing partner of solicitors Boodle Hatfield. 'Fixed
rates are also becoming more prevalent.'
The matter of professional fees is no longer an issue for a limited number
of long-established professions. The business services sector was the
fastest growing part of the small business revival of the 1980s and
increasing sums are spent by business on buying in professional services.
Manufacturing companies are not always adept at managing costing and pricing
issues but, among service businesses, understanding appears to be even less
highly developed. There is very little in the way of guidance on the issue
from the professional associations and published literature.
'This is an absolutely critical issue for professional firms but their
approach is very unscientific,' says Wilson.
'Most service organisations are not very good at measuring costs and setting
prices,' comments Victoria Tomlinson, founder of a Harrogate-based public
relations and marketing agency, Northern Lights. 'Service companies tend to
meet their clients' needs, come what may, and then absorb the costs.'
When the economy is booming, this failure to monitor costs and draw up a
pricing strategy may not have serious consequences but problems can arise
when economic conditions worsen.
Boodle Hatfield, a 27-partner firm, had to reduce staff and partner numbers
for the first time when it realised that total numbers and overheads were
too high for the number of fee-earning partners.
So how should professional and business services firms determine their costs
and set prices? Salaries form a greater part of the costs of a service
business but there will also be a sizeable monthly charge for premises,
telephones, insurance and cars. 'We invest large amounts in computer
technology,' says James Mendelssohn, marketing partner of accountants
Neville Russell. 'We need to recover those development costs.'
These costs must then be apportioned over the number of fee-earning partners
and staff and the hours they work. But beware of concentrating too much on
recovering costs and relating fees too closely to the hours worked, says
Honeyman-Brown.
'Avoid an inward focus on the management of your costs because people and
time are a finite resource and you run the risk of underperforming on your
revenue,' he advises. 'Focus on the value that you are providing to the
client and his ability and willingness to pay.
'If you save a client Pounds 200,000 on a Pounds 1m deal or prevent a Pounds
3m turnover business from going into receivership, then you deserve to be
paid more than the standard time rate.'
But selling an intangible business service depends on the customer
understanding what he is getting. A client can judge the work which goes
into an audit because the auditor's staff are on his premises and visibly
doing a job. But the effort which goes into a market research project, where
most of the work is done behind the scenes and where some lines of
investigation may prove to be a waste of time, will be less obvious.
'The client only sees the initial meeting, perhaps a couple of meetings in
the middle and the final report,' says Honeyman-Brown. 'He does not see the
50 hours of work you have put into it.'
Basing an estimate on a time-rate alone encourages the client to pull out
his calculator and compare the consultant or professional's hourly rate with
what he pays his cleaner or the garage mechanic. Price should be a mixture
of time and value with possibly a 'cap' on the final bill to reassure the
client.
Business services firms should be open about their fees and discuss the
basis on which they will charge at the outset. 'Give the client an estimate
and an explanation of how you got there,' suggests Wilson. In the US, he
notes, some professional firms present 'draft bills' which can be discussed
with clients. 'There is no macho issue if it is changed,' he says.
In 'commodity' areas such as conveyancing, audit or market research
interviews, there will often be a market price and tough competition. But an
opportunity to maximise revenues comes from long-term relationships with
clients - where the consultant or professional has in-depth knowledge of the
business which is not immediately available from a competitor.
For a new client, or where the full implications of a project are not
immediately visible, accountants Neville Russell might agree a price for an
initial two or three days work and then negotiate the price for the rest of
the contract once they know what is involved, says Mendelssohn.
Current pressure on professional fees will almost certainly ease with the
ending of the recession. But clients have become more demanding and it is
unlikely that a pricing policy which comes down to 'charging what the market
will bear' will be such an easy option in future.
*The Expense of Time. 24 pages. Pounds 6.95
Useful reading: Practice Development for Professional Firms. Aubrey Wilson.
McGraw Hill. 232 pages Pounds 17.95.
