FT  10 JUL 92 / Technology: City next in line
London's financial services companies are the next target for personal
computer software companies battling against the unauthorised copying of
software.
Mr Bradford Smith, European counsel for the Business Software Association,
which represents leading software companies including Adobe, Apple Computer,
Lotus and Microsoft, said yesterday that investigators were now ready to go
to court to seek inspection orders against a number of City firms.
He was speaking after the BSA claimed success in its latest skirmish against
software piracy. BSA investigators late last week raided the offices of
Tatung (UK) and inspected software running on 100 of the company's personal
computers.
Tatung (UK), is a subsidiary of Tatung Company, a Taiwanese manufacturer and
distributor of electronic consumer goods including computer hardware and
household appliances.
It is the first time that the BSA and its associate the Federation Against
Software Theft (Fast) have taken action against a computer hardware
manufacturer.
Earlier actions in the UK have been taken against Mirror Group Newspapers
and the London Borough of Greenwich. Both were settled out of court.
Tatung said this week that procedures to ensure observance of software
copyright had failed: 'We are erasing all unlicensed copies and we are
purchasing legitimate replacement software.
'We have compensated the software publishers for loss of licence fees and
costs'.
Mr Smith's announcement that finance houses are the next BSA target is an
indication of the group's determination to leave no commercial sector
untouched in its efforts to stamp out software piracy, reckoned
conservatively to be costing software publishers Pounds 300m a year.
Typically, the BSA and Fast act on information that pirated software is in
use; they secure a court order to enter a suspected pirate's premises in
search of unauthorised copies.
They have always emphasised that they are more interested in persuading
companies to use software that complies with the law than in dragging
suspects through the courts.
