FT  16 OCT 92 / The Birmingham Summit: Major sets out to re-establish his
authority
IN Brighton last week, Mr John Major began the painful process of rebuilding
his authority with the Conservative party faithful. In Birmingham today, he
must do the same with his European Community colleagues.
Neither task will be easy. Sterling's enforced departure from the exchange
rate mechanism and the threatened Tory rebellion over Maastricht have dented
Mr Major's authority at home and his standing in Europe. The economic
recession continues to to undermine the loyalty of his supporters at
Westminster.
Nor can the prime minister disguise in coming months the tension in a
strategy designed to reconcile the streak of chauvinism in his party with a
personal commitment to good Europeanism. To restore party unity, he has
pledged that British self-interest will be the guiding light of his European
policy. But to persuade his European partners that Britain should not be
relegated to the EC's second division, Mr Major must convince them that he
can and will deliver ratification of the Maastricht treaty.
His first hope must be that none of his counterparts in Birmingham have read
his unashamedly nationalistic speech to the Tory conference. It was tailored
to an audience ready to blame Brussels and Bonn for everything from the
economic recession to the weather. Reminding his supporters of the Second
World War, Mr Major said henceforth the national interest would come first,
second and third in all dealings with Europe.
But that was last week. His message today will be markedly different. Public
reaffirmation of the government's determination to halt the trend of EC
centralisation will be accompanied by private re-assurance to Chancellor
Helmut Kohl and others that he is determined to ratify Maastricht.
But he will explain that the divisions in his party may mean delaying this
until early next year, allowing him time to chip away at the less committed
Conservative rebels.
Mr Major, who met Mr Kohl last night, will seek to rebuild the Anglo-German
bridges burnt in the immediate aftermath of the sterling crisis. Demands for
radical reform of the ERM have been quietly dropped. The most Britain now
expects are a few technical adjustments to intervention arrangements. He
dare not admit it to his own MPs, but the prime minister hopes sterling can
be put back into the system in the latter half of next year.
Britain's ambitions for the 'clarification' of Maastricht - which will
dominate today's discussions and the more important Edinburgh summit in
eight weeks' time - are less dramatic than rhetoric implies.
From Birmingham, Mr Major wants a declaration of intent that other EC
governments will heed public concern evident in the debate over Maastricht
and bring the Community closer to its citizens. He needs a piece of paper
with which to persuade the Commons that his partners are as serious about
subsidiarity, openness and national identity as he is. It will be left to
Edinburgh to give substance to the broad principles agreed today.
No one in Whitehall doubts there will be wrangling about the institutional
changes that will imply. The smaller states want to preserve the role of the
Commission as a counterbalance to the powers of their larger partners. The
concept of subsidiarity has shown itself to be one easily bent to the
particular interests of different governments - often in mutually
contradictory ways.
But the central political calculation that gives comfort to Mr Major is that
his counterparts must agree by Edinburgh a document which will persuade the
Danish government to resubmit the treaty to its electorate. Such a
declaration will help persuade wavering Conservative MPs to return to the
Maastricht fold. That will not make it easy for Mr Major to ratify. But it
should make it possible.
