FT  16 MAR 92 / UN troops fan out across Croatia
THE commander of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in Yugoslavia
yesterday warned of the perils awaiting his troops as advanced parties
prepared to fan out to the war zones in the now independent republic of
Croatia.
General Satish Nambiar of India told some 340 peacekeepers at a barracks
north of Belgrade: 'We must bear in mind that we face a difficult and very
delicate task of preserving peace.' He was speaking after eight people were
killed on Saturday and more than 20 wounded in fighting between Serbian and
Croatian forces.
Gen Nambiar said he was aware that 'some of you have been rushed to this at
a very short notice. The reason for this was to bring in the force as soon
as possible.'
The UN Security Council has delayed the deployment of the bulk of the 14,000
peacekeepers pending its approval of a scaled-down budget, probably by April
1. The original figure of Dollars 634m (Pounds 360.2m) encountered
opposition from the council.
Mr Fred Eckhart, the UN spokesman, said: 'We have been given the yellow
light, but not the green.' Agreement on a new budget would allow for the
despatch within three weeks of the remaining forces. British officials
yesterday confirmed the 'temporary postponement' of the despatch of some
1,200 British troops until after the UK general election next month.
But the UN peacekeepers on the ground yesterday appeared eager to begin
their mission despite the potential dangers.
Col Robert Meille, the commander of a French infantry battalion, said:
'We're confident of success because our mission is to assure all sides that
peace is the only alternative'. France is sending the largest single
contingent.
Many of the peacekeepers arrived at the weekend. 'We had received a
three-day notice before coming here,' said Col Yuri Levchenko of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, bearing the insignia 'Russia' on his
fatigues. Col Levchenko, a veteran of the Afghan war, is heading a
contingent of several hundred soldiers, the first ever force of UN
peacekeepers from the former Soviet Union. They will be deployed in
Croatia's eastern Slavonia, the scene of some of the worst fighting.
Both Croatia and the Serb-controlled army have welcomed the deployment of UN
peacekeepers, but there have been regular violations of the 10-week old
ceasefire. Gen Nambiar yesterday stressed the importance for the
peacekeepers to be impartial, warning of the 'sensitive situation' in the
field.
The Serb-dominated Yugoslav federal army yesterday handed over the main
border crossing with Greece to the defence forces of the breakaway republic
of Macedonia, Reuter reports from Belgrade.
The Macedonian forces took over the Gevgelija crossing and all other
frontier posts to the east on the Greek border 'in a dignified manner', the
Belgrade-based Tanjug news agency said. The hand-over could deepen a crisis
between Macedonia and Greece, which is blocking European Community
recognition of the southern republic of about 2m Macedonian Slavs and ethnic
Albanians.
Athens has refused to let people identifying themselves as Macedonians cross
the border and accuses the republic of having territorial ambitions on
Greece's northern province of Macedonia. Gevgelija is the main crossing
point to the EC for Greek agricultural produce and other goods.
Mr Jose Cutileiro, the Portuguese ambassador whose country holds the
rotating EC presidency, met in the Macedonian capital of Skopje yesterday
with the republic's foreign minister, Mr Denko Maleski, to discuss the
dispute with Greece.
