FT  08 JAN 92 / Japan pledges to boost US imports
JAPAN yesterday greeted US president George Bush's call for freer access to
Japanese markets with a series of conciliatory announcements promising to
boost imports and support sales efforts by US companies.
The statements, from government and industry, came at the start of Mr Bush's
first official visit to Japan.
The president's agenda includes talks on global and regional issues, but the
overriding item will be the imbalance in bilateral economic ties.
Mr Bush, with one eye on the US recession and his looming election campaign,
will demand substantial concessions at summit meetings today and tomorrow
with Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, Japan's prime minister.
Japan's conciliatory moves came in the form of a package of economic
measures from the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti). The
ministry estimated that import-boosting proposals announced by 23 top
Japanese groups could result in an increase in Japanese imports of Dollars
10.2bn (Pounds 5.6bn) by 1993 compared with 1990. The companies have
promised to increase imports and local procurement for foreign factories by
50 to 100 per cent between 1990 and 1993.
Miti also promised greatly to expand a scheme begun last May in which Japan
gives export credit insurance for projects in developing countries involving
the purchase of US goods. The ministry, which has so far committed Dollars
700m to the scheme, yesterday pledged an extra Dollars 5bn over 'the next
several years'.
Among the president's contingent are Mr Robert Mosbacher, commerce
secretary, and around 20 top US executives. Mr Nicholas Brady, the treasury
secretary, unexpectedly joined the party yesterday, a measure of US concern
about the economic content of the visit.
Mr Brady met Mr Tsutomu Hata, Japanese finance minister. The two are
believed to have discussed the co-ordination of macro-economic policy,
including recent cuts in interest rates and the yen's appreciation against
the dollar to its highest level in three years.
Mr Bush's itinerary included a sightseeing trip to the ancient capital of
Kyoto, the official opening of a US retail store - Toys 'R' Us - and a
meeting with students at which he said he wanted to increase access to
Japanese markets for US goods and services.
Mr Mosbacher was presented with Miti's economic proposals, which included a
restatement of plans announced late last year to provide Japanese importers
with tax credits and other incentives.
However, Mr Noboru Hatakeyama, vice-minister for international affairs, said
there were limits to what the government could do, since Japan operated as a
market economy.
Yesterday's proposals contained no specific mention of the automotive
industry, the sector propelled to the top of Mr Bush's agenda after the
recent spate of redundancies among US carworkers. Officials were still
negotiating last night on US demands for Japan to increase purchases of
American cars and parts.
Japanese carmakers have recently promised to buy more foreign parts and some
companies have said they will announce moves to sell US vehicles in their
dealerships. Nissan announced yesterday it would stock Ford vehicles; Honda,
Mazda and Mitsubishi Motors have similar tie-ups with American companies.
US officials want to ensure that such proposals have a real impact. Nissan's
plan to sell Fords envisages handling just 3,000 vehicles a year. This comes
against a background which saw the US import 1.58m Japanese-made cars in the
first 11 months of 1991, compared with only 28,000 sold to Japan.
Chrysler chief attacks Japan, Page 4
Editorial Comment, Page 18
