FT  31 JUL 92 / The Property Market: Sea-change on the Danube - Vienna's
city centre proposals
The Donau-City could be Austria's answer to Canary Wharf. The 3.85m sq ft
project on the sparsely populated east bank of the Danube is destined to
become Vienna's second city centre. The scheme will cost AS15bn (Pounds
750,000m), making it one of the most ambitious in Viennese history.
The project is to be developed by WED (the Vienna development company for
the Danube area), a consortium owned by eight of Vienna's leading banks, two
insurance companies and Nomura Securities, the Japanese broker. The group
was formed last year to exploit the land which became available when the
city abandoned plans to hold a World Expo on the site in 1995.
The project is supported by the city authorities, which have a small stake
in the project. The authorities are anxious to bring business back to the
long-neglected banks of the Danube and to rebalance the development of the
city. 'Both halves of the city to the left and to the right of the Danube
must be developed equally and simultaneously,' said Mr Hannes Swoboda, city
counsellor for urban planning.
The ambitious scheme testifies to Vienna's belief that it is reclaiming its
historically important role in the heart of Europe. 'If Vienna accepts the
challenge, Donau-City could become the symbol of Austria's new regional and
international role,' says WED.
The developers play down comparisons with La Defense in France or Canary
Wharf in London, stressing that Donau-City will be a well-balanced mix of
commercial and residential space. Indeed the developers dislike comparisons
with any other schemes, claiming, somewhat improbably, that Donau-City is
developed around 'radically new urban concepts'.
'It will not be a sleepy, satellite town but a lively mixture of offices and
business,' WED declares. It will not be a city that buries its inhabitants
under concrete and traffic but a city that lets its inhabitants breathe.
The promise of 'inspirational' architecture arouses some scepticism among
local critics. And the artists' impressions of slab-like blocks, sometimes
elevated on stilts, is vaguely reminiscent of post-war architecture in the
UK.
But the scheme, which is set beside a park close to the United Nations
complex, will have a pleasant setting and is only a seven minute journey by
underground from the city centre. WED's heavy infrastructure costs - in
particular arising from the need to rebuild a motorway nearby - will force
it to charge some of the most expensive rents in Vienna.
Phase 1 - work on the motorway - is due to start towards the end of the
year. The buildings in the first phase will be completed at the end of 1996
but construction could be delayed - or even postponed - if the developers
fail to attract tenants before building starts. Persauding tenants to move
to these buildings could be difficult, since the buildings' location is
relatively isolated.
The uncertainty surrounding the viability of Donau-City underlines the
nervousness of a property market that is going through a period of upheaval.
Demand has increased in the past couple of years as international groups
such as IBM and Hewlett Packard, both computer companies, have chosen Vienna
for their east European regional headquarters.
A feasibility study by Jones Lang Wootton, the surveyors, and Nomura
Research, found that in terms of establishing regional headquarters for
eastern Europe, Vienna was ranked second behind Berlin. The city is highly
rated for its political and economic stability and for its quality of life
and environmental factors.
WED also believes that Vienna could emerge as a centre for environmental and
energy planning, to address serious problems in the former eastern bloc. The
city is a popular choice for international bodies; it is home to several
United Nations organisations, the International Atomic Energy Authority and
Opec.
But concern is mounting among investors that with the rising tide of
construction activity in Vienna - fuelled by rapid increases in rents over
the past five years, relaxation of restrictive landlord and tenant laws, and
the political changes in eastern Europe - there will be an oversupply of
office space in a city that traditionally has been ignored by developers.
More than 20 new schemes are under construction or in the pipeline. If these
are completed vacancy rates could increase from 1-3 per cent at present to 8
per cent within five years, says Jones Lang Wootton. Many developments,
though, may fall by the wayside. 'Scare stories of oversupply are
unrealistic because a lot of projects will not be built,' says Mr Martin
Lenikus of Lenikus Consulting, a local agent.
Nonetheless, some critics still believe that the construction of Donau-City
would result in a glut of space. For that reason, critics say the scheme may
yet be grounded.
But Mr Michael Hodges, a partner of Jones Lang Wootton which has carried out
work on the project's viability, is cautiously positive. 'While the scheme
will undoubtedly prove a further test to the resilience of the office
market, it will nevertheless provide Vienna with a new and important
milestone as an office centre,' he says.
