FT  07 MAR 92 / World Stock Markets: Spanish equities await further cut in
interest rates - The peseta's strength in the ERM suggests that investors
will not be disappointed
INVESTORS IN Spanish equities have enjoyed a gentle climb in values so far
this year, but any further progress is widely seen to be conditional on a
continued decline in interest rates.
The Madrid stock market, generally agreed to be undervalued, convincingly
broke through the 260 level 10 days ago. This was achieved on the back of a
cut of 25 basis points on February 25 that brought the Bank of Spain's
intervention rate down to the 12.40 per cent. Wall Street's record-breaking
advance also helped.
Having arrived at this rarefied plane, the index subsequently moved up to
266 before profit-taking eased it back slightly to close at 261.97
yesterday, a rise of 6.3 per cent so far this year, in line with the FT-A
Europe index.
There is a general consensus among market watchers that the timing and the
extent of a new rally will be dependent chiefly on whatever intervention
cuts the Bank of Spain may decide.
'Barring a stock market collapse in New York, the market is going to be
moved by interest rates - by those in Europe and by those in Spain,' says Mr
Salvador Garcia Atance, chairman of Asesores Bursatiles.
Mr Paul Farrow, head of research at the brokers FG Inversiones Bursatiles
believes that a fall in interest rates will mean a general, across the
board, revaluation of equities.
Predicting the next cut by the Bank of Spain involves the analysis of two
sets of data at this point. One concerns the usual domestic indicators, and
especially inflation and wage increase figures, and the other has to do with
the peseta's strength and the pound's weakness in the European Monetary
System's exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
There is not much in the domestic indicators that would recommend a cut in
interest rates in the immediate future. Inflationary pressures, particularly
underlying inflation, remain strong and an ill-tempered bout of labour
disputes in pursuit of sharp salary increases has preceded the annual wage
negotiations which will begin later this month.
A glance at the ERM, where the peseta represents a high ceiling and the
pound a low floor, nevertheless suggests that the Bank of Spain might be
forced to loosen its tight monetary policy for reasons which have nothing to
do with domestic economic considerations and everything to do with with
European good neighbourliness.
The difference between the pound and the peseta, which has recently widened
to 6.22 per cent and thus stretched the ERM band close to snapping point,
means that one or the other currency has to move. The Bank of England cannot
reasonably be expected to raise its rates ahead of the general election and
so the Bank of Spain may be forced to oblige by bringing the peseta down.
February's cut in the intervention rate was 10 basis points greater than
most analysts had expected and it was dictated by the pound's weakness. The
economy minister, Mr Carlos Solachaga, said at the time that the move sought
a 'more balanced situation' in the ERM and the current speculation is that
the minister could be repeating those very same words before the summer.
'Cuts are going to depend on the Germans and on the British,' says Mr Garcia
Atance of Asesores Bursatiles. 'We think it is going to be very difficult
for the rates not to ease by 10-15 basis points, perhaps by 25, over the
next two to three months.'
Confidence is on line because this long-term view is widely shared. 'Taking
a six-month view we are relatively positive,' says FG's Mr Farrow.
Market watchers are biding their time ahead of the next surge. In fact
Iberagentes, the Madrid broking house linked to Credit Lyonnais, is
recommending short-term selling. 'We had forecast a 260-265 index band for
the first quarter and now we think that it has peaked for the time being,'
says the brokers' deputy general manager, Mr Alvaro Villacieros.
Mr Stephen Hughes, the Spanish market analyst for Nikko Europe in London,
sees a period of consolidation before the the next resistance level of 270
is tackled and believes that, in the longer term, a rise to 285 is
achievable.
Societe Generale's broking arm in Spain is recommending utilities and
defensive stocks. 'Nothing much is likely to happen right now,' says Mr
Francesc Guardans, the company's chief executive.
