FT  08 JUN 92 / People: Shell Shock
SHELL TRANSPORT AND TRADING has yet to put a woman on its board but it has
demonstrated that it is more imaginative than many British multinationals by
appointing its first academic. Professor Bob O'Neill, Chichele professor of
the history of war at Oxford, has joined Shell as a non-executive director.
Until now the non-executive members on Shell's board have consisted of
retired senior civil servants, ex-diplomats and well-connected businessmen.
But the company has tended to pick its non-executive directors for their
broad strategic vision rather than their specialised expertise, so the
choice of a 55-year-old Australian military historian and veteran of the
Vietnam war is not as big a break with tradition as it might at first seem.
Shell Transport, the British end of the Royal Dutch Shell group, is one of
the world's most successful oil companies and analysts often ascribe this
success to its ability to think very long term about where its business is
going. Whereas other oil multinationals tend to be buffeted by short term
events, Shell puts a lot of effort into scenario planning exercises. Its
board of directors tend to be tapped for their geopolitical skills rather
than their abilities to explain the latest change in accounting standards.
Given this background, Professor O'Neill's expertise will come in handy. A
Rhodes scholar, he served in the Australian army between 1955 and 1968, has
been the official Australian historian for the Korean war, and headed
Australia's strategic and defence studies centre for a decade until 1982.
He then directed the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London
for five years and since 1987 has been based in Oxford where he is a fellow
of All Souls.
Professor O'Neill is the second non-executive appointment to the Shell board
in recent months. Last November, Sir Antony Acland, 62, former head of the
diplomatic service and ambassador to Washington, was appointed. They replace
Edmund Dell, a former Labour secretary of state for trade, and Sir Michael
Palliser, a former head of the diplomatic service, who have retired on
reaching 70.
