FT  18 JUN 92 / Technology: Wellcome's cures for despair - In the run-up to
the drug company's share offer, FT writers look at its Aids and herpes
treatments
REMEMBER herpes? In the early 1980s a herpes epidemic, carried on a tide of
sexual promiscuity, appeared to be sweeping through the west. Then along
came Aids. Herpes sank from public view.
The disease is still incurable and its incidence is still growing. Up to 40
per cent of US citizens have recurrent cold sores caused by the herpes
virus. As for genital herpes, an estimated 20m US citizens are infected.
Paradoxically, herpes has become even more significant since the discovery
of HIV. Clinicians believe that individuals with lesions caused by herpes
transmit the HIV virus more easily. Effective treatment of herpes may
therefore help prevent the spread of HIV. In addition, Aids patients become
highly vulnerable to viruses of the herpes family, which can prove fatal.
Analysts at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the UK brokers, estimate that the world
market for anti-herpes drugs increased from Dollars 35m (Pounds 19.2m) in
1981 to Dollars 1bn last year. Wellcome, the leading anti-viral drug
company, has about 70 per cent of this market. Its best-selling drug is
Zovirax, which last year generated sales of Pounds 471m.
Zovirax is a guanine nucleoside analogue which is inert and non-toxic to
normal cells. However, when the drug enters a cell containing the herpes
virus it reacts with an enzyme created by the virus to become a
triphosphate. Once converted, the triphosphate interacts with the virus' DNA
structure and stops the virus replicating.
The mechanism is similar to the effect of AZT on HIV. Zovirax cannot
eliminate the herpes but by preventing the virus multiplying it reduces the
effects and length of herpes attacks.
Since the drug was first licensed in 1981, Zovirax has been used to prevent
the herpes recurring. A recent five-year study demonstrated that patients
with recurrent genital herpes treated with Zovirax were seven times less
likely to have another attack.
The drug has also been licensed for herpes-related diseases. One is
cytomegalovirus (CMV); another is varicella zoster which causes chicken-pox
and shingles.
Much of the sales growth of Zovirax is likely to come from the treatment of
shingles, which often affects the elderly. About four people per 1,000 over
65 years old contract shingles. Zovirax only received a US licence for
shingles in 1991 so Wellcome has just started to exploit the market.
However, because the zoster virus is less susceptible to Zovirax than herpes
itself, the dosing needs to be at least four times greater. BZW estimates
sales for shingles alone will be worth Pounds 100m over the next two years.
The medicine is also being used for transplant patients infected with CMV or
shingles. About 31,400 people received transplants in the US last year and
the number is growing by between 12 and 15 per cent a year.
Transplant patients are given immunosuppressants to prevent their immune
systems rejecting the organ. But an additional effect is to make the
patients highly vulnerable to herpes-related diseases. Myron Levin of the
University of Colorado estimates about 40 per cent of bone marrow patients
have zoster and about 75 per cent CMV. Both diseases are capable of killing
the patients.
Hoare Govett, the UK brokers, estimates that increasing use of Zovirax for
herpes, transplant and Aids patients will allow sales to increase from
Pounds 471m last year to Pounds 875m by 1994.
Competition to Zovirax at present is limited. Any new drugs will need to
demonstrate they are safer, more effective, or more powerful and so need
less frequent doses.
SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American group, is developing two compounds,
Famcyclovir and Penciclovir. Both are better absorbed than Zovirax and work
longer.
Meanwhile, Wellcome is developing two compounds, known as 256U87 and 882U87.
At a recent conference in Berlin on herpes, clinicians were told that 256
was absorbed into the body three to four times more readily than Zovirax,
the existing treatment. The drug is in late clinical trials.
Meanwhile, 882 has been shown to be highly effective against CMV. The drug
is in earlier clinical trials to determine the right dosing.
Wellcome hopes to have both 256 and 882 on the market during the mid-1990s.
In the meantime, human behaviour being what it is, demand for its viral
products will continue to increase unabated.
