FT  11 JAN 92 / Property: French villas to rent
the kind passed on roads zigzagging up hillsides, or even beside the water
on the Cote d'Azur - may be briefly available to a wider public.
Owners of these lush properties in the south of France could be willing to
let them for holiday use - at a price. An agency specialising in this rental
market says that in high season such properties fetch from Pounds 2,000 to
Pounds 90,000 a month.
The agency, Riviera Retreats, at Mougins, is run by an English former naval
officer, Richard Wolf, and his wife. It represents Argosy Pollet, based in
Guernsey, a company which has been involved in letting on the Cote d'Azur
for 10 years.
A great variety of properties is on its books. In Cannes a villa sleeping 12
(and staff), a few minutes from the fashionable Croisette, rents for Pounds
26,000 in August.
A chateau at Montauroux, set in 12 acres, carries a top rental of Pounds
21,500 a month; an old mill at Grimaud lets for Pounds 10,000. At
Villefranche, near the water, a villa with painted ceilings, chandeliers,
marble floors, gardens, pool and private quay, commands a peak-month sum of
Pounds 90,000
Contrast this with a one-bedroom apartment in Cannes, with sea views, shared
gardens, pool and tennis court, at Pounds 3,500.
A London couple, who let their south of France property for July and August
each year, says the rent covers their costs. But the agency warns that sums
obtained in June and September are 30 per cent less - and owners must expect
much lower figures in the winter period - a property earning Pounds 7,000 a
month in summer may let for only Pounds 1,500 a month in winter. If a villa
is taken for six months in the low season, the rent is about a quarter of
the full summer price, or less.
The value of properties on Wolf's list ranges between Pounds 150,000 to many
millions of pounds; he says there is no clear relationship between value and
rental achieved. The state of equipment in a property, and its decoration,
count for much in letting.
All properties on the agency's list have swimming pools unless otherwise
stated.
Riviera Retreats (telephone number in France: 93 64 86 40) has 120 villas
and apartments on its letting list, nearly 100 managed on a year-round
basis.
