FT  27 MAR 92 / Libya tells court it is being blackmailed: Tripoli asks
International Court to restrain US, Britain and France from using force
LIBYA WENT to the International Court of Justice yesterday seeking an
emergency injunction to restrain the US and Britain from using force or
imposing sanctions in their campaign to get Tripoli to surrender two Libyans
alleged to have been involved in the Lockerbie bombing.
In its application, Libya requested that the US and Britain be told to stop
'taking any action against Libya calculated to coerce or compel Libya to
surrender the accused individuals to any jurisdiction outside of Libya.'
Libya saw 'no reason why it should give into this illegal and arbitrary
blackmail,' Mr Mohammed Al-Fatouri, Libya's ambassador to Brussels, said.
Addressing the court's 16 judges in the main chamber of the Peace Palace,
the court's seat in The Hague, Mr Al-Fatouri drew attention to what he said
were the 'progressively more explicit threats' from the US and Britain.'
He recalled in court that Libya had been the target of US air raids in 1986,
when the US had linked Libya to the bombing of a Berlin disco frequented by
US servicemen.
Professor Ian Brownlie, an Oxford law don speaking on behalf of Libya,
described the refusal by high-ranking officials such as US President George
Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle to rule out the use of force, coupled
with their demands for extradition of the two Libyans, as a 'pattern of
ultimatums not seen for some decades'.
Britain said the case was an attempt by Libya to ward off UN Security
Council-mandated sanctions. Mr Frank Berman, a Foreign Office legal adviser,
told the court that the case was 'directed at interfering with the function
and prerogatives of the Security Council under the United Nations charter'.
Professor Rosalind Higgins, counsel for the UK, said Libya's request for
provisional measures were too 'vague, imprecise and unsuitable' to be
ordered by the World Court.
Mr Alan Rodger, solicitor general for Scotland, said Libya's legal reasoning
was fundamentally flawed. 'Libya will say anything, however inconsistent, to
postpone the day that it may have to accept responsibility for its actions.'
The hearings are expected to continue today but it is likely to take at
least several weeks before the court rules on Libya's request for
'provisional measures'.
The US, Britain and France have already said that they will not wait for the
verdict before putting a sanctions resolution before the Security Council.
Mr Edwin Williamson, a legal adviser to the US State Department who will
address the court later in the proceedings, said yesterday, 'This (court)
action in no way inhibits what the Security Council is doing.'
Britain and the US wish to put the two men on trial for the 1988 bombing of
Pan Am flight 103 above the Scottish town of Lockerbie in which 270 people
died.
