FT  22 FEB 92 / Gardening: If it's begonias you want . . . - A glasshouse
which has few rivals in Britain for size and none for beauty
ON THE rebound from Edinburgh's Botanical Gardens, I have been cooling-off
in Glasgow's. This year, their Kelvinside site will be celebrating its 150th
anniversary. Several of the main glasshouses are being rebuilt but there is
plenty to enjoy meanwhile, although they do not have the heavenly quality of
their bigger neighbour.
The best site of all began as an instructive white elephant. When the
gardens opened in 1842, people were sure of entry only if they belonged to
the right social class. Suitable subscribers paid a guinea for family
membership but the plebs were let in only on Saturdays, and if they could
pay a shilling each. On a very few days the labouring classes were allowed
in, too, paying one penny each for the privilege. Everybody knew their place
until the directors over-reached themselves in the notorious affair of The
Glasshouse.
The offending extravagance still stands there: a magnificent, double-dome
Victorian glass-work which covers more than 23,000 sq ft if you add in its
various corridors. It has few rivals in Britain for size and, to my eye, it
has none for beauty; this masterful building is bold, simple and elegant.
It began life privately in the gardens of a well-known entrepreneur and
engineer, John Kibble, at Loch Long. He agreed a long lease with the Glasgow
Botanicals under which he would continue to use his glasshouse for private
functions and the directors would pay him rent. But they found the lease
hard to fulfil (I cannot help wondering if matters might have been easier if
the lower classes had been given more opportunities to tender their pennies,
and if tradesmen and the like had been included freely as subscribers).
Anyway, the city corporation soon had to bail them out. But once you enlist
friendly partners, you know what happens. Six years later, the loans and the
expenses sank the directors altogether. The city bought them out in a deal
which it cannot have regretted.
The Kibble palace might have sunk its first lessees but it remains in
excellent shape and repays a careful walk. Inside, the flora from various
continents is arranged in an ingenious progression while sculpted figures of
Victorian marble greet you as you stroll round. In the forecourt you can
find Eve, Cain and such companions as an Oriental slave. Among the shrubs, a
modest Miss New Zealand raises a strategically-placed knee and looks out
beside the camellias to a circular bed of huge tree ferns under the main
dome.
Individually, the geographical plantings have some fine old specimens,
especially some tree-like jasmine mesnyi and its butter-yellow flowers.
However, I did feel that more could be made of flora from regions such as
Australia and the Canaries. It would be fun to re-plant the Kibble palace
during this anniversary year.
Outdoors, February is not the season for Glasgow's particular features, a
huge double herbaceous border and a Chronological Bed where plants are
arranged by the years of their discovery. On the way to the Gents is a fine
show of white-flowered osmaronia but, early in spring, the main thrust of
the gardens lies under yet more glass up the hill.
When all the houses here are open again, we will see the full involvement of
Glasgow's botanists in anything from Papuan wildflowers to spice plants and
tropical trees. I visited with a sharp eye for ideas for a modern
conservatory. Here, two particular sections stood out. One was a cheerful
mass of poinsettias, azaleas, the scented hyacinths which greenhouses
segregate too often in pots, unusual salvias, and the sweet-scented, early
white rhododendron fragrantissimum.
On the outer sides, there were flowers all over two easy types of abutilon -
the dark-flowered Master Hugh and yellow Golden Fleece. In a nearby room,
the Powder Puff tree from Brazil would be more of a challenge for amateur
gardeners. At Glasgow this tall tree is covered in buds, like tight little
pin-cushions, and brilliant scarlet puffs of flower. Calliandra
inaequilatera is not an easy plant for the rest of us.
Begonias are another matter, though. If you want to see what the family
includes, Glasgow is the place to go and February a good moment in which to
strike. Glasgow holds the National Collection and has obtained plants from
the best hybridists and collectors, making this section the botanical high
spot of the greenhouses.
If you know only the huge double begonias which parks plant in circular
beds, the Glasgow display will open your eyes. One house brings together a
huge mass of multi-coloured leaves and pink and pinkish-white small flowers
which characterise the begonia in its natural habitats from Columbia to the
Himalayas, Brazil to the Red Sea. I was lost happily in a jungle of
potential house-plants, none of which would be difficult in damp, moderate
heat.
Hybrids like Universe have masses of fine white flowers above big mottled
leaves, like the ears of an elephant. I liked the idea of one called Tiger
Paws in a small drawing-room. Its green leaves are mottled with tiger
footprints in brown and white.
Nowadays, this good garden welcomes all comers, even those on the rebound
from Edinburgh. The labouring classes are guaranteed entry, and not just
because there are fewer jobs than ever for people in the city. There is only
one class of absentee. As in Edinburgh, so in Glasgow you would be
hard-pressed to find a serious patch of weeds. It might be cold in Scotland
but there are camellias already this year - and none of the signs of couch
grass which are bothering me even now in one of my borders.
