FT  25 SEP 92 / Parliament Debates the Economy: Rebels scratch open old
wounds
THE GOVERNMENT convincingly won the division at the end of the debate on its
economic strategy last night in the Commons, although the split in the Tory
party over Europe was apparent from the opening speech.
Only a handful of backbenchers defied the government whips by abstaining as
the motion expressing support for the government's policy passed by 322 to
296, a majority of 26.
A stream of Euro-sceptic critics on the government benches, such as Sir
Teddy Taylor and Mr William Cash, queued up to speak in the debate, but
abstained in the division rather than voting against the government.
From the start of the debate, Mr John Major faced pressure from both wings
of the party. Euro-sceptic MPs warned against a return to a system of
managed exchange rates. But Sir Edward Heath, the former Tory prime
minister, urged that the UK should not again be left on the sidelines if
Germany, France and the three Benelux countries moved quickly to a single
currency.
The trickiest intervention in the prime minister's speech among several from
Euro-sceptics came from Mr Nicholas Budgen, for long an opponent of fixed
exchange rates.
He pointed out that MPs had spent a long time discussing both the details
and the basis of the exchange rate mechanism, and asked Mr Major what new
details had caught him out unexpectedly, and what would have to happen
before he took sterling back into such a mechanism.
But there was also a call - swiftly rebuffed - from Mr Michael Spicer, a
former minister and a leading Euro-sceptic, for Mr Major to give his MPs a
free vote on the bill to ratify the Maastricht bill when it returns to the
Commons.
Sir Edward emphasised that there were many points of Mr Major's speech with
which he agreed, including his rejection of a referendum, but warned that
the review of what had occurred should go wider than the events of the past
week.
The government benches were crowded for the opening of the debate, but the
strength of feeling in the party was perhaps reflected in the fact that
Euro-sceptics as senior as Mr Kenneth Baker, the former home secretary,
remained in their places waiting to speak long after many of their
colleagues had left the debate.
Mr Baker said he had opposed Britain's entry into the ERM while Lady
Thatcher was prime minister, and hoped Mr Major would not be 'too vigorous'
in pursuing his search for a replacement for a system the advantages of
which had been exaggerated.
He turned his fire on Treasury officials, suggesting that Sir Terry Burns,
permanent secretary to the Treasury, should also be in the pillory alongside
the prime minister and the chancellor.
Commenting that the mandarins in the Treasury were held in high esteem, 'not
least by themselves', he said that their advice had been 'not marginally
wrong, but comprehensively wrong'.
Mr John Biffen, a former cabinet minister on the Euro-sceptic side of the
argument, predicted that as the unified Germany looked to exert economic
influence on Eastern Europe, the economic conditions envisaged in the
Maastricht treaty would become increasingly irrelevant.
