FT  10 AUG 92 / Arts: London's self-esteem 'rediscovered' - Exhibitions
THE AUTHORS of a recent report draw a disturbing picture of London as a
capital in decline. Despite its title, London: World City, they remark:
'Somewhere along the line, London appears to have lost . . . a sense of its
worth.' If this is so, the missing self-esteem can be rediscovered in the
German city of Essen, where the former residence of the Krupp dynasty, Villa
Hugel, plays host to the exhibition 'Metropole London 1800-1840'.
It is a sumptuous show with more than 500 exhibits from 100 public and
private collections, mainly British. It is not just the wealth and breadth
of the display which impress. It has also been put together with gusto.
This is not the first occasion that the Villa Hugel has proved to be an
ideal venue for such an ambitious show. The memorable evocation of 'Baroque
in Dresden', mounted in 1986, was followed by exhibitions on Prague and St
Petersburg. These portraits of cities focused on epochs of out-standing
cultural achievement.
Villa Hugel, situated in rambling parkland high over the river Ruhr, is the
mildly tasteless extravagance of a steel-magnate craving aristocratic
status, the product of German industrial might at its height. But the
neo-baroque pomposity and the sheer scale of its rooms lend period character
to a jumble of artefacts chosen to represent both the best and the worst
aspects of a city's most creative epoch.
As on the previous occasions, the Krupp-initiated Kulturstiftung Ruhr has
organised the London exhibition as part of its investment in cultural
activities.
And once again, the foundation has managed to persuade lenders to part with
the gems of their collections.
Unlike the golden ages of cities like Dresden and St. Petersburg, which
flourished and were then superseded, the impetus behind the rise of the
metropolitan London between 1800 and 1840 was economic vigour - the rapid
development of trade, commerce and industry - which in turn sparked off
advances in science and reactions in art.
The past frequently serves to illustrate the present. The exhibition begins
and ends with the entry into a new era, whose legacy is, at present,
undergoing rejuvenation with as yet uncertain success.
There are, on the one hand, the new docks in all their glory, recorded in
coloured aquatints, maps and construction drawings. Trading ships, decked in
flags, proudly sail into St Katherine's Dock on the opening day, watched by
a festive crowd. The first railway coaches, on the other hand, look very
much like an experiment, which did not stop the city planners from digging
vast trenches across town ready for the new London &amp; Birmingham Railway.
In between the dawn of the overseas trade and the outbreak of the railway
mania, the exhibition paints a picture of the city throbbing with activity:
from the elated Roman fantasies of John Soane, architect of the Bank of
England, to the vagaries of daily life as told by the scurrilous
caricaturists.
It is also a time of inventions both practical (if untried, such as gas
lighting) and exclusive (such as pottery from Wedgwood and others).
Painting, on display in the magnificent grand room, leaves its aristocratic
origins behind and turns to the taste of a new breed of connoisseurs, such
as the Barings, the powerful bankers memorably portrayed by Thomas Lawrence.
There is also the unsuccessful attempt by David Wilkie and Benjamin Robert
Haydon to elevate contemporary subject matter to grand historic pieces, as
well as the animal sentimentality of Landseer. Other sections cover literary
and scientific developments.
London certainly had 'a sense of its worth' in these years - a sense, it
seems, which extended throughout all walks of life.
A sumptuous catalogue in English has been published by Yale. It is London -
World City 1800-1840, edited by Celina Fox, containing 624 pages and selling
at Pounds 45.
Villa Hugel, Essen, daily until 8 November.
