FT  25 JUL 92 / Grim statistics mask advances: Aids has already claimed a
million lives, but drug companies are making progress towards a vaccine
The thousand journalists covering the international Aids conference in
Amsterdam this week found it far easier to write scare stories than to
report scientific breakthroughs.
One obsession was a mysterious new microbe, possibly responsible for several
dozen cases in which patients had symptoms of Aids but no trace of HIV, the
virus that normally causes the disease.
On the global level, there were statistics galore to show how 'small
discrete epidemics have coalesced into a worldwide pandemic sparing no
region and virtually no country', as Dr Michael Merson, director of the
World Health Organisation's Aids programme, put it. Between 10m and 12m
adults and 1m children are infected, 80 per cent of them in developing
countries; 2m people have developed Aids and more than 1m have died.
Projections for the year 2000 range from 30m to 120m people with HIV.
African delegates described how Aids - spread mainly through heterosexual
intercourse - was starting to destroy the social fabric of their countries.
Aids patients take up more than half the beds of urban hospitals in
countries such as Zaire and Zambia.
The global cost of Aids care, research and prevention was about Dollars 10bn
(Pounds 5.24bn) last year, the Harvard School of Public Health estimates.
The US alone has already spent Dollars 10bn looking after people with HIV in
the 10 years since Aids was first recognised as a disease.
The good news in Amsterdam was too subtle to make headlines. None of the
several thousand doctors and scientists at the conference reported anything
that even the most excitable journalist could call a big breakthrough. Even
so, the pharmaceutical industry is making progress in developing drugs and
vaccines. Scientists are uncovering the bizarre biological processes
underlying HIV infection and disease.
Within the next year or so, new drugs such as Glaxo's 3TC and Bristol-Myers
Squibb's d4T are likely to begin large-scale clinical trials. Although they
work in a similar way to Wellcome's AZT, which has had a virtual monopoly of
the anti-HIV market since it was rushed into production in 1987, they may
have fewer side effects and/or stronger anti-viral activity than AZT.
The latest evidence shows that a 'cocktail' of two or more anti-HIV drugs
works better than any single medicine on its own. Combination therapy will
multiply the benefits of new drugs, but unfortunately not to the extent of
curing patients.
A dozen candidate vaccines are in the first phase of clinical trials. None
of the uninfected volunteers has suffered any adverse reaction - and their
immune systems have developed some of the antibodies required to fight HIV.
Vaccine manufacturers and government health bodies in developing and
developed countries are now confident enough to be preparing for large-scale
trials, each involving several thousand people, which could start in
1994-95.
There will be formidable ethical problems: how, for example, to obtain
informed consent from a partly illiterate group to take part in a trial in
which half receive a 'placebo' dummy jab and the other half a potentially
risky experimental vaccine. Dr Stephen Lwanga, director-general of the
Uganda Aids Commission, said his country would a large-scale trial, on
certain conditions. 'I'm sure we will come to an amicable understanding on
who bears the liability if things go wrong  - and who derives the profits if
they go right,' he commented.
Looking further ahead, scientists at the conference reported remarkable
progress in understanding how the human immune system first defends itself
against HIV and then, after a few years, begins to succumb to the virus.
This has been balanced by new evidence of how HIV itself changes character
in a patient over time by genetic mutation. Together these two avenues of
research will lead eventually to new ideas for treating HIV.
Now that Aids is in its second decade, scientists are paying attention to
the minority of people with HIV who are still healthy more than 10 years
after infection. Researchers at the University of California, San Francisco,
have discovered that a type of white blood cell called CD8 keeps HIV under
control by suppressing the virus in infected cells.
In most people the CD8 cells lose their activity after a few years. Then the
CD4 cells - the immune cells normally studied to define the progress of Aids
 -disappear and symptoms appear. The UCSF researchers are working to develop
treatments based on CD8 cells.
The virus itself mutates more rapidly than any other microbe. Not only are
there countless different strains, but within each individual person HIV
changes character as the disease progresses. In the early years of infection
the rate of mutation is relatively low. Later, after the patient's immune
defences have collapsed, HIV can quickly change into more virulent forms.
These observations explain why patients become resistant to anti-HIV drugs
more quickly in the final stages of the disease. Several experimental drugs
have recently been abandoned because the virus quickly became resistant to
them.
Researchers are now identifying the precise genetic changes responsible for
drug resistance. They will then be able to predict which drug combinations
are best able to outwit HIV's genetic variability. This could be used to
delay the onset of resistance or even deliberately create resistance in
order to weaken the virus. (New evidence suggests that some mutations which
make HIV resistant to drugs also make it less virulent.)
The pharmaceutical industry remains committed to converting the advances in
basic science into better HIV drugs and vaccines. Drug companies were very
visible at the conference, with marketing staff in the vast exhibition hall
and researchers in the scientific sessions. The industry spends several
hundred million dollars a year on Aids R&amp;D. Compared to the likely
commercial return from the products, HIV probably gets a disproportionate
share of pharmaceutical research funds, because the companies' scientific
credibility would be at stake if they pulled out of such a fast-moving and
medically important field.
They got no thanks from the hundreds of Aids activists who were officially
accredited to the conference. Act-Up, the most vocal group, targeted several
companies for noisy 'die-in' demonstrations, accusing them of making
excessive profits from overpriced Aids drugs.
Professor Anthony Pinching of St Bartholomew's Hospital in London voiced the
concern of many specialists that the activists would go too far. 'The
industry makes a classic pantomime villain but what they fail to understand
is that its commitment and goodwill is jeopardised by their ridiculous
abuse,' he said. 'The executives will eventually decide that Aids is too hot
politically and they'll pull the plug.'
If the drug companies cut back on research it would be a scare story for the
millions of people who are dependent upon them to come up with a cure.
