FT  20 AUG 92 / Arts: Byrnam Wood - London Promenade Concert
THE archaic spelling of David Sawer's Byrnam Wood, the latest of this
season's Prom commissions, must be the composer's choice. The point of it is
somewhat obscure - like the point of the piece itself, though on Tuesday
Mark Wigglesworth took the BBC Symphony through it with clean assurance.
Macbeth did indeed provide the inspiration. Quite palpably, 'Birnam wood'
approached Dunsinane in an aqueous mist from which military fanfares soon
emerged, and a menacing thrust; then there was a sort of trio section,
reflective and wanly lyrical (presumably Macbeth's 'I 'gin to be a-weary of
the sun, / And wish the estate o' the world were now undone'). The
fanfare-motifs returned in sharper focus before a numb, discouraged coda.
Though Sawer insists that his 20-minutes-odd piece is not primarily
pictorial or illustrative, it is hard to hear it in any other way. Without
the literary-theatrical clue, we'd have had too little to hang on to. Yes,
there is plenty of fluent, lucid orchestral invention, proving the
composer's keen ear - but it proceeds through calculated harmonic blocks
which are really too transparent, each too patiently explored to keep much
sense of a forward impetus. There are a lot of spidery repeated-figures that
echo Minimalist manners, here more 'evocative' than constructive.
Sawer's score could serve as cogent underpinning for a visible dramatic
burden, but on its own it seemed to accumulate too little force to compel
our attention all the way. However, Wigglesworth judged its sober tempo to a
nicety - a sense of timeless processional gravity maintained at a decent
clip, a strong profile fixed for the long series of disconsolate climaxes. I
admired that very much, and no less his fervent but unhurried exposition of
Shostakovich's Symphony no 13 - the 'Babi Yar' one, on Yevtushenko texts
that used to be politically 'controversial'. The solo bass-baritone was John
Tomlinson, alight with controlled passion and keenly supported by male
voices from the London Philharmonic Choir and the Southwark Festival Chorus.
This angry Thirteenth may not be a 'symphony' in any respectable sense, but
with such performers it had the force of a musico-dramatic document.
