FT  18 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: Tough Italian plan for budget
savings
THE Italian government yesterday announced cost-cutting and revenue-raising
measures totalling L93,000bn (Pounds 41.2bn) in a 1993 budget package
designed to tackle the country's budget deficit. However, the scale of the
savings disappointed some economists, who had been calling for measures
worth up to L120,000bn.
The package envisages L43,000bn in spending cuts and L42,000bn in
revenue-raising measures, mainly from new taxes and charges. A further
L7,000bn is expected in privatisation proceeds. The government plans to
freeze spending next year at 1992 levels.
In a stern warning to potential opponents, Prof Giuliano Amato, the prime
minister, stressed that the credibility of the government and the lira were
linked to his budget plans. 'We must restore to Italians our own
self-confidence and, for those watching from abroad, confidence in our
country and currency,' he said.
The bulk of the savings will come from cuts in Italy's generous state
pensions system.
Under the latest scheme, the pensionable ages will be raised. Further
savings will come by freezing a 1.8 per cent pensions rise due in November,
and next year's increase in pensions will be linked to the rise in the cost
of living, rather than to salary levels which are normally higher.
Meanwhile, salaries for the 3m public sector employees due to renegotiate
their contracts next year, except for schoolteachers, will be frozen at this
year's levels. There will also be a freeze on public sector hiring.
In an attempt to win the grudging support of union leaders, called in to see
Mr Amato before the cabinet meeting yesterday, the government put forward
measures to curb tax evasion and show that the burden was being spread
fairly.
Tax-dodging, rife among the self-employed, will be countered by introducing
a form of 'minimum tax' to prevent any self-employed individual from
declaring an income lower than that of his employees.
Free medicines and a variety of other public health benefits will be
abolished for those earning over L40m a year, while extra charges are to be
imposed on large cars, boats and aircraft.
Mr Piero Barucci, treasury minister, said the measures, for the first time
in Italy, were focused on cutting spending rather than on raising income. In
the past, ambitious revenue-raising proposals have been diluted in
parliament. 'We responded with vigorous measures to a rigorous situation.
That's my message,' the minister said.
Details of the package prompted some recovery in the lira, the value of
which had declined against that of the D-Mark yesterday. On the stock
market, prices made up part of the ground lost on Wednesday.
The government is to submit new budgetary forecasts for 1993-95 in the next
seven days. Its original figures were criticised in parliament last week as
inadequate.
The predictions, which envisage a fall in the budget deficit to just 4.9 per
cent of gross domestic product by 1995, had already been attacked by
economists as too upbeat. Drawn up soon after Prof Amato's government had
come to office, they showed total public sector debt was expected to fall
marginally to 113.5 per cent of GDP in 1995, having reached a peak of 113.6
per cent in 1994.
Price rises, which declined last month to an annual 5.3 per cent, were
forecast to drop to 3.5 per cent in 1993, 2.5 per cent in 1994, and 2 per
cent in 1995.
