FT  13 FEB 92 / Struggles in the sky: The problems facing BAe
The 2,350 job cuts announced by British Aerospace yesterday have struck at
the heart of the diversified company's traditional military and commercial
aircraft activities. They are unlikely to be the last.
In the face of the decline in defence spending and the slump in the civil
aviation industry, BAe has been forced to speed up the restructuring of its
aircraft operations during the past 18 months. The latest cuts are part of a
long restructuring process which has seen more than 10,000 people leave the
company over the past two years.
The company has already warned that unless it wins the Ministry of Defence
order for new Asraam advanced air combat missiles this year it will be
forced to cut more jobs. Even more could follow if the company fails to
clinch quickly a new Saudi Arabian order for Tornado and Hawk aircraft.
BAe's commercial aircraft operations - with the possible exception of its 20
per cent stake in the European Airbus programme - could also be at risk if
it is unable to finalise the second phase of the Al Yamamah arms contract
with Saudi Arabia in the next few months.
'Without the second Al Yamamah contract, commercial aircraft, especially
smaller regional aircraft, are likely to become a luxury BAe could ill
afford in its present circumstances,' a City aerospace observer warned
yesterday.
The Middle East produced Pounds 2.2bn of BAe's revenues in 1990 largely as a
result of the first Al Yamamah contract, compared with about Pounds 115m in
1985. But the decline in oil prices and the low US dollar exchange rate
against sterling last year has put pressure on the programme's funding.
Saudi Arabia funds its payments to BAe from a regular amount of crude oil
set aside for the purpose; BAe is understood to be seeking an increase in
the amount of oil from 500,000 to 750,000 barrels a day, plus a cash
advance.
BAe, like most other aerospace companies, continues to derive the bulk of
its profits from military activities. In contrast, its commercial aircraft
business, which employs about 21,500 people, or 1,500 more than its military
aircraft division, has always struggled to make ends meet. Defence reported
operating profits of Pounds 273m in the first half of the company's current
financial year compared with a Pounds 16m loss for commercial aircraft.
After regrouping all its defence businesses under one umbrella at the end of
last year as part of its latest recovery efforts, BAe is restructuring its
commercial aircraft activities into three separate units: regional aircraft,
Airbus and corporate jets.
The biggest losses have come from the company's regional aircraft
activities, including small propeller commuter aircraft and 70-100 seater
jets. These losses are likely to grow in the present cut-throat conditions
of the market, which accounts for only 5 per cent of the overall civil
market, itself 50 per cent controlled by the US Boeing company. In addition,
in the present climate of recession it is difficult to see the civil market
taking over some of the slack from the decline in military business caused
by the post-cold-war cuts in defence spending.
At the time of its flopped Pounds 432m rights issue, BAe stated that despite
considerable improvements in efficiency and competitiveness, the regional
aircraft business in its present form 'does not generate a sufficient return
on capital employed'.
The most serious problem has been the BAe 146 regional jet conceived by
Hawker Siddeley in the early 1970s, saved by the Labour government in the
late 1970s, and now BAe's last wholly-owned commercial jet airliner. The 146
has faced fierce competition not only from other manufacturers such as
Fokker or Canadair but also from big aircraft makers such as Boeing and
McDonnell Douglas with their respective smaller derivatives of the Boeing
737 or MD80.
Unlike the rest of the industry, the 146 also failed to build up a backlog
of orders during the good years of the 1980s. Its current backlog is 40
aircraft. Production peaked at 36 aircraft a year in 1989, falling to 26
aircraft in 1991, and expected to be about 24 this year.
BAe has been actively looking for partners to form an industrial alliance in
the regional aircraft business. But negotiations are expected to be long and
difficult. In the meantime, the company has been forced to rationalise its
regional aircraft activities to match demand and prospects.
Its Advanced Turboprop (ATP) commuter aircraft programme has been under
pressure and has struggled in vain to make a return. The smaller BAe
Jetstream turboprop commuter aircraft programme has fared better in the
market.
After being highly critical and apprehensive over the European Airbus
programme for many years, BAe now regards its 20 per cent stake as holding
the most long-term promise for its commercial aircraft operations. But
although Airbus is expected to provide BAe with substantial annual revenues
by the mid-1990s, it is putting pressure on BAe resources. The company is in
the costly process of building up production of the wings for the new Airbus
A330/A340 widebody airliners due to be delivered to customers from 1994.
Airbus, like Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, also faces a difficult year in
terms of winning new orders because of the financial problems of all
international airlines. The other success story is BAe's 125 corporate jet
family, which has continued to perform strongly. But these programmes are
relatively small in the context of the company as a whole.
By splitting the commercial aircraft operations into three parts, BAe
appears to have set the stage for even broader restructuring of these
activities. This could eventually include the merger of its new regional
aircraft unit with other international partners and possibly a similar
alliance or even the sale of the profitable corporate jet business.
'They are going to have to take a tough decision whether they stay in the
regional market or not in the absence of finding a suitable partner,' said
Mr Keith Hodgkinson, aerospace analyst at Shearson Lehman.
This would mark the end of an era in the British aircraft industry. But BAe,
due to report its 1991 preliminary figures next week, which are expected to
show a loss because of extraordinary restructuring charges, is in a
precarious position.
BAe's overall difficulties have been compounded by its senior management's
loss of credibility after the mishandled rights issue last year.
The power vacuum created by Sir Roland Smith's departure after being forced
out of the chairmanship in September has not been filled; it has grown.
Sir Graham Day, already the chairman of Cadbury Schweppes, is only BAe's
interim chairman. After four months of searching for a full-time successor,
Sir Graham has just started interviewing potential candidates.
The search is proving difficult. Sir Christopher Hogg, chairman of
Courtaulds, the chemicals group, and Reuters, the financial information
company, was Sir Graham's favoured candidate. He turned the job down a month
ago.
Sir James Blyth, the chairman of Boots who is a BAe director and a former
head of export sales at the Ministry of Defence turned down the post last
autumn. Mr David Simon, the chief operating officer at British Petroleum
said no. Sir David Lees, the chairman of GKN, has also turned down an
approach. Attention is currently focused on Mr Christopher Lewinton,
chairman of TI, the engineering group.
The process of finding a new chairman has been complicated by the need to
find a new finance director. Mr Dudley Eustace is leaving this summer after
taking responsibility for the shortcomings of the company's financial
reporting system which failed to send early warnings of the collapse in
group profits.
The political climate in the UK is also likely to complicate the task of
finding a new chairman. Although BAe insists a new chairman is expected to
be appointed at the end of April, it seems likely that such a move will be
delayed until after the general election. The outcome will not just affect
how much work BAe will get from the Ministry of Defence. A new chairman
would want a clear political mandate to rationalise the company by closing
unprofitable operations and selling others without fear of political
interference.
Whoever ends up in the hot seat faces an uncertain future. He will confront
the dilemma of either refocusing the group on its traditional aerospace
activities, with a subsequent phasing out of its car and property interests,
or reinforcing its ambition to be Britain's leading diversified
manufacturing conglomerate.
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
                      BRITISH AEROSPACE
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   1991-92
                                                 First    Full
Pounds million            1990-90    1990-91     half     year*
Defence Systems**           300        486       273      500
Commercial Aircraft          15         35       (16)     (15)
Motor Vehicles               64         55       (45)     (65)
Property/Construction        52         19        15       20
Other                        10        (10)      (14)     (25)
Trading Profit              441        585       213      415
Launch costs                (45)       (47)      (27)     (65)
Interest                   (103)      (138)     (100)    (200)
Exceptionals                 40        (24)       -      (235)
Pre-tax profit              333        376        86      (85)
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
*Forecast.  **Includes interest on customer pre-payments.
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Kleinwort Benson Securities.
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
