FT  20 MAY 92 / Foreign Affairs: Reaper of a whirlwind - Environmentalism
does not come naturally to the new man in charge of Brazil's ecology
Mr Jose Goldemberg is on the defensive.
Two months ago, his colleague Mr Jose Lutzemberger, one of the world's
leading defenders of the Amazon rainforest, was sacked as Brazilian
environment minister by President Fernando Collor de Mello for publicly
accusing the federal agency responsible for protecting the forest -
supposedly under Mr Lutzemberger's own ministerial control - of corruption
and misuse of foreign funds. With barely 10 weeks to go before the Rio Earth
Summit, Mr Goldemberg stepped in as acting minister, while retaining his
education portfolio. He thus has responsibility for Brazil's two most urgent
problems, after the struggle to contain inflation - and the latter means he
has very little money to spend on either.
He also has to defend the environmental policies of a country whose already
low credibility in that department has been further lowered by Mr
Lutzemberger's departure, at a time when, by hosting the Earth Summit, it
has invited the scrutiny of environmentalists the world over.
He is at least able to say that the rate of deforestation of the Amazon has
fallen by half since the government took office, which, he claims, means a 1
per cent cut in worldwide carbon dioxide emissions. This has been achieved
partly by the removal of tax incentives, which previously encouraged
'development' of the area, and partly by more vigorous policing - though it
may also reflect a drop in demand for both timber and cattle due to the
country's recession.
But environmentalism does not come naturally to Mr Goldemberg. A nuclear
physicist by training, he exudes the self-confidence and certainty of the
great 19th-century educational reformers, rather than the diffidence and
guilt that are more fashionable among late 20th century scientists. 'I'm not
an environmentalist,' he says frankly. 'I'm a scientist who happens to know
what causes environmental destruction.' He then pulls out a hefty tome,
Energy for a Sustainable World, of which he is co-author, to prove that he
is, in his own words, 'not a completely worthless person'.
Certainly, his attitude is more sophisticated than that of many Brazilians
who ask, 'how can people in Europe make so much fuss about trees, when
three-year-old children here are begging in the street?' (A question usually
asked by members of the top 20 per cent of Brazil's population, who receive
26 times the income of the bottom 20 per cent.) But to conclude from that
that the rainforest is safe in his hands is a leap many environmentalists
will be unwilling to make.
In Mr Goldemberg's view, scouring the forest for medicinal substances, on
the off chance that 'eventually in one of these plants you might find a cure
for cancer', is 'not what science is about'. On the contrary, 'to discover
things requires a great deal of expenditure and equipment: just because a
tree belongs to a people doesn't give them a right to exploit it.' He thus
brushes aside the grievance of the Jaburandi people, who claim to have
discovered the only effective cure for glaucoma, only to see a big
international pharmaceutical company buy the entire crop of the plant and
patent the formula.
The Jaburandi are paid only per tonne of leaves harvested, although they say
it was their knowledge that led to the discovery in the first place. Other
Amazonian peoples are now said to be keeping their medical knowledge (for
instance, of the contraceptive properties of various plants) a
closely-guarded secret, until their right to share in the proceeds can be
guaranteed.
Brazil has already, in its 1988 constitution, recognised the Indians' rights
to the lands they occupy, and the government is carrying out the demarcation
of those lands. Indigenous peoples are thus already recognised as legal
entities enjoying collective rights. It seems only a small step from there
for them to take out patents and sign contracts. One problem that can be
anticipated is that more than one of them would claim 'ownership' of the
same traditional remedy. Ideally, perhaps, they should be persuaded to set
up a common forest protection fund, into which all royalties on traditional
forest products could be paid. But there might well be difficulty in
agreeing who should administer such a fund and how it could be spent.
Efforts to forge a nationwide representative body for the indigenous peoples
have so far been abortive. Their most eloquent spokesman is Mr Aylton Krenak
who is most often to be found squatting by a log fire in the 'Forest
People's Embassy' in Sao Paulo. But according to Mr Fabio Vilas, secretary
of the Brazilian Bishops' Conference's Conselho Indigenista Missionario
(CIMI), Mr Krenak is simply 'one person who decided he represented the
indigenous peoples: his movement has no elections, no general meetings, no
groups affiliated to it'. Mr Krenak's supporters accuse CIMI of seeking to
group the indigenous peoples 'under the skirts of the padres', instead of
enabling them 'to participate in Brazilian society while maintaining our own
customs'.
The problem of organising the indigenous peoples is real, but Mr Goldemberg
shows no interest in solving it. Stressing his 'enormous respect for
scientific knowledge' (and for the research costs involved in converting a
traditional herbal remedy into a saleable pharmaceutical drug), he admits
that he is 'too reactionary' to take alternative medicine seriously; and
even where forest products do turn out to have commercial value he doubts
the realism of trying to preserve the benefit for forest people.
'The world is a very nasty world,' he declares, citing the 19th-century
rubber boom which went bust when British adventurers 'stole' samples of
rubber trees and took them to Malaya, where they were soon able to producer
rubber much more cheaply than the Brazilian rubber-tappers could. He claims
that schemes to preserve or revive the forest economy always require an
unrealistic degree of state subsidy, and that the destiny of most forest
dwellers at the end of the 20th century must be to join the great mass
movement of urbanisation.
In practice, for most forest people, that could only mean a squalid and
marginal existence in the favelas (shantytowns) of the great Brazilian
cities. Statistically their life in the forest may be poorer, but there can
be little doubt that it is happier and more complete.
Does the law of history and the market forbid them to improve their living
standards by any other route? Perhaps mass urbanisation is indeed their
unavoidable fate, but there was a time when slavery was regarded as
similarly inevitable. History is not static: it is above all a record of
changing human attitudes and behaviour. We have learnt to set a value on
bio-diversity (the multiplicity of species) and on cultural diversity within
the human race. In the Amazon rainforest, both are at stake, and preserving
one can help to preserve the other.
One way to go about it, and perhaps the most effective in a market economy,
is to set a price on forest products reflecting the value of the environment
and culture which lie behind them. Perhaps European and North American
consumers could be persuaded to pay extra for a 'rain forest condom' made
from Amazon rubber? Another would be to recognise the inhabitants of the
forest as its custodians, and pay them a direct salary for performing that
role.
Brazil, and the world, can surely improve on Mr Goldemberg's Darwinian
fatalism.
