FT  20 FEB 92 / Survey of Contracted Business Services (5): Guards to be
qualified - Security Staff
usually attached to a gun. However, it is not just the crime rate that is
responsible for this dedication to security. In fact, some US towns are
safer than UK inner cities. 'Americans are very territorial,' explains one
former policeman who crossed the Atlantic to study the system. 'But they are
also very sensible. Staff and customers are easier to attract when they feel
safe, whether in a supermarket or an office block.'
The UK is moving rapidly along the same path. Two decades of terrorist
scares have left few reception areas unattended, although stricter firearms
laws preclude shows of extreme force. Managers are also more aware of the
treasures held in their buildings. Docks and factories have always been wary
of pilfering, yet even an average office block nowadays can hold a fortune
in computer technology.
Security means more than a watchful pair of eyes above an intimidating
uniform. It involves a wide variety of skills ranging from guard duties to
secure storage, computer protection, credit card distribution and even
cleaning. 'The days of Mrs Mopp have gone,' says Mrs Ann Perkins, commercial
director of Securicor. 'Companies want to be sure the people wandering round
their offices at night are trustworthy.'
All Securicor staff are now selected through psychometric testing, which
reveals characteristics such as reliability and honesty. 'It helps us retain
staff by filtering out the wrong people,' says Mrs Perkins. That helps the
clients by ensuring they get a stable workforce.
The price of extra care is small considering the Pounds 1bn turnover of this
part of the industry, but it is probably more than customers themselves
would fork out. Few could stretch to such specialised techniques.
The industry as a whole is encouraging the move towards higher standards.
For three years it has worked on a special certificate of competence, a
national vocational qualification (or the Scottish equivalent), which should
be in place by mid-1992.
One problem with creating a national standard is matching experts as varied
as an emergency alarm fitter with an armoured van guard, so two panels were
created to handle training on each side of the business, the Security and
Emergency Systems Lead Body and the Security Services Lead Body.
A dozen companies are currently carrying out trials on the guarding
qualification and large customers have already made clear that companies
refusing to take part will not get their business. So the long-term problem
of cowboy operators muddying the industry's image may at last be solved.
Securicor already runs several training schools, where staff attend
residential courses. This attention to skills is important in an industry
which covers such a wide spectrum of demands. These range from a small
company looking for reception staff to provide a smart and efficient
service, through to archiving of high-security documents and software for a
major financial or legal group.
The recession has taken its toll of mature markets such as large-scale
cash-carrying, but new areas are emerging to help ease the blow. Hospitals,
for instance, were made tragically aware of their need for tighter security
after assaults on patients and staff. Some schools and colleges could soon
be on the agenda as they switch to running their own expenditure. But small
businesses are currently the main growth area, partly because the recession
has boosted raids but also through an awareness of cash-carrying services
tailored to their needs.
Shopkeepers, for instance, need no longer face the choice of storing takings
overnight or creeping furtively to the bank with a plastic bag full of cash.
'We have recently taken on Pounds 2.5m worth of this kind of business,' says
Mrs Perkins.
Many outlets are now in covered shopping centres, of course, where patrols
are almost mandatory to guard the expensive fittings from vandals. Money
transfers may be part of a security package contracted out by the mall
managers, as can the stocking of cash machines for banks and building
societies.
The variety of tasks also means a wide range of charges, and some customers
have become increasingly nervous about what they are paying for. Sterling
Security, part of the P&amp;O group, has tackled this by investing heavily in
software, according to Mr David Evans, its commercial director. 'This
enables us to monitor the costs of providing a security service to a
particular site,' he says.
Businesses can now specify levels of pay, hours worked and the type of
staff. Instead of being charged the traditional hourly rate, they pay only
the direct costs of a contract, plus a management charge.
Mr Peter Hobbs, property manager of Esab, a manufacturing group based in
Waltham Cross, says the new service 'gives me far more control of
expenditure and the terms and conditions of employment of security officers.
'It seemed a good compromise between in-house security and using a
contractor on the hourly rate system.'
