FT  16 JUN 92 / International Bonds: Canadian utility prepares to launch
CDollars 750m issue
HYDRO QUEBEC, the Canadian utility, was yesterday preparing to launch its
third global bond, an issue of at least CDollars 750m 30-year paper.
Syndicate officials expected the deal to be launched in the next two to
three days. Yesterday, participants in the deal were discussing the fine
details of the transaction with the issuer.
Outstanding long-dated global bonds, which can be traded in both domestic
and Eurobond markets, issued by Hydro Quebec trade on a yield spread of
85-87 basis points over government bonds.
However, the bonds trade at a premium to face value following a sharp fall
in Canadian bond yields last year. Some syndicate officials said a new issue
could be launched at a marginally narrower yield spread.
Although European investors are strong buyers of Canadian dollar bonds, the
long-dated maturity may appeal more to investors in north America. Bankers
noted that earlier long-dated global bond issues have been 'stripped' -
repackaged into series of smaller zero coupon bonds - by investment banks in
the US and Canada.
Elsewhere, the Eurodollar sector was seen as the most likely source of new
issues. The Asian Development Bank is planning a Dollars 500m 10-year issue,
via Goldman Sachs, although underwriters were not expecting the deal to
emerge this week.
Nafinsa, the Mexican state-backed financing agency, has mandated JP Morgan
to lead manage a Dollars 100m 10-year offering. Bankers expected the bonds
to be priced at around 195 basis points more than US treasury bonds.
Nafinsa's existing 10-year paper trades on a spread of around 185-190 basis
points over treasuries.
European bond markets remain disturbed by uncertainty over the ratification
of the Maastricht treaty on European monetary union. On Thursday, the Irish
electorate vote in a referendum on the treaty. A rejection of Maastricht
could cause a further sell-off, while a vote in favour could boost all
European bond markets.
The International Securities Market Association, the regulatory body for the
Eurobond market, has won agreement from the Bank of Italy that ISMA rules on
securities trading should apply to cross-border trading of Italian
government securities.
A number of Italian and non-Italian banks are in dispute over the settlement
of trades in Italian government bonds, some of which have been repudiated.
ISMA said it 'objects in the strongest possible terms to the unilateral
cancellation of transactions'.
Salomon Inc, the parent company of Salomon Brothers, the US investment bank,
has had its long-term credit rating raised by one notch to A+ by IBCA, the
UK rating agency.
