FT  26 FEB 92 / Leading Article: Eco-imperialism
HOW WOULD the readers of this newspaper like to have an elephant in their
garden? What would they feel if they had to live off what that garden
produces? To pose the questions is to answer them. Why then should western
'elefriends' expect Africans to tolerate destructive animals that compete
for valuable resources?
The answer is to make elephants economically valuable. Some argue that the
best way is to permit trade in ivory, the issue that will dominate the
12-day triennial conference of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (Cites), which will start next Monday in Kyoto.
A total ban has been in place since 1989, following a decade in which
Africa's elephant population slumped from 1.2m to 600,000. The ban seems to
have been successful so far in lowering demand and so reducing poaching.
Zimbabwe, along with South Africa, Botswana, Namibia and Malawi, even claims
that culling is needed. These countries want a resumption in trade in ivory
and other elephant products, to generate funds for protection and
preservation.
Arrayed against Zimbabwe are the world's conservationists, who fear an end
to the ban will halt the recovery in elephant numbers. Under their pressure,
many governments have decided to support the ban's prolongation.
The practical argument for the ban is that, without it, there would be
confusion in the market, allowing smugglers greater room for their
activities. The practical argument against it is that it does not make
elephants worth preserving, but only makes them less worth killing.
Moreover, unless final demand has been lowered for good, trade will move
underground.
The case for the ban is not overwhelming. It is, in any case, no more than a
small part of the solution. Elephants need to be made worth preserving. One
way, which would not create the risks attendant upon an open trade in ivory,
is to permit trade in other elephant products. Another is tourism.
Yet another is for the rich to pay Africans directly to preserve endangered
animals. Environmentalists argue as if the preservation of loveable
pachyderms is the only moral issue. It is not. Equally important is whether
well-fed westerners should compel poorer people to adopt their values.
Compensation would be better. The amount they are prepared to pay would be a
good indication of how much they care about elephants.
Imperialism is no better for being green. If the rich want to preserve
elephants, they should put their money where their hearts are.
