FT  14 NOV 92 / How To Spend It: From Scotland to Nepal . . . a catalogue of
the best gift ideas - Carpets from India, sweaters from Guatemala or edible
goodies from the National Trust, Lucia van der Post has been searching the
Christmas brochures for interesting and attractive presents for the entire
family
CHRISTMAS is coming and the thud of catalogues landing on the doormat is
getting louder. If you feel you are still busy enough with your
non-Christmas shopping (it was the writer Keith Waterhouse who first noticed
that long before December he could not buy a thing that wasn't gift-wrapped
or topped with holly) try and remember what it was like last year . . . and
probably the year before that. Hectic, was it? Lists blank, mind blanker?
Take heart. With this week's How To Spend It guide in one hand, a drink in
the other, you can do it all from the peace and comfort of your armchair.
The General Trading Company, 144 Sloane Street, London SW1X 9BL. Tel:
071-730-0411. Pounds 1.
As always, beautifully presented, lots of full colour pages and almost
everything is tasteful. The company seems to have made a real effort to
present lots of ideas at Pounds 20 - blue-rimmed glasses from Mexico at
Pounds 5.90 a time, plain initialled tumblers at Pounds 7.55 a time, scented
candles in frosted glass containers at Pounds 5.75 and a really pretty sauce
ladle with a fruit and leaf embossed bowl for Pounds 10.75. Those who fancy
spending more will have no trouble - a soft, wool, blue and white, checked
Welsh blanket is Pounds 106, some pretty nightshirts, Pounds 47 and a
charming doorstop, a teddy bear copied from a Victorian original, Pounds 72.
Past Times, Witney, Oxfordshire OX8 6BH. Tel: 0993-779339.
Filled, as you might expect, with nostalgia - Victorian chocolate coins for
stockings (ten for Pounds 4.95), Dickensian advent calendars (Pounds 2.95),
Florentine crackers (Pounds 14.95 for six). An original copy of The Times on
any day of your choice since 1900 will cost you Pounds 19.95, the Chatsworth
trays are pretty and just Pounds 10.95 each.
Barclay &amp; Bodie, 7-9 Blenheim Terrace, London NW8 OEH. Tel: 071-372-5705.
Pounds 2.
Relatively new to the catalogue scene, Barclay &amp; Bodie is an enchanting shop
filled with seductive ideas for the house. Plain dark green pin board is
Pounds 43 for a small size, Pounds 54 for large. A neat little device for
measuring the height of the tennis net (vital now that the heads of racquets
are so big) at Pounds 14.95 would make a good stocking present. For bridge
fanatics there is a wildly extravagant (but beautiful) hand-embroidered
bridge cloth (Pounds 395), padded and frilled needlework baskets at Pounds
25 and some exceptionally pretty hand-embroidered, lace-trimmed cotton guest
towels (Pounds 24.50).
The V &amp; A Museum Catalogue, Freepost SU361, Dept. 5316, Hendon Road,
Sunderland, SR9 9AD.
Lots of lovely things, in particular jewellery - faux pearl earrings with a
pearl and bow brooch, (Pounds 29.95 for the brooch, Pounds 24.95 for the
earrings but just Pounds 46.90 if you buy both). Faux pearl earrings with a
twisted gold-plate setting (Pounds 14.95) and a charming rhinestone,
silver-plated copper and lilac enamel brooch and earrings (Pounds 22.50 for
the brooch, Pounds 24.95 for the earrings) and a beautiful Etruscan style
jasper and jade necklace (Pounds 75). Then there are some classically styled
verdigris candlesticks, Pounds 19.95 the pair, a small but good selection of
children's toys (nice old-fashioned drum and top, a jack-in-the-box, a penny
whistle and a series of wooden nesting cats). There is a really beautiful
hand-quilted patchwork bed cover - a copy of a 19th century ring design with
a scalloped edge. All in pure cotton, it costs Pounds 199. An innovation
this year is the introduction of 48-hour delivery (Pounds 6.50 extra
though]) and fax ordering services.
The Royal Academy of Arts Gift Catalogue, Royal Academy Enterprises, 8 Forge
Court, Reading Road, Yately, Camberley GU17 7RX. Pounds 1.
For those who are tired of nostalgia, this catalogue is a splendid antidote
 -resolutely contemporary images appear on plates, jugs, scarves, mugs, many
by eminent names such as ike Michael Rothenstein (who has embellished a jug,
a plate and a scarf), Hugh Casson, Paul Hogarth and Michael Kenny.
Influenced by the Tibet exhibition at the academy there are some really
enchanting papaier mache bowls (Pounds 14.95 embellished with an elephant or
a horse, Indian miniature-style). There is a good selection for the cook and
a small selection of stationery, all beautifully designed.
Scotts of Stow, Admail 222, The Square, Stow-on-the-Wold, Gloucs. GL54 1AF.
This is the catalogue for presents for the cook - from simple things such as
a plain white French-style soup tureen and soup bowls to a set of stainless
steel copper-based saucepan, to more esoteric gadgets like the Atlas Pasta
Machine and Le Saucier (an automatic sauce maker). If you are looking for
small things there is the Robert Welch Garlic Press (all sturdy cast-iron,
green, red or white, Pounds 14.95), the Parmesan cheese mill (Pounds 14.95),
Robert Welch's cast-iron salt and pepper mills, (Pounds 16.95 each).
Shaker, 25 Harcourt Street, London W1H 1DT. Tel: 071-724-7672.
If you like Shaker-style then this slim leaflet lists most of what is on
offer. New this year are some pure cotton throws - choose from Bear Paw
Throw in navy and cream or red and cream or the Lovers Knot Throw (both
Pounds 47.95) or the Country Friendship Throw in cranberry, navy and cream
(Pounds 55.95). There is a beautiful pure Shetland wool navy and white
blanket at Pounds 79 but also lots of smaller things.
Halcyon Days, 14 Brook Street, London W1Y 1AA. Tel: 071-629-8811. Pounds
1.50.
There is a fine selection of tiny one-off antiques - all expensive but
exclusive. Then there are the famous Halcyon days enamels - boxes
embellished with everything from flowers to endearing messages. The smallest
is Pounds 30.50, bigger ones are from Pounds 55 to Pounds 75.
Teddy Bears, 99 High Street, Witney, Oxfordshire OX8 6 LY. Tel. 0993 702616.
Pounds 2.
The catalogue for anybody who is planning on giving a teddy bear this
Christmas . Teddy Bears has been specialising in traditional teddy bears for
seven years and has established a good reputation. There are now some 92
different bears, 30 of them exclusive. The shop prefers telephone orders and
inquiries.
Traidcraft, Kingsway, Gateshead, Tyne &amp; Wear, NE11 0NE, UK. Tel:
091-491-0591.
Traidcraft believes ardently in trading fairly with the third world and,
although almost all its prices do seem exceedingly reasonable, it is at
pains to point out that cheap goods at the cheapest possible price is not
the point of the exercise.
It aims always to pay a fair price for the work involved and hopes that its
customers will look to it for some of the handiwork that it is difficult to
obtain in the west, rather than simply look for low prices. One problem is
that although the craft element is obviously still there, many of designs
lack the sophistication and finish that richer countries have become
accustomed to.
This autumn Traidcraft offers four different catalogues. Alternatives homes
in on clothing, jewellery and accessories, all of which have a strong ethnic
feel. There are hand-woven fabrics, batik block prints, natural dye knitwear
and traditionally embroidered fabrics such as the mirrorwork from Bangladesh
and the cross-stitching from the hilltribes of Thailand, all worked into
cosmetic bags, evening bags, scarves, shirts, dressing-gowns or boxer
shorts, many of them charming.
Nicest to my mind are the softer bags made from the hand-worked or
hand-embroidered fabrics, like the small cotton bag embroidered with
Gujerati mirrorwork (just Pounds 4), and the Red Akha Knapsack (a splendid
present for a teenager) made from hand-woven cotton with Akha hill tribe
embroidery, Pounds 12.95.
Interiors has some of the best ideas, dhurries at good prices (from Pounds
13.95), padded cotton bedspreads, antique carved mirrors (Pounds 22.95),
gold-leafed candlesticks, carved perfume pots, blue and white china, or an
enchanting hand-painted papier-mache bowl (Pounds 18.95).
Handmade &amp; Recycled Paper offers some truly charming cards, wrapping paper
and recycled paper, while the Christmas Cards &amp; Gifts catalogue has a
collection of cards with traditional Christmas images.
Oxfam Trading, Murdoch Road, Bicester, Devon OX6 7RF.
Oxfam, too, believes in helping poorer countries by trading rather than by
simply giving aid. Its catalogue offers pots from Nicaragua, carpets from
Tibet, papier mache from Kashmir, brass from India, and sweaters from
Guatemala; there is hardly a needy country in the world that it has not
visited and traded with.
Most readers by now are familiar with the standard Oxfam range but it is
only fair to say that it has gone to great lengths to improve quality. If
you prefer to do your Christmas shopping this way you really ought to be
able to find something for almost everybody.
For example, a beaded evening bag at Pounds 17.95 is both reasonably priced
and very attractive, a 34in square table cloth with four napkins, all
embroidered by women of the Garo tribe with innocently sweet birds and
flowers, is just Pounds 26.95, and a colourful Takka work bedspread is
Pounds 49.95.
Save The Children Home Shopper, PO Box 40, Burton-on-Trent, Staffs. DE14
3LQ.
Another perennial with plenty of cards, ribbons, crackers, wrapping paper
and other traditional festive delights to choose from.
It is a bit thin on actual presents, although if you look hard enough there
are a few things, such as a rather fine fountain pen, finished in red
lacquer, for just Pounds 4.99, or some carpet bowls for Pounds 26.50 that I
would not be dismayed to find in the stocking come Christmas morning.
I like best the old-style monks' hat, straight from Tibet, in bright cotton
from Bhutan - at Pounds 12.99 it would be a wow on any of the costas. The
selection of children's toys has something for most age-groups but is not
large. If you really want to help this particular charity you might find the
food section at the back more inspiring.
British Heart Foundation, PO Box 45 Burton-on-Trent, DE14 3LQ. Tel:
0283-512040.
A selection of cards, all of which can be personalised and a few of which
are really lovely (especially two from the Museum &amp; Gallery selection),
ribbons, wrapping paper et al (although much of the et al is not, if I may
put it this way, quite to my taste). A small selection of proper presents of
which the nicest seem to me to be a sturdy weekend holdall in a good green
with leather straps for Pounds 24.95, some useful gadgets for the DIY set
and some exceptionally pretty padded hangers.
NSPCC, 67 Saffron Hill, London EC1N 8RS.
Lots of cards, in every size, taste and mood, wrapping paper (some stunning
in plain gold and black and gold) and a range of gifts from an eye-catching
marble-faced watch (Pounds 22.95) to a jaunty selection of satchels,
duffle-bags and other paraphernalia for children. Some nice silk ties for
the chaps (just Pounds 14.99), small toys for children (nice elephant
bookends and a really charming wooden wagon packed full of animals).
Tearcraft, PO Box 777, Carlisle, Cumbria, CA3 OQS.
Another of the charities that trades with the Third World, believing
passionately in the dignity of work. Goods come from Peru, Thailand, India,
Bangladesh. Lots here that is very nice - I am a bit tired of T-shirts
personally and yet we all wear them all the time.
Tearcraft has two rather charming ones, one embellished with a parrot and
palm leaves, the other a faux naif aquataic scene of dolphin, sea and
underwater life. Both are just Pounds 12.95 each. There are bright and
cheerful wooden toys for children, a sweetly embroidered children's wall
tidy, some leather for chaps, which may not be of the same quality as our
big Western names but are an awful lot cheaper (black wallet for Pounds
8.95, credit card holder for Pounds 5.95).
Unicef - UK, Unit 1, Rignals Lane, Chelmsford, Essex CM2 8TU. Tel:
0245-76315.
A small catalogue mainly homing in on cards, paper and stationery but there
are some exceptionally attractive cards and those of a modernist turn of
mind who have trouble finding cards to their taste ought to find something
here (a particularly nice range by Michael Gaumnitz of France).
Countrywide Workshops Charitable Trust, 47 Fisherton Street, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 7 SU. Tel: 0722-326886.
Countrywide Workshops features the work of handicapped people all over the
country but this does not mean that the work is substandard - much of it has
especial charm. For instance the selection of cooks' and gardeners' aprons,
household bags (for linen, pegs, shoes), dishcloths, oven gloves are really
very pretty indeed, the leatherware is excellent value (a woman's handmade
in real hide, while not in the Kelly bag class is nicely made and
wonderfully priced at Pounds 39.75). There is lots of willow ware and some
sturdy wooden toys for children including old-fashioned things like
blackboards, cribs and nativity scenes.
The National Trust for Scotland, 5 Charlotte Square, Edinburgh, EH2 4DU.
Tel: 031-243-9355.
A very small catalogue but with a distinctly Scottish flavour, which does at
least mean it stands out from all the others, many of which buy from
identical sources. Lots of tartan - choose from Royal Stewart, Dress
MacDuff, Hunting Scott. Tartan crackers, rugs, ribbon, hangers. Some
sterling silver pieces - jam spoons, salmon pate knives, honey spoons, all
with a distinctly Celtic air. A beautiful pure silk scarf with hand-rolled
edges, richly coloured after the style of the painted ceilings at Crathes
Castle, also caught my eye.
The National Trust (Enterprises) Ltd, PO Box 101, Melksham, Wiltshire SN12
8EA.
Of all the charity catalogues this one probably has more things that most of
us would really like to find at the bottom of the tree. Lovely simple wooden
picture frames (from Pounds 14.95), a set of six absolutely plain pure Irish
linen napkins taken from an 18th century design at Wimpole Hall (Pounds
54.95), a sterling silver christening spoon for a lucky baby (Pounds 45),
some English pewter hair and clothes brushes (Pounds 25.50), good waterproof
travelling bags (sponge, shoe, dress covers etc), lots of attractive cards,
games, diaries and address books. There are also some nice games for
children and the usual National Trust selection of edible goodies.
