FT  20 OCT 92 / US may try to defuse airline row
THE UK and the US are to begin a new round of talks in London today in an
effort to negotiate a more liberal aviation agreement between the two
countries to clear the way for British Airways' proposed Dollars 750m
(Pounds 436m) investment in a 44 per cent stake in USAir.
The UK last week tabled a set of proposals to liberalise air services
between the two countries gradually. But it has insisted that any new
bilateral deal would hinge on the US government first approving the BA-USAir
transaction.
The US has come under pressure from the three largest US carriers - American
Airlines, United Airlines and Delta Air Lines - not to approve the BA deal
unless they are granted greater access to the UK. They also want the US
government to secure a new 'open skies' agreement with the UK before
granting approval for the BA acquisition of a large minority stake in USAir.
US airline officials suggested yesterday that the US government was
apparently prepared to agree to some phasing in of 'open skies' between the
two countries as the UK has proposed. But it wants firm commitments and a
timetable for liberalisation. However, the US proposal is not expected at
this stage to lead to a breakthrough in the complex negotiations. Airline
industry analysts believe a third round of talks will probably be necessary
before an agreement can be reached. One US airline official said he did not
think there would be any agreement before the US election.
The US is also understood to be seeking change in the current BA-USAir
agreement because it says the present structure would give BA virtual
control of the sixth-largest US carrier. BA denies that, arguing that its
deal complies with existing US regulations. BA proposes to acquire 44 per
cent of USAir shares and 21 per cent of the airline's voting rights. Foreign
ownership of airlines is limited to 25 per cent of voting rights in the US.
The big three US carriers said they would not object to the BA transaction
if they could compete on the same basis against BA. They also said they were
urging their government to negotiate for immediate and total liberalisation
rather than a phased introduction of 'open skies'.
The UK has proposed a three-step approach: immediate liberalisation of US
services to UK regional airports; liberalisation of services to London when
the US relaxes its existing foreign ownership rules; and complete
liberalisation.
