FT  23 JUN 92 / Survey on A-Z of Computing (21): The art of enjoying
homework - Teleworking
IMAGINE taking just 30 seconds to get to work. No traffic jams, no sweaty
tube trains. No fear of British Rail strikes or price rises. Teleworking
might be able to do this for your job.
In its simplest form, teleworking is a logical extension of executives
taking work home at the weekend. Many do it because it is the only way they
can finish work without interruptions.
The problem with taking work home is that the infrastructure of the office
is missing - the telephones, faxes and photocopiers. It still implies trips
into the office to deliver completed work and to collect the next batch.
Teleworking attempts to obviate visits to the office by working entirely
from home. To do this it needs to provide a communications system between
the worker and the central base. Several levels are possible. For some
professions, a telephone link may be enough. However, nearly every job needs
some paperwork and the fax becomes the next step. To avoid multiple
telephone lines, modern faxes allow intelligent switching between incoming
voice and fax calls and may also provide an answering machine.
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a better solution, especially where the company
already uses it extensively within its operations. An e-mail from home is
indistinguishable from one typed at an office desk. An effective teleworking
strategy almost always involves electronic mail at some level. Sadly, a lack
of standards has hindered the development of a dominant technology, unlike
the prevalent Group 3 fax. Even corporate electronic mail systems often lack
the ability to manage dial-in links effectively.
A number of companies are seeing the benefits of teleworking. Many of them
are technology-based companies such as computer manufacturers, but others
are traditional businesses such as solicitors. There are two principal
benefits to teleworking: the cost savings and the fact that employees love
it.
Costs may be reduced in a multitude of ways. The most obvious is the savings
in office rentals. Even with the slump in property prices, city rents remain
relatively high. Given that a single office worker needs a minimum of 100
square feet of space at say Pounds 12 a square foot, the savings start at
Pounds 1,200 a year. Then add in all the other facilities demanded by the
average City worker and the benefits mount. There are start-up costs, of
course. The new teleworker needs an extra telephone line and a fax. If
e-mail is involved the worker will also need a terminal or a PC. Usually,
they can simply take the one they already use.
Costs may also be diminished by employing cheaper staff. Once a London-based
company has set itself up to use teleworking, it could then recruit new
people in more distant locations, such as the North. Salaries become much
lower for the same quality of people. One US insurance company uses staff in
Ireland in this way, significantly reducing its costs and providing
employment to more deprived areas.
Women having babies traditionally faced a tough choice: they either had to
abandon their career or leave their children with paid strangers.
Teleworking enables mothers to combine a career and a family. The company
benefits by retaining the experience and the loyalty of its staff.
Teleworking is not without its own difficulties. Many jobs have a high
degree of face-to-face involvement. This is difficult to sustain in the
teleworking environment. Improvements in technology may reduce this soon
with the advent of the video-telephone.
Some jobs require attendance at a particular place. AA breakdown men would
be little use sitting in the comfort of their homes while drivers stand in
the pouring rain, head under the bonnet.
Some staff enjoy getting out of their homes - it is hard to imagine Rumpole
of the Bailey agreeing to work from home. In addition, there is a risk of
isolation and of loneliness among teleworkers. Companies that use
teleworking extensively stress the importance of regular meetings to
maintain morale.
Monitoring is a particularly fraught issue. Teleworking is very suitable for
activities that can be done as piece-work. It is much harder to manage where
work is less well defined. Managers worry about whether staff are actually
doing work or simply watching the Test match. The answer lies in structuring
work into measurable parcels or agreed performance levels. It is only an
extension of the problems faced in managing travelling sales staff, which
are already well known. Teleworking is a tool, not a panacea. It requires
management just like any business activity.
As technology improves and office costs continue to spiral upwards, it is
inevitable that teleworking will increase. It can significantly reduce
salary costs and allow companies to retain valuable staff. Once someone has
worked from home, it is very difficult to lure them back into the joys of
commuting.
