FT  17 OCT 92 / The UK Economy: Political turmoil is the stimulus behind cut
in rates
BRITAIN'S homeowners and businesses are now in debt to the nation's
beleaguered coal miners.
The government would not have cut bank base rates by 1 percentage point to 8
per cent around noon yesterday had it not become embroiled in a bitter
political crisis over its plans to axe 30,000 mining jobs.
Before yesterday's announcement, there were growing expectations that
further cuts in base rates were in the offing following the
1-percentage-point cut to 9 per cent on September 22 in the week after
'Black Wednesday'. But it had looked as if the government might delay the
rate cut until next month's Autumn Statement containing its public spending
decisions for 1993-94 and its latest economic forecasts.
The timing of yesterday's cut - coming at midday instead of at 10am -
smacked of panic. Other circumstances pointed to a hasty decision.
On Monday, Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, had indicated to members of the
Commons Treasury and Civil Service committee that there would be no rapid
lowering of rates. Later in the week, the Bank of England's money-market
operations had suggested that 9 per cent base rates were likely to be in
place for at least the rest of this month.
The final decision to cut rates was taken only yesterday morning in a
meeting at the Treasury attended by Mr Lamont, Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton,
governor of the Bank of England, Sir Terry Burns, Treasury permanent
secretary, Mr Eddie George, Bank deputy governor, and a number of Treasury
officials.
Although the timing of the cut was clearly linked to the government's
difficulties over the planned pit closures, yesterday's statement by Mr
Lamont provided a number of powerful arguments to justify the reduction of
base rates to their lowest level since June 1988.
The chancellor's references to M0, the narrow measure of money supply, M4,
the broad money measure, house prices and the producer prices index were
consistent with the government's new approach of basing decisions on
interest rates on a number of financial indicators. The statement also went
some way to meeting the government's promise to explain its monetary policy
more clearly to the public following sterling's abrupt departure from the
European exchange rate mechanism.
What the chancellor did not explain was how the government and the Bank of
England were taking a much gloomier view of the UK economy following events
over the past week.
Since Mr Lamont appeared before the Treasury committee, the government had
been given news of falling industrial production in August and rising
unemployment in September. It also had access to Bank of England figures,
due next week, pointing to continued slow monetary growth and subdued bank
lending last month. The coal closures, quite apart from the political damage
that they caused, were another economic factor to take into account. The
events of the week had also damaged consumer and business confidence.
Developments in financial markets also favoured lower interest rates. For
the domestic money market, it had become a question of when, not whether.
Increasingly, foreign exchange market analysts were arguing that the
prospect of a long recession was weighing more heavily on sterling than the
likelihood of a cut in interest rates.
It emerged yesterday that a reduction in base rates to around 8 per cent had
been under consideration by monetary authorities since Britain's departure
from the ERM on 'Black Wednesday'.
In the view of the both the Bank and the Treasury, UK monetary conditions
had become far too tight while sterling was linked to the strong D-Mark and
Britain was unable to bring its interest rates below German levels in the
ERM.
After leaving the ERM, the government had set about rebalancing policy -
easing monetary conditions through lower interest rates against the
background of sterling's trade-weighted devaluation of around 10 per cent -
while finalising tough public spending decisions.
Officials would have preferred to delay yesterday's rate cut until the
Autumn Statement was ready. But political necessity intervened. The decision
to cut rates was probably two-thirds rational economic judgment and
one-third political opportunism.
The anticipatory nature of the rate cut suggests that the authorities will
not be quick to follow up with a further sharp reduction in rates. The
feeling among officials is that monetary policy has been adjusted to
compensate for the earlier excessively tight conditions in the ERM.
Both the Bank and the Treasury will be watching carefully to see how
sterling reacts to developments. There will inevitably be some inflationary
impact as a result of its depreciation since Black Wednesday, although the
recessionary forces in the economy are now felt to be so strong that this
will be limited.
There is some concern that sterling - at around DM2.44 yesterday - is
undervalued against the D-Mark and that this could create unwelcome
inflationary pressures if maintained for more than a few months. But it is
hoped that sterling will recover against the D-Mark as the economy picks up
and when Germany cuts its interest rates. However, yesterday's decision on
base rates was not based on any expectation of an early relaxation of German
monetary policy.
The unanswerable question is whether 8 per cent base rates will suffice to
bring the UK's longest post-war recession to an end. Even before the plans
to close down much of Britain's coal industry, the August drop in industrial
production suggested that gross domestic product in the non-oil onshore
economy would be either flat or fall again in the third quarter. This week's
news has done nothing to allay fears that unemployment will keep on rising.
The international economy is also deteriorating. The Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development this week revised down its
expectations of growth in the industrialised world to 2.1 per cent next year
from the 3 per cent forecast in June. Unemployment is expected to average
more than 10 per cent in the OECD's European member states next year as
growth averages only 1.5 per cent.
There is some good economic news to be found in Britain. Unit labour costs -
up 1.8 per cent in August compared with August last year - are rising less
than in other big economies. Foreign manufacturers are also buying more from
Britain. But the bad news continues to outweigh the good, depressing
confidence and making uncertain the expansionary effect of cuts in interest
rates.
