FT  09 JAN 92 / Protest over Kenya deal with UK firm: World Bank attacks
cost of contract for proposed hydroelectric scheme as 'exorbitant'
THE WORLD Bank has laun-ched a strong attack on a Pounds 38.1m contract,
backed by the UK government, involving a British firm of consulting
engineers and a Kenyan state company.
The British firm, Knight Piesold and Partners, signed the contract in July
1990 with the Kenya Power and Lighting Corporation (KPLC) for consultancy
services on the proposed Ewaso Ngiro hydroelectric scheme.
In an internal document, the World Bank says the price of the contract for
consultancy services is 'five times what such services would normally cost'.
A World Bank official in Washington confirmed the authenticity of the
document but would not comment further.
KPLC is a state owned company under the Ministry of Energy. The ministry is
tarnished by allegations of corruption during the nine year tenure of Mr
Nicholas Biwott, the disgraced former minister who held the energy portfolio
until November last year.
No such allegations are made against the British company. Last night the
company denied the consultancy fee was excessive in relation to the likely,
final cost of the project.
Mr Biwott was sacked from the cabinet after allegations at a public inquiry
that he had received financial kickbacks from a Swiss consultancy firm and
that he was a prime suspect in the murder in February 1990 of Dr Robert
Ouko, the former foreign minister. He was arrested in connection with the
murder but later released after the police said they could not find enough
evidence to charge him.
Western officials also question the role of Britain's Export Credits
Guarantee Department (ECGD), which is understood to have guaranteed 85 per
cent of the loan. A spokesman for ECGD in London refused to confirm that a
credit has been arranged for the project, but western diplomats and bankers
close to the project insist that the guarantee has been approved. The
Department of Trade and Industry declined to comment.
According to the World Bank document, at least Dollars 28m (Pounds 15.3m)
has already been paid up front to Knight Piesold for a feasibility study -
including site investigation - on the hydroelectric scheme, which is not due
to come on stream for at least another decade. The British company says the
project will be completed earlier.
Western economists believe that a further payment of Dollars 16m will have
to be paid on presentation of the study by the middle of this year.
'The exorbitant cost of this contract together with the high level of
upfront payments . . . even before the feasibility study has been completed,
raises fundamental questions about procurement practices and financial
management,' says the document, drawn up after a special mission to Kenya
last November by the International Development Association, the soft loan
arm of the World Bank.
Knight Piesold says the scheme involves the multi-purpose development of the
Ewaso Ngiro river and includes three separate hydroelectric projects, a
river transfer scheme and an irrigation project. 'At about 12 per cent of
the total estimated cost (of the completed project cost), the consultancy
fee is entirely in line with the norm for work of this nature.'
It adds: 'Within the sum are a number of significant items not related to
consultancy, such as site investigation, survey, environmental impact
studies, financing charges and the construction of access roads - all of
these being essentially front-end costs.'
