FT  12 NOV 92 / Survey of Jordan (9): Culture worth more than camels - The
untapped tourist potential presents a delicate problem
WADI RUM, the place where TE Lawrence and the Arab rebels he was riding with
in 1917 were stunned into silence by the 'stupendous' surroundings, must
rank among the world's most impressive desert landscapes.
Yet over a period of four hours on a late October day, when the worst of the
broiling summer heat has faded, not many more than 50 visitors arrived at
the little Bedouin settlement and picturesque 'Beau Geste' police post which
serve as the departure point for journeys by camel or four-wheel drive
vehicles into the sandy-floored Wadi.
More come by bus in the late afternoon to watch the sun set over the great
brown fractured cliffsides towering over either side of the valley. But the
Wadi - about 50km as the crow flies north east of the Red Sea port of Aqaba
 -remains remarkably little tainted by the tramp of tourist masses.
So it is at most of Jordan's rich tourist attractions. At the most famous of
all, the extraordinary rock-cut Nabataean city of Petra, south east of the
Dead Sea, visitor accommodation is still limited to just 400 beds. On the
Dead Sea itself, where the minerals in the water and the atmospheric
conditions provide relief for many skin and other ailments, there is only
one hotel.
Elsewhere, from the beautifully preserved Roman city of Jerash, north of
Amman, to evocative crusader castles such as Kerak, the story is the same:
few tourist facilities, and relatively few tourists.
The government in Amman is well aware of the untapped tourist potential in
the country. It is working to develop the local industry, worried about
being left behind by its neighbours, Egypt, Israel and even the well-oiled
Palestinian tour operators in Israeli-occupied East Jerusalem and the West
Bank.
But the authorities are faced with a delicate task. Much of the attraction
of Jordan lies in the unspoilt nature of its sites. To increase volume too
much and too fast could easily be to kill the goose that laid the golden
egg.
This year, tourists have returned to Jordan in large numbers following the
1991 slump induced by the Gulf war - as they have done throughout the east
Mediterranean area. Officials say the volume will match the 1989 peak of
380,000 visitors, reaffirming tourism's place as the country's
second-biggest earning industry. Gross earnings of some Dollars 500m in 1989
accounted for 17 per cent of gross national product.
But Mr Yanal Hikmat, the minister of tourism, says he is anxious to avoid
expanding into the mass market. 'I have always wanted to raise Jordan above
the level of the belly dancers and camel caravans to a more cultural and
educational type of tourism. I think we would be satisfied with 1m visitors
a year by the year 2000, well catered for and well serviced.'
His senior official in the ministry, Mr Nasri Attallah, echoes this. 'Our
success lies in simplicity. Our sites are untouched, they have mystery, they
are uncrowded. Local people still mix with tourists. We very much want to
preserve that.'
Certainly, visitors have up to now benefited from the relative lack of
crowds - and welcome features such as fixed prices for horse and camel rides
at Petra and Wadi Rum that contrast with the chaotic rip-offs endemic to the
tourist industry in Egypt.
But the best intentions may be swept away by fast-growing demand and the
need to keep up with neighbouring competitors. This will be particularly
true if Middle East peace negotiations eventually yield open borders for
tourists. The prospect of Jordan becoming little more than a day trip for
visitors from Israel, Palestine and even Egypt is real and worrying.
Petra, for example, would be easily accessible to day trips from the Israeli
Red Sea resort of Eilat and the neighbouring Egyptian resort of Taba. Both
at present have hotel facilities far more sophisticated than Jordan's Aqaba,
also on the same strip of coast.
'I want to make sure these people stay in Jordan at least two nights and do
not just pass by in one day,' says Mr Hikmat. His overall intention is to
extend the average stay in Jordan beyond the present five to six nights.
To achieve that, Jordan must have the accommodation to compete. So it is
looking to the private sector to invest, providing incentives such as easy
terms for land acquisition and duty free imports. Two new privately-built
hotels will open in Petra next year, doubling local bed capacity. (A further
doubling is planned by 1995.)
But this quickly raises the tricky question of preserving the remoteness of
such sites - which gives them so much of their cachet now. Already the
authorities are considering whether to limit passage into Petra through the
famed 'siq', or narrow defile, to entry only, leading visitors out by an
alternative route.
As Mr Attallah says, Jordan's problem is to expand tourism while wearing
'kid gloves'.
