FT  06 NOV 92 / Yeltsin rejects cabinet reshuffle
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin yesterday denied he would reshuffle his cabinet as
demanded by Civic Union, a powerful conservative opposition group, although
he hinted that he was prepared to make a few changes to his economic reform
programme.
He said there were 'practically no big disagreements or changes' in policy
demands presented to him by Mr Arkady Volsky, the chief of Russia's
industrialists and a leading influence in the Civic Union opposition
movement. 'Maybe two or three or four clarifications, corrections are
possible. They will be taken into account in the government's programme.'
But Mr Yeltsin said he would not give in to Civic Union's demands for a
drastic overhaul of the cabinet. 'I told them they have an excessive
appetite. We will not make the changes they want.'
As a condition for supporting the president at a December session of the
Congress of People's Deputies, which wants to remove Mr Yeltsin's reformist
government, Mr Volsky wants changes to economic policy and a restructured
cabinet, in which Mr Yegor Gaidar would still figure, but no longer as prime
minister.
'They said they are in favour of keeping Gaidar but the number of deputy
prime ministers and ministers named by them (as people who should be removed
from office). . . practically destroys the Yeltsin-Gaidar team,' Mr Yeltsin
said.
Mr Yeltsin, however, did not deny that a few ministerial heads might roll.
He declined to say which names or aspects of economic policy been discussed
with Civic Union leaders on Tuesday. But a senior member of the Gaidar team,
Mr Alexander Shokhin, deputy prime minister responsible for foreign economic
relations, said he could not serve in a cabinet which carried out the Civic
Union programme.
'There are some similarities in general terms between our programme and that
of the Civic Union - but in the detail, as for example when they talk of
freezing prices and reintroducing state orders (the elaborate old state
procurement system), they're absolutely different,' he told the Financial
Times.
He said leaders of the Civic Union had made clear to Mr Yeltsin they wanted
a number of senior jobs for themselves.
Ukrainian leaders yesterday played another card in their risky bid to win
financial compensation in exchange for giving up their nuclear weapons,
write Oleksandr Tkachenko and Chrystia Freeland.
'Ukraine cannot allow the nuclear weapons which are located on its territory
to be removed for free,' said Mr Ihor Yukhnovsky, the first deputy prime
minister.
While reiterating Ukraine's eventual commitment to becoming non-nuclear, he
insisted: 'Ukraine must be paid for its nuclear weapons.'
His comments are the latest move in Ukraine's campaign to receive a
political and economic pay-back in return for its historic pledge to
renounce nuclear weapons.
