FT  16 JUL 92 / Germany plans Pounds 170bn transport revolution
THE German government yesterday set aside its money worries and committed
itself to a DM493bn (Pounds 170bn) plan to reform and partially privatise
the national transport system.
Only weeks after accepting a finance ministry proposal for a clamp on public
spending, the cabinet agreed to build 2,400km of roads and 2,200km of
railway by 2010.
Centrepiece of the reform, presented by Mr Gunter Krause, transport
minister, is the privatisation of the railways.
Starting in 1994, the western Bundesbahn and the Reichsbahn in the east will
be bundled together in a shareholding group, Deutsche Bahnen AG (DBAG).
Operations will be split into three independent companies under the DBAG
umbrella, responsible for passenger traffic, freight and track management.
DBAG itself is to be dissolved after five years and its three components
left to run their own affairs.
On incorporation, the government will take over the railway's debt mountain,
which is expected to reach DM55bn this year. However, no decisions have yet
been made on the financing of the reforms, nor the nature and extent of the
government's plans for privatisation. Mr Krause claimed the scheme would
have a 'neutral' impact on the federal budget.
Mr Krause said one objective was to switch 10 per cent of road traffic back
to the railways.
Although Mr Krause's initiative was widely welcomed, the lack of detail on
financing drew fire from business and industrial organisations, while the
road-building schemes were attacked by environmentalists as 'dead-end'
policies.
One potential source of funds is road tolls. Germany was Europe's leading
transit route, Mr Krause said, and foreign road users should share the
costs. Further cash would come from the sale of railway property.
Five of the new road projects, including a tunnel under the Elbe in Hamburg,
are to be undertaken by private groups. They will quote for and construct
the roads, and the government will pay by instalments. A further 23 projects
are being considered for similar treatment.
Including stretches in need of rebuilding and widening, and 1,000 by-passes
in eastern Germany, the development plan involves 11,600km of concrete and
asphalt and a total cost of DM191bn.
Improvements to the railways, which include completion of a 3,200km
high-speed network, will cost around DM194bn.
The cabinet also gave provisional blessing to track for the newly-developed
'magnet' hovertrain between Hamburg and Berlin and possibly to Bonn, Bremen
and Cologne.
