FT  11 JUN 92 / The Earth Summit: Convention on forests causes high emotions
 -Deep divisions over how to conserve the world's dwindling tree cover
THE most emotional conflict at the Earth Summit has been over the world's
dwindling forests. Before the conference, plans for a forest convention had
to be dropped and last-minute negotiations were still under way yesterday on
a set of 'forest principles' for conservation and management.
Even if agreement is reached, environmentalists complain that this would not
be binding and would not halt de-forestation.
Also, there seems unlikely to be any commitment to a future convention.
The crux of the debate is tropical forests and a sharp difference in how
they are viewed by north and south.
Industrialised nations tend to see them in environmental terms as a trove of
biodiversity and greenhouse gas 'sinks' that absorb carbon dioxide and thus
reduce global warming.
Developing countries tend to see them in economic terms as a trove of
resources, such as a free source of fuel, valuable tropical woods and
potential farmland.
Malaysia, which has led resistance by the Group of 77 developing countries
to a convention, argues that, if the forests are so important, then the
north must pay to preserve them, pointing out that the first world has
already destroyed most of its forests.
With plans to log up to 50 per cent of its forests by the end of the decade,
Malaysia is hardly disinterested.
Mr Lim Keng Yaik, its primary industries minister, says: 'This is the first
time in any multilateral negotiations I've seen the poor south being asked
to support the rich north. Well, I'm poor and need my forests to get on in
life so, if you want them, you must pay - and give me technology and
investment'.
In the Rio negotiations themselves, India is taking the hardest line, while
officials from Brazil, which has the world's largest forest, insist they
will only agree to a convention if it includes other areas such as temperate
forests, deserts, marine estuaries, mountains and savannahs.
All OECD countries and Russia favour a strong declaration on forests, with a
commitment to a future convention, but the US delegation is leading the
charge. It is anxious to show its green credentials in at least one area and
so have at least one document for President George Bush to sign when he
arrives today.
Mr William Reilly, head of the Environmental Protection Agency, says: 'The
principal priority of the US at this conference is in better management and
conservation of the world's forests.'
Last week, Mr Bush announced a Dollars 150m annual grant for forests, and
the US moved to curb clear-cutting in its own forests, but the initiative
was interpreted as a distraction from its refusal to sign the biodiversity
treaty.
Environmentalists even say that US support on forests is proving a liability
because of its status as the villain of the summit.
Environmentalists want the issue resolved urgently because forest cover has
been reduced by a third from its original extent.
Over the last four decades, de-forestation has accelerated sharply,
especially in developing countries, which have 60 per cent of remaining
world forest cover.
Tropical forests are disappearing at the rate of 17m hectares a year,
according to FAO statistics. This not only adds to global warming, soil
erosion and flooding, but, because 50-75 per cent of all species of plants
and animals live in tropical rainforests and most are yet to be identified,
this means species are being lost even before being identified by humanity.
Developing countries are furious at the attempt to describe forests as a
'common global heritage.' Mr Jeff Sirmon of the US Forestry Service insists:
'Forests must be saved for the good of the planet.'
But Mr Lim protests: 'That's just a way of saying - what's mine is mine and
what's yours is mine too. If it's common heritage, then pay for it, just as
I have to pay for oil and biotechnology.'
Third world nations also argue that they have more pressing priorities, such
as present poverty, and see any attempt at international monitoring as an
infringement of sovereignty.
There is backing for this from northern forest groups, which issued a
statement to the summit, saying that Canada and Brazil are comparable in
size yet Brazil has protected more than 9 per cent of its forest, compared
to less than 3 per cent in Canada, and points out that the average US
citizen uses 300 kg paper a year while, on the African continent, the
average is less than one.
So contentious is the issue that, until this week, it seemed that even the
forest principles would not be agreed to.
With 10 per cent of the world's forest and a 25 per cent share in the
Dollars 100bn world timber trade, Canada has been playing a vital mediating
role.
Mr Jag Maini from the Canadian environment ministry, explains: 'For us,
forests have both an economic and environmental role because Canadian
forestry represents a Dollars 55bn industry and 800,000 jobs.'
Disagreement remains on the issue of trade and the ability of countries to
take unilateral action, such as boycotts of timber products, as well as
commitment to a future convention.
But environmental groups say that, even if signed, the principles are too
weak because they are not binding, set no date to halt de-forestation, and
fail to address root causes of de-forestation such as poverty and terms of
trade.
Mr Robert Buschbacher of the World Wide Fund for Nature says: 'The
declaration is weaker than some existing international agreements. It is a
huge missed opportunity to protect the world's forests.'
Mr Maini is less pessimistic: 'It's a very complicated issue and the forest
principles are at least a start. I see them like the Ten Commandments - we
all lie and cheat a little but they've played an essential role in
establishing social order.'
