FT  06 MAY 92 / Swiss wonder if it's safe to get into the water: Some see
IMF and World Bank entry as little more than leaping in with the sharks
EVERY FEW months, an orderly row of campaign posters appears in the main
squares of Swiss towns and cities signalling the start of campaigning for
another round of plebiscites.
Among those erected last week in preparation for votes on May 17, one stands
out from 100 paces. It features the unmistakable and terrifying image of a
shark's open mouth. 'Down with the murderous tactics of the finance sharks,'
screams the slogan beside the great beast. The reference, it turns out, is
to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Opposition to Switzerland joining those institutions is strongly felt, it
seems. And, by all accounts, the referendum result will be a close one, with
the odds slightly in favour of rejection. This would be a serious blow for
the government in view of other plebiscites due in the next few months on
whether Switzerland should move towards joining the European Community.
The campaign is also remarkable for bringing together the most unlikely
bedfellows - left-wingers and Greens who feel IMF and World Bank policies
towards third world countries are too brutal, and conservatives who think
Fund membership fees are a waste of money.
'The IMF is interested only in keeping third world countries stable so they
can pay back their huge debts to the west,' says Mr Roland Brunner, a member
of the left-Green action committee opposing membership. 'There is no
advantage for the third world in the way the IMF works, lending them money
to pay interest on the excessive debts they already have.'
On the right of the political spectrum, there is no complaint about IMF
policies. The issue is a more practical one. 'The cost of joining is money
thrown out of the window,' says Mr Jurg Scherrer, president of the
Automobile Party, a fringe group known mainly for wanting fewer controls on
cars and more on immigrants.
'At the moment, we are participants in the IMF's projects when we choose to
be,' he says. 'We can look at each project on a case-by-case basis. If we
were a member, we would have only one vote and it would make no difference.'
Mr Scherrer recoils at the suggestion that he is in league with the left in
this battle. 'We are certainly not collaborating with the Green party on
this. Our reasons for opposing membership are totally different from
theirs.'
The federal government, which strongly favours joining the IMF and World
Bank, has pulled out all the stops in advocating its case. In late March, it
trotted out the foreign, finance and economics ministers, and the central
bank president, to emphasise the importance of Switzerland playing a full
role in international institutions.
Mr Rene Felber, foreign minister, said Switzerland's observer status at the
IMF and the World Bank was proving more and more inadequate and would become
increasingly meaningless.
The president of the Swiss National Bank, Mr Markus Lusser, said IMF
membership would cost only about SFr40m (Pounds 14.8m) a year in the
interest revenue that Switzerland would lose by having to deposit money with
the fund at below market rates. 'We are one of the world's richest
countries,' he said. 'This good fortune makes us duty bound to help other
countries.'
Mr Otto Stich, finance minister, rejected arguments that the tough
conditions the IMF attached to its aid to developing countries hurt the
poorer sections of their populations. 'The IMF is not the cause of such
circumstances. It is called in as an emergency doctor,' he said.
While all four parties in the governing coalition officially support the
government's stance, there are mavericks, the most important of whom is Mr
Christoph Blocher. Charismatic leader of the conservative Swiss People's
Party in the Zurich canton, Mr Blocher shares the views of the Automobile
Party, and has nothing but disdain for federal officials' desire to join.
'They just want to be members of the club.'
Both sides admit the result of the voting is uncertain. Mr Scherrer recalled
that the voters had turned down a proposal to join the United Nations as
recently as 1986. He also pointed to the over-stretched federal budget.
A leading Zurich banker said the decisive factor would probably be the
traditional reluctance of Swiss voters to approve any spending for which
they could not see concrete results.
