FT  18 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Breaking the ice over Canada's
frozen assets - Plans to develop a rich zinc-copper deposit in the Northwest
Territories
AVAILABILITY OF Russian ice-breaking ships, the biggest in the world, able
to force their way through ice a metre thick and topped with 40 centimetres
of snow, has changed the outlook for Izok Lake, one of the largest
undeveloped base metals deposits in North America.
No other known zinc-copper deposit in the world has better grades (metal per
tonne of ore) than Izok Lake, according to Mr Klaus Zeitler, president of
Metall Mining, a subsidiary of Metallgesellschaft of Germany. But its
location, in the frozen wastes of the Artic circle in Canada's Northwest
Territories, has held back development for about 20 years.
There seemed to be no economic way of transporting Izok Lake concentrates
(an intermediate material) to smelters at least 3,000 miles away in more
salubrious climates.
The Russian ice-breaking ships, more than 15 of them built in the former
East Germany or Finland, could solve the problem because they could move
concentrates from the Artic for two or three months a year, says Mr Zeitler.
Since the break-up of the former Soviet Union the Russians have been very
interested in doing business.
His company is paying CDollars 15m (Pounds 7.3m) to acquire a 40 per cent
interest in Izok Lake from Minnova, a mining company ultimately owned by the
Noranda, Canada's biggest natural resources group.
Last November Minnova paid USDollars 20m and a royalty to Falconbridge for
Izok Lake and two other properties in the Northwest Territories.
Falconbridge sold because it wanted to focus on its nickel projects l
expenditure on those.
Mr David Watkins, Minnova's president, reckons that Izok Lake would cost
CDollars 300m to develop.
Metall Mining's Mr Zeitler says that Izok Lake has up to 20m tonnes or ore
containing 14.4 per cent zinc and 3.2 per cent copper. There is also some
lead and silver.
He suggests that, although the expected tonnage from an open pit mine would
not be huge - about 400,000 tonnes a year, or half that of the Red Dog
zinc-lead mine in Alaska - the grades would ensure production of
concentrates containing 120,000 to 130,000 tonnes of zinc a year and 30,000
tonnes of copper.
Mr Zeitler recalls that 15 years ago Metall's first Canadian project was the
Nanisivik zinc mine on Baffin Island. 'At the time the big Canadian
companies shied away from involvement in the Artic because of the perceived
transportation difficulties. But Nanisivik has been a full technical,
logistical and financial success,' he says.
Izok Lake is 90 km (56 miles) away from Lupin, an underground gold mine
owned by Echo Bay Mines. Mr Zeitler suggests Lupin may benefit if Izok Lake
is developed. Echo Bay, one of North America's biggest gold producers,
delivers essential supplies to Lupin over a 500 km ice road from
Yellowknife, capital of the Northwest Territories. This road is available
only three months a year. If Lupin was to share the same infrastructure as
Izok Lake it could build its ice road northwards for 300 km and have it open
for five months, Mr Zeitler suggests.
He says: 'Over the past 20 years the mining industry has gained a great deal
of knowledge about the Artic. Based on this expertise and today's
technology, I believe that Izok Lake's time for development has come'.
