FT  14 FEB 92 / UK Company News: Holmes Protection Dollars 35.5m in the red
and seeking new funds
HOLMES PROTECTION, the US security group that is restructuring under new
management following a shareholders' revolt last year, yesterday reported a
Dollars 35.5m (Pounds 19.8m) pre-tax loss for 1991 after exceptional costs.
Last December, new management under the chairmanship of Sir Ian MacGregor,
former chairman of British Steel and the National Coal Board, secured a
restructuring of group debt that would write-off half the Dollars 69m
figure.
Holmes said yesterday that its ability to continue as a going concern was
dependent on it raising sufficient funds in a proposed new share issue to
pay the lenders Dollars 33m within the 'next few months'.
The loss for 1991 compared with previous profits of Dollars 5.29m.
Exceptional provisions of Dollars 30.7m mostly related to the write-down of
acquired subscriber contracts. Interest charges rose from Dollars 7.29m to
Dollars 8.23m.
Operating profits fell from Dollars 6.6m to Dollars 3.4m on sales down 7 per
cent at Dollars 59m from an operational base reduced by the previous board's
sale of activities to repay debt.
Losses per share totalled 52 cents (earnings of 7 cents)
After consultation with Arthur Andersen, its new auditors, Holmes has
adopted more conservative accounting standards.
The useful life and carrying value of acquired subscriber contracts has been
reviewed, leading to the Dollars 21m write down, and fixed assets have also
been reduced by Dollars 3.6m, also taken as an exceptional charge.
Holmes said its strategy was to increase the recurring revenue base in order
to cover the high proportion of fixed costs of running its moni- toring and
servicing installations.
The group would pursue a vigorous sales effort and seek to acquire
subscriber contracts from third parties.
Orders for new installations in January had already surpassed the previous
year's level by 20 per cent and there had been a substantial drop in
cancellation rates.
