FT  04 APR 92 / Sport: Rising star falls back to earth - Squash / At 18 Del
Harris was set to rule the world. At 22 he's happy with a slice of Essex
THE OXFORD dictionary says that 'burn out' is to burn to nothing, to
extinction. The young squash professional sitting in the Ardleigh sports
centre near Colchester was far from that. Jeans and a lumberjack's shirt
could not disguise his build, that of a heavyweight boxer. True, he looked
as though he would rather have been match point down against an old rival
than talking about himself, but little about him suggested he was a man
burnt to nothing.
Yet some say Del Harris is burnt out. He is the boy wonder who did not go on
to become world champion, and it is doubtful now that he ever will. 'What do
you do when you wake up one morning aged 19 and realise that you've done
just about everything there is to do in squash?' asked an acquaintance of
Harris's.
Long before he could vote, Harris was the most brilliant junior squash
player Britain has ever produced. He won every title open to him in England.
He won the Drysdale Cup, the de facto world junior championships, four times
in a row, an unprecedented achievement.
One night in 1988 he gave an exhibition at the Royal Automobile Club in
London. 'Del will play your two best players', said his manager, Norman
Norrington, with a knowing smile. 'Put them both on court against him, one
against two. Del is a big, strong boy. He can handle that.'
It was a remarkable demonstration of Harris's talent. Taking enormous
strides and hitting the ball so hard that at times it sounded like thunder
claps, Harris hurtled around the court to such effect it looked as though it
would need three opponents to contain him, not two. Those who watched that
night were convinced he would become world champion in due course.
But Harris may have soared too high too quickly. The man who was ranked
eighth in the world when he was 18 is now 12th in the world aged 22. In the
British Open squash championship, which starts today, Harris has no
expectation of getting beyond the last 16.
'Del is an exceptional athlete', says Jonah Barrington, Britain's best-ever
squash player. 'He was very confident on court and he has immense power
which on occasions has to be seen to be believed. I remember watching him
play Ross Norman (a former world champion). Norman was obviously very
experienced. He was prepared to play an attritional game, which Del doesn't
like to do because of his height and weight. Del obliterated him in
half-an-hour for the loss of three points. It was one of the most remarkable
demonstrations I have ever seen. It should have been videoed for posterity.'
Performances such as this were rare. Harris is big and heavy - 6 ft 1 in and
nearly 14 stone, hardly the ideal measurements in a sport where champions
are several inches shorter and as much as four stone lighter.
His notorious on-court confidence suffered from a series of challenge
matches against the Pakistani stars, Jehangir and Jansher Khan, the best
players in the world. The Khans, sensing an emerging rival, were determined
to put the upstart in his place once and for all, and did so with
devastating effect. In ten matches Harris won only one game.
He climbed to No 7 in the world only to injure a disc in his lower back,
probably from training too hard. No sooner had he recovered than he suffered
an attack of Bell's palsy, an illness that affects the facial nerves. For
three weeks he was numb down the left side of his face. He could not feel
the water when he took a shower. Half his tongue was numb. Then, almost as
suddenly as it had arrived, it disappeared.
At last he was fit and healthy again. But these setbacks had scarred him
mentally. 'Going on the circuit early and playing the top guys all the time
meant I got beaten a lot and that knocked my confidence', says Harris. 'I
started doubting my ability, my fitness, my technique. In time all these
doubts got to me. They affected my mind. It has not gone as well as it
might.'
Squash expects potential champions to work hardest when there are the most
temptations not to. 'To be dedicated is not enough', says Barrington, whose
own dedication was unquestioned. 'You need to be obsessed with it.' Far from
being obsessed by squash, Harris has become rather tired of it. 'Because my
life has been given up to squash I've lost a little interest in the game',
he says. 'I started playing when I was nine and it has been squash every day
since then. I never seem to have a break. I need a rest.'
Harris is a gentle man, handsome and rich. He is about to move in to a
Pounds 250,000 house being built for him by his father, and he owns other
property near Colchester where he grew up. He may not have become world
champion, but he is healthy and happy, never more so than in his home
surroundings. Age is on his side. He may yet come again.
