FT  04 MAR 92 / Hardliners strengthen grip on Likud
HARDLINERS were yesterday in firm charge of the ruling Likud party of Mr
Yitzhak Shamir, the Israeli prime minister, after completing a resounding
victory in elections for the party's list of candidates for the general
election in June.
But the marked rightward shift in the Likud orchestrated by Mr Shamir and
his allies in more than a week of bitter feuding was won at the expense of
two important party factions whose angry disaffection could prove costly in
the election against a revitalised Labour opposition led by Mr Yitzhak
Rabin, the newly-elected leader.
Mr Shamir and Mr Moshe Arens, his defence minister, combined forces with Mr
Ariel Sharon, the hardline housing minister, to ensure that the Likud's
ranked list of 51 candidates was dominated by their supporters.
The losers were Mr David Levy, the foreign minister and champion of the
large Sephardi, or Oriental Jewish faction in the Likud, and a group of
liberals.
The results were a clear assertion of supremacy by those who have flatly
refused to offer any compromise on the claim to perpetual Israeli rule over
the occupied territories in the current Middle East peace process and those
 -like Mr Sharon  - who have opposed the talks altogether.
But the outcome opened up deep splits within Likud which was formed from a
coalition of forces in the 1970s under former prime minister Menachem Begin,
himself gravely ill yesterday after a heart attack. Sephardi party members
were furious at what they saw as a crushing of their interests by the
Shamir-Arens-Sharon alliance which represents the old Ashkenazi, or European
leadership.
In his time, Mr Begin was always careful to court Sephardi support,
recognising its role in bringing the Likud to power in 1977. On Monday
night, however, his son Binyamin Begin, a senior Likud MP, was booed and
jostled out of an attempt to calm a meeting of Mr Levy's angry supporters.
Mr Levy accused his rivals of 'destroying the Likud', prompting Mr Shamir to
issue public assurances that Mr Levy's positions as deputy prime minister
and foreign minister would still be his if Likud won the election. He
brushed aside threats from Levy supporters to defect to the Labour party,
saying the divisions would soon be smoothed over.
