FT  07 MAY 92 / Technology: Striking it rich in the deep blue sea
'WE GO where no one else dares,' boasts an engineer from the deep-sea
drilling team of Petrobras, Brazil's state oil monopoly. At 625 metres, the
company's Platform XIII in the Marlim oilfield off the coast of Rio de
Janeiro is the world's deepest in production.
Petrobras's efforts were rewarded earlier this week with the Offshore
Technology Conference Award for Distinguished Achievement - the oil
industry's most prestigious technology prize.
The company has been breaking records for deep sea oil production since 1986
when it put into commercial operation a well at a depth of 384m. 'Having
identified oil in deeper waters we realised we needed to develop the
technologies to make this production viable,' says Roberto Jardim, director
of deep-sea production at Petrobras.
Since then the company has been going deeper and deeper, breaking depth
records for installation of monobuoys, manifolds and submerged pipelines. In
March of last year it broke through the 750m barrier at its Marlim field.
Previously, 350m was considered the limit because it is the maximum depth at
which divers can work. Most platforms in the North Sea and the Gulf of
Mexico are at less than 200m.
Petrobras was forced to go deeper because Brazil's main oil reserves lie in
water as deep as 3,000m. Until the late 1970s the country was importing 80
per cent of its oil needs but the combination of two oil shocks sent the
bill soaring. In addition, the debt crisis which cut off access to foreign
capital made it imperative for Brazil to start exploiting its own reserves.
'Unlike other companies which test new equipment exhaustively before use we
like to develop our equipment on site even though this may mean interrupting
production. We can do this because we have the advantage of real fields to
test in so we can move quickly to make the process economic,' says Jardim.
Mainly as a result of its deep-sea successes Brazil now imports only 40 per
cent of its 1.2m barrel per day needs. The Campos Basin, where Petrobras's
wells are located, accounts for more than 60 per cent of Brazil's oil
production. It has estimated reserves of 6bn barrels in a 100,000 sq km area
ranging from the coast to a depth of 3,000m.
The secret of the company's success, according to Petrobras technicians, is
the combination of a 'wet Christmas tree' and a deep-sea robot. A 'wet
Christmas tree' is oil industry jargon for the pipe and valve mechanism
placed on a wellhead to control flow before oil can be pumped out.
Conventional oilfields use steel-lines or divers to guide the positioning.
But fields such as Marlim are too deep to use these methods - at 720m where
the first Marlim well was completed the pressure is 14 times that of the
earth's atmosphere. The Petrobras breakthrough was achieved by using a
satellite signal to direct the tree into its place on the wellhead, guided
by the giant eye (in the form of a video camera) of a robot lowered on to
the seabed.
Oil from such sub-sea wells is pumped to a floating pier to which ships can
anchor in the open sea, making it possible to load safely in the Campos
Basin. The company has 11 such floating production systems. 'These have been
very important in leading our deep-sea drilling because they enable us to go
into production within a year of discovery, giving quick returns,' says
Jardim.
According to Petrobras officials, production costs for Marlim are Dollars 8
per barrel - competitive with other offshore operations. Deep-sea production
will be the biggest contributor in the company's plans to increase
production from 650,000 barrels per day to 1m by the end of 1994. 'We want
to go deeper still,' says Ernesto Weber, former Petrobras chief. The company
aims to break the 2,000m depth mark by the end of this decade.
