FT  25 APR 92 / Property: Still waiting for their ship to come in - London's
Docklands, an area with a blighted past and an uncertain future
DURING ten roller-coaster years, the London Docklands has been remoulded
into one of the most exhilarating, bewildering and exasperating landscapes
in Britain.
For the purists, hype gave way to hostility long ago. 'London's Docklands
contains one of the worst collections of late 20th century building to be
seen anywhere in the world,' said the Architecture Design and Technology
Press. 'The triumph of commercial expediency over civic values,' concluded
the Prince of Wales.
But anybody tired of the sullen ranks of suburban terraces elsewhere in
London could be swayed by the Dockland's proximity to the heart of the
capital, its energy and the appeal of being a pioneer in an area where urban
history is still being made.
A surreal 'city of the 21st century' has been superimposed on an area that
still has Dickensian streets, 18th century churches and faint echoes of its
raffish maritime past.
The fit is not wholly successful: the toy-like light railway that glides by
the rooftops is notoriously unreliable; the flimsy balconies and steeply
pitched roofs of new developments resemble those of dolls' houses; and the
towering Canary Wharf looks like a fairy-tale castle deposited in the middle
of nowhere.
The most popular developments in the Docklands are those that successfully
combine the old and the new. The dream of most would-be buyers in the
Docklands is a converted warehouse, complete with mellow brown brick, beams,
huge rooms, high ceilings and views of the Thames.
A three-bedroom flat with these attributes in New Crane Wharf in Wapping
would cost Pounds 325,000. Flats in Butlers Wharf, a scheme originally
devised by Sir Terence Conran, a short walk from the City, are more
expensive. A three bedroom flat with a magnificent view on to Tower Bridge
costs Pounds 450,000. (Savills are the agent for both these developments.)
Not all warehouse conversions live up to the fantasy image, though. Some
have insufficient light, no balconies and do not face the river. The
position of the windows means that even the best river views are often
obscured when sitting.
Newly-built developments can be as popular, and expensive, as converted
warehouses. Knight Frank &amp; Rutley is marketing two bedroom flats in the St
Hilda's development overlooking the river in Wapping High Street for Pounds
300,000.
Whatever the charms of these buildings, potential buyers have to consider
the disadvantages of moving to an area that has undergone such a dramatic
upheaval. As well as some friction between long-standing inhabitants and
wealthy newcomers, there are reminders that the new developments have been
grafted on to an area noted for dereliction and poverty.
For instance, some flats in the ziggurat built by Regalian at Free Trade
Wharf, which cost up to Pounds 265,000 for two-bedrooms) offer a
breathtaking view of the river at its steepest point in the bend at the
front, but a view of run-down housing over the bustling four-lane highway to
the back.
The practical problems that have dogged Dockland pioneers are starting to
ease. More shops are slowly arriving, most notably a Safeway supermarket
opening later this year in Wapping. The traffic problems will be greatly
improved when the current batch of extensive roadworks is completed.
Indeed, many Docklands dwellers say the area's attraction is a practical
one. Compared to the travails of commuting from the country, a short drive
into the City has great appeal for bankers and brokers. 'British Rail has
made more sales for us than anybody else,' says one saleswoman.
Is now the time to buy? After a difficult few years, agents have a spring in
their step. 'For three months before the election, people were holding
back,' says Sarah Shelley of Knight Frank &amp; Rutley. Since the election, she
has been innundated with enquiries, she says.
'I firmly believe that now we have a Tory government we have hit the
bottom,' says Russell Taylor of Savills. He predicts that prices will stay
level for the next 12 months.
Prices have fallen 30-40 per cent from their peak, according to Taylor. Even
now, however, valuers working for building societies maintain that buildings
are often overpriced.
Some developers are prepared to offer large discounts for rapid sales. But
others are determined not to be pushed into offering firesale prices. The
receivers who manage Butlers Wharf are taking a long term view, preferring
to let flats rather than sell them at bargain prices.
Anyone buying a property in the hope of making a rapid capital gain should
also consider the possibility that the buildings bought by people hoping for
a speculative gain may be released as the market recovers.
Any assessment of the state of the market has to grapple with the diverse
character of different parts of the Docklands. As the most established part
of the market, Wapping's property tends to be more expensive than the Isle
of Dogs, where prices for one-bedroom flats startt Pounds 55,000. Surrey
Quays, which offers four bedroom houses at Pounds 90,000, is dismissed as a
suburban housing estate by agents working north of the river.
The biggest question mark hangs over the Isle of Dogs, which is dominated by
the huge Canary Wharf development. This has an uncertain future. Its
developer Olympia &amp; York has run into financial difficulties. The company is
in talks with its bankers, which will determine whether it can carry on with
the project.
The stakes are high, and there are large implications for the residential
market. The establishment of a financial centre on the Isle of Dogs was
expected to boost demand for housing enormously. The doubts over the area's
commercial prospects have punctured these hopes.
Another, related problem is the future of the extension of the Jubilee line,
which is to link Canary Wharf with Central London by 1996. This tube link,
which would boost house prices, could be in jeopardy because O &amp; Y is
scheduled to make a large contribution to the project.
Agents say these doubts are not deterring people who are already working at
Canary Wharf from buying property close to their employment. Although the
area has a rather desolate, clinical atmosphere, there are attractive
properties available.
Consider, for instance, Rosehaugh's Anchorage Point next to the brash,
nautical Cascades development, which became an early landmark on the island.
This new block of flats, which has a swimming pool and gymnasium, charges
Pounds 130,000 for a two-bedroom flat. (The agent is Savills).
Canary Wharf's problems are further evidence that the establishment of the
Docklands as a thriving commercial centre will take longer than was expected
in the heady days of the property boom. That suggests that people buying
property in the hope of a speculative gain may have to wait longer than they
bargained for.
People should only step into the Docklands market if they like the area's
character and its proximity to the City. Anyone less sure could try it out
by making use of the area's well-established letting market.
