FT  04 JAN 92 / Gardening: How to keep your plants contained - The pots,
tubs, urns and bags that are available to gardeners
THERE IS little new about container gardening except, perhaps, the name and
the facilities that are available for carrying it out. But gardeners have
always grown some plants in pots, tubs, boxes, urns and many other
containers which could be moved about readily, maybe brought under cover
when the weather was bad or the plants were out of season or, more likely
nowadays when so many container plants are cheaply raised from seed, simply
discarded and replaced with something new.
Le Notre made great use of containers in France in the 17th century. The
Versailles tubs which he used are still one of the most elegant designs.
They are particularly suitable for large plants such as orange bushes -
which is what Le Notre wanted them for - camellias, hydrangeas or
rhododendrons.
At the other extreme of utility without beauty is the growing bag. This is a
fairly recent innovation which scored an instant success as a convenient way
of growing tomatoes, cucumbers and other crops that are susceptible to
soil-borne pests and diseases.
Anything that makes it easy to use fresh growing composts for each crop, and
to dispose easily and with certainty what has already been used, must be
attractive to growers.
It was soon clear that such bags had uses for ornamental plants but it took
manufacturers a surprisingly long time to realise that these required bags
more attractive in appearance than the plain black, or even worse, the
advertisement-covered bags used for commercial crops.
Really good containers should be attractive in their own right so that they
can be used as ornaments even when nothing is growing in them.
There are two main ways in which ornamental plants may be used in
containers, one to maintain a constantly changing display, largely of plants
grown from seed and discarded after a single season of display; the other
for more permanent cultivation mainly of shrubs and perennials, some of
which may need protection during the winter.
There is no doubt that it is the seed-raised plants, many of them raised
professionally and marketed when just coming into flower, that are making
the greatest advance in sales at the moment and are being marketed in vast
numbers for hanging baskets, window boxes, pots and ornamental containers of
many kinds.
The rise in popularity of patio and terrace gardens, and the increasing use
of balconies for growing plants, have all contributed to this increase in
using containers, and growers have been quick to seize on the opportunity to
market plants in convenient packs suitable for making successive displays.
There are two main danger areas in container gardening whatever its precise
purpose and material. These are watering and feeding. They are closely
related since plants can only take in food in solution, which is one good
reason for mixing the food, whether organic or inorganic, with water.
It is just as easy, and as harmful, to overfeed and overwater as to do the
reverse and the two guidelines I regard as most helpful are to use feeds
according to label instructions erring, if at all, on understrength, and to
give water, with or without food, until it starts to trickle out of the
drainage holes or slits, or through the moss used to line hanging baskets,
and then to give no more until it is needed - and that is the hardest thing
of all to judge.
Eye and touch are still the best guides but these are skills that require
practice. Moisture guages are available but I have not found them
particularly helpful.
As to what to put in containers, many garden centres and nurseries have
excellent display areas with frequently changing container plantings and
much can be learnt from them.
An excellent book called Container Gardening by Malcolm Hillier, published
by Dorling Kindersley, at Pounds 14.99, is worth obtaining.
It could prove very valuable to inexperienced gardeners not only for its
sensible text but also for its many excellent colour pictures.
They show a great variety of containers, both conventional and
unconventional, ways of using them and of associating plants in them.
At the moment terracotta appears to be the most favoured material for
containers. Even my local petrol station maintains an excellent selection of
them and, because of its porocity, it is a material that plants like.
Terracotta is only the up-market name for what in humbler circumstances is
just a clay pot - and most old gardeners still maintain that plants feel
more at home in clay than in plastic because clay breathes and also allows
movement of water.
When plants are to be changed frequently I would always prefer peat-based
composts which are clean and easy to handle.
For more permanent planting there is a good case to be made for
old-fashioned soil-based composts of the John Innes type, but I find that
many of those sold under that name contain too little humus and so get too
impervious to air and water after a few months.
The remedy is to add more peat, leaf mould, old mushroom compost or whatever
is available that will keep the mixture porous for a long time.
