FT  23 JUN 92 / International Capital Markets: LTV petitions court in labour
dispute
LTV, the large US steelmaker which has been operating under the protection
of Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code for the past six years, said yesterday
that its steel unit had asked the bankruptcy court for authority to reject
its labour agreement with the United Steelworkers of America.
The union speedily retaliated, however, threatening industrial action if the
current collective bargaining agreement is thrown out. 'We have repeatedly
told the company that if its petition results in the rejection of our labour
contract, a work stoppage would follow,' said Mr Anthony Rainaldi, chairman
of the union's negotiating committee.
'There is no question that the company risks committing suicide with this
step, and the negotiating differences between us do not warrant that risk,'
he said.
The increased tension comes in the wake of an LTV reorganisation plan, which
was hammered out earlier this year and appeared likely to win the backing of
the group's leading creditors. If implemented, this would finally allow the
company to emerge from bankruptcy. However, the plan pegged creditors'
recoveries to union concessions, and management at LTV's steel division has
subsequently held a series of talks with the USW.
Under US bankruptcy law, a debtor can, with court approval, reject a labour
agreement if negotiations fail to produce an acceptable new accord. It can
then effectively impose its own terms.
Yesterday, LTV said 'deep fundamental differences' still separated the union
and the management positions, even after the latest round of bargaining
which started on May 18. It added, however, that it was committed to 'good
faith bargaining' and did not intend to implement 'unilateral modifications
to the labour agreement' until the outcome of the sale of its aerospace and
defence division was certain.
By contrast, the union claimed that LTV had walked out of negotiations, and
accused the company of 'stubbornly sticking to all of its concession
demands, both for active and retired workers'. It said it was making
'preparations for the upcoming fight'.
When LTV first raised the possibility of revoking the labour contract in
April, the union said that it would not permit the wages and benefits of its
members and pensioners 'to be held hostage'.
'If the company persists in its misguided strategy, there will be serious
repercussions in the plants and the marketplace,' it warned two months ago.
