FT  28 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets: De Beers reflects Johannesburg's woes -
The fall in its share price has dragged the whole market lower
Following a long period of gravity-defying upward movement, the Johannesburg
Stock Exchange (JSE) has, over the past two months, finally experienced the
correction analysts have been predicting for more than a year.
A combination of political gloom and economic stagnation has seen the
overall index fall by 17 per cent from its 1992 peak of 3,749 set in June to
close yesterday at 3,126. The industrial index has retreated 14 per cent
from a high of 4,694, also reached in June, to stand yesterday at 4,058.
The JSE rose by nearly 40 per cent in 1991, fuelled by optimism about a
political settlement, and the familiar hothouse effect of large
institutional cash-flows, trapped by exchange control, chasing a limited
number of quality stocks. Optimists believed that the improved political
outlook justified the upward rerating, especially of industrial shares.
The consensus, however, was that the JSE was waiting for an excuse for a
downward correction. Mr Anthony Gibson, portfolio manager at investment
house Syfrets, notes that on the five occasions in the past 30 years when
the price/earnings ratio of the JSE has reached 12.5 (it is now 12) the
rating has unwound within 12 months, either through stronger earnings growth
or lower share prices.
The past few months have given no reason for confidence on the former, but
ample on the latter. Political gloom was undoubtedly the catalyst, with the
collapse in May of constitutional talks, the Boipatong massacre in mid-June,
and the subsequent mass action campaign organised by the African National
Congress, driving the country into its worst political crisis since the
release of ANC leader Mr Nelson Mandela in February 1990. Belief that the
country was moving towards a speedy negotiated settlement was replaced by
the realisation of a difficult and potentially protracted transition.
Economic news was also depressing. By June, economists had realised that far
from the recession bottoming out, it had been aggravated by the worst
drought this century, putting the country on course for its third
consecutive year of negative growth.
Recent corporate news has only served to confirm what the economists had
been forecasting.
In a category of its own, in terms of impact, was the announcement earlier
this month by De Beers, which controls the world diamond market, that a
'substantial reduction' in the final dividend was likely owing to a sudden
deterioration in the market outlook.
The unexpected news had a devastating effect on the price of the dominant
share on the JSE - it accounts for approximately 10 per cent of all trade
and has a similar weighting in the overall index. From R73 per share on the
day the results were released - and having stood at R94 as recently as May
14 - the price for De Beers has plunged 24 per cent to close at R55.50
yesterday, dragging the overall index down by 7 per cent over the same
period.
Although the market was on the way down, the De Beers announcement
undoubtedly crystallised perceptions, emphasising that the world economy was
weaker than many realised.
De Beers itself may not yet have bottomed out: citing the prospect of a
large dividend cut and weak earnings, analysts believe the share price is
likely to hit R45 before it reaches R60 again.
Although there is agreement that the JSE is by now discounting most of the
bad economic and political news, analysts agree that it is more likely to go
down than up. In particular, it remains vulnerable to weaker world markets,
especially the Dow Jones Industrial indicator for Wall Street, which the the
JSE tracks closely.
Investors should probably be happy if the market finishes the year at
current levels, though present indicators suggest they may not be so
fortunate.
With growth in company earnings now being put out to the second half of next
year, an upturn for the JSE is probably unlikely before the first quarter of
1993.
