FT  24 DEC 92 / Finance and the Family: It pays to put your budgeting on
record - A look at programs to help with personal finances / Software
TWO YEARS ago, I resolved to put our domestic finances on computer. Never
before has an effort at self-improvement had such long-lasting results.
Computer budgeting has, of course, proved what experience had strongly
suggested already: namely, that if it isn't one thing it's another. A nasty
noise from the clutch or a prime William Gear at Christie's - there is
rarely a month that doesn't involve a large and wholly unpredictable
expense.
But it really does help to have things in order. Doing the income tax
remains a chore but is no longer a nightmare. Decisions, large and small,
are much easier.
A newcomer called Quicken is undoubtedly the computer budget program to go
for. It is priced modestly, easy to use and full of useful features. Until
the end of January, purchasers of Quicken can receive (for less than half
price) a copy of Tax Reckoner, a sound piece of software which I recommended
in 1991.
It is distressing to think about income tax at all in these precious weeks
between the discharge of one's 1992 obligations and the arrival of the 1993
return form on the mat. But if you can bear to get to grips with Tax
Reckoner now, you will find it a powerful assistant later. Its authors can
supply an annual update to accommodate changes introduced in the Budget.
If you do not have a hard disk on your home computer, perhaps because it is
an old office model, consider an idiosyncratic budget program called
Personal Cashflow. The unusual thing about it is that you do not have to
call for a 'report' when you want to survey your finances. You type 'V' (for
View) and there it all is.
Quicken includes portfolio management among its many virtues. It lacks some
of the more sophisticated forms of graph, and share prices cannot be updated
automatically by telephone, but it includes all basic facilities and some
useful extras.
For instance, you can assign an 'investment goal' to a share or an asset,
according to your ambitions for it (income, capital growth, maximum safety,
or whatever), and monitor the subsequent performance of a group of shares
with a common goal.
There are great advantages in having your share portfolio and the rest of
your finances under one electronic roof. For that reason alone, for
portfolio management I would prefer Quicken to the nearest competitor,
Stockmarket 2 from Meridian Software. But, again, if you are using
somebody's cast-off computer, you might be grateful for a sound program,
priced reasonably, which can run from a single floppy disk. Stockmarket 2
meets the job description. It is simple and straightforward and the graphs
are excellent.
For more advanced portfolio management, I remain enthusiastic about
Fairshares from JSL Software. I have been using it for nearly a year now,
updating prices weekly and adding company results and dividend declarations
as they come in. I have learned a lot. I value the chance to store historic
information about turnover and earnings per share, and the program's ability
to convert old purchase prices into their modern, index-linked equivalents.
These features supplement and give further meaning to price graphs - and the
graphs themselves are wonderful.
High among my frivolous resolutions for 1993 is a face- to-face encounter
with double-entry bookkeeping. I do not understand debits and credits. To
me, the terminology seems wilfully perverse, but I am determined to master
it. To this end, I will use the computer-assisted course published by Ivy
Educational Publishing. I have worked successfully through other courses
offered by Ivy. They can teach me bookkeeping if anyone can.
Quicken costs Pounds 49.95 from Intuit Ltd, Manor Court, High Street,
Harmondsworth, West Drayton, Middlesex UB7 0AQ. Freephone 0800-585-058. Fax
081-759-2077. Until the end of January, Quicken and Vital Software's Tax
Reckoner are available as a package from Intuit for Pounds 99.
Personal Cashflow 2.1 costs Pounds 49 from Majengo Software Ltd, 3 Hatter's
Croft, Cockermouth, Cumbria CA13 9RJ. Tel. 0900-824-945. Fax 0900-828-532. A
demonstration disk is available.
Stockmarket 2 costs Pounds 49.95 from Meridian Software, Amberley House, The
Park, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 6AL. Tel. 081-309-5960.
Fairshares 6.5 costs Pounds 99 plus Pounds 10 for postage and packing from
JSL Software Ltd, Freepost 5 West Street, Epsom, Surrey KT18 7RL. Tel.
0372-741-969. Fax 0372 739883. Other versions of the program have more
features and cost more. A demonstration disk is available.
Write to Ivy Educational Publishing plc, Ivy House, 233/235 Roehampton Lane,
London SW15 4LB for a list of its computer-based financial courses. Tel.
081-780-1494. Fax 081-780-1420.
