FT  04 APR 92 / Food: Bargain buys when you are in France - Off on holiday?
Jancis Robinson picks some wine bargains
ONE OF life's great mysteries is why anyone ever buys a bottle of wine in a
so-called duty-free shop - especially in France, where excise duty on wine
is negligible anyway. You can usually save a pound or two on a bottle of
champagne, but the overpriced still wines are to be avoided at all costs,
especially at airports.
The two most arresting sights at Charles de Gaulle Airport recently were
'Euro Disneyfication' in full swing, and the Chateau Haut-Brion 1984 offered
there for sale at FFr380 a bottle, when it could be bought in a French
supermarket for FFr199.
As this year's holiday season gets under way, British wine enthusiasts would
do well to keep a keen eye on wine prices in France, particularly because,
from the beginning of next year, returning Britons (like all EC travellers)
will be allowed to import as many as 120 bottles of wine without any
question of having to pay the UK chancellor's distasteful new excise duty of
95p a bottle. (You can bring in even more if you can convince Customs
officers that it is really all for personal use.)
Britain's more aggressive retailers are said to be scouring the Channel
ports for likely sites; personally, I fear for the nation's axles. A saving
of Pounds 114-plus-VAT a head is quite an incentive to cram bottles into
every possible corner of even the frailest of vehicles. I only hope that the
ferry operators will take into account the dramatically increased weight of
returning Brits - not just a few extra pounds on the waistline, but about
180 kilos (nearly 400lb) of vin per person.
But what sort of vin should it be? A trawl around French supermarkets
reveals just how seriously they now take wine - fine wine, in particular. It
would seem that any self-respecting Auchan, Carrefour, Euromarche, Leclerc
and Monoprix has to have its treasured bottles of Chateau d'Yquem and,
perhaps, an 'off-vintage' of a first-growth claret, to reassure customers
that it, too, knows what the famous names of Bordeaux are. And prices for
off-vintages are revealingly low.
At Angers Euromarche recently, for example, you could buy a bottle of either
Ch Latour 1987 or Ch Haut-Brion 1984 for less than FFr200 (Pounds 20), below
the theoretical current wholesale price at source in Bordeaux, long before
any taxes or margins are accounted for. (For these wines, Harveys of Bristol
and London's Berry Bros &amp; Rudd charge Pounds 32.22 and Pounds 40
respectively.) This, of course, is evidence of the dire straits in which the
Bordeaux merchants now find themselves, having been forced to buy lesser
vintages to secure their allocations of the good ones. (Many British
supermarkets are similarly awash with 1987's less successful bottlings).
A better bet, for those who like their bargains to taste good too, would be
the current special offer in Auchan supermarkets in the Paris region
(centralised buying is rare among French retailers) on 1985 and 1989
clarets. No off-vintages, these. Ch l'Angelus 1985 is just FFr160 francs
(Pounds 25 at Peatlings) while Ch Nenin 1989 is Ffr95 (Pounds 14.99 in
Oddbins' 1989 offer).
You might not want - or be able to devote - all of your 120-bottle allowance
to such smart wines, but it is significant that French supermarkets can
offer a range of crus classes, and the odd truly great wine, by the single
bottle - even if many have reached the shelf via America and even Britain
(check for slip labels, and that there is no seepage).
Montparnasse's INNO/Monoprix clearly sees itself as a wine showcase, with
three vintages apiece of Chx Mouton and Margaux, including Ch
Mouton-Rothschild 1970 at sive jewel Ch Latour 1961 languishing on a dark
shelf at FFr3200. (If you could find it in Britain, you would almost
certainly have to spend more than Pounds 4500 to buy a whole case of it.)
Foires aux Vins, special wine promotions, have become an established fact of
hypermarche life. Many branches of Leclerc will be in full fling this month.
The Bayeux one, about an hour's drive from both Cherbourg and Le Havre, has
a much better cave than the supermarket norm throughout the year.
But the most realistic wine value in France is under FFr40 a bottle (wines
that would sell in Britain for Pounds 2-Pounds 7). The current rash of
special offers on petits chateaux, Bordeaux's legion of small wine farms,
can take supermarket prices as low as FFr12 a bottle for a fault-free claret
which would cost at least Pounds 3 on a British shelf. It would also make
sense to stock up on names more familiar to the French than the British -
such as sturdy red Madiran, which could sell for FFr18 a bottle; Bourgueil
(FFr26), or Sylvaner d'Alsace (white wine prices are not so hot this year,
thanks to frosts a year ago).
Good specialist wine merchants, cavistes, are much thinner on the ground
than in Britain. The Guide Hachette des Vins, a 950-page annual wine
directory available in most French bookshops, lists fewer than 25 outside
Paris. The Caves Jeanne-d'Arc, in Rouen's rue Jeanne d'Arc, is the most
accessible to cross-Channel raiders.
For the true connoisseur, however, France's greatest duty-free treasures
will be found chez the family that made them. The trick is to identify the
quality-conscious goodies - rather than the avaricious baddies - which lurk
behind the signs promising you Degustation-Vente. An investment of FFr159 in
the Guide Hachette could repay handsomely in this respect: it lists most
(not all) of France's top producers and the wines they have to sell,
together with a price guide, star ratings, telephone numbers, opening hours,
vinification details and even tasting notes for those (French speakers) who
wish to impress as they taste their way through dark caves and dusty
cellars: the very antithesis of airport shopping.
