FT  19 FEB 92 / Gloom in Germany over outlook for economy
THE GERMAN economy stands at a watershed, and the coming months will decide
if the present slowdown is a pause for breath, or the beginning of a
longer-lasting downturn, the Economics Ministry warned yesterday.
In its gloomiest prognosis for months, the ministry identified two decisive
negative factors which could tip the economy into a lasting recession:
continuation of last year's high rate of wage increases, and a failure in
the negotiations in the Uruguay round of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (Gatt).
Publication of the ministry's latest monthly report coincided with new
statistics for wages, prices and external trade for the past year. They
showed largely negative trends on all fronts for 1991 as a whole, although
there was a marginal improvement in December's trade figures and January's
inflation rate.
In particular, the wage figures published by the Federal Statistics Office
showed that although gross wages rose faster than inflation, net wages -
after tax and social security payments - actually fell below the rise in the
consumer price index.
Between October 1990 and October 1991, gross wages in west German industry
and commerce rose by an average 5.4 per cent, compared with a 3.5 per cent
increase in the cost of living. However, after allowing for both tax
(including the 'solidarity surcharge' for unification) and inflation, net
wages dropped between 1.1 and 3.3 per cent, according to Mr Egon Holder,
head of the statistical office.
That loss in purchasing power is now an important factor fuelling union pay
demands and contributing to the slowdown in the west German economy.
As for the trade picture, Germany saw a large deterioration in its trade
balance and current account over the year, related essentially to the import
surge to fuel demand in east Germany, combined with declining export demand
in the rest of the world economy. However, imports dropped sharply (by 7.6
per cent) in December, to mark a slight recovery.
In spite of the combination of surging imports and sluggish exports, visible
trade remained in surplus, but down from DM107.4bn (Pounds 37.4bn) in 1990
to just DM20.8bn (Pounds 7.2bn) last year. Within that figure is a sharp
reduction in Germany's trade surplus with France and Britain (down by almost
DM10bn in each case, to DM8.6bn and DM8.1bn respectively), and a switch from
surplus to a DM1.3bn deficit with the US.
The overall balance of payments switched from a surplus of DM77.4bn in 1990
to a deficit of DM34.2bn last year, including payments for the Gulf war and
a significant outflow of investment capital.
The Economics Ministry warned that the rate of wage increases was equally
worrying in both east and west Germany. While pay rises in the west were
fuelling inflation, those in the east were discouraging investment in the
region, leaving it dependent on government subsidies - which meant a
continuing high tax burden and therefore depressed consumer demand in the
west.
