FT  06 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Sri Lanka sees bright future in
the tea leaves - Managers of the privatised plantations are brimming with
confidence
IT HAS been less than six months since Sri Lanka pushed through a radical
reform of its tea industry, but plantation managers are already confident
that they can rapidly turn the loss-making sector round.
In June, the tea estates - which have for nearly two decades been run at a
loss by the state - were regrouped and placed under private management.
One of the new management companies, Hayleys Plantation Services, expects
its Talawakelle plantations to become profitable within the next two years.
Mr WL Wijewardena, the general manager, says that the situation can be
improved dramatically simply by employing standard techniques, such as
proper use of fertiliser, to increase yields.
Sri Lankan yields, which average 1,100 kg a hectare, are far below those of
its main competitors, such as India and Kenya. State managers, through
neglect and incompetence, did little to improve the situation. Scant
attention was paid to replanting higher-yielding tea varieties and the
application of fertiliser was sporadic.
Managers at Talawakelle also intend to become more sensitive to market
needs, says Mr Wijewardena. Sri Lanka has been notoriously slow to react to
international trends, for example producing only 3 per cent of CTC (cut,
tear and curl) tea, which accounts for the greater part of world trade.
There is also scope to enter specialist markets such as scented teas and tea
bags.
Those involved in the Sri Lankan industry are hoping that Mr Wijewardena's
confidence is well founded. The sector, in spite of being the country's
largest net earner of foreign exchange, has been an economic liability ever
since estates were nationalised in the mid-1970s.
The two state corporations put in charge of plantations were heavily
subsidised by the government, to the tune of SLRs400m (Pounds 5.8m) a month,
according to brokers Forbes and Walker.
Mr Maxwell Fernando, a consultant at Forbes and Walker, estimates that the
total loss to the economy during 17 years of state management was a
'colossal' SLRs50bn.
Whatever the scale of losses, the government has seen fit to shuffle off
responsibility for running the estates. Fear of wholesale redundancies among
the largely Indian Tamil workforce, however, persuaded the administration to
stop short of outright privatisation.
Instead it chose to privatise estate management, drawing up contracts that
ensure it a share in profits but protect it from losses. These are to be
absorbed by the new management companies, while plantation workers are to
benefit from a 10 per cent share in any profits.
Government officials admit privately that the recent reforms are a precursor
to full-scale privatisation. Some managers expect to be offered at least a
portion of estate equity within five years. The public would also be offered
a stake, as has happened in other sell-offs in the government's
'peoplisation' programme.
If privatisation is to be successful, management teams will have to move
into profit before then. Their task has been made far more difficult by four
months of drought earlier this year, which has cut production sharply.
In the first six months of 1992, output was 41.4m kg down on last year.
Forbes and Walker is forecasting a total 1992 crop of 180m kg, 23 per cent
lower than last year's record.
In spite of such difficulties, Mr Wijewardena expects at least 70 per cent
of the new management companies to be successful.
