FT  09 JAN 92 / Technology: Electric vehicles gain momentum
A prototype of the electric car that BMW intends to sell in the US in the
second half of the 1990s is on display at the Los Angeles motor show which
opened to the public this week.
It represents one of several developments on the electric car front in the
past few weeks, with more manufacturers indicating their interest in
commercial production of such vehicles despite their formidable cost and
performance disadvantages compared with petrol or diesel cars.
They are being spurred by the accelerating momentum in North America towards
wide adoption of Californian clean air standards. These require that from
1998 zero emissions vehicles (Zev), in other words electric ones, make up 2
per cent of the sales of every manufacturer selling more than 35,000 cars in
the state, rising to at least 10 per cent of annual sales from 2003.
Manufacturers which do not comply will be barred from selling any cars in
the state.
In California alone, this means a forecast of 35,000 Zev sales in 1998,
rising to more than 150,000 a year from 2003.
However, a further 12 states, plus Washington DC, have now indicated their
intention to adopt the California standards, which would mean 110,000 Zev
sales in 1998 and more than 500,000 in 2003.
Despite the fact that General Motors is already preparing a plant to produce
the Impact, which GM intends to be the first electric car in volume
production, GM, Ford and Chrysler collectively insist that other states do
not have California's air pollution problems.
But along with European and Japanese manufacturers seeking to maintain a
presence in North America, they want vehicles ready to put on the market if
California's standards spread throughout North America and into Europe.
In the past few weeks Fiat has indicated its intention to produce an
electric version of the Cinquecento, its new small car, and Citroen of
France has unveiled a prototype electric town car, the Citela.
Earlier this week Ford said that within a year it would have a fleet of 80
Ford Ecostar electric vans running commercial trials in several US and
European cities.
The BMW at Los Angeles, designated E2, strongly resembles an earlier
prototype, E1, unveiled at the Frankfurt motor show in September. However,
it has been 'stretched' to accommodate a bigger battery pack for long
distances and to provide extra interior room for the Californians who
initially will buy it.
Styled by Los Angeles-based Designworks, of which BMW is part owner, the E2
is claimed by BMW to have a maximum range of 267 miles; acceleration to
50mph in 15.6 seconds and a top speed of 75mph.
The batteries are high-energy sodium-sulphur. Problems include an eight-hour
recharging time and a battery cost of around DM40,000 (Pounds 14,000).
Citroen's model, the Citela, is a city car with a recyclable body. Citroen
claims a range of up to 130 miles, a top speed of up to 70mph, and a quick
recharge facility - of one minute per mile of range.
