FT  13 JUN 92 / Finance &amp; The Family: Fidelity's charge cuts stir the Pep
pot
PERSONAL equity plans are one of the most tax-efficient ways to invest - but
efficiency does not come cheaply.
People can invest Pounds 6,000 in a general Pep in the tax year with a
further Pounds 3,000 in a single company Pep. A married couple could shelter
Pounds 18,000 each year in Peps and pay neither income tax nor capital gains
tax on the returns.
These benefits have to be balanced against the relatively high charges
usually imposed by companies running the Peps.
Mindful of this, Fidelity Investments is cutting its initial charge on its
unit trust Peps from Monday. It will fall from 5.25 per cent to 2 per cent
while annual management fees of 1 per cent to 1.5 per cent, depending on the
fund, remain unaltered. There will be no VAT on the initial charge.
Instead Fidelity will be the first to impose an exit charge on a unit trust
Pep. This will be 3 per cent in the first year, 2 per cent in the second and
1 per cent in the third. There will be no withdrawal charges after that.
Under current rules unit trusts cannot impose an exit fee but there is less
control under Pep regulations.
Barry Bateman, managing director of Fidelity, acknowledged that high initial
charges dilute the tax benefits. He said the new charging structure
recognised the importance of Peps as a 'popular and mainstream product' best
used for long term savings.
BESt Investment, which publishes Best PEP Advice and Best PEP Selections,
calculates that the total cost of a Fidelity Pep is 7 to 8.8 per cent
depending on the fund. Cheaper unit or investment trust Peps are offered by
Ivory &amp; Sime, Dunedin, Lloyds, Foreign &amp; Colonial and Equitable.
Fidelity has lost market share in Peps, from 4.4 per cent of the market from
April 1990-91 to 2.2 per cent in 1991-92. Bateman acknowledged: 'We did not
perform as well as we would like to have done in 1991.' He was pleased with
performance this year.
Fidelity's unit trust performance was dented last year. Its Special
Situations UK growth fund, still an outstanding performer over 10 years,
ranked second in its sector, had been losing money over the past three
years. It was ranked 108 out of 125 to the beginning of this month,
according to Finstat. It has improved over the past six months to be ranked
10.
'Clearly, Fidelity felt it had to do something dramatic,' said John Spiers,
of BESt Investment. He said investors should be guided by the fund
management record and should remember that good performance outweighs lower
charges in the long run.
However, Roz Barder, of Chase de Vere, which produces Pepguide, said that
Fidelity's aggressive fund management style meant that 'if the market
performs badly, their funds tend to nose-dive but on the other hand they
tend to recover more quickly.'
The last five years have been bad for the unit trust industry. The market
crash of October 1987 and high real interest rates meant that returns were
outperformed by banks and building societies. Someone who invested Pounds
1,000 would have only made Pounds 156 in the average unit trust over the
past five years to May and would have lost money in the past year, according
to Money Management.
Fidelity's move adds another element of competition to the unit trust
industry. In February, Murray Johnstone cut the initial charge on all its
unit trusts from 5 to 1 per cent, but increased its annual management fee
from 1 per cent to 1.5 per cent. Gartmore eliminated the initial charge on
its UK Index Fund last month.
Fidelity is keeping up the 3 per cent commission it pays to financial
advisers. It is relying on the annual management charge to produce stable
income. Fidelity is also introducing a savings plan for its Peps and
allowing variable lump sum contributions and facilities to switch in and out
of funds.
