FT  30 JUN 92 / Management (The Growing Business): How to help yourself -
Britain's small firms' minister is keen to make the most of existing
enterprise networks
Unlike Belgian small businesses, which have their own Ministry for the
Middle Classes, Britain's small firms must make do with a junior minister at
the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).
But just two months into her new job, Baroness Denton, the first woman to
hold the small firms' portfolio, has already impressed business lobbyists
with her practical approach to the issues. Unlike her immediate
predecessors, Baroness Denton has a business background. She spent much of
her career in marketing in the motor industry followed by five years as
deputy chairman of the Black Country Development Corporation.
Not that any radical change in government policies towards small firms seems
imminent. Concessions to small businesses in the shape of subsidised loans
or other special programmes would have to be paid for by loading the cost on
to other businesses. 'I am not sure that either money or legislation is what
small business needs,' she says.
The baroness is no more willing than her predecessors to give way to the
small firms' lobby for changes in the law to overcome the problem of late
payments.
She has been writing to the chairmen of selected large companies - some of
whom sit with her in the House of Lords - urging them to pay more speedily.
But she believes small businesses could do more to solve the problem
themselves, by tightening up on the terms in their contracts and complaining
more loudly if customers delay.
The British government is anyway waiting to see what proposals on late
payments come from the European Commission, which has been working on this
issue for more than a year.
As part of a programme to get to know the small business sector, Baroness
Denton has been holding talks with the banks, who have been criticised for
their high-handed attitudes. 'I have no illusion about the fact that the
banks will remain the chief source of finance for small business,' she said.
But they may have make do without the protection of the government's Loan
Guarantee Scheme, which has been under review. The banks regard loans made
under the scheme as last resort lending and in the present economic climate,
many banks are reluctant to make loans to good quality businesses, the
baroness notes. 'The scheme started in 1981, which is not a bad life. The
climate now is very different to the one in which it was started. There
should be evolutionary change going on.'
The main thrust of the government's small firms policy appears to be towards
getting the best value from partnerships: between small businesses and
large; between business support networks such as the Training and Enterprise
Councils (Tecs) and the chambers of commerce and small firms; and between
academic institutions, including schools, and business.
'How can we transfer wealth - not just finance but knowledge - from large to
small companies?' Baroness Denton asks. Large companies could make unused
space on their in-house training schemes available to small businesses or
open their training centres to small firms at weekends, she suggests.
This marks a continuation of the direction which policy has taken in recent
months. Two initiatives were a pilot scheme run by five local enterprise
agencies to establish 'marriage bureaux' to bring private investors and
entrepreneurs together and a scheme to help trade associations develop ways
of overcoming the problem of the slow payment of debts.
The new small firms' minister also wants business organisations such as the
Tecs and the chambers to play a greater role in helping businesses in
trouble. 'I am concerned that we are losing companies which are trading
profitably.' Banks might be persuaded to let these organisations help
businesses sort out their problems instead of rushing to call in the
receiver.
Baroness Denton believes there is scope for the Tecs to do more to develop
their enterprise role alongside their more generously funded responsibility
for training. It should also be possible for the DTI's regional offices to
make more use of their industry knowledge, she says.
It remains to be seen whether this hands-off approach, persuading a myriad
of intermediary agencies to work more effectively, will prove effective.
Small business owners themselves often prefer to work with independent
organisations rather than those which they see as representing the heavy
hand of government. But making the spark of enterprise travel along this
network may need a more obvious and more generously-funded commitment from
government.
And even if this issue can be tackled, Baroness Denton faces a problem which
dogs all small firms' ministers. Many of the decisions which most closely
affect small firms, on interest rates, taxes and social security charges,
are taken in other departments - the Treasury or Social Services. Over these
she can have little influence.
