FT  23 NOV 92 / After-shocks shatter currency union illusion: Yesterday's
realignment of Europe's exchange rates emphasises the split between hard and
soft currencies
If there were still any optimists who thought the European exchange rate
mechanism (ERM) provided a quick route to monetary stability, yesterday's
currency realignment has now buried this illusion for good.
Shattered, too, has been the notion - still entertained by some European
finance ministers during last year's Maastricht treaty negotiations - that
all 12 EC countries would somehow arrive at economic and monetary union
(Emu) at once.
The 6 per cent devaluation of the Spanish peseta and the Portuguese escudo
follows two realignments of the ERM in September, resulting in the floating
of sterling and the lira and the first devaluation (by 5 per cent) of the
peseta.
The renewed upheaval emphasises how the system of European exchange rates
has been split into a 'hard' nucleus built around the D-Mark, and outer
layers of 'softer' currencies. It has confirmed a central precept: Emu, it
comes about, will take place at two (or several) speeds.
The degree of European disarray also places a question mark over whether
even a smaller group of hard currency countries - France, Germany and the
Benelux countries - will accomplish a scaled-down Emu by the Maastricht
target date of 1999. Scepticism about the Emu timetable has been underlined
in the past few days by the man who, more than any other, holds the key to
the ERM's future, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, president of the Bundesbank.
Mr Schlesinger's hold over Bundesbank decision-making has recently been
strengthened. This reflects organisational changes lowering the number of
seats on the Bundesbank's sometimes fractious council, shifting the balance
of power firmly towards Mr Schlesinger's Frankfurt-based directorate and
away from the regional board members.
Mr Schlesinger's overriding goal is to ensure that, by the time he retires
next September, Germany is firmly on track for a 2 per cent inflation rate
in 1994. The present underlying level of German inflation, Mr Schlesinger
believes, is still 4 per cent.
The central bank president wants to avoid a repeat of the September
experience, when the Bundesbank explicitly traded a cut in interest rates
for the lira devaluation at the weekend of September 12-13. The Bundesbank
seems likely, therefore, to keep its discount and Lombard rates unchanged
until the end of the year.
Mr Schlesinger's toughness has implications for both the 'hard' and the
'soft' European currencies. The ERM member most likely to come under
immediate pressure is the Irish punt, left unchanged yesterday ahead of this
week's Irish general election. Additionally, the French franc will not be
immune to fresh jitters during the run-up to France's March parliamentary
elections.
The franc benefited greatly from Bundesbank support during the previous ERM
turmoil, weathering the storms after the expenditure of FFr160bn (Pounds
19.6bn) in currency intervention. However, in contrast to previous ERM
realignments in the mid-to-late 1980s, speculators recently have earned
sizeable profits by forcing governments to make relatively large changes in
currency parities.
The strength of the speculators increases the franc's vulnerability -
especially if doubts grow about the effect on French competitiveness of the
devaluations by some of France's biggest trading partners. Since the lira
realignment on September 12-13, the French franc has registered an
unprecedented effective revaluation (as of last Friday) of 16 per cent
against sterling and of 13 per cent against the lira.
In a climate of shrinking European growth, this represents a substantial
challenge for French exporters - adding to fears that the devaluation round
may not yet have run its course.
The ERM upsets mark a contrast to the calm which went before. During the 5
3/4 years before the September lira devaluation, the ERM experienced only
one, technical, realignment. Since 1989, three countries - Spain (June
1989), Britain (October 1990) and Portugal (April 1992) - joined the ERM
with 6 per cent fluctuation bands. Two non-EC countries, Sweden and Finland,
pegged their currencies to the European currency unit (in May and June 1991
respectively) backing up efforts to join the EC.
Now, the landscape has changed drastically. Since September, four currencies
 -those of Britain, Italy, Sweden and Finland - have been forced to float.
The five EC countries whose currencies have either been devalued or are
floating (including Greece, not part of the ERM), make up collectively about
45 per cent of EC gross national product.
The autumn devaluations have had a big effect on EC competitiveness. The
seven European countries now effectively making up the 'soft currency' club
 -Britain, Finland, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain and Sweden - account for
26 per cent and 30 per cent of the total exports of Germany and France
respectively. The challenge of foreign devaluations is even greater for
Ireland, which sells 42 per cent of exports to the seven-member 'soft'
currency club.
The immediate cause for the unrest leading to the weekend devaluation was
Sweden's decision last Thursday to float the krona, leading to an effective
devaluation of 9 per cent against the D-Mark.
The underlying reason for the turbulence, however, was that the September
changes, rather than correcting problems, had left some European currency
relationships looking still further out of line with reality. Between
September 11 and November 20, the lira and sterling were effectively
devalued 12 per cent and 13 per cent respectively against the D-Mark -
giving a susbstantial fillips to Italian and British exporters. During this
time, the peseta, on account of its devaluation in September, rose by about
4 per cent against sterling, while the escudo climbed 10 per cent. For two
countries which last year ran trade deficits of Dollars 13.3bn (Spain) and
Dollars 6.5bn (Portugal) against the rest of the EC, this scale of
revaluation was untenable.
The main dilemma facing the ERM is that Germany, because of reunification
strains, is straying from its traditional fiscal discipline. Additionally,
German inflation is now higher than in several other European countries.
Yet the Bundesbank's four- decade-old anti-inflation track record bolsters
the foreign exchange markets' belief that, while other ERM currencies fall
by the wayside, the D-Mark will remain strong. The Bundesbank is pleased
that signs of a marked economic slowdown are already starting to damp
inflationary pressure on the wage bargaining and budgetary fronts. But only
when these pressures show stronger signs of diminishing will the central
bank significantly relax its stance. Although the Bundesbank could start
easing interest rates quite sharply from next spring, the ERM's bumpy ride
may last for several more months.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
THE HARD AND SOFT DIVIDE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1991 share of EC GDP
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Hard currencies                    Soft currencies
Germany            25.0%           Italy           18.3%
France             19.2%           UK              16.2%
Netherlands         4.6%           Spain            8.4%
Belgium             3.2%           Greece           1.1%
Denmark             2.1%           Portugal         1.1%
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Intermediate
Ireland             0.7%
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
