FT  08 OCT 92 / Survey on Austria (11): Hotel owners calculate carefully -
Tourism aims at quality
FOR AUSTRIA'S ambitious tourism industry, a good year may not be good
enough.
After several years of rapid expansion in the number of visitors and in
tourism revenue, Austria's most important industry is expecting a
significant growth slowdown for 1992, primarily because of the world
recession.
Revenue from tourism will still reach a new record high, but hotel owners
and tour operators are talking about a crisis. 'The profitability of hotels
is very poor, it is a real problem both in the cities and the resorts,' says
Mr Michael Raffling, head of the hotel and restaurant section in the
Austrian chamber of commerce.
Following years of heavy investment in expanding and upgrading facilities,
many hotel owners are heavily indebted and are being hurt by high European
interest rates. Any difficulties filling beds are often solved by offering
heavy discounts on room prices, which tends to depress profits further, he
says.
'We are advising hotel owners to calculate carefully. We tell them not to
subsidise their guests,' Mr Raffling says. Instead, he says hotels could
attract more visitors by focusing on special groups such as skiers, golfers
or fitness fanatics, who are willing the pay the full price if their
interests are met.
Tourism experts who are not affiliated with the hotel industry do not see
any fundamental problems behind the growth slowdown. The extremely hot
weather in central Europe this summer has hurt some resorts because many
Austrians decided to stay at home while Germans went to the cooler Baltic
sea resorts, says Mr Paul Schimka, head of the tourism section in the
chamber of commerce.
The main cities of Vienna and Salzburg, where hotels rely heavily on US and
British visitors, had suffered a major setback last year because of the Gulf
war, and are only recovering modestly so far this year. Recession in the US
and Britain and the weak dollar are keeping those groups of tourists away,
Mr Schimka says.
But he expects the winter season to be very strong 'because last year's
heavy snowfall was the best advertisement we could get.'
Mr Egon Smeral, tourism forecaster at the Austrian Economic Research
Institute (WIFO), is expecting a revenue increase of 5 per cent or less from
the record ASch364bn earned from tourism in 1991. This is less than targets
set early in the year, but it will keep the country on a long-term growth
track well above its main European competitors.
'Austria is gaining market share,' Mr Smeral says. 'Last year, tourism in
Europe declined, and this year it is stagnating, but in Austria it is still
growing.'
The country continues to benefit indirectly from the war in what was
formerly Yugoslavia, because tourists who might have gone there go to
Austria instead. Reports of pollution in the Mediterranean may have also
worked in Austria's favour.
Austria is investing heavily in advertising, and a series of exhibitions on
the Hapsburg empire is generating good publicity as far as San Francisco and
Tokyo.
The number of overnight stays, which climbed 5.3 per cent to 130 million
last year, is likely to stagnate in 1992, but experts say this is no reason
to worry. The industry is focusing on quality rather than mass tourism, and
cheap private beds are quickly disappearing.
The opening of Eastern Europe has brought less of an influx of low-budget
tourists than many had expected. In the early days after the collapse of the
Berlin wall, hordes of tourists in rickety coaches would arrive in Vienna at
weekends for a look at the city's treasures and depart after spending almost
nothing. But both the coaches and the tourists' spending power have improved
significantly, tourism officials say.
