FT  27 JUL 92 / Saddam pulls back from brink: Iraqi president flexes muscles
in strongest challenge yet to UN resolutions
PRESIDENT Saddam Hussein has once again pulled back from the brink of a
fresh military confrontation with the west. But on this occasion he came
closer to provoking military action than at any time since the end of the
Gulf conflict in February last year.
Iraq's refusal to grant access for United Nations weapons inspectors -
charged with identifying and dismantling Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
 -to the agriculture ministry in Baghdad was the strongest challenge yet to
the terms of the UN Gulf ceasefire resolutions. It concided with other signs
of increasing defiance from Baghdad.
Earlier this month in a speech that recalled some of his more bombastic
statements during the Gulf crisis, Mr Saddam sneered at the UN, the west and
its regional allies.
The UN Security Council, he declared, had become 'an advertising billboard
for US interests and policies towards the world.' He condemned what he
described as the 'miserable actions and deeds of this international
organisation.'
Some regional experts see this tone as a sign the regime, which is under
increasing pressure - reports of coup plots and terrorism abound  - is
seeking to redeem its authority. Others argue Mr Saddam feels that, having
resisted pressure for more than year, he is in a stronger position to thumb
his nose at international opinion. A combination of these two factors may be
at work.
Iraqi perversity has been apparent for weeks. Apart from barring the weapons
inspectors, Baghdad has:
Refused to co-operate with a UN commission charged with re-drawing its
boundary with Kuwait;
Objected to the terms for the UN-supervised sale of Iraqi oil to pay for
humanitarian supplies;
Stalled on the renewal of an agreement covering the presence of UN guards
and humanitarian groups in Iraq;
Begun using fixed-wing military aircraft, according to western intelligence,
in defiance of the Gulf conflict ceasefire. Iraqi MiG-23s have reportedly
flown missions against Shi'ite rebels hiding out in the marshes south of the
town of Amara on the Tigris.
Stepped-up military operations against rebels would tend to support the view
that the regime is flexing its muscles again, although reports persist of
morale problems in the military's higher ranks and of an increasingly
beleaguered President Saddam relying even more on supporters from his home
area of Takrit, north of Baghdad.
There have been frequent reports in the past year of coup attempts, most of
them emanating from Iraqi opposition sources living abroad. The most recent
attempt, according to Iraqi emigres, occurred in late June when four
Republican Guard officers plotted to blow up the Iraqi leader's car.
The allegations of coup plots have coincided with reports of a continuing
purge of the military. As many as 200 officers are said to have been
stripped of their authority and some executed.
However, as recently as last month, US intelligence concluded that the Iraqi
leader had strengthened his position in the past year, an embarrassment for
the US administration, which is dogged by criticism that it has not done
more to get rid of Mr Saddam.
A national intelligence estimate, which represented the combined efforts of
various US intelligence agencies, reported that, with the help of Jordan and
by using hidden Iraqi reserves, the regime had begun rebuilding its
infrastructure. President Saddam had also re-organised his military and his
five security services to strengthen control.
Western intelligence has been paying particular attention to ways in which
Iraq may be funding imports of goods, including the purchase of military
spare parts in contravention of UN ceasefire terms.
In spite of Iraqi efforts to re-equip its re-organised military, western
experts doubt whether he would be in a position to combat any bombing attack
by the allies.
During the Gulf conflict Iraqi surface-to-air missiles proved ineffective
and Scud medium-range missiles aimed at Israel and Saudi Arabia were wildly
innaccurate. Kurdish intelligence reports that Iraq is still holding on to
some of its Scuds and their launchers, but numbers have been reduced.
Western experts estimate about 50 per cent of Iraq's ground forces were
destroyed. Main battle tanks, ranging from Chieftains to Russian-supplied
T-72's were reduced from nearly 6,000 to under 3,000.
The loss of most of Iraq's frontline fighter aircraft, flown to 'safety' in
neighbouring Iran during the Gulf conflict, has been another blow. These
fighters are reportedly being integrated into Iran's airforce.
Mr Saddam must recognise that his capacity to resist would be almost nil,
but this feebleness does not, it seems, prevent him from indulging in a
political strategy of brinkmanship and defiance.
While the latest crisis has been defused, it is almost certain that there
will be further confrontations with the UN and the west. The danger for Mr
Saddam and for the region is that he will miscalculate and go beyond the
brink.
 -----------------------------
       ETHNIC GROUPS
 -----------------------------
Arabs             73.5 percent
Kurds             21.6 percent
Turkmen            2.4 percent
Others             2.5 percent
 -----------------------------
Religious groups
 -----------------------------
Shi'ite Moslems   53.5 percent
Sunni Moslems     41.5 percent
Christians         3.6 percent
Yazidis &amp; Others   1.4 percent
 -----------------------------
Source: Middle East
Military balance 1987
 -----------------------------
