FT  18 JUN 92 / International Company News: Resellers tap Canada's
telephones - A look at the implications of a landmark ruling
IN THE two years since Canada opened its doors to discounted telephone
services, a host of aggressive companies, known as resellers, have carved
several hundred million dollars out of the established phone utilities'
annual revenues.
The resellers, who lease phone lines at bulk discounts from the phone
companies and then resell them to smaller users, now account for about 4 to
5 per cent of all telephone calls in Canada.
Their early success could look modest, however, compared with what lies in
store following a landmark ruling by the Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission (CRTC).
The CRTC has cleared the way for resellers to expand the geographical
territory they serve and to gain access to the phone companies' own
discounted services. It is also encouraging resellers to build their own
networks, a move which would give them more control over their costs and
further spur competition with the phone companies.
'The pro-competition approach was more than anyone expected,' says Mr Tom
Davies, president of ACC Long Distance of Toronto, one of the 20 to 30
resellers which have set up business in the past two years.
The telephone companies, on the other hand, are furious at the CRTC's
ruling, which also opened up the long-distance market to competition for the
first time.
Mr Jean Monty, Bell Canada's chairman, is appealing against the decision on
the grounds that new competitors will make a much smaller proportional
contribution than Bell towards subsidising cheap local rates from
long-distance revenues, and towards the cost of connecting new entrants'
equipment to the phone companies' networks.
Most of the resellers in the market are expected to gear up for expansion in
the wake of the CRTC ruling.
Until now, their marketing efforts have centred on mid-sized businesses in
Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia, and they have been able to offer
services only between a limited number of cities.
They are now talking about extending services to smaller businesses and
moving into the other seven provinces. Call-Net Communications, the biggest
reseller, also has plans for a cut-price service to households.
An array of new products, such as phone credit cards and private lines, is
likely to appear. Most important, the CRTC ruling should enable the
resellers, especially the most efficient ones, to widen their margins.
Nonetheless, some consumers targeted by resellers in the US will probably be
out of reach for some time in Canada.
The Canadian market will continue to be more tightly regulated than the US.
As a result, the fee charged by Canadian telephone companies for access to
their networks is likely to be considerably higher than the 3 to 3.5 US
cents per call average south of the border.
The resellers' own ranks are expected to thin as competition intensifies. Mr
Douglas Cunningham, analyst at BBN James Capel in Toronto, forecasts that no
more than four or five companies will dominate the market. 'Small resellers
will probably not survive,' Mr Cunningham predicts.
The survivors will certainly include some of the British and US-owned
companies which already dominate the resale business.
Call-Net, in which Rochester Telephone of Rochester, New York, has a stake
of almost 20 per cent, says its revenues (including those of a sister
company, Lightel) will reach CDollars 100m (Dollars 83.3m) this year from
about 6,000 medium and small businesses.
The Canadian subsidiary of the UK's Cable &amp; Wireless has 5,000 network
customers and expects its resale revenues to top CDollars 50m this year.
Montreal-based Fonorola, whose biggest shareholder is J Rothschild Holdings,
will submit expansion plans to its board next week. The company, whose sales
are also around CDollars 50m a year, expects to launch some new services -
it declines to be precise - by next January.
The CRTC decision is especially welcome to the foreign-controlled companies
because it flies in the face of legislation before parliament which would
reserve a stake of at least 80 per cent in any common carrier for Canadian
shareholders.
The resellers are optimistic that the CRTC's ruling, plus their own plans
for investment and new jobs, will persuade the government to water down the
proposed new Telecommunications Act.
For example, ACC Long-Distance, which is also controlled by a US company,
has expanded its workforce in Canada from five to 52 in the past 18 months.
