FT  14 MAR 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Appealing to the taxman
CAN YOU please give details about appealing to an independent tribunal re:
the inland revenue.
What is the address? Are there specific forms? Can more than one year be
referred to?
A free pamphlet on tax appeals (IR37) is obtainable from your tax office, or
from any convenient tax office. (The special rules for Northern Ireland were
abolished by the 1988 Finance Act, with effect from April 1989.)
Generally speaking, an appeal against an assessment should be given within
30 days of the day on which the notice of assessment is posted to you; and
should incorporate an application to postpone payment of the amount of tax
which you consider is not actually due from you; you should set out your
reasons, briefly.
On the other hand, the 30-day time limit for giving notice of appeal against
the refusal of a claim does not start to run until the notice of refusal
actually reaches you. (This inconsistency appears to have no logical basis:
you may like to ask your MP to enquire why the time limit in section 31(1)
of the Taxes Management Act 1970 is a few days shorter than that set out in
section 42(3) even ignoring the three-month time limit in the proviso to
that subsection)
Notice of appeal should generally be given to the tax office which sent you
the notice which you are appealing against. If you have not been sent an
appeal form, you can simply give notice by letter.
We are not quite sure what you mean by your third question: if you mean 'Can
appeal notices for more than one year be included on a single sheet of
paper?', the answer is Yes.
If you cannot reach agreement with the tax inspector, then it will generally
be necessary to appear before the General (or Special) Commissioners to
argue your case. In some circumstances, however, (where the point in dispute
is one of interpretation of a specific statutory provision) it may be
possible simply to submit written representations for consideration.
If the tax inspector is dilatory in responding to your notice of appeal or
subsequent correspondence, you can always take the matter out of his hands
by asking the Commissioners' clerk to put your appeal on the list for
hearing (explaining that there has been unreasonable delay by the
inspector).
