FT  23 MAR 92 / Collor sacks defender of Amazon rainforest: Environment row
in Brazil as Earth Summit approaches
PRESIDENT Fernando Collor of Brazil has sacked his environment minister, Mr
Jose Lutzenberger, one of the world's leading defenders of the Amazon
rainforest, just two months before Brazil is due to host the United Nations
World Environment Conference.
The move comes after Mr Lutzenberger embarrassed the government by publicly
accusing Ibama, the federal agency responsible for protecting the forest, of
corruption and misuse of foreign funds.
Speaking in New York last week at a preparatory meeting for the UN
conference, or Earth Summit, Mr Lutzenberger accused Ibama of working 'as an
agent for the woodchoppers' and distributing licences to chop down the
Amazon. Irritated by the controversy, Mr Collor has also sacked the head of
Ibama.
Ironically, despite Mr Lutzenberger's claims that Amazonian forest fires
have been reduced during his tenure, the figures for last year are expected
to show an increase. However, the main reason for his dismissal was Mr
Collor's fear that Mr Lutzenberger would embarrass Brazil at the Earth
Summit by resigning with an attack on the government.
Mr Lutzenberger, the most colourful figure in the Brazilian cabinet, is a
world-renowned ecologist whose appointment as minister in 1990 was seen as a
clever ploy by Mr Collor to stifle international criticism of Brazil's poor
environmental record.
Known for his eccentric behaviour, he is no stranger to controversy. At the
previous preparatory meeting in Geneva he sparked off a row by referring to
the governor of Amazonas state as 'a baboon' and calling the Brazilian
military 'the enemies of the environment' for opposing what they see as
international interference in the Amazon.
Mr Lutzenberger achieved little in office other than to secure the
demarcation of a reserve for the threatened Yanomami Indian population. He
often admitted that he felt frustrated in government and it was thought to
be only a matter of time before he resigned.
Mr Jose Goldemberg, the education minister, who takes over the post
temporarily, admitted 'there has been considerable divergence between the
environmental position defended by our Foreign Office and Lutzenberger's
declarations'. The government has had difficulty forming a coherent position
to take to the summit. Mr Lutzenberger has not agreed with the Foreign
Office emphasis on 'sustainable development' as a solution to the Amazon
problem, fearing it could be misused by those intent on exploitation.
The third minister to be dismissed in a month, he is likely to prove a
weighty opponent.
After being informed of his dismissal he said that were he not having to
take penicillin he would be 'drinking champagne'. However, he added: 'I also
feel sad because I fear what may now happen in terms of devastation of the
Amazon.'
