FT  28 NOV 92 / How To Spend It: Tried and tested trees  - Lucia van der
Post tests designer trees, pulls tasteful crackers and examines inventive
alternatives to paper streamers and battered baubles
NO HOUSE ever seems properly decked out for Christmas without a tree. One of
the quintessential Christmas images, the tree is a marvellous decorative
device besides being a useful focal point for the presents.
Notions of how to dress the tree vary. Some families have rituals that can
never be altered, others prefer to ring the changes. Anybody wanting
inspiration might like to know that from December 2 to December 8 12
different designer-decorated trees can be seen on display at Sotheby's,
34-35 New Bond Street, London W1. The trees have all been donated to the
Save the Children Fund and will be auctioned at a gala dinner on December 9.
Anybody wanting one of the trees does not have to go to the dinner - sealed
bids can be left at Sotheby's.
Decorative ideas range from the almost impossible to copy (such as Garrards'
enchanting pearl pagoda tree alight with strings of pearls, crystals and
silver bells) to Simpsons of Piccadilly's Teddy Bear tree (sketched below)
which would not be beyond the talents of most of us to emulate.
When it comes to real trees, the word is that prices are up this year - in
the region of 5 per cent for home-grown trees and between 15 per cent and 20
per cent for imported ones, due to the devaluation of sterling.
Many families like to buy directly from the grower - the British Christmas
Tree Growers Association, 12 Lauriston Road, Wimbledon, London SW19, will
supply a list of places where they can be bought in return for an SAE.
Artificial trees are improving all the time. Pulbrook &amp; Gould, Liscartan
House, 127 Sloane Street, London SW1X 9AS (mail order available) has found
some beauties. Made by hand with very fine pine needles, some are very hard
to tell from real. The prices may at first sight seem horrendous (Pounds 95
for 5ft 6in, Pounds 129.50 for 6ft 6in) but bear in mind that they can be
packed away into a 4ft by 18in box and brought out year after year looking
fresh.
