FT  13 JAN 92 / International Company News: Retail fears shift to Macy's
from Federated/Allied
ONE big US retail bankruptcy - that of Federated Department Stores and
Allied Stores - is expected to move to a close this week, but worries that
another could start at Macy's drove down the New York-based department store
chain's bonds on Friday.
At the end of last week, the bankruptcy court judge in the Federated/Allied
case agreed to sign an order confirming the companies' reorganisation plan.
Final technicalities delayed his formal approval, but this is expected
shortly. The two groups - which take in chains like Bloomingdale's, Lazarus
in Cincinnati, and Bon Marche in Seattle - could then emerge from bankruptcy
in mid-February.
Under the reorganisation plan, which won backing from creditors in
late-December, Federated and Allied would be merged into one group.
Essentially, creditors would get a mixture of cash, new debt securities and
equity in the merged company. The two retail groups already share common
senior management.
The reorganisation plan provides for the issue of about 80m new shares,
which will be listed. It would reduce debt and other claims against the
companies from about Dollars 8.2bn when Federated/Allied filed for
bankruptcy protection in January 1990, to about Dollars 3bn.
The retailers' escape from corporate purgatory has symbolic significance
too. Federated/Allied were acquired by Canada's Campeau Corporation through
two multi-billion dollar leveraged bids in 1986 and 1988. When bankruptcy
ensued, it seemed to epitomise the demise of the debt-laden 1980s and the
era of financially-engineered deals.
But, while one retail sector problem seems close to resolution, junk bonds
issued by R. H. Macy fell sharply on Friday - following heavy losses earlier
in the week - on rumours of a delayed payment to trade creditors.
Late on Friday, Macy's confirmed that it would not send out vendor cheques
until January 25, essentially two weeks' late, but claimed this was due to
'clean down' provisions in its banking agreements. A revolving credit
agreement requires Macy's to reduce borrowings under the facility below
certain levels during the December-February period. By delaying supplier
payments, Macy's hopes to meet the banking requirements.
Earlier in the week, Macy's claimed that talk of a bankruptcy filing was
'unfounded' and, on Friday evening, said this position was unchanged.
Nevertheless, its zero coupon bonds fell to Dollars 23, having been around
Dollars 35 mid-week. Macy's lost Dollars 155.4m in the quarter ended
November 2, worse than analysts expected, and is thought to have shared in
the generally disappointing Christmas season.
