FT  13 JUL 92 / Survey of Japan (10): Yamazaki's family affair - Machine
tool industry
'IT is a characteristic of the machine tool industry that from the top of
the boom to the bottom of the slump the market can halve. We need to lower
the break-even point so that we can survive that,' says Mr Teruyuki
Yamazaki, one of the world's leading machine tool makers.
Sitting in his sumptuous office - paintings by Ingres, Delacroix and
Boucher, sculpture by Rodin, furniture old English - he scarcely looks hard
up. There is no question, though, that times are tough. His company,
Yamazaki Mazak, is running at 60 per cent capacity. 'But we're in profit
this month, anyway,' he says.
The present slump in machine tool orders is partly a function of over
investment by Japanese industry in the bubble years. In the two years
1987-89, according to the Japan Machine Tool Builders' Association, domestic
sales of machine tools virtually doubled. In the first four months of this
year, domestic orders are down by nearly half.
However, this is not without precedent. Mr Tsunehiko Yamazaki,
vice-president of the private family-owned business and Teruyuki's brother,
says: 'In the history of the industry, there have been plenty of examples of
famous manufacturers dating back to the Industrial Revolution going under.
The only way to avoid that is through continuous investment.'
Yamazaki is expanding capacity at its main plant, at Minokamo in southern
Japan. It has just opened its first Asian manufacturing operation, in
Singapore. In the past three years, capital expenditure has averaged Dollars
100m, or about 10 per cent of turnover. This year it will be about the same
'not because we wanted it, but because we were committed to it,' says
Teruyuki .
Yamazaki takes to the extreme the principle of automated manufacture. 'A job
which used to take 1,000 operatives can now be done with 10. We can generate
Dollars 10m of output with the same overheads as for Dollars 1m,' says
Teruyuki.
The physical process this involves is slightly spooky to watch. Machine
tools are, of course, machines for making machines. The Minokamo plant takes
this a step further. In essence, it is one large machine-making machine to
make machines.
At one end of the plant unmanned loaders, some 10 feet long and three feet
high, roam around the floor, playing tunes to warn any stray humans of their
approach. One rolls up to the warehouse counter, playing 'Annie Laurie,' and
deposits a couple of machined body parts.
Another robot, a spindly giant about 100 feet high, whisks the parts up and
stacks them under the roof. The loader picks up a pallet of small parts and
moves off again. One of its fellows waits courteously for it to pass. It
then moves off, tootling 'Fur Elise.' They will go on doing this all night.
In a culture which still does not permit lay-offs, this gives a useful
element of flexibility. 'When the plant is running below capacity, as now,
we can simply eliminate one of the unmanned night shifts. That's why we're
not losing money,' says Tsunehiko.
The process of automation, Teruyuki says, has further to go. 'The cost of
labour is rising and working hours in Japan are going to be reduced. So
whether we like it or not, the number of craftsmen is going to be reduced.
Even if the technology isn't cost-effective yet, it will be one day.'
It is often alleged that in terms of quality and precision, Japanese machine
tools still do not match the more expensive hand-built machines from Germany
and Switzerland.
Tsunehiko's response to the charge is aggressive: 'People sometimes say that
such a precise machine should be hand made. We don't deny that some parts
should be made by hand. But where unmanned operation is possible, a lot of
talk to the contrary is sour grapes. Perhaps some people without the
electronic knowledge are afraid to adapt it into their technology. We
aren't'
Yamazaki's other chief defence against the roller coaster nature of its
industry has always been its international diversity. Japan accounts for
only some 30 per cent of its sales, with 25 per cent coming from the US and
a further 25 per cent in Europe. It manufactures in the US and the UK.
Geographical spread is of limited use this time round. 'In the 30 years I've
been in this business,' says Tsunehiko, 'this is the first time I've seen
all the world economies going down together'.
Teruyuki qualifies this slightly. 'Although Japan and Europe are poor at
present, the US and Far East are not so bad. But that still means that two
out of our three main markets are down, which is a serious problem.'
The forward picture is still confused. 'In the past two months, there has
been a small improvement in order intake in the UK and the US which we
couldn't have expected four or five months ago. But in Germany and Japan,
orders are weak compared with what we expected six months ago.'
Does it help that Yamazaki has remained a private company? 'It has
advantages and disadvantages,' says Teruyuki. 'If we'd been listed when the
stock market was booming, we'd have had cheaper money. But the problem is
that all that cheap money was someone else's. Now it has to be paid back.'
There is a wider consideration. The machine tool industry's continuous
demand for investment means the return on equity is typically low - perhaps
lower than would be accepted by a public company. It is doubtless no
coincidence that many of Yamazaki's competitors elsewhere in the world are
private as well.
Teruyuki goes further: 'Making machine tools is a job which should be handed
down from generation to generation. Sometimes, a machine tool company is
sold to a conglomerate because the son is not interested and it fades away.'
Yamazaki was founded by Teruyuki's father in 1919. So will Teruyuki's son
succeed him? 'I believe so. He's already on the board.'
