FT  03 SEP 92 / Slovaks fear a costly divorce: A look at the break-up with
the Czechs
THE 'civilised divorce' agreed between Czech and Slovak leaders last week
includes a currency union, tariff-free movement of goods and visa-free
movement of people. But it has not yet tackled other contentious issues such
as the co-ordination of foreign and security policies.
A leaked 'working text' of a draft treaty between the two republics drawn up
by Mr Vladimir Meciar's party, the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia,
before last week's meeting revealed that the Slovaks, who campaigned on a
separatist platform at last June's elections, in reality still hanker after
a broader, confederal 'union' with the Czech lands.
Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech leader, has made clear he favours a clean
political break but puts priority on preserving an economic relationship
which reflects the economic integration of the two states. While rejecting a
broader, confederal relationship, the Czechs hope that the mutual interest
in close monetary and economic co-operation will ensure that political
independence does not translate into indifference or hostility.
The economic and political implications of divorce were underlined during a
sobering meeting between Slovak economists and IMF and World Bank officials
in Washington last month. They warned that divorce would be costly for
Slovakia, where unemployment is nearly 12 per cent. This compares with under
3 per cent in the Czech lands, which have a more diversified economy and
have attracted the bulk of foreign investment.
After independence next January 1 Slovakia is expected to lose Czech
subsidies of between Dollars 300m (Pounds 150.7m) and Dollars 1bn annually.
Divorce will also leave Bratislava responsible for re-shaping an economy
dominated by energy-intensive arms and other heavy industries.
Slovakia also faces two major international problems inherited from the
communist past. The first leaves Bratislava, the Slovak capital, to settle a
dispute with Hungary over the Danube river hydro-electric complex and the
second saddles it with handling Czechoslovakia's share in the Krivoi Rog
iron ore enrichment project in the Ukraine.
Prague, which decided to pull out of the Ukrainian deal earlier this year,
has been trying unsuccessfully to privatise Czechoslovakia's share in a
project, which will eventually produce iron pellets needed by the Slovak
steel industry.
Czech negotiators say the prospect of divorce has injected a new realism
into Slovak thinking and re-inforced pro-market economists there. Faced with
the phasing out of Czech subsidies, for example, the Slovak authorities have
shelved plans to build a subway in Bratislava.
Instead they plan to invest in a new link-up with Austrian railways. A rapid
rail link via Vienna airport would attract spillover traffic to the
under-used Bratislava airport. It would also suit plans to establish tariff
free manufacturing zones close to the Austrian border, similar to
maquiladora plants along the US-Mexican border. Much however depends on
Slovakia's ability to attract foreign investors, who were alarmed by the new
government's decision to reverse privatisation of the Danubia printing house
and take it back under state control.
The prospect of independence has also led to a new look at the Slovak arms
industry, hit hard by federal policies to curb exports and the end of the
cold war. Mr Julius Toth, the Slovak finance minister, last month announced
that, instead of converting military plants to civilian use, Slovakia will
step up its search for foreign markets while reducing the industry's
capacity by 10-15 per cent annually over the next few years.
For the leaders of both the Czech lands and Slovakia, however, the most
important appointment before their divorce is their scheduled meeting with
European Community officials on October 5. On the agenda is the future of
the EC Association Agreement signed last year with a federal State which is
due to disappear on December 31.
The Czech side will be satisfied with essentially unchanged terms. But
Slovakia, whose steel exports are particularly vulnerable to anti-dumping
measures demanded by EC steelmakers, and is losing its former financial
subsidies from Prague, is now in greater need of freer access to EC markets.
Bratislava is hoping that Brussels will show, if not sympathy, at least
understanding for the historical factors which pushed it to an economically
disruptive divorce.
