FT  23 OCT 92 / World Trade News: Likely battle plans if war breaks out
MR Arthur Dunkel, the ever-patient director general of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt), remains resolute that the latest setback in
farm trade negotiations between the European Community and the US will not
be fatal.
'I can't imagine that the US or the EC would take the responsibility of
breaking down the round at a time when we need so much a success as a signal
for the very sluggish world economy,' he said yesterday. Over the past 40
years, trade liberalisation under Gatt has been credited with much of the
global economic growth that has marked the post-war period.
But what if the unimaginable happened? What if the US administration
announced the immediate imposition of Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) of punitive
tariffs on EC farm exports as a sop to oilseed farmers who have argued for
six years - and won Gatt support in their case - that the EC's oilseed
subsidy regime is damaging their exports?
The immediate response would be retaliation from the EC, which has already
drawn up, but not made public, a 'hit-list' of US farm exports that would be
targeted.
From here, the slippery slope to trade war is more difficult to chart. It is
likely that subsidy wars would be declared on a number of farm product -
wheat and beef would be early candidates. The price for taxpayers in the EC
and the US could be considerable, as funds are channelled into such subsidy
wars. The price for other farm exporters, like Australia, Argentina, Canada,
and many developing countries, could be even greater as exports are lost and
farm export prices fall.
A long-standing dispute over steel exports to the US would also quickly
spill over, perhaps with the US imposing countervailing duties on imports
from countries deemed to be dumping steel into the US market. A number of
other disputes have been held in abeyance while Uruguay Round negotiations
have continued in good faith and these would quickly rise to the surface.
Another casualty of a deterioration in trade relations would be the Gatt's
dispute-settlement system - the only multilateral forum in which trade
complaints can be dealt with. Already Mr Dunkel has talked of
'non-implementation of many (dispute) panel findings continuing to undermine
the effectiveness of the Gatt system'.
He said in his annual report in March that two-thirds of panel reports since
1986 needing domestic action had not been acted upon. Many countries have
linked action to a successful outcome of the Uruguay Round. Nine out of
every 10 cases involve Japan, Canada, the US or the EC.
The US has already warned that it has exhausted its patience with the Gatt
dispute settlement system as far as its dispute with the EC over oilseeds is
concerned.
Implicit is that the US will in future settle disputes bilaterally rather
than use Gatt.
A number of recent successes by the US in using its domestic 'Section 301'
legislation to force trade, or market opening compromises from countries
like China, India and Taiwan suggests that a Uruguay Round failure would see
rapid abandonment of multilateral dispute settlement procedures.
A further price of failure would be that areas of trade still outside the
multilateral framework - like trade in services, textiles and farm products,
and in protection of intellectual property - would remain hampered by
national trade barriers or regulation.
