FT  24 JUL 92 / London Stock Exchange: Cautious rally helped by retail
sector
THE GLOOM lifted a little on the UK stock market yesterday as faint glimmers
of economic recovery at home were accompanied by a steadier tone in sterling
and in the other European stock markets. However, a gain of 11.6 still left
the FT-SE Index just short of the 2,400 mark and strategists were wary of
identifying any change in the generally negative trend of the market.
The Footsie closed at 2,399.5, the best of the day, and Seaq trading volume
increased to 512.9m shares from the 428.1m of the previous session. The
stock market was relieved that the changes in UK government spending
policies, hinted at in the City of London on the previous day, proved less
immediately threatening to public investment than feared.
Building and construction shares, most at risk from cuts in public spending,
had a calmer session.
More positive for investors was the view expressed by the British Chambers
of Commerce that the domestic economy was staging a fragile recovery.
Equities were slow to respond, however, until shareholders at the annual
meeting of Boots, the high street retailer and drugs group, were told that
sales were 10.8 per cent up in the first quarter of the year. 'Bucking the
trend,' was the view from the boardroom but equity traders took the
statement more favourably.
Nevertheless, in spite of a modest improvement in sterling, the
international scene continued to provide uncertainties for London, which was
unsettled by an increase in a key Spanish interest rate.
Confidence was also restrained by a sharp fall in British Aerospace as a
large block of stock was placed in the market. The Footsie also suffered the
effects of a heavy setback in Reuters as the weight of analysts' opinion
came down increasingly on a negative view of this week's trading statement.
But the bears - traders who sold stock last week when the Footsie was around
3.4 per cent higher than at present and must meet commitments before the
equity account closes tonight - were buyers yesterday. With the September
future contract on the Footsie edging above 2,400, the underlying equity
market staged a technical rally in the second half of the session.
Dealers doubted if yesterday's retail business would be worth much more than
the Pounds 715.9m of the previous session; retail business has for some
weeks now remained below the Pounds 1bn mark regarded as the indication of a
seriously traded equity market. For UK securities houses, the problems of
low turnover are now compounded by serious losses in several leading Footsie
stocks.
The good news from Boots brought a general improvement in store and retail
issues. Banking stocks also looked very firm but this largely reflected a
recommendation from a UK brokerage house.
Heavyweight manufacturing shares remained uninspired. Wellcome edged forward
to 830p as the market awaited the outcome today of the share tender
operation. The rest of the pharmaceutical sector, which has attracted
investors over the past fortnight, gave ground and closed quietly.
