FT  01 OCT 92 / Survey of The New Towns of Britain (3): To wind up an empire
 -Interview, the Commission manager talks to Michael Cassell
THE MORE successful Mr John Walker is at his job, the quicker he will find
himself looking for another.
As general manager of the Commission for New Towns, he is the man charged
with day-to-day responsibility for winding up its Pounds 2bn land and
property empire in England. The faster he fulfils his brief, the closer he
gets to the day when he will have to find alternative employment.
As Sir Neil Shields, the Commission chairman, puts it: 'The co-operation of
our staff has been magnificent. All the time people are basically being
asked to work hard at putting themselves out of a job.'
The property recession means the process of asset disposal and development
is likely to take longer than anyone might have imagined three or four years
ago when deals were queueing up to be signed.
But, even so, the likelihood is that most work will come to an end within
the next decade or so.
According to Mr Walker: 'The finite life of the Commission is an important,
ever-present factor for the staff but they handle it well. People obviously
work against a background of longer-term uncertainty, but where there is any
certainty of employment today?'
Mr Walker, a Mancunian by birth, was appointed to his job at the Commission
in 1991, before he had fully relinquished his responsibilities as deputy
general manager of Milton Keynes, the last new town development corporation
which was wound up earlier this year.
He is fiercely protective of Milton Keynes, which has become the butt of
jokes about soulless suburbia. For a start, he lives there and intends to
keep his home there, even though it means his former, four-minute trip to
work has been replaced by a much lengthier inter-city train and tube
journey.
'There were, and remain, plenty of misconceptions about the place which are
perpetuated by the media. But if we could persuade people to come and see
the town, we reckoned we had done nine-tenths of the job. Business now
recognises Milton Keynes as a complete success story, though many
individuals still have an inaccurate image of it as a place to live.'
Now 44, Mr Walker began his career in local government armed with a graduate
planning diploma but became quickly disillusioned with town hall life and
headed off to see the world.
When he ran out of money, he returned in 1975 and sought job references from
two friends working in Milton Keynes. He took an economic planning post in
the development corporation.
At that time, the new town largely comprised mountains of mud and earth. His
early responsibilities entailed helping to plan for a balanced local
economy, identifying areas for economic growth and devising programmes for
attracting incoming investment.
Mr Walker reckoned he would stay for a couple of years at most. 'I was
open-minded, verging on the sceptical, when it came to new towns, not that I
knew too much about them. I think I had visited Corby once.'
The concept of new towns, however, quickly grew on him and Walker came to
see them as 'a highly relevant response to the mounting urban problems of
the day'.
In 1981, he was appointed director of planning, taking overall charge of
strategic planning for the new town at a critical stage in its development.
Government policy towards the new towns was changing, with the first
Thatcher administration reducing the flow of public funds and encouraging
the private sector to take up the investment momentum.
Milton Keynes itself, however, was already beginning to emerge as a credible
development location for the private sector.
In 1987, Mr Walker was appointed deputy general manager of the development
corporation, the post he held until moving to the commission.
With the commission poised to withdraw steadily from the communities over
which it has had control for up to 30 years, diplomacy will be the order of
the day as local councils regain- some of the authority and responsibilities
taken from them in recent years.
Mr Walker acknowledges that another generation of new towns is unlikely,
although they have provided plenty of examples of best practice in urban
planning which remain to be utilised elswhere.
