FT  24 JUN 92 / Business and the Environment: Package of market ideas to
tackle tide of waste - Pioneering concepts are agitating the international
packaging industry
The rising tide of packaging waste poses an increasingly acute problem for
the modern consumer economies. Few issues challenge more urgently the
ingenuity of environmentalists, industrialists, and bureaucrats the world
over.
Until recently, the proposed solutions have tended to favour a regulatory
approach relying on governmental intervention. Legislation has been
introduced to force industry to recover and to recycle increasing
proportions of packaging waste. Strict targets for recycling rates have been
set; sometimes, it seems, almost arbitrarily. Certain forms of waste
disposal, such as incineration, have been banned.
These solutions have certainly forced the packaging industry to address the
issues as never before. They have however led to results which, in many
cases, only harm the environment further.
For example, German companies have dumped zero-cost plastics packaging waste
on foreign markets as far away as South Africa after being forced by their
draconian recycling regime to collect it but unable to reprocess it
commercially within their own borders.
In a discussion paper* to be published this week, the Centre for Social and
Economic Research on the Global Environment, an environmental think-tank,
forcefully argues that market-based solutions can be a more effective way of
tackling the root problems: how to ensure that the minimal amount of
packaging is used in the first place and how to create economic incentives
to recover and recycle the waste that is inevitably produced.
The neat solution they came up with - which the authors claim was conceived
while waiting for a delayed flight at Brussels airport - is a graduated tax,
imposed on packaging products to reflect their full environmental costs. The
tax could either be imposed directly by government or by industry itself in
the form of a levy. The market would then determine the 'best' forms of
packaging.
The argument is that, at present, there is a 'market failure' in the pricing
of packages because the 'external' costs of disposing of the waste products
by means of landfill, incineration or composting are not included in the
original price. The study suggests that an environmental tax would have the
effect of 'internalising' some of these 'external' costs, reflecting their
true environmental and social impact.
A blanket tax on all packages to cover these costs would not discriminate
between packages which had differing environmental impacts. Nor would it
encourage manufacturers to develop design to use less raw material.
The report therefore suggests there should be several variables within the
tax calculation to accommodate these concerns and to ensure the viability of
the 'Polluter Pays Principle', which is widely becoming accepted as an
essential component of market-based environmental solutions.
The formula for the tax (illustrated) shows how this might work.
Should the manufacturer of a packaging product reduce the weight per litre
of its product, then the burden of tax would reduce correspondingly.
Similarly, if the rate of recycling (expressed as a fraction) was increased,
then the calculation would again change and the tax would fall further.
The paper suggests that the 'external' costs should be limited to the
environmental damage resulting only from the manufacture and transport of
packaging products.
Other considerations, such as the environmental damage caused by bauxite
extraction to produce aluminium cans, should be separately regulated by
governments. Levying additional tax on a package to account for such factors
would result in inefficient double taxation.
One obvious complication is that the tax will vary when applied to different
products and countries. The costs of waste disposal are for instance very
much higher in the Netherlands than in the US, partly because if you try to
dig a landfill tip in the Netherlands, you end up with a swimming pool.
That suggests taxes have to be calculated nationally, or perhaps even
regionally. Practical problems arise as to how the tax may be collected and
what effect it might have on international trade.
Rough calculations of the effects of applying such a tax throw up surprising
conclusions, which the authors accept are 'counter-intuitive from an
environmentalist viewpoint'.
When applied to the UK market for beverage packaging, the study suggests
that cartons would be taxed lowest (mainly as a result of their low weight);
followed by plastic PET bottles; returnable glass bottles (assuming they are
re-used on average 14 times); and aluminium cans. Heavy non-returnable glass
bottles incur an extremely high tax.
The independent study was produced with the help of Tetra Pak, the Swedish
packaging group which is the world's biggest manufacturer of multi-layered
beverage cartons.
Environmentalists have nevertheless welcomed the study as a very useful
contribution to the debate.
* Packaging Waste and the Polluter Pays Principle - A Taxation Solution.
David Pearce, Kerry Turner and Inger Bresson. Centre for Social and Economic
Research on the Global Environment (CSERGE), University College, London.
