FT  04 NOV 92 / UK Company News: BAT poised to light up new market - A look
at the potential for its latest cigarette ventures in eastern Europe
THE FIRST snow of the Russian winter dusted the roofs of the Kremlin across
the river from the Kempinski hotel where Sir Patrick Sheehy, chairman of BAT
Industries, the UK-based tobacco conglomerate, recently opened formal
negotiations for a joint venture with Moscow's largest cigarette factory.
At breakfast in the German-run hotel, Mr IN Ordjonikidze, deputy mayor of
Moscow, and Mr LJ Sinelnikov, director of the Yava factory, warmly toasted
with champagne the prospect of a deal that would modernise a small but
important piece of the country's antiquated industry.
In Russia's hard-pressed economy, cigarettes are regarded not as a health
hazard but as socially benign. Demand heavily outweighs supply, giving them
the status of a surrogate currency which, unlike the rouble, does not
depreciate. Factories that produce cigarettes provide secure jobs and
finance local community services.
The letters of intent signed in Moscow marked a further advance in BAT's
long-term expansion strategy in the former communist republics - markets for
a potential 700bn cigarettes a year, seven times larger than the UK.
BAT, which presents its third-quarter results today, established its first
base in eastern Europe earlier this year when it agreed a joint venture deal
with the state-owned cigarette factory at Pecs in Hungary. It is investing
Pounds 20m in the operation over three years.
Two cigarette joint ventures are being set up in the Ukraine, at Prilucky -
where the factory supports two schools and a sports stadium  - and
Cherkassy, south of Kiev. BAT, which is helping to improve the republic's
tobacco crop, is also talking about investing in a leaf processing plant at
Monastirisk.
Apart from the Yava factory in Moscow, BAT's team has visited more than half
of Russia's other 23 cigarette producers. At least two more joint ventures
seem likely to follow; one near Moscow, another in Siberia.
Exploratory talks continue about possible developments in other former
Soviet republics, and also in Poland, Bulgaria and Romania.
'The investments we are making are essentially long-term,' says Sir Patrick.
'We do not expect to be making significant profits for at least 10 years,
possibly 25 years.'
However, the Hungarian venture is already surpassing the group's most
optimistic forecasts, Sir Patrick says.
'When we took over, we inherited a management geared to loss not profit,
since that was the route to subsidy; a workforce rewarded not with cash but
free accommodation and holiday homes; and a distribution network so inured
to selling whatever the state monopoly chose to supply that it scarcely
believed it could order what it wanted.'
Pecs is now producing more cigarettes more economically than ever before.
The factory, which previously supplied 40 per cent of Hungary's 27bn
cigarettes a year, has profitably raised its market share to more than 50
per cent. Its Sobianae brand is the market leader.
'That was achieved not only by investing in new technology, but also by
revolutionising the management of the business and so making more productive
use of a willing, skilled, and highly educated workforce.'
But if the Pecs venture is beginning to show what rewards are possible, the
practical obstacles to reaching even that stage of development remain
immense.
There is a willingness to embrace free markets, says Sir Patrick, but a lack
of institutions to make them work. Commercial law is inadequate, taxes are
liable to unpredictable change, banking systems are inefficient.
'In some places, it is virtually impossible to predict the course of
official policy,' he says.
In Czechoslovakia, where BAT competed against Philip Morris for control of
the Tabak cigarette monopoly, the UK group was given three weeks to tender,
a week to inspect the factories, and a brief meeting with management. 'It
subsequently emerged that the privatisation ministry, in conjunction with
its Japanese advisers, had already sewn up a deal with the Americans, and
that our role was simply to make up the numbers.'
Poland, in contrast, threw open its doors to every cigarette company that
knocked on them. The market, as a result, is in total confusion.
The break-up of the Soviet Union and the transfer of power to individual
republics has lengthened rather than reduced the bureaucratic process.
Central decision-making is now anathema. To clinch the Yava deal, BAT will
have to secure the agreement of the 1,400 factory workers and management;
but at the same time it will have to negotiate a labyrinth of city
government rules and regulations.
Merely valuing Yava's assets could be a bigger problem than any BAT may face
in re-equipping the cramped five-storey pre-1915 factory, raising
efficiency, and improving the quality of its output of 14bn cigarettes a
year.
Russian officials welcome BAT's policy of maintaining and developing local
brands; but until they can make up the shortfall in supply, the group is
exporting its international brands from Germany, the UK, US, and Brazil.
BAT's German factories alone have exported 7bn cigarettes to eastern Europe
since the Berlin Wall came down. Total BAT exports have surged in the first
nine months of this year, running at nearly three times the volumes of a
year ago.
Sales to Russia, hitherto largely dependent on barter deals, have been
boosted by the government's decision earlier this year to allow any private
trader with hard currency to import cigarettes.
Truckloads of Pall Mall, HB, Hollywood, Kent, and Lucky Strike are now the
currency in which many a domestic business deal is settled as well as a
staple part of the retail trade.
