FT  15 APR 92 / International Company News: Japan Tobacco enters the
overseas market
JAPAN Tobacco, the Japanese tobacco monopoly, has made its first
international acquisition with the purchase of The Manchester Tobacco
Company, a small British cigarette maker whose Kings and Regatta brands
account for about 1 per cent of the UK market.
Japan Tobacco is about 135 times bigger than Manchester, with 1990 sales of
Y2,701.8bn (Dollars 20.27bn) against about Pounds 89m (Dollars 153m) for the
British company last year.
It is putting Pounds 5m into the acquisition, including the purchase of
equity and a commitment to buy new equipment to improve the quality of the
operation. Mr Fursa Hogan, Manchester Tobacco chairman, will stay on as
managing director.
Although Japan Tobacco says its long-term strategy is to expand
internationally, this initial acquisition appears more like a test of the
waters rather than the opening gambit of a big expansion strategy. About 3.5
per cent of Japan Tobacco's production is exported.
The company said yesterday it had no plans to expand the Manchester
business, to increase exports, or to use the company to channel imports of
Japan Tobacco's best-selling Mild Seven brand.
The Japanese government plans a public offering of Japan Tobacco shares
later this year, although nothing concrete has been announced.
The structure of Japan Tobacco was changed from a government bureau to a
joint stock company in 1985, after which its financial performance has
improved considerably. The company reported profits of Y93.2bn, up 88 per
cent since the change in structure. Inventories of tobacco leaves have also
fallen sharply following a programme to reduce acreage.
The Japanese cigarette market has expanded in recent years after earlier
declines. In the six months to last September sales grew by 2.5 per cent,
compared with a year earlier, to 167bn cigarettes.
Imported cigarette sales have grown more quickly than domestic brands, and
now account for about 16 per cent of the market.
The company has diversified into a wide range of fields and has an extensive
research programme. Its research scientists recently discovered a chemical
substance that stimulates the portion of the brain that causes the sensation
of hunger.
The company has suggested that the substance may be used to treat anorexia
nervosa, and is already being used to fatten up geese to obtain livers used
to make pate de foie gras.
