FT  15 JUN 92 / Personal View: The economic costs of Ireland saying 'no'
On Thursday, the Irish people go to the polls to decide whether to ratify
the Maastricht Treaty. Although in earlier Irish referenda on European
Community membership and on the Single European Act, pro-EC majorities of 83
per cent and 70 per cent respectively were recorded, the result this time is
far from certain.
As in Denmark, a certain popular negativism towards politics and politicians
is working against ratification. In addition, many are frustrated at being
asked to vote on something they feel they do not understand, and are liable
to decide that, when in doubt, they should say 'no'.
There are also fears about an erosion of cherished neutrality. In addition,
the introduction by Mr Charles Haughey, the former taoiseach, of a protocol
on abortion into the treaty has provoked a hostile reaction to ratification
from both sides in the controversy over abortion and the rights to travel
and information.
It is impossible to say at this stage how heavily these emotional factors
will weigh against the immense economic benefits EC membership has brought
to Ireland, and the prospect of lower interest rates that European economic
and monetary union is expected to bring in its train.
Unhappily the referendum issue has eclipsed a recent report on the Irish
economy by the Economic and Social Research Institute which is relevant to
the economic issues raised by the Maastricht Treaty. This report is the
first to give a considered reaction to the longer-term economic implications
of startling improvements in the Irish balance of payments estimates
revealed earlier this year. These revisions effectively doubled previous
forecasts of the 1991 Irish external payments surplus and have positive
implications for the future prospects of the economy - which were already
bright, even before this new data became available.
Last year's Irish current external surplus is now placed at 4.5-5 per cent
of gross national product - almost twice the Japanese figure. For the
current year the institute forecast a rise in the external surplus to almost
7 per cent. It bases this on what it describes as a 'cautious' forecast of a
10 per cent rise in the volume of exports - a description justified by the
export returns for the early months of this year.
This performance reflects the remarkable improvement in competitiveness that
has taken place during the past 10 years as a result of the incomes policies
pursued by successive Irish governments. Because of these policies,
industrial pay rates have risen more slowly in every year since 1986 than is
the case for the group of countries with which Ireland mainly trades: the
UK, the US, France, Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands. According
to the central bank, this favourable pay trend, together with productivity
increases, has reduced Irish unit wage costs relative to those of these
trading partners by no less than 30 per cent during the past decade. The
result has been a radical improvement in the balance of payments - from a
disastrous 1981 deficit of almost 15 per cent of GNP to the now-forecast
1992 surplus of almost 7 per cent.
With an external surplus running ahead of any other EC country and well over
double that forecast for Japan, the Irish economy is now remarkably
well-placed for a sustained high rate of growth. Even in the present year,
when high interest rates in Europe are holding back economic expansion, the
Irish growth rate is forecast at 3.25 per cent - higher than anywhere else
in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Were it not
for some unwise handling of recent budgets, which has left the government
with too little room to stimulate growth by means of tax cuts, an even
higher rate of growth could currently be achieved.
In the institute's view, what is now holding back even more rapid growth is
simply 'unduly pessimistic assessments of Irish economic prospects' and a
'misguided perception' in Ireland that 'economic prospects (are)
significantly higher' in the UK and US. This has led to perverse capital
outflows, the reversal of which, the institute philosophically concludes,
must await the persuasive effect of 'allowing the facts to change the
general perception within the financial community of Ireland's relative
economic prospects'.
In Ireland itself, however, there is as yet little public recognition of
these growth possibilities. Consequently, the Maastricht referendum is
taking place in an unreal atmosphere of national pessimism induced by the
present record level of unemployment. This high unemployment is not
primarily a function of Irish economic performance but rather a consequence
of past demographic forces - the fact that the traditionally high Irish
birth rate started to fall much later than in the rest of Europe, its recent
one-third decline dating back only to 1980 - and of the UK recession, which
has reversed the traditional flow of Irish emigration across the Irish Sea.
There is in consequence no recognition by Irish public opinion of the scale
of the growth that could be released by lower interest rates as and when
Germany eventually gets its affairs into order - or of the correlative
danger, that a 'no' vote might have the effect of reversing the recent
steady downward movement in these rates.
For if the well-placed Irish economy has a vulnerable spot, it is in the
extent of its dependence in recent years on non-resident subscriptions to
its domestic government borrowing. German institutions have been happy in
recent years to secure a somewhat higher rate of return from Irish
government stock than they could achieve at home and have been encouraged to
do so by the strength of the Irish pound, which for more than five years has
without strain kept within 1 per cent of its central rate vis-a-vis the
D-Mark.
A 'no' vote on Thursday might disturb this confidence, especially as German
opinion, conscious of the strength of the Irish pound, may not be quite as
well informed about the unusual growth prospects of the economy - Ireland's
best-kept secret of recent times.
However, public opinion polls taken last week suggested a two-to-one
majority in favour of the treaty among those who had made up their minds -
with, however, up to one-third of those polled still undecided. Since then,
the leaders of the four main political parties have issued a strongly worded
and comprehensive joint call for a 'yes' vote, which also has the support of
the trade unions, employers' and farmers' organisations.
Fears of a 'no' vote have been somewhat allayed by these developments,
although memories of the late swing which in 1986 converted a prospective
majority for divorce into a negative decision continue to haunt the
political establishment.
The author is the former Irish prime minister.
