FT  12 MAY 92 / Survey of Angola (9): Port is still well equipped - Lobito
THE sleepy port of Lobito, once an important stop-off point for exports of
minerals from Zaire and Zambia, awaits its renaissance. Lobito's port, like
most of Angola's transport infrastructure, has suffered from the war,
although in comparison with Luanda it has emerged in far better shape from
the years of civil conflict.
Set in a natural harbour formed by a 5km sand-spit, the port remains
relatively well equipped with six deep-water berths and a long coastal quay,
all of which are in a reasonable state of repair.
A large number of the original cranes and fork lift trucks have been kept in
relatively good order, the port is remarkably tidy and, unlike in Luanda,
there are no serious problems of security and theft, says Mr Belmiro
Ferreira, head of the port authority's finance department. Local businessmen
also say that formalities are processed more speedily than in the capital.
In 1973, the port handled 2.6m tonnes of cargo, traffic having risen sharply
in the preceding years. It has fallen to a fraction of that volume but Mr
Ferreira is confident that with peace Lobito can once again play a leading
role in the national and provincial economy. 'Now that the war is over, and
the roads are opening up, there are good perspectives for the port.'
Some rehabilitation work will be needed to bring installations and equipment
up to the standards required to meet any rise in traffic. An emergency plan
has been drawn up which includes rehabilitation of infrastructures and
purchase of cargo handling and maritime equipment and of vehicles. The plan
envisages investment of about Dollars 14m and Spanish financing for the
first part has already been agreed, Mr Ferreira says.
It used to be said that without the Benguela railway Lobito would not exist
and that without Lobito port the railway could not function. Mr Ferreira
agrees that a resumption of international traffic on the Benguela line would
have a crucial impact on Lobito. But the port would benefit also from a
resurgence of domestic agriculture and mining, both of which have declined
dramatically since the war. Before that, a large quantity of agricultural
exports, especially maize from the Huambo and Bie provinces, as well as iron
ore from Cuimba, were exported through Lobito.
Nowadays there are no exports out of Lobito and ships are a rare sight in
the port. But once the road northwards is fully refurbished, Lobito could
become an attractive alternative to Luanda where long delays are common and
security is a nightmare for shippers.
