FT  15 OCT 92 / Survey of The Nuclear Industry (1): Anxieties spoil the
birthday celebrations / Investigation into the fightback and the intensive
research into fusion power - the hope for the future
Fifty years after the first controlled nuclear chain reaction on a Chicago
squash court, the industry is facing up to the erosion of public confidence
as a result of the Three Mile Island accident in 1979, the Chernobyl
disaster in 1986, and a perception that it is uncompetitively expensive. It
has also been attacked by environmental campaigners.
AS THE nuclear industry prepares to celebrate the 50th anniversary of its
scientific birth - the first controlled nuclear chain reaction, achieved by
Enrico Fermi and his team in Chicago on December 2, 1942 - it is facing up
to the fact that nuclear power may already have passed its peak, in terms of
its contribution to world electricity generation.
According to Nukem, the international nuclear consultancy, the peak was
probably achieved last year. In 1991, the world's 420 nuclear power reactors
supplied 2,009 Terawatt-hours (TWh) of electricity, a record 16.6 per cent
of the total demand.
'Nuclear's share in world power generation is expected to decline gradually
from 1992 onwards,' says Nukem. Although nuclear output will increase very
slightly over the next 15 years, it will not keep pace with the projected
growth in demand for electricity - which will therefore be met mainly by
burning more fossil fuel and from renewable energy sources.
Statistics from the OECD's Nuclear Energy Agency paint a similar picture for
the 24 wealthy industrialised countries, which together account for 80 per
cent of the world's nuclear power. Their total nuclear generating capacity
is expected to rise from 264 gigawatts (GW) in 1991 to 296 GW in 2000 and
321 GW in 2010, but the industry will lose ground slowly in relation to
other sources of power.
The latest projection for the end of the century is only one quarter of the
one published in 1977, when the NEA forecast that OECD countries would have
1,200 GW of nuclear capacity in 2000.
The two crucial events undermining the growth of nuclear power were the
Three Mile Island accident in 1979 - since when no new plant has been
ordered in the US - and the Chernobyl disaster in 1986. They were the focal
points for a more general loss of public confidence in nuclear safety.
Anti-nuclear groups have played successfully upon people's fears both of a
sudden Chernobyl-type release of radiation and of the slow impact of
radioactive wastes on the environment.
At the same time, nuclear power has been struggling against the perception
that it is uncompetitively expensive. Its costs are only partly caused by
increasingly stringent safety requirements.
Another factor is that the most efficient size for a modern pressurised
water reactor (PWR) is around 1,400 MW. Such a huge plant requires a lead
time of about 10 years and an investment of Pounds 2bn to plan and build.
Utilities, especially privately-owned ones, would prefer to buy a series of
smaller gas-fired power stations which could be ordered and built within
three years - and with less risk of a public outcry.
Commercial prospects for nuclear equipment manufacturers are correspondingly
bleak. A 20-year chart of new orders worldwide, published in Nuclear
Engineering International's 1992 World Nuclear Industry Handbook, shows
demand slumping from 30-40 GW per year in the early 1970s to around 10 GW a
year in the early 80s and only 2 GW now.
Companies are subsisting on a growing volume of replacement and maintenance
work on existing reactors, while continuing to design new reactors which
they hope utilities will order during the second half of 1990s.
Even so, there are a few relatively bright spots around the world:
Asia offers the best growth prospects. Japan is on course to boost its
proportion of nuclear electricity from about 25 per cent now to 35 per cent
within 10 years. An important problem in densely populated Japan is where to
put reactors; however, a large site at Higashidori in the far north of the
main island, Honshu, has just become available, following an agreement on
compensation between the utilities and local fishing co-operatives.
Elsewhere in the region, South Korea and Taiwan are leading the nuclear
expansion movement.
In the United States, the industry's pressure group, the Council for Energy
Awareness, was able to proclaim 1991 as 'a banner year' even though there
was still no sign of any new orders, because the country's 111 plants put on
a record performance, operating at 70 per cent of capacity compared to 66
per cent in 1990.
The industry now hopes that US utilities will start to order 'new advanced
design nuclear plants' in the mid-1990s. Three US manufacturers
(Westinghouse, General Electric and ABB/Combustion Engineering) are working
on reactor designs.
In western Europe, France is the showpiece of the nuclear industry. PWRs
generate almost three-quarters of French electricity - more than anywhere
else in the world - and export surplus power to neighbouring countries.
Although a few more PWRs are now under construction or being planned by
Electricite de France, the country does not want to rely on nuclear for more
than 80 per cent of its electricity, for reasons of diversity and security
of supply. In the UK, 1994 will be a crucial year for the industry: the
country's first PWR, Sizewell B, is due for completion and the government
has promised to review the whole future of nuclear power then.
In eastern Europe, the nuclear industry has been disrupted, like all other
activities, by the collapse of communism and the Soviet Union. The region's
58 Soviet-designed reactors do not meet western safety standards - and 25 of
them need upgrading urgently - but the countries involved do not have the
billions of dollars required and the west is proving slow at providing
financial and economic assistance.
Even so, there is likely to be a long-term role for nuclear power in a
region that is very short of energy. And there may be scope for building new
plants in countries such as Hungary and Czechoslovakia, which could export
some of their electricity to western Europe.
Having had to defend itself against a constant barrage of attacks from
environmental campaigners, the international nuclear industry is becoming
increasingly aggressive in its own use of green arguments. Nuclear spokesmen
take every opportunity to point out that their plants generate none of the
pollutant gases - carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides -
associated with the main competition, fossil fuels.
But the most compelling strategic argument for maintaining nuclear power is
that it ensures a diversity of energy sources for individual countries and
for the world as a whole.
Although supplies of gas, oil and coal have been ample for the past decade -
and will remain so for many years to come, according to most forecasts -
there is always the possibility that unexpected world events could suddenly
bring serious shortages. Or scientists might find that global warming,
induced by burning fossil fuels, gathers pace more quickly than anyone had
predicted. In that case, renewable energy sources could not come to the
rescue quickly enough.
Nuclear power cannot provide a viable option for the future if the
supporting industry is allowed to wither away. Lead times are so long - a
decade for an individual nuclear plant and much more than that for a new
generation of reactors - that an active programme of manufacturing,
development and research is essential.
The most forward-looking research is into fusion power: obtaining energy
from combining light atoms rather than splitting heavy ones. The Joint
European Torus (JET) at Culham near Oxford achieved controlled fusion power
for the first time last November, and the EC, US, Japan and Russia agreed
this year to spend Dollars 1bn over the next six years designing a 1,000 MW
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor. If ITER succeeds, it will
then have to be followed by a demonstration power plant before fusion power
could become a commercial reality - some time in the middle of the next
century.
Even critics of the nuclear industry have to admit that it has long-term
vision.
