FT  21 APR 92 / BR faulted over safety projects
FAR FEWER railway passengers' lives would be lost if British Rail worried
less about preventing headline-hitting train disasters and concentrated on
stopping people falling out of trains, according to an analysis in May's
edition of Railway Gazette International.
Mr Richard Hope, the magazine's consultant editor, says statistical evidence
suggests that British Rail's safety spending bears little relation to the
potential for saving life.
In the three years from 1988 to 1990, nearly half the 615 passengers killed
or seriously injured were victims of accidents while getting on or off
trains or falling out of them.
Most such deaths and injuries could be avoided by replacing old 'slam-door'
carriages with new trains fitted with power-operated doors. Instead,
however, BR has slowed the replacement of old trains to pump more money into
measures aimed at preventing big train crashes.
The most costly of those measures is automatic train protection, an
electronic system of controlling trains that is intended to reduce or
eliminate the possibility of high-speed collisions.
An analysis of the accident records of 10 European countries from 1981 to
1990 shows that those with automatic train protection did have lower
casualty rates, but the differences were small.
Mr Hope says the analysis suggests that France, which has suffered a spate
of train disasters since 1986, might have recorded 126 fewer deaths and 82
fewer serious injuries between 1981 and 1990 if it had installed automatic
train protection.
France is now spending FFr4.6bn (Pounds 465m) on installing automatic train
protection. Mr Hope questions whether such investment can be justified by
the potential savings in casualties when Department of Transport
computations put the cost of a death at Pounds 665,000 and a serious injury
at Pounds 20,000.
Mr Hope concludes that such investment probably cannot be justified. The
main fault of the railways is in apparently not attempting an investment
appraisal of this nature - or at least not making it public.
