FT  08 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Yorkshire Electricity improves to Pounds
142m
YORKSHIRE Electricity yesterday announced one of the more modest profit
increases of the sector reporting season.
Pre-tax profits for the 12 months to March 31 amounted to Pounds 141.9m, a
21 per cent increase on the previous year's pro forma figures, giving
earnings per share of 48.3p.
A proposed final dividend of 12.53p lifts the total to 17.76p; the company
said it expected to maintain real dividend growth of between 5 and 8 per
cent.
The reason for the modest underlying growth in earnings was that the company
was not forced to push tariffs up as sharply in April 1991 as regionals who
had undercharged the previous year.
The main distribution business contributed most to the profits upturn,
making operating profits of Pounds 135.3m against Pounds 107.4m.
This was mainly due to higher tariffs, but about 1.5 per cent of the
increase came from a modest 0.9 per cent increase in volumes sold.
Costs in the business rose by about Pounds 4m net, after a saving of 2 per
cent real, or about Pounds 3m after 100 jobs were cut.
The supply business saw operating profits fall to Pounds 8.9m (Pounds
14.2m). Costs rose as the company made a Pounds 6m (Pounds 3.5m) provision
for bad debts and spending on customer services rose.
The retail business incurred a loss after a bad debt provision at the
interim stage of about Pounds 10m, but was now trading profitably.
Contracting and other non-core businesses made a small contribution.
The company expects little improvement in electricity sales, but fairly
consistent cost and job cutting.
The gas marketing business, set up last month, will begin earning in August.
COMMENT
Yorkshire deserves a prize for avoiding the cliches of every other regional
company about matching shareholders' and customers' needs. It has a good
record on customer service and its tariff increases this year are the second
lowest of the 12 companies. Thus, it can afford to express confidence in the
regulatory formula by charging customers the maximum allowable. This
strategy of collecting a bit extra in advance has pleased shareholders, made
sure the supply business is in profit, and cushioned the company against
unexpected cost increases. But given that the regulator yesterday emphasised
that he would clamp down on companies' charges to customers if he thought
they were not cutting costs enough, Yorkshire's 2 per cent real cost saving
might look a little modest. Analysts expect pre-tax profits this year of
Pounds 155m-Pounds 160m, putting the shares on a prospective p/e of 6.4 to
7.9. A dividend of between 19.5p and 19.9p is forecast.
