FT  06 OCT 92 / Markets remain wary of Brazil's economics team
BRAZIL'S new government began work yesterday, faced with the task of
dispelling the financial markets' doubts over the calibre of its economics
team and policy direction.
Of the six ministers sworn in yesterday only one - Mr Fernando Henrique
Cardoso, the new foreign minister - is a name of any standing. The holder of
the important finance and economy portfolio, Mr Gustavo Krause, is a
little-known congressman from the north-eastern state of Pernambuco.
Friday's market reaction was hardly a boost for the country's sixth economy
minister in as many years. The main Sao Paulo index dropped 8 per cent on
his nomination and yesterday closed a further 7.5 per cent down.
In an attempt to calm the markets Mr Krause, who is a lawyer and tax
specialist, and Mr Paulo Haddad, the new planning minister, are taking every
opportunity to pledge support for the orthodox stabilisation programme of Mr
Marclio Marques Moreira, the former economy minister.
Nerves steadied a little with the team's pledge to maintain international
commitments, such as the recently negotiated termsheet with creditor banks
on Dollars 44bn (Pounds 24.7bn) of commercial debt. Relief also greeted the
news that Mr Francisco Gros, the respected central bank governor, has agreed
to stay on, though not indefinitely.
But the hastily written profiles of Mr Krause being transmitted frantically
on fax machines around Brazil and international markets are doing little to
abate fears that President Itamar Franco may be throwing away the
opportunity offered by the enthusiastic reaction to last week's vote to
impeach ex-President Fernando Collor.
One foreign banker commented: 'Brazil is a specialist in lost chances.'
While other Latin American economies have internationally known and widely
published economists at their helm, the best-known written work by Mr
Krause, a former mayor of the north-eastern town of Recife, is his 'Ten
Commandments of Bohemianism' which hangs in bars all over the city and
advocates liquid refreshment. He is a superstitious man and practitioner of
Umbanda, a form of white magic derived from African religions.
Apparently untroubled by the negative reaction to his appointment as head of
the world's ninth largest economy, Mr Krause appeared on breakfast
television yesterday to reiterate there would be no shock plans.
Tight monetary policy would be maintained and big new government projects
prohibited.
To reduce inflation from current levels of 25 per cent a month he will focus
on dialogue to achieve pre-fixing of prices and salaries.
Mr Krause said yesterday 'a pact is fundamental - it's impossible to
administer this economy unilaterally'. He hopes to recoup some of the 25 per
cent real fall in tax receipts of the last two years by offering sector-wide
tax cuts in return for reduced evasion - an experiment carried out
successfully when he was finance secretary of the Pernambuco state
government.
A priority for Mr Krause is fiscal reform. He plans a two-step adjustment,
with emergency legislation to come into effect next year and a more complete
reform to be discussed with next September's planned constitutional
revision.
The real test for the new team will come with their stance on structural
reforms such as trade liberalisation and, in particular, privatisation,
which several members of the new cabinet and Mr Franco have spoken out
against in the past.
