FT  19 NOV 92 / Major faces new attack over arms to Iraq affair
OPPOSITION leaders last night joined forces to accuse Mr John Major of
misleading parliament in his statements about government guidelines covering
the sale of arms-related equipment to Iraq. The move came as Labour called
for a Commons debate on the subject on Monday.
In separate open letters, Mr John Smith and Mr Paddy Ashdown highlighted
repeated government pledges that the 1985 guidelines had been consistently
applied. These assurances were contrasted with Downing Street admissions to
journalists that changes had secretly taken place.
'Any objective analysis of the statements made by John Major and other
ministers must reach the conclusion that parliament and members of
parliament have been consistently misled on this issue,' Mr Smith wrote in
what was much the more aggressive of the two letters.
The Labour leader called on the prime minister to 'now apologise' to
parliament. It was 'extraordinary' that Mr Major had 'so categorically
denied' that ministers had misled MPs in prime minister's questions on
Tuesday, when Downing Street was 'telling journalists that the 1985
guidelines were changed in December 1988.'
Mr Ashdown asked Mr Major to explain 'this discrepancy': 'Were you badly
briefed by your officials - did you mistakenly inform me and the House in
your previous statements and letters - or is this all part of what many are
now increasingly regarding as a high-level and systematic action which has
had the effect of misleading parliament?'.
In a strongly worded motion for next week's debate, Labour charged that, as
a result of the 'private change of policy', British 'servicemen may have
been exposed to fire from shells and rockets made in munitions factories
equipped by Britain.'
'The conduct of ministers in this matter has been inconsistent with the
security of British troops, with open government, and with the just
administration of legal process,' it continued.
Mr Major is expected to be absent for the debate which will be opened by Mr
Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary. Labour said last night it
would use the debate to set out the case against the government and the
questions that it hoped Lord Justice Scott's inquiry would be able to
answer.
The 1988 change was first publicly alluded to in the all-party trade and
industry select committee's report into the Iraqi supergun affair, published
in March. But it first attracted widespread attention following the release
of previously restricted Whitehall documents during the Matrix Churchill
court case last week.
This brought to light an April 1989 letter signed by the private secretary
of Mr William Waldegrave, then a Foreign Office minister, which stated: 'We
agreed that we should continue to interpret the guidelines more flexibly in
respect of Iraq, as we have done in practice since the end of last year.'
The letter was addressed to Mr Alan Clark, then trade minister.
Downing Street, which had no immediate response to yesterday's
correspondence, has argued that the 1988 changes were not 'significant.'
Labour also published yesterday a list of UK companies - including
Rolls-Royce, ICL and British Aerospace - which it said had been 'implicated'
in the supply of defence-related equipment to Iraq. Most of the companies
named denied that the list contained anything new.
When innocence is not enough Page 12
