FT  18 FEB 92 / World Stock Markets: Irish stocks unruffled by political
upheaval - The calm and composure in Dublin's stockbroking community
In recent months, the dealing rooms of Dublin's stockbroking community have
been a refuge of calm and composure from the frenzy and commotion in the
meeting rooms and corridors of the Irish parliament.
The political upheaval, which brought the country to the brink of a general
election and culminated last week in the abrupt termination of the 38-year
political career of prime minister Mr Charles Haughey, barely caused a
ripple on the Dublin stock exchange. As one broker remarked: 'These issues
loom larger in the media than they do in the minds of professional
investors.'
Events such as a shift in German interest rates, or a downturn in retail
sales in the UK or US, are more likely to make an impact on Irish business
prospects than party squabbles in the Dail.
After nearly 10 months of flat performance and thin trading, the Dublin
market finally staged a rally in mid-January. With some minor erosion since
then, this has left the ISEQ general index at 1,442.54 yesterday, up 4.5 per
cent since last December 31, marginally ahead of the FT-Actuaries Europe
index.
This was triggered by an upturn in New York, according to Davy Stockbrokers,
one of the 'big four' Dublin houses. 'Most of the Irish industrials depend
upon the outside world for momentum in their earnings,' says a Davy analyst.
Around 60 per cent of the earnings of quoted Irish industrial groups are
derived from overseas sales. Jefferson Smurfit, an Irish blue chip stock,
which accounts for 17.5 per cent of the Dublin stock market's IPounds 8.4bn
(Dollars 5.3bn) market capitalisation, has climbed 17 per cent this year on
the heels of the New York rally. Almost 90 per cent of its sales are
overseas.
The question being asked now is whether the market is following the pattern
of 1991, which saw a 40 per cent surge in the first quarter, and lethargy
for the rest of the year. By December, some brokers were complaining that
they were not even meeting their overheads.
Overall, however, the market grew by some 20 per cent in 1991, making it one
of the better-performing markets in Europe, and most of the Dublin broking
firms are predicting a similar outturn in 1992.
Davy expects between 15 and 20 per cent growth and National City Brokers is
forecasting 20 per cent. Solomon's, a subsidiary of Anglo-Irish Bank, noted
that 1,600 for the ISEQ index by the year-end would represent 16 per cent
growth over 1991, but would still leave the Irish market off its all-time
high, which it reached in 1990.
Mr Brian O'Loughlan, a fund manager at Irish Life, Ireland's biggest life
assurance company and a major institutional investor, sees a foundation for
all this. 'Earnings (on Irish stocks) could well be 12 to 13 per cent up
this year,' he says. 'Valuations on the Irish market are quite attractive
relative to the US and the UK, so there is room for rerating. That kind of
(market) growth is achievable.'
While Smurfit, in p/e terms, trades at a substantial discount to US paper
stocks, another Irish blue chip, CRH, is seen as cheap against its UK
counterparts. Irish food shares are similarly seen to have a good
risk-reward balance. There is an expectation, therefore, that even if the US
and UK markets flatten out, Dublin can catch up the ground it lost in 1990.
'There would be money to come in and buy cheap stocks here,' says one
analyst.
Meanwhile, there is excitement for the market in the anticipated flotation
of Guinness Peat Aviation (GPA), the world's largest aircraft leasing
company. Investors are still waiting for a firm date for the flotation,
planned for London, Tokyo, New York and Dublin, which could value GPA at
between Dollars 3bn and Dollars 4bn.
Mr O'Loughlan says that Irish institutional investors who do not already
hold a significant stake in the Shannon-based aircraft leasing company will
want to build one up for strategic reasons: 'The benchmark set by those who
already have a stake is about 7 to 8 per cent of their portfolios. The
demand for GPA shares in the Irish market would be around IPounds 75m to
IPounds 100m.'
