FT  25 JUL 92 / Travel group collapse hits 50,000
ABOUT 50,000 people who booked holidays with coach tour operator Land Travel
have no prospect of recovering their money after the Bath-based company went
into liquidation yesterday and two of its top executives were arrested.
Last night, Avon and Somerset police said Mr Valere Tjolle, company
chairman, and Ms Theresa McDermott, company secretary, had been released on
bail without charge after helping with inquiries 'into allegations of
fraud'.
Another 2,500 people, already on holiday on the Continent, were last night
struggling to get back home in the wake of the collapse as it emerged that
Land Travel was not a member of the Association of British Travel Agents
(Abta) or of the Bus and Coach Council.
Customers, as a result, were not covered by any guarantee that they would
receive refunds or be brought back.
Liquidator Grant Thornton said it was already apparent that customers and
other creditors would not receive any payment from the company.
The Foreign Office said 106 coaches carrying Land Travel customers were
returning to the UK from Czechoslovakia, Austria, France, Germany, Spain,
Italy and the Netherlands. It said there was little likelihood of
holidaymakers being stranded.
However, British consulates on the Continent have been told to be ready to
deal with any tourists unable to return home.
The ferry companies P&amp;O and Sealink said they would ensure that all Land
Travel customers were able to cross the Channel to the UK even if they did
not have valid tickets.
Grant Thornton said that 140 full-time Land Travel employees and 200
part-time staff were made redundant yesterday.
The collapse of Land Travel follows warnings by tourist industry executives
that heavy discounting could lead to company failures during the summer.
Grant Thornton said that in one instance the company had offered a six-day
holiday in luxury accommodation in Paris for Pounds 59.
In a statement issued through the liquidator, Mr Tjolle said price-cutting
had been responsible for the company's collapse. 'Operating in a very
difficult market, we tried an ambitious price discounting strategy. Although
customers were delighted with the service and outstanding value for money
they were enjoying, unfortunately the dramatic increase in demand
over-extended our resources,' he said.
Travel industry officials said rumours about Land Travel's financial
stability had been circulating for months. Abta said it had been receiving
complaints for several weeks from customers whose holidays had been
cancelled shortly before departure. Abta told the customers it could take no
action as the company was not one of its members.
P&amp;O said it stopped taking Land Travel bookings more than six weeks ago.
Sealink began refusing bookings 10 days ago. The Advertising Standards
Authority said it first received complaints about Land Travel in 1988.
The collapse comes only three days after the government announced proposals
to protect buyers of land and sea-based package holidays.
Although all air charter passengers are protected by a bonding scheme
administered by the Civil Aviation Authority, many surface-based holidays
offer no money-back guarantee.
The government has proposed establishing a central reserve fund to ensure
that non-charter package tourists are protected.
Customers stranded, Page 4
