FT  27 APR 92 / Old foes resume the bickering: Notebook
A MEETING of finance ministers of the Group of Seven would not feel right
without a bout of public bickering between the US and Germany.
At a press conference yesterday Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister,
was still visibly peeved by the US Treasury's criticism of German fiscal
policy. 'Complaints and accusations don't help,' he said, adding that 'I'm
not going to be put in the dock'.
Meanwhile, the national champions - Mr David Mulford, the US Treasury
under-secretary for international affairs, and Mr Horst Kohler, state
secretary in the Bonn Finance Ministry - have been seen talking to each
other in Washington after trading charge and counter-charge last week.
This latest spat, triggered by Mr Mulford's claim that Germany's high fiscal
deficits were becoming a structural problem and exporting slow growth to the
Europe, rapidly moved up the Richter scale of public rows. If Mr Mulford
thought he could make his strictures acceptable by insisting that the US was
not trying to prescribe policy for Bonn, he must have suffered a shock.
US officials were certainly taken aback by the sharpness of Mr Kohler's
reply, which accused Mr Mulford at one point of making 'one-sided and partly
false public comments'.
While some officials in Washington put the whole thing down to Mr Mulford's
insensitivity and Mr Kohler's thin skin, others could see a method behind
the US Treasury's megaphone diplomacy.
If the US had first raised its worries about Germany's fiscal policy in
yesterday's G7 meeting, the day's discussions on Russia and the world
economy would have been overshadowed by a round of table banging.
If foreign exchange reserves are a guide to a country's ability to import,
it is no wonder that Russia's imports have collapsed.
A new International Monetary Fund economic review of the Russian Federation
discloses that the reserves of the Russian central bank fell to just Dollars
12m (Pounds 6.7m) at the end of January.
