FT  19 NOV 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising: Going underground is
just the ticket
Travellers on London's underground railway have long been accustomed to
whiling away spare moments by studying the highly inventive and often
attractive posters and artwork which line the stations and trains.
From today the 2m passengers a day who use the Tube have something else to
study - the backs of their tickets. London Transport Advertising has reached
agreement with Mercury Communications - tussling hard with BT for the ears
of the telephone-using public - to carry Mercury ads on the back of Tube
tickets.
Mercury is spending Pounds 2m on a television, poster and back-of-ticket
campaign to spread its message. The slogan will appear on 20m daily and
one-day travel card tickets. The message - 'I must remember that Mercurycard
Phones take credit cards' - is aimed at reinforcing the growing trend of
using ordinary credit cards to make telephone calls.
LTA acts for London Transport, which runs London's buses and underground,
and carries 11,000 different advertising campaigns, from the mammoth to the
tiny, at any one time. LTA's turnover from selling advertising space is
Pounds 28m annually, which, after costs, is ploughed back into LT.
In recent years the Tube, the first stretches of which were constructed in
the 1860s, has been showing signs of its age. But its ingrained dirt has
been enlivened by wonderful poster representations of paintings as well as
mini-posters of some of the best poetry in English, the brainchild of a New
York emigre, Judith Chernaik, who badgered London Transport into the scheme.
But the Tube is also home to some of the most creative outdoor advertising.
Unlike most other outdoor poster sites, rapidly passed by and swiftly
forgotten, underground passengers often have little to do but wait for their
train and gaze around, giving copywriters and graphic artists the almost
perfect, cross-class and multicultural captive audience.
Not that anything goes. Tube adverts are subject to close scrutiny by LT. In
September 1988 it declined to carry posters for Martin Scorsese's film, The
Last Temptation of Christ. In June it rejected one on behalf of the English
Shakespeare Company, featuring a 1514 drawing by the German artist, Hans
Baldung Grien, of (naked) witches from Macbeth. In July a poster
commissioned by the Barbican art gallery from cartoonist Ralph Steadman, who
has a dramatically violent style, was turned down. But the Mercury ads, both
on the tickets and in every carriage, are likely to offend no-one, perhaps
alarming only BT.
London Transport says that though Mercury's back-of-ticket advertising
scheme is a first, other advertisers are beginning to form a queue. Indeed,
according to Brian Robinson, managing director of LTA, back-of-ticket
advertising could offer advertisers a highly targeted opportunity, with
corner shop businesses potentially able to buy space on the back of tickets
sold from a single station.
But as ill-luck would have it, Mercury's campaign looks like it will
coincide with one of the Tube's most serious industrial protests for several
years. Tube staff are threatening an all-out strike next week against
planned redundancies. What chance a refund?
