FT  08 JUN 92 / Czechs and Slovaks reconsider the federation: Following
weekend elections, the two peoples may be heading for a 'velvet divorce'
The fate of Czechoslovakia now rests with two powerful politicians after
weekend elections revealed the strength of left-wing separatist feelings in
Slovakia and strong support for western-style economic reforms in the Czech
lands.
Voters in the economically more advanced and populous Czech republic, with
its capital in Prague, strongly supported the Civic Democratic party (ODS)
led by Mr Vaclav Klaus, the federal finance minister. But Slovaks in the
economically fragile eastern part of the federal state voted overwhelmingly
for Mr Vladimir Meciar, leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia. Mr
Meciar has promised that Slovakia will no longer be dictated to by Prague
but until now has stopped short of demanding outright independence.
The two men, who will dominate their respective republican parliaments, will
have to make difficult compromises at a federal level which will test their
political skills to the utmost if the Czech and Slovak federation is to
survive.
In the Czech republic, the results are a personal triumph for Mr Klaus, and
a blow to the pollsters who predicted the ODS would only pick up about 20
per cent of the vote. It got more than 30 per cent.
The polls failed to register how Mr Klaus managed to win the pocket-book
loyalty of millions of voters by implementing the first stage of mass
privatisation before the election.
More than 8.5m voters went into these elections as the owners of voucher
books entitling them to shares in thousands of Czech and Slovak companies
now being privatised. Mr Klaus has made sure that millions of Czechs and
Slovaks have a stake in the successful outcome of economic reform.
At a first glance, the election results indicate that this has mainly
affected voters in the Czech lands. Many Slovak voters responded instead to
Mr Meciar's argument that an arrogant Prague had imposed macro-economic
policies which failed to reflect the different needs of Slovakia's weaker
and more vulnerable economy, still heavily based on arms and heavy industry.
But finding common ground on constitutional issues will be as difficult as
bridging the wide economic differences. Over the last two years, Czech and
Slovak politicians have tried and failed to write a new constitution to
replace that inherited from the communist regime which was swept away by the
November 1989 'velvet revolution'.
The question is whether Mr Klaus and Mr Meciar, having emerged as clear
leaders in their respective republics, have the political and personal
skills to negotiate a new basis for co-existence.
At present, legislation in the tri-cameral federal assembly has to be
approved both by the mixed Chamber of Peoples and the Chamber of Nations,
where Czechs and Slovaks have equal weight and vote separately. This allows
a handful of Slovaks to veto constitutional or legislative changes.
The first indication of a willingness to compromise will come early next
month with a presidential election by the new parliament. The Civic Forum
coalition, which backed the incumbent, Mr Vaclav Havel, split 15 months ago
and is now dead. Mr Havel, a Czech, will need Mr Meciar's Slovak votes to be
re-elected.
Mr Klaus, whose ODS was the only party to fight the election in both
republics, apart from the neo-fascist republican party of Mr Miroslav
Sladek, rejects any idea of a looser confederation and insists that a future
reformed federation must rest on a common currency, a single central bank,
close co-operation in fiscal and monetary policy and commitment to market
reforms.
This would leave the federal government with crucial economic powers against
the wishes of Mr Meciar, who wants economic decisions to be made in
Bratislava, the Slovak capital. Mr Meciar calls for greater state
intervention, financed by budget deficits if necessary and a Slovak central
bank.
This is anathema to Mr Klaus, who campaigned on the principle that the
federation is only worth preserving if it is based on 'sound principles'. If
not, he says, it would be better to opt for a 'velvet divorce'.
One of the few areas of common ground is the belief that dissolution of the
federal republic would not lead to the ethnic violence which has
characterised the partition of former Yugoslavia.
The elections, in which over 80 per cent of the electorate voted, were
impeccably peaceful. Together the Czechs and Slovaks ran the most successful
democracy in central Europe between the wars. But Slovaks have long resented
Prague's dominant role which has fueled the desire for Slovak national
sovereignty.
If these resentments lead to political divorce, however, it would inevitably
distract attention from economic reform. It would also cost the Slovak
budget an estimated Dollars 500m in annual subsidies from the Czech lands
and lead to a projected 100 per cent devaluation of the new Slovak currency.
After several recent devaluations, the federal currency, the koruna, is
stable at about 29-30 to the US dollar.
By contrast, the Czech lands, released from the burden of subsidising
Slovakia, and benefiting from proximity to the German and other EC markets,
would probably become even more attractive to foreigners. Investment bankers
in Prague say mainly US and EC companies have projects worth up to Dollars
5bn in the pipeline. Several dozen projects are only awaiting Czech
government approval before they can start. The attractiveness of investment
has been reinforced by the strong vote for rapid privatisation and market
reforms.
Slovakia has received some recent foreign investment, like Volkswagen's new
assembly plant in Bratislava and a joint venture with Whirlpool, the US
domestic appliance group. But over 80 per cent of foreign investment so far
has been in the Czech lands. Secession and a lesser commitment to economic
reform would further reduce Slovakia's attractiveness to foreign investors
who are desperately needed to help restructure the economy.
Apart from the strong economic arguments for remaining attached to what is
likely to be an increasingly powerful Czech economic 'locomotive', Slovakia
has a 600,000 strong ethnic Hungarian minority, an unresolved conflict with
Hungary over the controversial Gabcikovo dam project on the Danube and a
disputed border with a resurgent independent Ukraine. This is a potentially
dangerous part of the world for a small country on its own.
But Czechs too would be diminished if Slovakia peeled away, leaving them
alone to face the unresolved issue of compensation for the 3m ethnic Germans
expelled after the last war. Heavy German investment has already stirred the
first worries about the long-term risks to the survival of Czech culture as
a small country of only 10m people.
These are powerful, common sense reasons for Czechs and Slovaks to
re-negotiate the basis of their continuing co-existence.
Before the election, president Havel told voters they had the power 'to make
Czechoslovakia a focus of European stability or a place of permanent
conflict . . . and permanent political and constitutional crisis'. The
voters have spoken. It is now up to their elected leaders to decide which
path the country chooses.
