FT  15 AUG 92 / Markets: Summer doldrums bring chill to New York - Wall
Street
THE SUMMER doldrums have arrived on Wall Street, even if New York's weather
has done its best to throw everybody off their stride (temperatures actually
fell into the 60s this week, prompting the reappearance of fur coats on
Fifth Avenue).
Investors are staying away from the market, trading volume has slumped, and
traders have had nothing better to do than tell new Dan Quayle jokes.
(Question: What's the difference between Dan Quayle and the 30-year Treasury
bond? Answer: The Treasury bond eventually matures.)
The same 30-year bond was centre stage for a while this week, after it
plunged more than a point on Thursday, dragging an already wobbly stock
market down with it. The trigger for the 30-year bond's sharp fall was some
remarks made by James Baker, the outgoing Secretary of State and new chief
of President Bush's re-election campaign.
Announcing his resignation at the State Department, Baker indicated that
lower taxes should be a key element of the President's campaign and second
term. The bond market took fright at this suggestion, which implied that
government borrowing, and with it the budget deficit, will rise if President
Bush is re-elected.
The talk of deficit-widening fiscal policies could not have come at a worse
time for bond dealers and investors, who were trying to digest the Dollars
10bn in new 30-year bonds the Treasury had auctioned off that afternoon. The
subsequent plunge in bond prices set off a wave of computer sell programs on
the stock markets as institutional investors shuddered at the sight of a
sharp uptick in long-term bond rates.
There was an even more panicky response to Baker's comments in Chicago,
where the Treasury bond futures pit went into a frenzy of selling, while on
foreign exchange markets, the dollar also wobbled.
The sustained weakness in the dollar - which required two more rounds of
concerted central bank intervention this week - has, in turn, been upsetting
bond markets, which fear that there is no more room for further cuts in US
interest rates with the dollar trading near its all-time low against the
D-mark,
Thursday showed just how jittery US financial markets have become during
this presidential election season. The big lead in the polls that Democratic
nominee Governor Bill Clinton has built up (the latest puts the gap at 18
points) continues to worry the markets, which believe that a Democrat in the
White House will be bad news for the economy, and even worse news for hopes
of a lower deficit.
Next week's Republican convention in Houston may provide some temporary
relief, assuming Bush receives the 'post-convention bounce' in the polls
customarily afforded to incumbents and challengers.
If the pre-convention bickering between hard-line conservatives and the more
centrist Bush camp is anything to go by, however, Houston could offer more
political drama than the organisers may have bargained for. A publicly
divided Republican party is the last thing financial markets want.
At least investors had some economic news to cheer this week, although, as
always, it came heavily laden with qualifications. Retail sales and
industrial production were both up in July, consumer and producer prices
barely budged last month, while the latest weekly jobless claims fell
sharply.
The 0.5 per cent rise in retail sales, however, was announced alongside a
big downward revision of the previous month's estimate of sales. Industrial
production rose, but the gain was due almost entirely to a weather-related
increase in utility use and a rebound in the mining sector following the
early summer rail strike. Otherwise, manufacturing output was flat last
month. The big drop in new jobless claims was also the result of a one-off
factor - the previous week's figures had been inflated by the temporary
closure of some General Motors' plants.
Unemployment is unlikely to fall significantly until the big US corporations
have completed their post-recession round of restructurings. The latest
shake-up came from McDonnell Douglas, the defence and aerospace group, which
on Monday announced plans to consolidate its six military contracting units
into two divisions, to find a buyer or a partner for its helicopter
business, and to close its aircraft parts plant in Ohio.
The news may not have gone down well in Columbus, where 1,000 people will be
made redundant, but the restructuring was well received by investors, who
rushed to buy McDonnell stock, sending it up 20 per cent to Dollars 43 in
four days of hectic trading.
 -------------------------------------------
Monday     3337.58   +   05.40
Tuesday    3331.10   -   06.48
Wednesday  3320.83   -   10.27
Thursday   3313.27   -   07.56
Friday     3328.94   +   15.67
 -------------------------------------------
