FT  25 APR 92 / Gardening: Early victims of the annual conflict - The front
lawn
FOR THE first time in three years, the weather is favouring late planters.
The sequence of dry springs has broken; frosts have not been erratic; the
ground is warming without becoming hard. It is all an incentive to buy and
plant, but before you pitch in, reflect on my report from the front line.
The front line, as usual, is littered with casualties. I blame them not so
much on frost as on a winter of cold winds. In the Cotswolds, they include
almost anything of marginal hardiness which went unprotected: the better
sorts of cistus, the riskier forms of penstemon and anything with silky
silver leaves.
As I exhume corpses, I notice a warning to planters: despite appearances,
these casualties have hardly ever crept out of their original ball of
compost during four or five years in the open ground. The top growth, even
the flowers, were promising, but something deterred the roots from spreading
far and wide.
I have no doubt about the culprit: it is the sad apology for earth in which
most of our nurseries now grow on their stock. Most of this compost is peat;
some of it is white perlite; none of it is plain loam of the robust variety
which these plants then meet in the garden. It is as if the roots emerge
from a light cocoon and then go on strike when they encounter reality on
three sides. Corpse upon corpse shows the same effect which has not killed
them, but has certainly slowed them up.
You and I have to learn to live with it because nurserymen are not likely to
change their convenient ways. These light composts are easy to buy,
transport, force-feed and keep clean: innocent customers are now accustomed
to them and there are only a few eccentrics like myself who prefer to buy
'open ground' plants with bare roots and a dead appearance in late winter.
We are all told that it is marvellously easy nowadays to plant anything from
a container at any time of the year: we hear much less about the difficulty
of persuading plants inside it to grow on smoothly.
My first cure for the difficulty is water. Much of our newly-bought stock is
planted out when it is already too dry. The compost in plastic containers
tends to dry out on a warm shopping day in the garden centre and dry out
even more drastically in the car boot.
I have just been planting a group of pot-grown box bushes: here, there is
the added complication that their fibrous roots are already a tangled mass
and the only way of wetting this muddle is to stand the entire ball of roots
for an hour or two in a bucket of water. Casual watering from a can merely
runs down the outer sides of the root ball and reaches nothing: the plant
goes into the ground with a dry centre and is not saved by most people's
habit of watering gently round the plant, not directly at its centre.
If you are planting during this weekend, ignore the trivial distraction of
any rain and keep a bucket nearby in which to immerse each subject which
comes equipped with its own designer-compost.
The next step is to loosen the ground to as fine a texture as possible
immediately around the new ball of roots. On a clay soil, you will have to
have a second bucket of a light, leafy compost to hand in order to add to
this workable zone round your new acquisition. Labels will probably tell you
to plant your pot-grown purchase in yet more peat, but I rebel against
correcting the culprit by using yet more of it and I do not find that
another handful solves the problem. Sooner or later, the roots have to be
persuaded to explore your local soil and in my view, they might as well
start as soon as possible.
They will be persuaded more quickly if you avoid the amateur's other great
mistake. Whenever you plant, you must make a hole which is deep enough for
the job. Except on heavy soils, the level of the ground will always settle
round newly-planted stock and beginners will be caught out and find their
plants protruding above ground level like corks in a half-opened bottle.
It is extremely difficult to plant too deeply unless you are handling roses
or larger shrubs which have been grafted: here, you should not bury the
plant below the point of grafting unless you want endless suckers.
Otherwise, you must allow for the surrounding soil to settle if you are to
persuade the upper tangle of roots to leave their nursery home. The more I
see newly-planted borders, the more I realise how people do not realise this
fact.
It is not only important to plant deeply: it is absolutely vital that you
give a plant enough width. There are two great popular fallacies about
roots. One is that they somehow eat the surrounding soil and its goodness.
Of course they do nothing of the sort. They are enabled to take up goodness
from it by moisture: they are incorrigible drinkers, not eaters.
The second fallacy is that roots move around. Again, they mostly do no such
thing. Existing roots stay exactly where you have finally planted them, or
squashed them without noticing while treading on the soil as you fill up the
hole. They then grow outwards, if you are lucky, from the tangled position
in which you have left them.
Once you understand these two fallacies you can see the importance of my
advice. Watering allows your plant to pick up goodness: I totally mistrust
scientists who tell us in the early stages of a drought that there is no
need to water anything. The advice emphatically does not apply to
newly-bought and planted goods.
As roots cannot move, you must be sure to space them out and tease them to a
full, straight length when setting them first into the ground. If they are
hideously tangled and impacted at the bottom of a pot, loosen them by
pulling them gently sideways and not fussing too much if some are torn in
the process. You have to break the circle if they are not to go round and
round on themselves.
Finally, watch out for plants which are all top-growth and no bottom, let
alone a tangled ball of roots. They will be appearing by the hundred in
garden centres during the next month because plants in a one-litre size look
much more promising and fetch a higher price than smaller versions in 9 cm
squares of polythene.
The trouble is that many of the apparent litre-sized varieties were only
nine centimetre plants a week or two ago. They have been over-potted,
frequently in the sort of non-compost which persuades half-hearted gardeners
that there is absolutely no chance of meeting anything so undesirable as a
worm. Investigate gently below the surface to be sure that your chosen plant
is well rooted and is not still rolling around in a bed which is too big for
it.
The litre size will cost you up to half as much again, so you want to be
sure that the extra value is there. If it is, I like to calculate that I can
divide one of these bigger plants into three or four smaller ones, shake off
the useless compost and grow them on in my own soil in a special corner
until next autumn. This practice gives you several plants for the price of
one and allows you to break them gently into local conditions.
At this late stage, if you want an instant border, sow hardy annuals or buy
some of the more bearable varieties of dahlia - which really do exist. Do
not believe that you will make it in three months from a mass of
container-grown purchases, brought back from a display unit in a burst of
post-electoral confidence.
