FT  14 MAY 92 / Survey of World Electricity (15): Flickers of anxiety -
Chris Cragg takes the pulse of Japan's nuclear industry
ON THE face of it, nuclear power in Japan has a rosy future. With 42 units
in operation, with a gross capacity of 33,404MW, the industry had an average
capacity factor of 73.4 per cent in February.
By most standards, this capacity factor - a measure of output against the
theoretical maximum availability - is excellent. Japanese reactors work
well.
Equally, apart from the comparatively minor Mihama incident in February
1991, a primary coolant tube rupture in the steam generator, Japanese
nuclear energy has been remarkably free of accidents and Japan relatively
free of the knee-jerk antagonism to nuclear electricity that is familiar in
Britain, Germany and the US.
Yet within the electricity industry as a whole, there is a creeping
nervousness about the promise of nuclear.
On the surface all appears normal. Last month, the centrifuges of Japan's
Nuclear Fuel Industries' (JNFl) uranium enrichment plant at Rokkashomura
started to roll out the planned 150,000 separative work units (SWUs) a year
of enriched uranium. The eventual target will be 1,500,000 SWUs a year.
Rokkashomura, after some initial local nervousness, will eventually become
Japan's version of Sellafield, reprocessing spent fuel into re-usable
uranium and plutonium ready for the fast breeder reactors Japan plans to
build.
Nowhere else in the world is there quite the faith that the nuclear fuel
cycle will be closed.
The mid-term MITI plan for the nation's electricity foresees 72,500MW of
capacity by 2010. Yet it is this apparent vote of confidence that is making
Japan's power utilities nervous.
It represents an expansion in capacity which would considerably more than
double the units now in operation.
What bothers the industry is where these new units are going to go and just
how long it will take to persuade the inhabitants of any new sites to accept
them.
Furthermore, demanding that the nuclear construction industry should build
two 1,000MW reactors per year for the next 20 years is a challenge only the
Japanese would take seriously.
Japan does indeed have 10 reactors under construction, amounting to a
combined total of 10,488MW, with the last on line in October 1996.
Permission for two further plant, amounting to 2,181MW has also been given.
The problem is that planning authorisation for some of these plant dates
back as far as 1982. As a recent MlTl survey disclosed, the lead time for
building a nuclear plant, including finding a site as well as construction
time is now over 25 years. This lead time has been increasing steadily, from
just over eight years in the 1970s to just over 17 years in the 1980s.
The nub of the problem is space. In contrast to German or US methods, the
Japanese power corporations have, like the French, adopted a policy of
financial persuasion in relation to the inhabitants of a potential nuclear
site. Yet localities have become increasingly sophisticated and demanding in
return.
While the power companies complain that the inhabitants fail to realise the
real economic benefits to the neighbourhood in terms of local industry and
jobs, the locality-minded Japanese often object to the export of the power
from the area to supply the cities.
In Japan, where land is extremely expensive close to the largest power
demand, this makes for huge difficulties.
Consequently, the current draft nuclear budget for fiscal 1992 from MlTl has
increased last year's allocation for power plant siting promotion by 10.6
per cent to Y43,000m (Dollars 341m) with a further Y16,205m going on special
subsidies to those around future sites. At this rate, the state will be
spending over Dollars 1bn every two years on nuclear plant siting.
The total MlTl draft budget for the Nuclear Power Resources Siting Account,
including safety and grants to develop local industrial complexes, now
amounts to over Y80bn a year.
Even with this and offers of up to 50 per cent discounts for local
consumers, it is still easier to build a plant on an established site, but
there are limits even to this.
Tokyo Electric Power, for example, has hopes of a planned 1,356MW reactor at
Kashiwazaki Kariwa on the north coast of Honshu Island. Yet if this goes
ahead, it will be the seventh unit on the site, giving it an enormous
8,212MW of capacity. The twin sites of Fukushima host 9,096MW of capacity,
although not in such a small area.
By contrast Tohoku Electric Power's proposed plan to build a reactor on a
new site at Maki, again on the north coast of Honshu, has had an authorised
plan since 1981 but commercial operation is not expected before 2000.
With these kind of problems, even those within the Japanese nuclear industry
are beginning to wonder if the MlTl targets for 2010 are not too high. Yet
Japanese power consumption, in comparison with both Europe and the US,
continues to grow more rapidly than expectations. The problem is that peak
demand is growing more rapidly than the average demand in most parts of the
country.
Tokyo Electric, for example, had a peak demand of 27.3GW in 1980, compared
with 44.7GW in 1990, while base-load grew by a much smaller percentage.
Seasonal demand in Tokyo used to be only 29 per cent above base load in
1980. It is now expected to be 38 per cent above it in 1999.
Such increases in peak demand - apparently much increased by a craze for
personal cleanliness amongst Japanese youth and hence greater use of hot
water - do not sit easily with the rising capital and site-finding costs of
nuclear capacity.
Nuclear remains primarily a base-load provider, when run at its most
efficient. Consequently many now believe that the real need in the Japanese
network is for more gas-fired stations that can follow the load curve.
As a result, some of the largest corporations in Japan met last December to
discuss the idea of a Japanese trunkline gas grid, using Russian Sakhalin
and Yakutsk gas. Significantly, among them were Tokyo Electric Power and
Kansai Electric Power, the two largest power utilities.
Whether such a pipeline will come to fruition remains impossible to say.
Nonetheless, there are plenty of trends to indicate greater use of gas-fired
generation in Japan.
Cogeneration, although still trivial in relation to grid supply, has doubled
to 1.9GW since 1989.
More gas companies are switching from LPG and towngas to imported natural
gas, thus developing the potential for household use. Perhaps most
significantly of all, Tokyo Electric Power is planning to build the world's
largest gas-fired combined cycle station at Yokohama, close to its area of
peak demand. At 2,800MW, this could be running in 1996, five years after the
proposal.
Needless to say, this does not suggest that Japan's nuclear expansion is
over. Certainly nobody would admit as much officially. Nonetheless, it may
be slowing down.
The writer is editor of Energy Economist, a FTBI energy newsletter
