FT  22 OCT 92 / EC prepares tougher policy on asylum: Victims of civil war
or torture may be excluded
EC MINISTERS have made progress on an agreement to toughen policy towards
illegal immigrants and bogus asylum-seekers in response to the current
refugee crisis in Europe.
The new policy would apply a narrow test of whether asylum-seekers are 'in
fear of persecution', as defined under the 1951 Geneva convention.
Victims of civil wars or those raped or tortured by repressive regimes would
most likely be excluded, expanding EC efforts to close the asylum door into
the Community.
The refugee crisis in Europe has deepened this year as a result of civil
wars in former Yugoslavia, and economic dislocation in eastern Europe.
Germany alone has taken more than 220,000 asylum seekers from Bosnia, more
than any other country apart from neighbouring Croatia.
EC immigration ministers are due to consider a draft declaration at a
meeting in London on November 30. The document would not have the force of
law, but as a political statement of intent it could pave the way for a new
international convention on the treatment of asylum-seekers and refugees. It
is due to be highlighted in the BBC radio programme Opinion today.
Despite some reservations among EC member states with liberal refugee
policies - notably Germany and Denmark - EC and UK officials said yesterday
that a consensus has emerged on the need to harmonise how members treat
asylum requests.
Using the 1951 Geneva convention as the foundation, the aim is to isolate
'manifestly unfounded' applications for refugee status. This would help to
unblock the huge backlog in, say, Germany which has led to racist attacks on
asylum-seekers waiting to be processed, an EC official said.
Another aim is to discourage the international movement of refugees by
making those travelling between continents generally ineligible for official
refugee status in Europe. Although each application will be treated on
merit, UK officials said the Community wants to crack down on 'refugee
tourists'.
A third goal is to encourage groups suffering under repressive regimes to
seek redress in their own courts for human rights violations - a stand which
could technically restrict, for example, Kurds from Turkey.
Britain, which takes a tougher line than most of its EC partners, is leading
the debate as EC president.
