FT  03 NOV 92 / Clues from Clinton
The leader of Britain's Labour party, Mr John Smith, would do well to study
the presidential campaign conducted by Governor Bill Clinton, rather than
play silly buffers over the Maastricht vote tomorrow night. Even if there is
an upset today and President Bush wins a second term, there is much that
Labour can learn from the Democrats.
It will be objected that the two countries are so different that there is no
great value in comparative studies. Anyhow, it might be said, let Mr Clinton
win first, and then ask how he did it - if he does. The first lesson for
Labour is the opposite. Mr Smith will be haunted if Mr Clinton loses. If a
failure to topple the Tories in mid-recession in April is followed by a
failure to dislodge Mr Bush at a time of high unemployment in November then
parties of the democratic left will have to ask themselves whether any
formula can bring them victory.
Such questioning would be less painful on the other side of the Atlantic
than over here. The presidency is merely the most prominent of the many
political posts open to the Democrats. They tend to win more than their fair
share of the rest, including both houses of Congress, a majority of state
governorships, places in state assemblies, and city mayoralties.
Labour may sigh over this. Politics would be richer if the UK were a
federation and if the Conservatives had not set out to bury local
government. But they have to operate in the world as it is. In that world -
the real one - there is only one British prize worth having. Mr Smith either
becomes prime minister in, say, 1996, or he hardly becomes a footnote in
history.
He should therefore be devoting all his energies, and his intellect, to a
study of how to get his hands on the keys to Number 10 Downing Street. What
he should not be doing is compromising his personal reputation for
consistency by opposing the government on a vote to proceed with debate on
the bill to ratify the Maastricht treaty - and then wrapping up the decision
in specious excuses about its being a vote of confidence. Mr Clinton could
tell him a thing or two about blurring a track record for straight dealing.
The temptation for Labour is to see the government's present embarrassment
as a chance to score points. This distracts it from what should be a
single-minded pursuit of eventual office. Some in the party fantasise about
bringing the government down now. Such an absurd proposition is not worth
pursuing. Others think it would be good fun to overthrow the prime minister.
The most likely result of that would be the election of Mr Kenneth Clarke,
who after a year or two would be the beneficiary of the end of the recession
and thus a probable contender for the honour of scoring the fifth successive
Tory election victory in a row.
Labour will stand the best chance if it plays a long game. That is what the
Clinton Democrats have done, partly through the Democratic Leadership
Conference, a right-inclined grouping of southern governors and other
elected representatives. The conference has captured the party. It has
worked through sympathetic think-tanks to position it more towards the
centre of US politics. It has abandoned the unteachable left.
Under Mr Neil Kinnock Labour did half of much the same thing, even down to
promoting the establishment of the Institute for Public Policy Research. Mr
Kinnock's efforts did not bear fruit. Labour was still seen in April as its
old self, the Woolworths of political choices in a country increasingly
aspiring to buying its goods at Marks and Spencer. His changes did not reach
into the soul of his party. Voters understood that. Mistrust of Labour's
true motives defeated it.
Mr Clinton, a proponent of workfare, has deliberately pitched both his
politics and his rhetoric to the Reagan Democrats (for which read Britain's
famous Thatcherite skilled working classes). He has sought votes among the
middle classes and in the suburbs, territory that is still largely alien to
Labour. The governor has employed a southern strategy; Labour's only hope of
real progress in the south of England is an agreement with the Liberal
Democrats. Mr Clinton has focused his proposals to increase income taxes on
families with incomes greater than Dollars 200,000, far above the level
proposed by Labour in April. Labour's April image was subliminally to the
left of its slick packaging; Mr Clinton makes you feel that his
administration might be a workable alternative management of a capitalist
system in which Democrats truly believe.
The former Labour leader understood that this was what had to be done, but
he was unable to make more than superficial progress. The task for Mr Smith
is to reconstruct his party, and its way of thinking, from the guts
outwards. Nothing he has done as leader so far suggests that he is doing
this. If the consequence is a Labour party that never returns to office,
that will be what it deserves.
