FT  15 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Health reforms
THE UK National Health Service appears to be returning to old ways 18 months
after the government launched its far-reaching health service reforms. Ward
closures and lengthening waiting lists for operations are again threatened
as hospitals run out of money before the end of the financial year. It
appears that little has changed since 1987 when a similar crisis led the
government to create an internal market in the NHS.
In one sense, this is hardly surprising: an important cause of the 1987 NHS
crisis was the shortage of funds, a condition the reforms did nothing to
cure. Instead, the internal market converted district health authorities
into purchasers of health care, free to shop around among competing
providers such as hospitals and community health organisations. The aim was
to ensure that the available funds would be spent more efficiently. But the
internal market did not, of itself, generate new funds.
In practice, generous funding was agreed in successive years, to ease the
passage of the politically controversial changes. Ministers warmly welcomed
the improvements in health care which followed and credited them to the
reforms. Now, with much less generous settlements for the next three years,
they must face the down side of the internal market.
The first is that a real market system must produce losers as well as
winners, as those who are less efficient go to the wall. In London, the
losers are likely to be the world-famous hospitals recommended for closure
or merger in the Tomlinson report. With doubts over the figures behind some
of Tomlinson's recommendations, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health
secretary, will need skill and resolution to eliminate excess capacity in
London.
A second problem is that while providers now vie for business, the district
health authorities which act as purchasers on behalf of most people are
largely immune to market forces. The only competition comes from a minority
of family doctors who are fund-holders, directly purchasing health care for
their patients in the internal market. They have been a dynamic force,
producing significant efficiency savings while improving the quality of care
for their patients. Fund-holding should be extended, with smaller practices
grouped to make viable purchasing units.
Finally, there are few incentives to reward providers whose efficiency in
treating patients leads them to fulfil their contracts and so run out of
work before the end of the year. Where it can be demonstrated that greater
efficiency rather than the quality and cost of their services has led to
such problems, additional funds should be made available. That will be
difficult next year when the real growth in the health service budget is
unlikely to be more than 1 per cent. The government will remain under
pressure to lubricate with more cash the incomplete process of creating a
working market in health care.
