FT  21 NOV 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Women and sin - As they say in
Europe
I HAD thought the British fuss over supplying arms-making equipment to a
valued customer like Iraq would have hit the European headlines. But it did
not; instead, it was women priests who created the real stir. There was
front-page comment right across Catholic Europe, not only in Rome and Madrid
but also Brussels, Paris and Vienna. But not Munich. The Protestants,
meanwhile, found women priests a bit of a bore - except, for some reason, in
Geneva.
I had always thought the Church of England occupied such an odd position in
the spectrum of European religious observance that it would be too esoteric
an institution to interest foreigners. It is, after all, only one of the
many strands in the fabric of Anglo-Saxon devotion.
General de Gaulle observed (presumably after a particularly bruising Sunday
dinner in wartime London) that 'les Anglais ont beaucoup de religions mais
seulement une sauce.' (The English have many religions but only one sauce).
But, the Church of England possesses considerable charms for continental
newspapers. Not only is it a part of the always newsy aspects of English
quirkiness, it also represents a sort of unleaded Catholicism which such
sophisticated liberals prefer.
Thus, El Pais devoted two pages to the story and there were days of comment
in Italy. The Spanish paper managed to start a useful row in domestic
religious circles: it quoted the secretary of the Episcopal Commission for
Interconfessional Relations, Julian Garcia Hernando, as saying that the
incorporation of women as priests 'is an open question since, from the
doctrinal point of view, there is no dogmatic definition.' But he added that
the step should not have been taken in isolation.
The article continued much to my surprise: 'Theologians and Christian
communities have expressed satisfaction at the Anglican position and have
seen it as proof of its sensitivity to secular society.'
This went to the heart of the matter. What are Catholics coming to if they
can talk about 'sensitivity to secular society?' Fortunately, the auxiliary
bishop of Madrid, Javier Martinez, was there to underline why the the
Reformation had been such a ghastly mistake: 'It is a tendency of the great
Protestant churches to dissolve themselves into the dominant culture.'
The other religious story was the publication of the new catechism, the
Church's list of dos and, more importantly, don'ts. The press revelled in
the new areas of sin. The latest additions seem to reflect the increasing
weight of Latin Americans among the faithful. It is now possible to indulge
that old Brazilian pastime of escaping the clutches of the taxman by driving
blind drunk through the rain forest and commit three sins at once.
Traditionalists who were disappointed by the pardoning of Galileo for his
subversive notions regarding the motion of the planets will be reassured by
the inflexibility of this first catechism in four centuries. The Archbishop
of Tours, Mgr Jean Honore wrote in La Croix, this latest edition 'which
hopes to be a clear affirmation of faith' also risked 'accentuating a sort
of rupture with the modern world.'
Thus masturbation continues to be right up there with mass-murder as a bad
thing and delights those reporters whose job it is to summarise catechisms.
Liberation even managed to produce a comparative analysis of policy on such
sins today and yesterday, creating what is known in the trade as a 'box'
devoted solely to prostitution, sodomy, lasciviousness, and impure thoughts
as well as what is also known as 'solitary vice,' at least until Madonna
came along.
But there was one voice that objected to the levity that the subject of
religion seems to inspire in certain quarters. Writing under the one-word
headline 'Priestesses' in Die Presse of Vienna, Thomas Chorherr castigated
the 'scurrility' of certain kinds of religious reporting which at best sees
a church as a cultural monument. 'Only Christendom enjoys religious
voyeurism. Perhaps because there there is so much transparency. Sometimes it
emerges as exhibitionism.'
Most people know the old Jewish story of what happened when the Rabbi was
asked why Jews always answered a question with a question. He said, 'And why
shouldn't a Jew answer a question with a question?' Now as it happens the
Cardinal-Archbishop of Paris, Mgr Jean-Marie Lustiger, born a Jew, was asked
why it was that the new catechism appeared first in French. 'Would you
rather it had been in English?' he replied.
James Morgan is diplomatic correspondent of BBC World Service.
