FT  21 FEB 92 / Labour pledges to scrap Tories' health reforms
THE LABOUR party pledged yesterday to abolish the government's National
Health Service reforms, clearing the way for a general election
fight-to-the-finish on the NHS.
Labour is committed to end the internal market on which the government's
changes are based, scrap GP fundholding and return self-governing hospitals
to health authority control. A Labour government would also restore free eye
and dental checks.
Mr Neil Kinnock, party leader, announcing Labour's health policy, expressed
determination to put improvement of the NHS and other public services ahead
of tax cuts.
The party's decision to fight the election on a clear pledge to wipe away
all the central features of last year's biggest-ever reforms of the NHS,
rather than adapt them, reflects continuing con-fidence that Labour enjoys a
strong lead over the Con-servatives on health issues.
Mr William Waldegrave, health secretary, responded defiantly to Labour's
plans by announcing the expansion of GP fundholding, one of the most
controversial aspects of the reforms.
From next year, fundholders will be able to buy not only hospital treatment
for their patients, but district nursing, health visiting and other services
as well.
Labour's proposals retain the spirit of a split between the financing of
health care and its provision which is at the heart of the government's NHS
reforms. But this would be achieved through agreements between health
authorities and hospitals rather than in a competitive market. Incentive
funds would be introduced to try to ensure that targets were met and
performance improved.
Some health care specialists question whether this would impose enough
discipline on hospitals and authorities for maximum efficiency. The
Institute of Health Services Management said that it thought the proposal
would be a 'retrograde step in the light of experiences over the past year'.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow health secretary, said the Labour plans had 'three key
strengths' which the Conservatives could not match. They would treat people
by clinical need rather than purchasing power; enable patients rather than
managers to decide where they should be treated; and increase NHS efficiency
by cutting out the 'waste of creating a commercial market'.
The Labour programme emphasises the importance of developing health
promotion and non-hospital based primary and community care.
The Government has shelved plans to cut the fees paid to dentists for
National Health Service work, averting a threatened mass exodus from the
NHS.
Mix of care and cash, Page 13
Editorial Comment; Observer, Page 18
