FT  30 SEP 92 / Europe and World Trade: France angered by steel levy
STRAINED trade relations between France and the US worsened yesterday when
the French government called on the European Community to consider
retaliation against US levies recently imposed on imported French, German
and British steel.
The French industry ministry said the duties on imported European carbon
steel bars and rods, provisionally imposed on September 22, would block
exports worth FFr90m (Pounds 10.32m) a year from Usinor Sacilor, the French
state-owned steelmaker.
'This is a protectionist operation carried out under a legal disguise,' said
Mr Yves-Thibault de Silguy, international affairs director of Usinor
Sacilor.
EC foreign affairs ministers were expected to discuss action at a meeting
next Tuesday, at France's request, he said.
Usinor Sacilor might be forced to make lay-offs next year unless the duties
were reversed, Mr de Silguy said.
Paris fears the preliminary levies could be extended to flat-rolled
products, the raw material for car bodies and white goods, which would block
FFr1bn of French exports and FFr5bn of EC sales a year to the US.
'Such practices, which lead to the de facto closure of the US market to
foreign steel products, call into question the US commitment to an open
world trading system,' said the French industry ministry.
The preliminary levies, paid as a cash deposit or bond, are due for a final
decision by the US Commerce Department by December 7.
It would then be up to the International Trade Commission to confirm whether
the US steel industry was suffering real injury, before customs began
collecting the duties.
Usinor Sacilor, which has made several large takeovers in the US in recent
years in an attempt to avoid import rows, has been harder hit by the
preliminary duties than any other European steel maker.
The company is being charged a 64.55 per cent dumping margin, on top of a
12.88 per cent preliminary anti-subsidy duty imposed by the US earlier this
month.
German steel makers are being provisionally charged 49.3 per cent of import
value, while British imports are subject to a preliminary levy of 32.02 per
cent.
