FT  20 FEB 92 / Arts: Cumbre Flamenca - Sadler's Wells
Cumbre Flamenca is returned to Sadler's Wells, and that is sufficient news
to send the faithful flocking as to a shrine. The production and the cast
remain much as on previous visits - La Chana, she of the purring heels and
headlong energies, is alas not with the group this season, though her
replacement, Mariquilla, is a grand acquisition - and the cumulative power
of the evening is as tempestuous as ever.
We go to watch Flamenco of this quality to be astounded by wild virtuosity
from dancers, singers, guitarists. We also go, and this is the deeper
reason, to see interpreters who become possessed by their art. Isadora
Duncan's words after a transcendent performance were 'The god was with me',
and the preliminary half of each Cumbre Flamenca scene seems an invocation
to the divinity who will, if all is well, then drive the artist onwards for
the final intoxicating and intoxicated outburst - and this is as true of the
musicians as of the dancers. It is fascinating to see the performers
starting from cold, relying upon skill and savoir faire, and then becoming
(or at least seeming to become) taken over by the style and the language of
their art.
It is thus, at Tuesday night's opening, that we were first held by Nino del
Tupe's tremendous guitar solo, in which he brooded over melody, probed and
developed it, and drew us into his world as he caressed notes or spat them
out at us. So, too, with the tiny, stalwart Mariquilla, starting her
Alegrias on what looked like automatic pilot, and then gradually yielding to
the urgings of singers and musicians as her legs flashed out and embroidered
the dance's metre. At her best, at her most self-sacrificing, she generated
a heady combination of spontaneity and exact rhythmic control.
The other dancer to take similar fire was Cristobal Reyes in an astonishing
partnership with Pedro Montoya's clapping. The opening sequence was fine,
and not a little cliche-ridden (whence the arched body, and the 'You have
insulted my sister' look), but when driven by - and echoing - Montoya's
prodigious hand-claps, Reyes lost every predictable mannerism, and burned
his way into the dance. Our applause was incense - the god was pleased - and
the brilliantly controlled improvisations and variations goaded feet and
limbs to fresh marvels.
An especial merit of Cumbre Flamenca is the varied talents and styles of the
five dancers - three women, two men - and I salute the opulent manner of
Angela Granados as she manipulated a train whose ruffles became an essential
aspect of her art. By turns carapace and coils from which her body reared,
as if to strike at us, her dress amplified every step. Juana Amaya is a
traditional artist, and fine, but I find her most interesting when she
appears at her angriest - stamping in solid, heavy movement; striding the
stage and suddenly squatting into a step - and the dance becomes raw,
dangerous.
There is nothing raw or dangerous about Antonio Canales' performances: these
are polished, elegant, and alone among his colleagues he seems determined to
remain in complete control of his dancing. Its gloss and bravura look oddly
out of place in an evening in which we can still sense certain earthy truths
about dance and our response to it.
