FT  06 FEB 92 / MoD knew of supergun project in 1989, MPs are told
THE OFFICES of Mrs Margaret Thatcher and Mr Alan Clark, a junior defence
minister, were contacted by the company that supplied propellant for the
Iraqi supergun months before parliament learned of the project's existence,
MPs heard yesterday.
Mr Gerald James, former chairman of Astra, the UK defence manufacturer which
went into receivership earlier this week, told the Commons trade and
industry committee that he and Mr Christopher Gumbley, then Astra's chief
executive, notified the Ministry of Defence of the project in September
1989.
Astra had just acquired PRB, the Belgian munitions company, and discovered
that it was working on 'unusual types of propellants for very large guns'
for Iraq.
Officials from the Department of Trade and Industry, the MoD and the Foreign
Office have confirmed that they became aware of Project Babylon as a result
of Astra's disclosures in autumn 1989. Mr James alleged yesterday that Mr
Gumbley had also discussed the company's business with the offices of Mrs
Thatcher and Mr Clark in early 1990. Mr Gumbley was later jailed for nine
months for bribing an MoD official. At his trial he said he was being
'victimised' for his part in exposing the supergun project.
Mr Nicholas Ridley, then trade and industry secretary, told the Commons in
April 1990 that the government had 'only recently' become aware of the
supergun project.
Mr James told MPs he believed the propellant contract was being financed by
Midland Bank, and said he had learned that Mr Stephan Kock, a former
non-executive director of Astra and consultant for Midland Bank's defence
export financing department, had visited Baghdad in 1988 to arrange the
financing. The bank will give evidence to the committee next week.
In more than 50 pages of evidence, Mr James accused the government and
security services of an 'apparent and deliberate effort to fudge and confuse
the issues by attacking manufacturers and industrialists as if they are
entirely to blame for the government's conduct, when in reality they were
meeting requirements initiated by government'.
Mr James alleged that Astra had been steered into three of its biggest
acquisitions, including that of PRB, in the 1980s by members of the
government and security services. During the acquisition of PRB, Sir John
Cuckney, a former Midland Bank director and an ex-member of MI5 and chairman
of venture capital group 3i, Astra's main shareholder, had telephoned him to
urge him to complete the deal as quickly as possible.
Mr James said the UK defence industry in the 1980s was being influenced by a
group he called the 'Savoy mafia', which he alleged comprised ministers,
defence officials and company directors who met at the suite of Mr Alan
Curtis, chairman of the Lotus group, in the Savoy Hotel in London. They
included Mr George Younger, then defence secretary, Mr Colin Chandler, head
of defence sales, Sir Peter Levene, then head of defence procurement, and
others whose names Mr James said he would supply privately to the committee.
Mr James said Mr Curtis also seemed to work closely with Mr Steve Tipping, a
close friend of Mr Mark Thatcher, son of the former prime minister. Mr James
was introduced to Mr Curtis at an Army Air Corps open day at Middle Wallop,
Hampshire, in 1988, at which Sir Denis Thatcher and Mark were present.
Mr Ken Warren, committee chairman, said: 'It appeared to you that Mr Curtis,
as chairman of Lotus, could open doors right to the very top in government?'
Mr James said 'Yes.'
