FT  26 OCT 92 / Unity frays at the edges: Canada's political future may
hinge on the outcome of today's constitutional referendum
The moderation which has always been a hallmark of Canadian politics is in
serious danger of being undercut by the outcome of a national referendum to
be held today.
If opinion polls are right, voters will reject a constitutional reform
package which was designed to unite the disparate regions and population
groups of the world's second-biggest country, but has ended up exposing
their divisions.
The future of Canada itself could be at stake. Mr Joe Clark, the
constitutional affairs minister, gloomily predicted last week that a No vote
would inexorably lead to the province of Quebec going its own way by the end
of the century. 'I think gradually the country would just come apart,' Mr
Clark said.
The Yes forces are still praying for a last-minute miracle. Many voters,
especially in Quebec, may have a change of heart as they ponder the economic
costs of prolonged political uncertainty and the possible break-up of their
country. The Yes side could even pick up a few votes in the surge of
Canadian pride which has followed the Toronto Blue Jays' victory over the
Atlanta Braves in the World Series baseball championship on Saturday night.
The referendum will not be binding on the federal parliament or provincial
legislatures, whose ratification is still required for the new constitution
to take effect. But it will be impossible to put the latest proposals into
practice without a Yes vote in Quebec and a clear majority of the nine
mainly English-speaking provinces.
Besides heightening uncertainty about Canada's future, rejection of the
proposals will be a sharp slap in the face to moderate, mainstream
politicians. Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, opposition leaders and the
premiers of the 10 provinces have spent the past two years painstakingly
piecing together a deal.
Voters will be asked today whether they endorse the fruits of those labours
in the form of the carefully-balanced Charlottetown agreement (named after
the capital of Prince Edward Island where it was signed last August and
where, incidentally, the Canadian federation was born 125 years ago).
The architects of the Charlottetown deal had two chief aims. First, they had
to produce a document acceptable to Quebec. The francophone province refused
to sign Canada's 1982 constitution and was left at the altar in 1990 when
Manitoba and Newfoundland failed to ratify the Meech Lake accord, the
contents of which were similar to, but less far-reaching, than the latest
proposals.
Second, the latest proposals have attempted to redress some of the
long-standing grievances of western Canadians and aboriginal Indians and
Inuit. Quebec's right to 'preserve and promote' its unique French character
would be enshrined in the constitution. Its ability to do that would be
buttressed by giving the provincial government control over such matters as
culture and immigration. On the other hand, the francophone province would
not get jurisdiction over other areas of government - such as regional
development - which it has sought.
Western Canadians would gain stronger influence in faraway Ottawa through
reform of the federal Senate. The present impotent chamber, which is filled
with patronage appointees mostly from Ontario and Quebec, would be replaced
by an elected body with equal representation from all 10 provinces. To
mollify Quebec and Ontario, however, the revamped upper chamber would have
more limited powers than proponents of Senate reform demanded. The central
Canadian provinces would also be given stronger representation in an
enlarged House of Commons.
The Charlottetown deal, in other words, is a classic Canadian compromise. By
rejecting it, Canadians run the risk of passing the initiative to the less
moderate, more self-centred, groups which have campaigned against it. The
Alberta-based Reform party, for instance, has argued that the proposed new
constitution gives away far too much to Quebec. Mr Pierre Trudeau, the
former prime minister, has persuaded many English speakers to vote No today
by accusing the deal's architects of bowing to 'blackmail' by the
francophone province. Mr Trudeau and other arch-federalists say Quebec's
demands for more powers should be resisted and its threats to break away
from Canada ignored.
But the biggest winners from a No vote are likely to be the two separatist
parties, the Parti Quebecois and Bloc Quebecois. Their leaders, Mr Jacques
Parizeau and Mr Lucien Bouchard respectively, have heaped scorn on Quebec
premier Robert Bourassa for 'selling out' the francophone province. They
argue that Mr Bourassa failed to get the extra powers for Quebec in
Charlottetown demanded by his own Liberal party. 'A ce prix-la, c'est Non'
('At that price, it's No'), the separatists' posters proclaim.
Almost all the country's elected politicians, not to mention business and
trade union leaders, have come out in favour of the deal. They have
campaigned across the country in 'odd couples' such as Conservative Mr
Mulroney and Ontario's Social-Democratic Premier Bob Rae. The heads of
Ontario's Chamber of Commerce and Federation of Labour briefly put aside
their differences last week to declare the agreement 'an excellent
consensus'.
But like last month's referendum on the Maastricht treaty in France, the
campaign in Canada has become a lightning rod for a disgruntled electorate
to vent its anger at unpopular political leaders. The economy remains mired
in recession, with unemployment at more than 11 per cent. Public spending is
being cut. Many Canadians put the blame on plant closures caused by the 1989
free-trade agreement with the US, on high taxes, and on generous policies
towards immigrants.
While French voters took out their unhappiness on President Mitterrand, the
main targets in Canada have been Mr Mulroney and Mr Mike Harcourt, British
Columbia's Social-Democratic premier. The Reform party's TV ads pointedly
call the Charlottetown agreement 'Mulroney's deal'. They add: 'If you want
to follow the politicians, vote Yes. If you want to lead the politicians,
vote No.'
Defending the compromises in the Charlottetown agreement has proved
difficult. No sooner had a British Columbia minister assured his
constituents on the west coast that Quebec gained very little from the deal,
than his words were repeated by the separatists to prove what a weak-kneed
negotiator Mr Bourassa had been. But the referendum has also brought to the
surface some longer-term and more fundamental shifts in society.
A gradual transfer of power to provincial governments over the past two
decades has encouraged Canadians to put narrow regional interests above
those of the nation as a whole. The political clout of aboriginal people has
grown enormously in recent years. Prof Kimon Valaskakis, an economist at the
Universite de Montreal, compares Canada to a club where 'the costs go up,
and the services to members keep going down'.
Similarly, the balance between individual rights and collective
responsibilities has been altered by the Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
which enshrined various rights as part of the repatriation of the
constitution from Britain in 1982. The charter has greatly improved the lot
of, for instance, religious minorities or people with disabilities. But in
the process, it has increased the political power of special interest
groups, making it difficult to forge a consensus on an issue as broad as a
constitution.
The federal government even failed during the Charlottetown talks to
persuade the provinces to commit themselves to a mechanism for bringing down
the non-tariff barriers - such as government procurement preferences and
transport licences - which often make it easier for Canadian companies to
trade with the US than with other parts of their own country.
Such disparate forces as television, cross-border shopping and the US-Canada
free trade agreement are slowly but inexorably drawing Canadians closer to
the states to the south, than to the provinces to the east and west.
Canadian and US companies are integrating their operations on the two sides
of the border, treating North America as a single market. Even the millions
of Canadians who cheered their team on to victory in the World Series had no
choice but watch TV coverage provided by CBS, the US-based network.
Judging by opinion polls, radio talk shows and even casual conversations,
most Canadians, whether they end up voting Yes or No, never want to hear the
word 'constitution' again. Mr Mulroney and other leaders in English-speaking
Canada are thus likely to respond to a No victory by seeking to close the
book on constitutional negotiations for the time being. They will be anxious
both to save their own political skins and to contain the economic damage
which further political uncertainty could cause.
Although the new constitution would not defuse Canada's political tensions
overnight, business leaders are optimistic that its adoption would at least
bolster investor confidence and hasten economic recovery. It might shift
politicians' attention from the struggle to keep the country together and
towards ways of improving the country's long-term competitiveness - for
instance, by dismantling inter-provincial trade barriers and easing the
implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Observers say a No vote would, at the very least, delay a resumption of the
downward trend in interest rates. The main banks raised the prime rate (the
rate at which they lend to their best customers) by a record two percentage
points to 8.25 per cent last month as the Canadian dollar fell in
anticipation of a No vote.
But Mr Parizeau and Mr Bouchard in Quebec will have the bit between their
teeth. They started their referendum campaign last August merely by asking
voters to reject the terms of the agreement. But the scent of victory has
emboldened them to turn the vote into a mandate for stepping up the drive
towards Quebec independence.
In the event of a No vote, they are planning to push for a provincial
election which must, in any case, be held within the next two years. If they
win, they have promised a referendum on some form of independence. The
chances are remote that any Quebec politician would risk speaking out in
favour of closer ties with the rest of Canada. At the same time,
English-speaking federalists may grow weary of fighting yet again to keep
their country in one piece. Canada will not break apart soon. But it is in
real danger of drifting apart.
