FT  15 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Pearson interested in Maxwell businesses
PEARSON, the publishing, banking and industrial group, is still interested
in acquiring parts of the collapsed Maxwell empire despite its decision not
to go ahead with a bid for Mirror Group Newspapers.
Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, would like to buy the college
publishing division of Macmillan in the US, which has turnover of about
Dollars 100m (Pounds 56m), and is also interested in some of the Maxwell
business magazines in the Maxwell Business Communication division.
The college publishing business would fit well with Addison-Wesley, the main
Pearson educational publisher in the US. Macmillan, the main asset of
Maxwell Communication Corporation, successfully applied for Chapter 11
protection under US bankruptcy law which shields the company's assets from
creditors during reorganisation.
It is still unclear which Macmillan businesses will come onto the market,
but Pearson is unlikely to be a candidate to buy all of Macmillan.
The Pearson announcement that its flirtation with the possibility of making
a bid for MGN is over seems to be final rather than a tactical manoeuvre.
The company is interpreting its formal announcement to the Stock Exchange,
confirmed on Monday, as effectively barring any involvement for six months
as if a bid attempt had actually been made.
Mr Frank Barlow, group managing director, insisted that there was no split
on the Pearson board on the issue: 'That is the absolute truth,' he said.
On MGN, it seems it was Mr Barlow, a former Mirror executive in the 1960s,
who led his colleagues up the hill and then led them down again.
Pearson's interest flickered when a journalist called Lord Blakenham,
chairman and chief executive, to ask if the company was interested. Lord
Blakenham was about to say no when Mr Barlow advised delay.
'There's Pounds 70m a year cash flow in there,' was Mr Barlow's first
thought. Within a few days Lord Blakenham and other Pearson directors became
enthusiastic although Mr James Joll, finance director, was negative about
the idea from the outset.
Pearson, emphasising that it was only interested at the right price, asked
Lazard Brothers, its financial advisers in which it has a 50 per cent stake,
to investigate. Although it was impossible to get detailed figures, Mr
Barlow said that Lazards called the week before Christmas to set out the
numbers: that about Pounds 400m was missing from the Mirror pension fund,
some Pounds 100m from the company and there was normal debt of about Pounds
340m following the May flotation of MGN.
'When I heard those figures it seemed to me that it was very unlikely that
the deal was going to be possible,' Mr Barlow said.
In fact similar numbers had been around for quite a number of weeks. At
about the same time as the FT revealed the Pearson interest the paper had
also been reporting that Pounds 350m had gone from the MGN pension fund and
that it was feared that Pounds 95m had been siphoned off from the newspaper
group.
The weight of numbers, the uncertainty, the delay and the amount of
management time that would have to be diverted convinced Mr Barlow that
Pearson should not go ahead. He added that the reaction of the City was not
a factor.
Mr Eric de Bellaigue, publishing analyst at Panmure Gordon, had been very
negative. He said that the FT and the Daily Mirror had nothing in common
apart from a tinge of pink.
'It also sits uncomfortably with the emphasis on expansion in growth markets
 -popular newspapers in the UK are in the business of fighting over a slowly
diminishing cake,' he added.
Mr Barlow pointed out other analysts were more positive.
Last Monday Mr Barlow advised his executive management committee that he
thought the idea should be dropped. This view was endorsed at a routine
board meeting last Friday. The discussion lasted just 20 minutes.
