FT  02 NOV 92 / German Government Bonds: Economists optimistic about cut in
rates
THERE is little doubt among economists that the Bundesbank will sooner or
later embark on a substantial cut in interest rates - following its
half-hearted move in the middle of September to cut the Lombard rate by 0.25
percentage points to 9.50 per cent and the Discount by 0.5 points to 8.25
per cent.
This optimism, combined with the safe-haven status of the D-Mark amid
September's currency turmoil, explains why over the last two months bund
yields have dropped. They fell from the plateau of 8 per cent or above where
they were for most of the first eight months of the year and are now at 7.45
per cent, and are widely expected to fall still further.
However, the timing of the Bundesbank's next move on interest rates - and
thus the future course of the bund market - remains uncertain. Some
observers expect a cut of at least 0.5 percentage points in the Lombard rate
by the end of the year. Others more cautiously predict the cut will not come
until next spring, by which time inflationary pressures may have subsided
and the 1993 wage round will be out of the way.
The conviction that rates will turn is based on a number of factors,
including past experience: rates halved during two previous recessionary
phases - 1974-76 and 1981-83 - and the market is convinced that a
significant cut in the Lombard rate will presage the beginning of a swift
move back to very much lower levels.
Hopes have been fuelled further by a fall since early September of nearly a
full percentage point in the overnight money rates which the Bundesbank
steers via its security repurchase agreements and other instruments. But
last week the Bundesbank resisted the temptation to let rates fall below
8.75 per cent.
Increasingly bad news on the state of the German economy - most recently the
predictions last week from Germany's five most important research institutes
that GDP growth in western Germany would be only 0.5 per cent next year - is
grist to the interest rate optimists' mill. It is thought extremely unlikely
the Bundesbank will want to hold rates at the present level in the face of a
serious recession.
In spite of all this, the Bundesbank still sees its main task as squashing
inflation out of the system, not acting as an instrument of counter-cyclical
economic policy.
Here the indicators are negative: preliminary consumer price figures for
October out last week showed a 3.8 per cent increase in annual inflation,
worse than expected after a 3.6 rise in September. And there is no
indication that M3 money supply growth is suddenly going to crumple back to
the Bundesbank's 3.5 to 5.5 per cent target range.
Over the longer term, the sharp slowdown in the economy, combined with the
appreciation of the D-Mark will work to squeeze inflation out of the system.
But the Bundesbank is unlikely to squander decades of carefully won
anti-inflation credibility at a time when its chosen indicators - headline
inflation and M3 money supply growth - are out of line.
Thus the big cut is likely to come next spring rather than this Christmas,
with the result that bunds are likely to enter another phase of
consolidation.
