FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance &amp; The Family: The strange case of the frozen
chickens - Last year complaints to the insurance ombudsman rose 64%. John
Authers gives advice on making a fuss
IF YOU feel like complaining about insurance companies, you are not alone.
The insurance ombudsman disclosed in his annual report this week, that he
had to handle 4,334 cases last year - a rise of 64 per cent.
Meanwhile 13,899 people made inquiries in writing and 26,048 by phone.
In two thirds of cases, the insurance company's decision was upheld, and the
report includes examples of dishonest claims. But 32 per cent of the time,
policyholders were awarded money. A total of Pounds 5m was awarded, ranging
from Pounds 500,000 (over the unusual case of a disputed death benefit on a
life policy) to two awards of Pounds 5.
The ombudsman's scheme includes more than 340 companies, and is used as the
complaints resolution mechanism by Lautro, the life assurance and unit trust
regulator.
How should you go about complaining if you have an insurance problem? The
ombudsman's office should be regarded as a destination of last resort. Your
complaint must first have been referred to the senior management of your
insurer, which must be given an opportunity to resolve the complaint.
Once you have received a final judgment from the company, you must contact
the ombudsman within six months. It is also important that the matter
concerns you personally (not someone else's policy) and that your policy or
contract was issued in the UK, Isle of Man or Channel Islands.
The ombudsman will not step in if the complaint is already the subject of
legal proceedings or arbitration, or if it concerns a policy in the name of
companies or partnerships rather than individual people. You cannot complain
to him about commercial risks, or levels of premiums. Importantly, given the
volume of letters to the Weekend FT which this area generates, complaints
about surrender values, bonuses and rates of return on life policies are
also off-limits.
If your problem passes all these tests, write to the ombudsman. You will
then be asked to fill in a form, and provide relevant documents (you will,
deservedly, be scuppered if you have not bothered to keep them).
There is no charge and you do not need legal or other professional
representation. Should you employ a solicitor, it will be at your own cost.
The ombudsman has wide powers to command the insurers to produce
information, and can hold investigations. The average case takes four months
and 24 days to clear up. The chief virtue of the scheme is that it is
cheaper and quicker than going to court. This tends to be longer in
financial services disputes where there are allegations of mis-selling by
salesmen - a common problem.
Dr Julian Farrand, the ombudsman, was not optimistic that the Securities and
Investments Board's proposals on disclosure and the publishing of 'key
features' documents about products would significantly cut complaints about
life assurance and investment products.
He welcomed the suggestion that sales representatives should be forced to
write to clients explaining exactly why they had recommended one product
rather than another. By the end of this year, this could be a legal
requirement, and would provide an extra defence when policies have been
wrongly sold.
This might clamp down on some of the outrageous selling tactics mentioned in
the report. One salesman explaining why he had sold a whole-of-life policy
to an unmarried 18-year-old with no children, who wanted to save, said: 'The
reason I did not attempt to sell a Capital Accumulation Plan (a 10-year
endowment) is because in February 1988 I was unaware the Capital
Accumulation Plan existed. In fact, my first CAP sale was not until July
1988. Perhaps if my training had included the plan, I would have marketed it
more often. However, at the time, my training had only included the
Financial Security Account and the Personal Retirement Account.'
The ombudsman decided that the entire sale had been unsuitable. It is
alarming that a salesman was let loose on the public while still
insufficiently trained to give suitable advice.
Half-truths are also used. One salesman denied assuring a widow that she
would receive at least 10 per cent income a year from an investment bond.
However, he admitted he had said, in response to repeated questions, that he
was sure it would do better. It did not. The sales were set aside, and she
was paid interest.
These cases suggest the dangers for consumers, and show why it is worthwhile
to complain. But Dr Farrand also suggested a list of three 'don'ts' for
policyholders who want to complain:
Do not be dishonest. Plenty of people are. The report cited the example of a
pensioner who claimed that a refrigerator breakdown ruined 93lbs of meat in
his freezer compartment - allegedly a week's supply for the claimant and any
guests that might drop by. Investigation showed that the freezer could only
hold about 42lbs, and so the ombudsman found in favour of the insurer.
Dishonesty can also attach to claims about disability. According to Dr
Farrand: 'A video showed an allegedly disabled roofer hammering nails into
tiles and gutters. After the show, despite commenting that it had been one
of his better days, he was able to appreciate the insurer's stance without
further argument.'
Do not be reckless. The test that claimants show that they used 'reasonable
care' has been relaxed, according to Dr Farrand, but is not finished
altogether.
For example, there was no joy from the ombudsman for the man whose car was
stolen after he had knowingly left it unlocked with the keys in the ignition
while he ran back into his house to collect something.
However, this test is subtle. There was a pay-out for the parents of the boy
who fell to his death while trying to jump from one hotel balcony to
another, because he did not realise there was any danger, but not for the
teenager who died after a daring dive from a high bridge, who it was thought
must have realised the risks he was taking.
Do not have unreasonable expectations. Read the small print, the minutiae
can often be distressing. For example, a woman being treated with hormone
implants for menopausal symptoms appealed to the ombudsman when her insurers
gave notice that they would only pay for another six months.
The policy covered costs of treatment for 'medical conditions' which were
defined as 'any disease, illness or injury'. As the menopause plainly does
not qualify under any of these headings, the ombudsman ruled that the
insurers need not have paid anything at all.
The insurance ombudsman, City Gate One, 135 Park St, London SE1 9EA.
071-928-7600.
