FT  18 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Argentina angry at Brazil imports
INDUSTRIALISTS in Argentina are demanding that the government take action to
slow an avalanche of imports, especially from Brazil, which they claim is
threatening the survival of domestic industry.
Mr Israel Mahler, head of the Argentine Industrial Union (UIA), which
represents the country's industry, said at the weekend that 'we are very
close to industrial disruption, because (the imports) affect the domestic
market, the last redoubt that is left to certain sectors.'
The UIA has singled out Brazil as the chief offender, with which Argentina
together with Paraguay and Uruguay, plans to create a common market to be
known as Mercosur by the end of 1994. The four countries are already
reducing trade barriers in preparation for economic integration.
However, concern is rising in Argentina over the volume of Brazilian
exports. Brazil is now expected to run up a Dollars 1.5bn surplus in its
trade with Argentina this year, contributing heavily to Argentina's
deteriorating trade balance. Argentina registered a Dollars 302m trade
deficit in the first quarter, which forecasters fear could rise to an annual
deficit of more than Dollars 1bn. Even optimistic analysts expect the
Dollars 3.87bn trade surplus of 1991 to be whittled away to a very small
surplus.
The UIA wants the government to tighten up anti-dumping procedures and
increase administrative controls to prevent 'abuse' by foreign, particularly
Brazilian, competitors. The union has also demanded that the government
introduce countervailing duties against Brazil to offset the effects of
Brazil's macroeconomic instability. The government has so far refused to
adopt any protectionist measures.
The UIA says Brazilian companies receive government export incentives,
subsidised trade finance and artificially low prices for such inputs as
steel, gas and electricity, plus the benefits of a strongly undervalued
currency. Furthermore, Brazil's severe economic downturn has strongly
increased exports.
However, the Brazilians blame serious structural distortions in Argentina
for the surge in imports. Argentina's industrial costs are rising steadily,
pricing companies out of the international market.
