FT  07 MAR 92 / Nationalists tighten their grip on power in Azerbaijan
THE worsening military situation in Azerbaijan appears to have played into
the hands of opposition nationalist leaders, who yesterday forced the
resignation of President Ayaz Mutalibov.
Mr Mutalibov, himself a more moderate nationalist, had earlier said: 'The
people elected me and only they must dismiss me.' But the former leader of
the Azerbaijan Communist party was persuaded to go with a Rbs10,000-a-month
pension and a promise to retain five bodyguards.
Elected president last September, Mr Mutalibov lost control as thousands of
demonstrators demanded his resignation. Cars toured the streets, horns
blaring, and 30,000 protesters paraded around the parliament building waving
nationalist flags and shouting 'Freedom]'
Looking exhausted after a two-day battering from opposition deputies in
parliament, and slurring his words, Mr Mutalibov said he was stepping down
because he feared aggression against Azerbaijan.
Chief among the opposition nationalists who now hold the balance of power,
as conflict sharpens with neighbouring Armenia over the disputed territory
of Nagorno-Karabakh, are Mr Etibar Mamedov and Mr Ragim Gajiev. They led
criticism by deputies of Mr Mutalibov for signing a treaty in Minsk last
month on the formation of a united military force for the Commonwealth of
Independent States and have called for increased discipline, foreshadowing a
possible military government.
The republic's forces has suffered defeats at the hands of Armenian
guerrillas, and authority has passed to a national council of parliament,
drawn from nationalist parties and the former communist groups. Mr Gusan
Gusanov, the prime minister, has been charged with forming a new coalition
cabinet. Mr Gusanov told the parliament that 'those who have lost the war
(with Armenia) must be dismissed'.
New parliamentary elections and a referendum on whether Azerbaijan will be a
presidential or a parliamentary republic are promised once the situation has
stabilised.
Mr Gajiev said after the session that 'now we hope to achieve real
independence for Azerbaijan - though it is one of the most difficult periods
in the people's history'.
Reports from Azerbaijan sources in Nagorno-Karabakh indicated that the
Commonwealth of Independent States military, which has been pulling out of
the enclave, has captured the towns of Khodjali and Askeran. Other reports
said that the towns had been taken by Azerbaijani forces.
Last night Armenia said Azerbaijani forces had attacked villages in
Nagorno-Karabakh with tanks and artillery, and accused Baku of exaggerating
the scale of an alleged massacre of Azerbaijanis to mask the offensive.
Intensive fighting was reported in several areas, with scores of people said
to be killed or wounded and many others missing.
