FT  04 SEP 92 / Technology: IGM expands its horizons
IGM was founded in 1967 by Gunther Kloimuller and Franz Vokurka, two former
Siemens engineers who are now managing board chairman and supervisory board
chairman respectively at the Austrian company.
It claims about 15 per cent of the world arc welding robot market in money
terms, but rather less in unit terms, as it sells smaller numbers of
relatively expensive equipment. About 50 per cent of the market is in
European hands, with the rest held by big Japanese robot suppliers such as
Yaskawa and GMFanuc.
But with consolidated turnover of Sch524m (Pounds 27m) in the year ended
August 1991, IGM is a minnow in comparison to the Japanese and European
robot giants, and has to exploit every global opportunity to support
research and development spending of about 10 per cent of sales.
To bolster its financial strength, the company went public in 1989, raising
Sch275m from an issue of preference shares, and last year issued ordinary
shares publicly. Just over 50 per cent of the company is retained by the two
founders and their families.
The decision was a timely move. With the worldwide recession in capital
equipment purchases, IGM's sales fell 10-12 per cent in 1990-91, and a
further decline of 4 to 5 per cent is expected for the financial year just
ended.
But IGM has also been particularly effected by the upheaval in the former
Soviet Union and eastern Europe, whose share of turnover has dropped from
25.3 per cent in 1989-90 to an expected 14 per cent in the year just ended.
This has prompted an aggressive policy of Far Eastern expansion. A
collaboration agreement last year with India's Bharat Earth Movers was
followed this spring with the establishment of a Korean subsidiary, and IGM
also wants much stronger representation in China.
But the eastern countries are also regarded as very promising long-term  -
the Russians, says Langner, have always been keen on the latest developments
in robotics. Along with its subsidiary in Russia, IGM is negotiating to
establish a Ukrainian subsidiary, and is also manufacturing components at an
86 per cent owned Hungarian subsidiary, Roper Robottechnika.
Although the European Community and Far East are the main export areas, IGM
is also keen to exploit opportunities in the US, where it will open new
offices and production facilities at Milwaukee at the end of this year.
