FT  22 JUN 92 / Arts: Charles Groves - Obituary
The conductor Charles Groves has died at the age of 77. He once said that he
regarded himself as more of a GP than a consultant, and thought there were
too many conductors aspiring to the latter category at the expense of the
former. His career was very much that of the all-purpose music-maker, with
no less distinction in his work across a broad spectrum of the classical and
modern repertory. In working with every major British orchestra and most of
the opera companies, he was utterly professional and totally dependable, as
ready (as he said) 'to do everything from the St John Passion to Messiaen
and Stockhausen'.
He had notable spells of influential association at Bournemouth, where in
1954 he brought the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra into being after civic
support was withdrawn from the old Municipal Orchestra, and with the Royal
Liverpool Philharmonic, 1963-77 (and afterwards as conductor laureate),
where he was the first British conductor to perform all 10 Mahler symphonies
and to establish a post of associate conductor to encourage younger talent.
This interest in developing talent led to his later presidence of the both
the National Youth Orchestra and the National Association of Youth
Orchestras.
Groves was born in London, and entered music by way of St Paul's Cathedral
School and the Royal College of Music. While still at the RCM he was engaged
as a freelance accompanist to play for Toscanini's choral rehearsals at the
BBC, which he then joined as chorusmaster in 1938. During the war years he
was asked to take charge of the Revue Orchestra, and at 28 was appointed
conductor of the BBC Northern Orchestra in Manchester. Here he was expected
'to do about five concerts a week with no guest conductors' and acquired a
broad basis of repertory as a result.
His BBC work brought him into opera by way of several studio productions. He
became music director (1961-63) for Welsh National Opera, which he had
frequently conducted, and from 1978 he spent two years in charge of English
National Opera. where he conducted the complete Ring cycle as well as
Weber's Euryanthe, Verdi's The Two Foscari and other major repertory. He
withdrew early from his contract on grounds of ill-health, but management
problems were a factor.
Groves acknowledged Toscanini and Beecham as formative influences on his
conducting craft, and followed the latter in his championship of Delius,
making several notable recordings during the 1970s.
He was appointed OBE in 1958 and CBE in 1968, and knighted in 1973.
