FT  01 MAY 92 / The Battle For Midland: Smaller companies look to foreign
bodies for improved choice and service
THE PROSPECT of Britain's 'big-four' clearing banks becoming only three if
Lloyds goes ahead with a successful bid for Midland has prompted small
business owners and their organisations to consider the attractions of
banking with a foreign owned bank.
Few UK small businesses know much about how Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation treats its customers. But organisations such as the Forum of
Private Business, with 19,000 members, believe a successful bid from the
Honkong Bank would inject a new vitality into a jaded UK banking market.
A takeover by Lloyds, in contrast, would merely strengthen attitudes to
dealing with small business clients which were implicitly criticised last
year when the government insisted on the banks introducing codes of conduct
for dealing with their customers.
'Small businesses need more choice not less,' said Mr Stan Mendham, chief
executive of the forum. 'As they emerge from recession they need financial
stability which should come from a more diverse banking system.'
The ideal outcome for the forum would be if Hongkong Bank acquired Midland
leaving Lloyds free to form links with a Continental bank. 'Either
combination would bring new attitudes, principles and capital,' said Mr
Mendham.
There is a possibility of overseas banks moving into the UK corporate
market, according to Mr David Burton, a partner in The Centre for
Consultancy (Surrey) which advises businesses on their banking
relationships.
Continental banks are seen as having closer and more long-term relationships
with their business customers.
British banks have traditionally emphasised the importance of deposit
protection, whereas banks on the Continent and in Japan see themselves more
as intermediaries between sources of finance and business, according to Mr
Martin Binks, a Nottingham University researcher who has studied the banks'
relations with small businesses.
This has led to British banks basing lending on the amount of capital
already in the business. Overseas banks are more willing to relate lending
to present and future income.
But are the continental banks really that much closer to their smaller
customers?
Many of the direct shareholdings in industry held by the German banks were
acquired immediately after the Second World War to prevent large companies
failing. NatWest Bank has commissioned a study of the equity holdings of the
German banks to see whether they really are more supportive of small
business.
British small business organisations also point to the US banking system
where there are many very small local banks. As small businesses themselves
these banks are closer to their smaller customers and can understand their
needs better. Small banks are however more prone to failure, as the annual
US banking closure statistics show.
The weakness of the small businesses argument in favour of more foreign
competition in the UK market is that so far no continental European or US
bank has established a long term presence in the small and medium-sized
business market.
The Americans in particular are noted for expanding into attractive business
sectors and then withdrawing rapidly when head office policy changes or
business conditions deteriorate. Citibank, for example, began to establish a
regional network but closed them soon afterwards.
'A lot of the foreign banks have withdrawn from these markets,' said Mr
Simon Whitney-Long, a partner of the Bank Relationship Consultancy. 'Some
believe they will be expanding again in six months but that is not a lot of
help to small businesses now.'
Overseas banks will also have to overcome the problem of providing a
personal service to small and medium-sized business clients from a very
limited branch network or from a single office in London. A common complaint
about the big UK clearers, which do have extensive branch networks, is that
they are still too remote from their small business customers.
The success of Midland Bank's First Direct operation, where personal clients
do their banking on the phone, has prompted some banking consultants to
wonder whether small business clients might also be willing to do business
in this way. This might provide an opening for a non-UK bank without a large
network.
There are many obstacles to overcome before an overseas bank could establish
itself as a friend of small business in the UK. Presently though, the
continental banks and the smaller UK banks have the advantage of a good name
with their small business customers.
This is partly because they are able to provide a more personal service to
their smaller number of customers and partly because, since their market
share is small, they rarely show up in the surveys which have revealed
dissatisfaction with the larger banks.
But the symbolism of one large UK bank offering Pounds 3.6bn for another at
a time when businessmen and women are having difficulty negotiating a Pounds
10,000 overdraft with their bank manager is not lost on the small business
community.
