FT  12 MAR 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Best foot forward
This would seem an odd moment for a company to double its expenditure on
advertising, with the industry in deep recession. Yet you would have to run
fast to keep up with what Reebok International is spending on marketing.
John Duerden, president and chief executive of the sports shoe company, has
set an advertising budget of Dollars 220m this year, almost twice as much as
last year.
Reebok has 26 per cent of the world market, worth some Dollars 24bn (Pounds
13.6bn), against Nike's 30 per cent. With its decision to increase its
advertising spending, a battle royal with Nike, rather like that between
Coke and Pepsi, is about to be joined.
The Reebok group first hit sales of Dollars 1bn in 1986 but in that year
spent only Dollars 11m on advertising. Last year, to support sales of
Dollars 2.7bn the company was spending 10 times as much on marketing.
Duerden is convinced that Reebok must think in global terms, and is
launching a worldwide campaign in August. The new slogan, 'The World's
Greatest Athletes Wear Reeboks', will be backed by two American Olympic
decathletes.
Though not an official Barcelona Olympics' sponsor, Reebok will be sole
sponsor of the NBC network coverage of the games. US Olympic medal-winners
will be seen wearing Reebok apparel.
Other techniques will include direct marketing through a quarterly
newsletter, expansion of Reebok's fitness clubs, an extension of its
'Sisters' Network' - running clubs for women organised in conjunction with
Running Magazine.
Duerden is also supervising product development to push Reebok to the
forefront of top athletes' minds with a new running shoe some 3 ounces
lighter than anything else on the market. The 'Instapump' eschews
conventional laces, using instead a CO gas cylinder to pump it up so that it
fits like a glove on the foot.
The shoe will not be sold before March 1993 - and will cost a staggering
Pounds 100 or more - but the technology will eventually filter down into the
type of running shoes bought by ordinary consumers.
