FT  16 JUN 92 / Survey of Belgium 92 (6): A year of stagnation - The
chemical industry
THIS YEAR'S results reporting season was not a happy one for Belgium's
chemical companies. The Gulf war and the recession in the US and the UK, a
surge in cheap imports from eastern Europe and the re-emergence of
overcapacity in basic chemicals production all took their toll in 1991.
It was the first real year of stagnation in the chemicals sector after a
long period of growth.
Solvay SA, the kingdom's second-biggest company and Belgium's largest
chemicals company, saw its profits slide 22 per cent. The company's plastics
business - especially its cyclical products such as polyvinyl chloride, used
in a plethora of industrial applications - fared worse and was largely
blamed for the poor results.
Tessenderlo Chemie, a producer of mainly basic chemicals and therefore the
most dependent on cyclical products of the large Belgian companies,
witnessed a 32 per cent drop in net profits.
Nevertheless, despite the gloomy picture painted by annual reports, the
chemicals industry in Belgium as a whole managed to scrape a 1.7 per cent
turnover increase at BFr952bn in 1991, the Belgian Federation of Chemical
Industries (FCI) reported in May.
This compares with a drop in turnover in 1991 of 5.9 per cent from the
previous year in the UK chemicals industry and a 2.1 per cent slide in
Germany, according to the Brussels-based European Chemical Industry Council.
In addition, a massive 50 per cent jump in investment in the industry last
year helped the chemicals sector in Belgium register an increase in
employment of 2.8 per cent between 1990 and 1991, according to industry
figures.
Belgian chemicals have been cushioned to some extent from recession by their
wide product spread. 'Global results were better than elsewhere because the
industry in Belgium is very diversified,' said Mr Paul Launois, chief
economist with the FCI. Only half of the sector's business in Belgium is in
basic or bulk chemicals; the rest is divided between parachemicals,
including pharmaceuticals and chemical transformation of rubber and
plastics.'
The industry also managed to fight off some of the worst effects of the
slump by posting good results for 1991 in the pharmaceuticals sector, one of
the main growth areas. The success of the anti-allergic drug Zyrtec, now
registered in 70 countries, helped UCB, Belgium's second largest chemicals
company, to offset a 22.1 per cent profit slump in its chemicals division,
so that the company posted an overall 1 per cent profit.
Analysts expect the company's income to continue to rise a minimum of 10 per
cent a year, and a further boost is expected from the US Food and Drugs
Administration approval of Zyrtec, expected in the autumn. Sales growth is
also expected for UCB's other market leader, the memory aid Nootropil.
Solvay expects its animal and health division to expand rapidly over the
next few years. They already account for 14.3 per cent of Solvay sales. The
company plans a high level of research and development investment, currently
standing at about Dollars 200m, small acquisitions to boost its portfolio
and a string of marketing alliances such as the one reached with Upjohn last
year. Under the agreement, the US company will market Solvay's
anti-depressant Fluvoxamine in Europe. Although Fluvoxamine had been on the
market for several years it was struggling to reach its sales targets.
Because of its strategic position in Europe's industrial belt, with good sea
outlets, Belgium has long been considered by US and German companies as a
good base from which to serve the rest of Europe. The German firms
Agfa-Gevaert, Bayer and BASF and the US's Dow Chemical and Monsanto all have
subsidiaries in Belgium, the majority established since the 60s.
In turn, this has forced Belgian companies who saw their share in the
domestic market shrink as a result, to consolidate and expand their
activities abroad. BASF-Antwerpen, the wholly-owned Belgian subsidiary of
the German chemicals giant, put up a quarter of the BFr106bn ploughed into
the industry last year, making Belgium by far the favourite place for BASF's
foreign investment. A BFr6.5bn ammonia plant was opened by the company on
its 600-hectare Antwerp site in 1991. Work also began on a BFr27bn 'steam
cracker' which produces ethylene - vital for numerous production processes -
now due to become operative at the end of 1993 and only the second to be
built in Belgium.
BASF-Antwerpen is also due to put into operation this year a new ethyl
benzine and styrene plant and work has begun on a new ethylene oxide and
ethylene glycol plant.
Solvay, already the world leader in its primary business of soda ash, a
chemical used to make glass, hydrogen peroxide and high-density
polyethylene, has also plunged into a radical restructuring and acquisitions
programme in order to strengthen its position on the world market.
In March this year, the 139-year-old company dissolved a 21-year-old joint
venture with Laporte PLC of the UK, giving Solvay full ownership of the
Interox worldwide business in the hydrogen peroxide and persalts businesses.
A month later the company announced it was buying natural soda ash mines in
the US from Tenneco Inc. Analysts said the Dollars 500m paid for the mines
was steep, and the deal led to a downgrade in the company's credit ratings.
But Solvay remained undeterred.
'We have effectively bought reserves in trona (a mineral used to make soda
ash) for 100 years', said Baron Daniel Janssen, the company's chairman, when
he announced the purchase. He also said it would help strengthen the
position of the company, which carries out 75 per cent of its business
overseas, in the growing North American soda ash market as well as giving
Solvay a good base from which to launch an export drive to Latin America and
Asia.
Continuing its push overseas, Solvay also programmed Dollars 125m for
investment in a soda ash and hydrogen plant in Bernberg, eastern Germany,
returned to Solvay last year by the Treuhandenstalt, more than 50 years
after it was seized by the Nazis. The plant is set to become the company's
base in eastern Europe.
Chemical industry experts in Belgium are predicting an improvement in
business around October. But the threat of more cheap imports into Belgium
from east Europe and Saudi Arabia, the continuing existence of the
overcapacity phenomena, as well as the slowdown in the German economy -
Belgium exports three quarters of its products, a large quantity of which
goes to Germany - meant that first quarter 1992 results continued the
downward trend.
But the restructuring and investments made by some of Belgium's key players
in the sector last year should put the industry in a good position for when
the situation improves. 'It takes a while for the benefits to come upstream
with investment in the chemical industry but we expect it to do so at about
the same time as an upturn in the world economy', said Mr Launois.
