FT  18 DEC 92 / Pools operators fear lottery will cost 3,000 jobs
FOOTBALL POOLS operators warned yesterday that up to 3,000 jobs could be
lost in their industry as a result of the government's plans for a national
lottery starting in 1994.
Tickets will cost Pounds 1 and there will be a top prize of at least Pounds
1m a week. The games will range from scratch cards with instant prizes to
weekly draws using the latest computer technology.
The National Lottery Bill, published yesterday, contained no concessions for
pools operators employing 6,500 people, mainly on Merseyside.
Mr Malcolm Hughes, managing director of Vernons Pools, said two of the three
main pools operators - Vernons and Zetters - could go to the wall unless the
industry was allowed to 'compete on level terms with the lottery'. Operators
of existing charity lotteries were also critical of the plan.
On an annual turnover of Pounds 1.5bn, Mr Peter Brooke, national heritage
secretary, predicted prizes of about Pounds 14m a week. The money raised
will go equally to five causes - the arts, heritage, sport, charities and a
new fund to celebrate the millennium.
The lottery 'will create jobs and generate new work for existing
businesses', Mr Brooke said. 'It opens up a wealth of exciting new
opportunities. It will create millionaires and museums.'
A single licence will be awarded by tender to run the lottery although other
companies can get sub-licences to run individual games which will be part of
the national lottery. The bill gives no details of the tender criteria.
Companies expected to bid for the lottery licences include Racal, Rank,
Vernons, Bass, UK Charity Lotteries and consortia being put together by a
number of merchant banks. British Telecommunications is also considered a
possibility. The Post Office wants to sell tickets.
Mr Brooke rejected concessions for the pools industry, which has turnover of
Pounds 853m a year and is dominated by Littlewoods. He said talk of a level
playing field was 'misplaced'. Skill was a factor when filling in pools
coupons whereas lotteries were games of pure chance.
Mr Hughes of Vernons claimed this was 'absolute nonsense', saying most
people used birthdays and any other numbers that they could think of.
The pools companies want the right to advertise on television, collect
contributions legally through retail outlets, roll over prizes from one week
to the next if there is no outright winner and pay the same rate of tax as
the national lottery. The pools companies pay a total of 47.5 per cent of
turnover on tax and donations to sport and the arts.
More than 100 MPs have already signed a Commons motion supporting the pools
operators' case and Mr Brooke promised yesterday that 'dialogue will
continue'.
Mr Frank Flannery, managing director of UK Charity Lotteries, a lottery
manager, said charity lotteries were currently worth about Pounds 260m a
year. 'There is a grave danger that this will be completely wiped out,' he
said.
Lottery launched amid pools row, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 12
