FT  02 SEP 92 / Survey of Aerospace (15): Much ado about deregulation -
Americans grin as carriers groan
THIS summer, millions of US holidaymakers have clambered aboard their
holiday flights. Most have several hundred extra dollars in their pockets,
thanks to a ferocious price war which halved domestic fares in the
late-spring.
The nation's airlines, by contrast, will be totting up the damage. Most have
already posted losses for the second quarter of 1992, and the current three
months seems unlikely to yield much recovery. Traffic volumes are guaranteed
to be heavy this summer, but the fare war meant that many tickets were sold
at uneconomic levels. The sudden surge in traffic, meanwhile, is inflating
costs.
This is the sharp end of deregulation. Come November, it will be 14 years
since the US Congress decided that any US airline should be allowed to fly
any domestic route, and charge whatever it wished. Since then, travellers
have become accustomed to 'cheap' fares - including time-limited promotional
campaigns, such as the latest May/June offer - while US carriers have been
forced to pay acute attention to their costs.
But the deregulated climate has also led to dozens of airline
consolidations, with carriers either merging or going out of business
altogether. And even the survivors, bowed by an aggregate Dollars 6bn loss
during the last couple of years, are cutting back on capital spending for
the future.
Now the worry is that deregulation will generate an oligopoly, with the
three mega-carriers - American, United, and Delta - inflating prices once
their competitors have disappeared. Carriers deny this scenario strongly and
it is probably simplistic, at the very least. Nevertheless, given the bloody
battlefield which constitutes the US airline industry, it is little wonder
that Europe is setting off down the 'deregulation' road with a certain
wariness.
For the average air traveller, deregulation has been a mixed blessing. Fares
are almost certainly cheaper as a result. The US Air Transport Association,
for example, notes that since 1978, domestic air fares have risen by 53.4
per cent, while the consumer price index has increased by 108.9 per cent.
But in order to provide services at these prices levels, airlines shied away
from traditional point-to-point services, and implemented 'hub and spoke'
systems instead. This means that a passenger who wants to go from New York
to Little Rock, say, will find that he has to waste time flying into
Nashville or Memphis. Once he has touched down at the hub city, he will
probably have to change planes as well.
Clearly, the hub system offers carriers an enormous advantage - permitting
them to feed numerous flights in and out of the hub at the same time, so
that the aircraft landing in Little Rock carries visitors who began their
journeys in totally different cities. But from a passenger's standpoint,
'hubbing' means extra travel time and, arguably, greater risk of delays,
lost luggage, and so on.
For the airline industry, too, deregulation has been a mixture of pros and
cons. The initial impact was much as expected: a wave of new entrants, most
of which hoped to capitalise on lower cost structures. Names like Peoples
Express, New York Air and Capitol suddenly landed on the nation's tarmacs.
Yet in less than a decade and a half, virtually all of these companies have
been eliminated. Peoples Express became part of the Continental Airlines
group; Republic merged with Northwest; Midway eventually folded; and so on.
America West is one of the few 'new airlines' which is hanging on grimly,
under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code.
More recently, the consolidation trend has been exacerbated by the sheer
level of losses which the industry has been enduring - some inflicted by
external events, like the Gulf War - and by the added burden of some onerous
debt levels taken on during the 1980s. Three 'national' carriers are in
bankruptcy: Eastern, Pan Am, Midway and Braniff have all stopped operating
in the last two years, and only the three mega-carriers and a couple of
smaller 'niche' airlines seem sure to survive.
Already, the prospect of an industry dominated by three big players has
prompted calls for 're-regulation', has contributed to an ongoing Justice
Department investigation into allegations of price-fixing in the industry,
and has yielded a class action suit against all national carriers on similar
grounds. The last - which could have gone to an unpredictable jury trial
with trebled damages because of its anti-trust nature - was settled by the
main carriers without admission of guilt this year.
At face value, when bargain fares are so readily available and the industry
is losing money hand-over-fist, price-fixing charges would seem difficult to
sustain. But as the number of carriers continues to shrink, the allegations
seems unlikely to abate.
