FT  24 APR 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (25): Raised ceiling
clears the air - Personal equity plans / Abolition of the Pounds 3,000 limit
has simplified tax-free investment
THE INVESTMENT trust sector succeeded in getting most of what it wanted with
Norman Lamont's Budget. The Pounds 3,000 limit on an investment or unit
trust in a personal equity plan was abolished in favour of the full Pounds
6,000 allowance.
Shares held in a Pep are free of income and capital gains tax. The industry
had been lobbying hard for a 'level playing field' with direct equity
investment.
The Pounds 3,000 ceiling on collective funds had arguably worked against the
interests of the private investor and against the government's own policy of
encouraging wider share ownership. It meant that private investors were
exposed to the performance of a handful of Peppable shares, instead of being
able to spread their holdings in collective funds.
The Association of Investment Trust Companies welcomed the change in the
Budget, and said it hoped that it would encourage investment trusts to
launch more Peps.
The abolition of the Pounds 3,000 band simplifies the Pep structure for
investment trusts. There are now only two levels for investment through a
Pep - the maximum Pounds 6,000 and Pounds 1,500. What the investment trust
industry was hoping for, but did not get, was the abolition of this lower
limit, which applies to 'non-qualifying' trusts.
A trust must hold at least half its funds in shares in the UK or another EC
member state in order to qualify under the Pep regulations. Of the 250 or so
investment trusts on the market, only 96 currently qualify under the Pep
rules.
The category most affected by Mr Lamont's decision not to abolish the Pounds
1,500 level, apart from the investment trusts which invest specifically in
areas outside the EC, is the large international general trusts. These
invest in different markets worldwide, lessening the private investor's
exposure to a single market. 'The big general international trusts are still
excluded, yet they are the ideal place for the first-time investor,' said
the AITC.
Six of the eight trusts managed by Foreign &amp; Colonial are 'non-qualifying',
including its general international fund, the largest investment trust. This
has about 50 per cent of its assets in the UK and the EC; but to qualify, it
would have to commit itself to raise this to about 55 per cent in case it
needed to sell stock in one of these markets.
'The whole thing is a nonsense,' said Jeremy Tigue, of Foreign &amp; Colonial.
'It's a crazy distinction to make. Our good results have been due to our
flexibility.'
Foreign &amp; Colonial started to offer Peps last October and has sold 3,500 so
far. Only two funds - the Eurotrust and German investment trusts - are
qualifying. F&amp;C 'tops up' its Pep to Pounds 6,000 with the others by adding
blue-chip shares - BT, BTR, BAT, Lloyds Bank and Shell - to cover the
remainder.
Mr Tigue estimates that, as a result of the non-qualifying rule, F&amp;C loses
out by Pounds 4,500 for each Pep sold - a total of Pounds 15.6m. He says
that F&amp;C, while reluctant to become a qualifying trust, is leaving its
options open.
But the abolition of the Pounds 3,000 Pep ceiling will put more pressure on
the non-qualifying trusts, believes Hamish Buchan, head of investment trust
research at County NatWest WoodMac. 'It suddenly opens up the gap between
the qualifying and non-qualifying trusts,' he says. 'Those such as Foreign &amp;
Colonial and Alliance may find themselves at a competitive disadvantage as a
result.'
However, the industry as a whole can only benefit from the abolition of the
Pounds 3,000 ceiling. In 1991-92 investment trusts concentrated on new
issues, to take advantage of the loophole in the Pep rules that allowed such
trusts to qualify for the Pounds 6,000 limit.
M&amp;G launched two new issues - Income and Recovery - and there were many
other issues from managers such as Fidelity and Robert Fleming.
Many such issues had split-capital structures, and a high income, offering
particular attractions to a Pep investor. For example, M&amp;G Income offered a
6.55 per cent yield, equivalent to 11 per cent gross for a higher-rate
taxpayer.
Split-capital issues also helped prevent the shares dropping to a discount
to net assets on trading, a problem with investment trust new issues. But
now that it is possible to put a full Pounds 6,000 into an existing trust,
investors can buy assets at a discount.
New issues may well be squeezed out of the Pep market as a result of the
abolition of the Pounds 3,000 ceiling, and unit trusts, with their freedom
to advertise, may once more take the lion's share of the Pep market.
Of the Pounds 4.5bn invested in Peps in the year to April 1991, only Pounds
180m went into investment trust Peps, compared with Pounds 1.44bn in unit
trusts. Unit trusts can usually afford to spend more on promotion, because
of their higher charges, while investment trusts are quoted companies and
therefore are not allowed to advertise their shares. (However, this
restriction does not apply to their savings plans.)
With the uncertainty of the election out of the way, the future of Peps
looks secure and investors can expect an increased number of investment
trusts to offer Peps.
