FT  09 JAN 92 / German parties agree to draft new asylum law
GERMANY'S four leading political parties in government and opposition have
agreed urgently to draw up a common proposal for a new asylum law, intended
to accelerate the processing of asylum applications from 12 months to six
weeks.
The agreement emerged from cross-party talks yesterday, in spite of grave
doubts that the acceleration plan will work, and against criticism that the
streamlined procedure will limit the fundamental rights of asylum-seekers.
The idea is to speed up processing of asylum applications, which last year
topped 256,000, an increase of almost 33 per cent, in order to stem the flow
and send economic migrants swiftly home to their country of origin.
However, there is a fundamental difference between the parties. The
Christian Democrats, senior partners in the ruling coalition, believe that
the liberal German constitution should be changed to limit the right of
political asylum. Their coalition partners, the Free Democrats (FDP), and
the Social Democrats (SPD) in opposition, reject any constitutional change,
and say that the influx can be contained through improved procedures.
There was no apparent progress yesterday in persuading individual federal
states to prepare new 'collection camps' for refugees, to protect them from
the rash of racist attacks on the hostels and individual apartments where
they are currently housed.
The idea of the new procedure is to streamline consideration of all those
applications for political asylum which are 'clearly without foundation',
given that only 6.9 per cent of all applications were actually approved last
year.
However, Amnesty International, the human rights organisation, has attacked
the proposals to allow decisions to be taken by a single judge, and to limit
the right of appeal against those decisions.
To make the new procedure work, the states are also supposed to find an
additional 500 legally qualified personnel, but so far they have failed to
do so. As for the collection camps, only Baden-Wurttemberg, of the 16
states, has prepared adequate accommodation, according to the Interior
Ministry.
What the parties did agree yesterday was to draft a common amendment to the
asylum law, possibly by next week, with a first reading in parliament
possible by February.
