FT  14 APR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equities maintain upward momentum
A FEELING of anti-climax pervaded London's equity market yesterday, but
there was still sufficient buying interest from local and overseas investors
to produce another session of good gains across the board.
Worries about political developments in Russia, plus a fresh slide in the
Tokyo market overnight combined to take the edge off the market, as did the
sight of wreckage resulting from the terrorist bomb in the City on Friday
evening.
Dealers were wary of the market at the outset, concerned about Tokyo's
500-points plus decline, and the possibility that the huge jump in share
prices last Friday after the Tory election victory could attract a bout of
profit-taking.
Marketmakers opened the leaders around Friday's closing levels in an effort
to encourage more of the heavy two-way business that boosted turnover last
week. The move proved successful, with buyers moving in quickly and boosting
the FT-SE 100-share index to the day's best level of 2,606.5, or 33.9
higher, within an hour or so of the start of business.
Thereafter, the market traded in a narrow range, with intermittent bouts of
profit-taking followed by flurries of keen buying interest.
The Footsie future provided a measure of support for cash, holding a good
premium to the underlying market throughout the trading session.
At the close, the FT-SE 100 share index was 18.4 higher at 2,591.0. Turnover
of 629.3m shares, although sharply higher than average, fell well short of
Friday's 1,345.4m, itself way ahead of any single trading session for many
months. Statistics published by the Stock Exchange show that the value of
customer business transacted on Friday hit a massive Pounds 2.59bn, having
failed to reach Pounds 1bn on any of the previous four trading session last
week.
Damage wrought by Friday's bomb in the City was the latest disaster to
affect composite insurers although specialists said the impact would be
cushioned by reinsurance.
Midland Bank spurted ahead on rumours that merger terms in the region of
420p a share from Hongkong &amp; Shanghai would be announced mid-week. Allied
Breweries was one of the Footsie's biggest casualties after Sir Gordon
Borrie, director-general of the Office of Fair Trading, criticised long-term
supply agreements between national brewers and pub retailing companies.
Shares in the construction and building materials sectors were supported
ahead of a busy week of company news, including figures from industry
leaders such as Taylor Woodrow, RMC and Tarmac.
Strategists continue to adopt a positive stance on the UK market in the wake
of the Tories' general election victory.
The Global Strategy team at US investment bank Morgan Stanley has increased
the UK equities weighting of its European Model Portfolio from 8.5 per cent
to 14 per cent at the expense of its German portfolio which now comprises 26
per cent, down from 31.5 per cent. 'The voters' verdict has made the UK one
of the best disinflationary stories in Europe; it bolsters the long term
prospects for equities and bonds,' said Morgan Stanley.
