FT  19 MAR 92 / Bush's rival virtually concedes defeat: Buchanan's attacks
on US president fail to sway voters
MR Pat Buchanan yesterday finally conceded that 'only celestial
intervention' could deny President George Bush the Republican party's
nomination for the November presidential election.
The conservative television broadcaster declined to withdraw after suffering
heavy defeats in Tuesday's primaries in Illinois and Michigan, which left Mr
Bush with about 80 per cent of the delegates needed for the nomination.
Mr Buchanan said he would focus his energies on North Carolina and
California, which vote in early May and June respectively, but promised not
to air commercials criticising the president.
Mr Buchanan won only 25 per cent of the vote in Michigan, where he had
campaigned hard, and 22 per cent in Illinois. Both results were well down on
the 30 per cent plus protest scores achieved in earlier primaries.
Although not a factor in these two states, the apparently improving state of
the economy, together with Mr Buchanan's virtual concession of defeat,
leaves Mr Bush in his most comfortable political position this year.
Further qualified consolation was provided yesterday by the Federal
Reserve's latest survey of business conditions nationwide, the so-called
Beige Book, which found a 'modestly more optimistic' sentiment as a result
of strength in housing, car sales and housebuilding.
Mr Bush, however, may not yet turn his fire on the clear Democratic
frontrunner, Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas. His first target is likely
to be the Democrats in Congress, which is due this week to pass a
reflationary package containing some tax increases certain to attract a
presidential veto.
But the president may also stand back in the hope of seeing Mr Clinton
attract the same sort of withering attack from former governor of California
Mr Jerry Brown that Mr Buchanan had been inflicting on Mr Bush. Mr Brown
launched a vituperative assault on Mr Clinton before this week's primaries.
Mr Clinton took the two big industrial states impressively, with 51 per cent
in each, bringing his delegate total closer to half the 2,145 needed for the
Democratic nomination. He therefore established, beyond a doubt, his
credentials as a national candidate.
Mr Brown pushed former Massachusetts senator Mr Paul Tsongas into third
place in Michigan and cut into his support in Illinois.
Mr Tsongas was conspicuously downcast after the results and went out of his
way to congratulate Mr Clinton, seeking to eliminate some of the bitterness
that has characterised recent exchanges between the two. He may also have
been preparing the way for a withdrawal if the Connecticut primary next
Tuesday and New York two weeks later go badly.
Mr Brown, however, promised Mr Clinton no quarter, again raising questions
about the governor's character and sense of propriety. Some senior
Democrats, fearful that the party could tear itself apart, have urged Mr
Brown to tone down his rhetoric.
Nafta signal, Page 3
Brown's protest baton, Page 6
Hopes on economy, Page 7
