FT  13 NOV 92 / Survey of Japan and the European Community (12): All-round
benefits - Collaboration in research and development
WHEN Mr Hirokazu Negishi, Canon's head of research and development for
Europe, came up with the idea of a making stereo loudspeaker that would
provide stereo effect to a much broader area than conventional box
loudspeakers, he chose to develop the product in the UK.
After working on early prototypes, Mr Negishi called on the expertise of Mr
Ian Flindell, an acoustics researcher at the Institute of Sound and
Vibration Research at the University of Southampton to conduct
psycho-acoustic research, and audio designer Mike Jewitt to play a leading
role in the design of the innovative speakers.
The result, wide imaging stereo, which uses acoustic mirrors to give a wider
stereo effect, became the camera maker's first audio product and was
launched in the UK last year.
Canon is one of a growing number of Japanese manufacturers in the EC which
have been reaping the benefits of conducting research and design activities
in the region.
The number of Japanese manufacturers in the European Community with research
and development facilities has surged from 73 just two years ago to 203 at
the end of January this year, according to a survey by the Japan External
Trade Organisation, (Jetro).
Japanese companies in a variety of industrial sectors, ranging from
electronics to pharmaceuticals, have been encouraged to set up R&amp;D
facilities in the EC both by the need to localise their operations and the
recognition that Europe is a rich source of scientific and intellectual
talent.
'It is the third wave of Japanese investment in the EC,' says Mr Steve
Kremer, analyst at the Anglo-Japanese Economic Institute.
The first big wave was of investment in basic assembly facilities which was
followed by investment by component suppliers. The third wave of investment
in R&amp;D facilities is the next logical step in the globalisation process of
Japanese corporations.
The majority of Japanese R&amp;D centres are still concerned mainly with the
task of adapting products to local markets, either through cosmetic changes
or by incorporating local components into existing designs, Mr Kremer says.
Higher value-added fundamental research is still a small proportion of the
total and only 18 per cent of Japanese manufacturers responding to a Jetro
survey cited basic research as an activity carried out at their R&amp;D centres.
Nevertheless, the presence of Japanese R&amp;D facilities in the EC has brought
significant benefits not only to the Japanese companies concerned but to
local academic institutions as well.
For European academic and research institutions, Japanese R&amp;D activity,
which has sprouted a growing number of collaborative relationships between
corporate R&amp;D organisations and local insitutions, has become a major source
of research funds.
'It has certainly worked from the UK university's point of view,' Mr Kremer
notes.
'The timing is very good because universities are increasingly having to go
out and find funds for their research projects.'
Toshiba, for example, contributes substantial funds to Cambridge University
where it conducts collaborative research with the Cavendish Laboratory. In
addition to such collaborative projects, several Japanese companies with
their own R&amp;D facilities in the region commission local academic
institutions to conduct research in areas where they cannot do so themselves
either because of a lack of facilities or staff.
The Japanese have also benefitted from intellectual resources which are
simply not available in Japan, according to Mr Kremer - 'this country has
some of the best brains in pharmaceuticals research, for example.'
Many Japanese researchers point out that European researchers have much to
teach the Japanese with their different approach to research and
development.
Mr Negishi at Canon says that the Japanese approach to R&amp;D tends to be
evolutionary whereas in the west, the emphasis is creativity and big,
revolutionary breakthroughs.
In addition, Japanese companies must often look abroad for help in specific
fields such as pharmaceuticals and software where work has lagged behind the
west. Canon's project to develop 3-D graphics based on software rather than
hardware is another example of R&amp;D that the group felt would be better done
in the UK than in Japan.
The Japanese have been quick to tap the expertise of their EC partners. By
locating its R&amp;D Centre within Surrey Research Park, adjacent to the
University of Surrey, Canon was able to call on the help of engineers at the
University's music department while it was developing the wide imaging
stereo.
'Many of these people have very sensitive ears,' Mr Negishi says.
Similarly, Toshiba's Cambridge Research Centre, which is the group's first
corporate R&amp;D centre outside Japan, is located in the Cambridge Science
Park.
Toshiba's R&amp;D Centre, which is one of the more progressive of Japanese R&amp;D
facilities in the EC in that it conducts basic research, has access to
university facilities and the use of laboratory equipment to carry out
collaborative research projects.
In Germany, Matsushita, the electronics group, set up the Panasonic European
R&amp;D Centre near Frankfurt, last year.
The centre, which is working on different European television standards, has
close relationships with the University of Frankfurt and research contracts
with the University of Darmstadt as well as the Academy of Media Arts in
Cologne.
Sony Broadcast and Communications Advanced Developments is the Japanese
group's R&amp;D centre in Basingstoke which focuses on professional broadcast
and audio markets.
Taking the idea of global R&amp;D a step further than most, Sony's research
groups based in Japan, California, Australia and the UK are computer
networked for extensive co-operation on projects.
Similar collaboration between Japan and the UK has recently produced a high
quality convertor to integrate high definition TV with the European PAL
system.
