FT  19 NOV 92 / Affluent areas score highest
THE MOST striking feature of the exam results tables released yesterday for
England is that they are the first ever published by the government.
For decades, most schools and local education authorities have fought to
keep their results under wraps. As late as this summer the Financial Times
found strong hostility, even among leading private schools, to giving their
results to the press.
It is difficult to see what most of the fuss was about. There is nothing
unexpected in the national picture. The depressing statistic that barely one
in three 16-year-olds in England gains five or more GCSE passes at grades A
to C - generally the bare minimum for proceeding to A-levels - is well
known.
Nor does the regional breakdown offer many surprises. When England's 108
education authorities are ranked by the proportions gaining five or more
GCSEs at grades A to C within each, the bottom 35 are cities or inner-city
boroughs. Tower Hamlets in east London stressed yesterday that in a third of
its schools English was the second language of virtually all those taking
GCSEs; in only two schools were more than four fifths of candidates native
speakers.
By contrast, every English county south of Birmingham comes in the top 50
except the Isle of Wight and Leicestershire. The top table is a roll-call of
relative affluence and includes Harrow, Kingston upon Thames, West Sussex,
Sutton, Bromley, and Surrey.
At the local level the tables are more revealing. The variation in the
performance of schools in the same locality is graphic, and socio-economic
factors do not explain everything.
Consider Oxfordshire, which ranked 14th in overall GCSE attainment.
Excluding its special schools, the tables give results for 35 comprehensives
and nine private schools. The county average for the proportion gaining five
GCSE passes at grades A to C - 41.2 per cent of the 15-16 age group -
disguises wide variations.
In all but two of the nine private schools, all selective, 85 per cent or
more of the pupils gained five-plus GCSEs at A to C. In the top state school
 -Chiltern Edge, near Henley-on-Thames - 60 per cent achieved that.
Between those extremes, though, wide variations do not appear to be easily
explained in socio-economic terms. The town of Didcot has two comprehensives
drawing on an almost identical 'priority area'.
In the girls' school 52 per cent of pupils gained five GCSEs at grades A to
C whereas at the boys' school only 30 per cent did so. Similarly, Bicester's
two comprehensives, with comparable 'priority areas', gained starkly
divergent results.
The worst GCSE performance in the county was achieved by Milham Ford Girls
School, in Oxford, only 15 per cent of whose 15-to-16-year-olds gained five
GCSEs at grade A to C. It is the only secondary school in the county
balloting on opting-out for grant-maintained status.
Whatever the advantages of grant-maintained status, better exam results do
not appear to be among them. Lincolnshire's 18 opted-out schools perform on
a par with their counterparts controlled by the county's education
authority; eight are below the national average and 10 above, of which six
are selective grammar schools with results similar to those of the county's
grammar schools which have not opted out. The county's top school, Kesteven
and Sleaford High School for Girls - 97 per cent of whose pupils gained five
or more GCSEs at grade A to C - is still under LEA control.
Now that suppression is not an option, education authorities, teachers and
educationalists will have an incentive to devise meaningful 'value-added'
analyses. With the national tests for 11-year-olds and 14-year-olds
starting, there will soon be ample material with which to do it.
