FT  23 JUL 92 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (1): Shake-up is on the way -
Drugs companies are concerned that they could be forced to negotiate not
only the traditional hurdles of safety, quality and efficacy, but a new one
 -that of cost-benefit
PHARMACEUTICAL companies have withstood the recession as though charmed.
Apparently inoculated against the slowdown in the world economy, the sector
has offered conspicuously impressive earnings growth.
But parts of the pharmaceuticals business look sick and the prognosis for
some groups is gloomy. Income growth looks set to slow while costs continue
to escalate. Faced with the danger of falling returns, the sector looks set
for significant restructuring, with the strong becoming stronger and the
weak driven into mergers or even forced to exit.
The main driving force behind the coming shake-up is increasing state
interference with drug prices. Governments everywhere are trying to control
rapidly expanding healthcare budgets. Ageing populations and the growing
cost of health technology have led to an alarming increase in healthcare
expenditure.
In the US, spending on health increased between 1960 and 1991 from 5.5 per
cent of GNP to 12 per cent, according to Mr Peter Lauper, head of
pharma-economics at Ciba-Geigy, the Swiss group. He estimates the figure
will reach 15 per cent by the end of the decade.
For governments, the agony has been compounded because the burden of such
increases has fallen disproportionately on the state. Over the past 20
years, the proportion of healthcare spending paid for by the US federal and
state authorities has risen from 22 per cent to 41 per cent.
Governments, scared by such figures but politically shy of tackling
expenditure on hospitals and doctors, see drugs expenditure as an attractive
target for cost savings.
Most governments have attempted to achieve savings through aggressive
pharmaceuticals price controls. The pace of such interference is
accelerating. Last month, the German government extended its reference
pricing system, setting limits for the reimbursement of certain drugs.
Patients pay the balance. In Japan, the Finance Ministry launched the latest
in a series of price cuts last April.
In the US, political pressure from politicians has drawn blood. Last month,
Mr Gerald Mossinghoff, president of the US Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Association, said drugs companies supplying a third of the US market had
promised voluntarily to keep price increases at or below the rate of
inflation.
As price controls start to bite, so growth in the world pharmaceuticals
market will decelerate. Wellcome, the British group, estimates that between
1985 and 1990, the world drugs market increased on average by 13 per cent a
year. For the five years after 1995 that figure could fall to only 5 per
cent, it believes. Others believe the figure could be about 9 per cent.
The other force driving change is the rapidly rising cost of research and
development. The industry spends about Dollars 26bn at present. In the US,
R&amp;D expenditure was Dollars 11bn in 1992, up from Dollars 9.6bn in 1991 and
about Dollars 600m in 1970. Dr Armin Kessler, president of the European
Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries Associations, has warned that even
the existing level of expenditure is unsustainable.
It is in this context of rising costs and slowing growth that
pharmaceuticals groups and the drugs divisions of almost all the big
chemicals companies are trying to expand. But the industry cannot
accommodate them all, warns Mr David Alcraft, director of healthcare and
pharmaceuticals at PA Consulting Group.
Competition is increasing. In the UK, for example, there were 28 per cent
more drugs on the market in 1990 than in 1980, according to Mr Martyn
Postle, a consultant at Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
With slowing revenue growth and increasing costs, the industry's return on
capital is bound to fall, warns Mr Postle. He argues the sector is on the
threshold of a significant shakeout. In 1989, half of world sales were in
the hands of 25 companies. He believes that by the end of the decade that
figure will be 15.
The impact of the slowdown will fall unevenly. Those companies that have
previously been able to offset a lack of new products by increasing prices
will prove most vulnerable. Analysts believe US companies such as Warner
Lambert and Upjohn have been highly dependent on price increases for revenue
growth.
Those that survive must be doubly strong. First they must create innovative
products that can command premium prices. Then they must have the necessary
marketing networks to exploit them fully.
Creating such innovative products is far from easy. Discovering new chemical
entities is fairly simple. The difficult part is identifying which ones are
likely to provide competitive advantage through greater safety or efficacy.
Mr Lauper at Ciba-Geigy explains: 'The essential component is quality of
spend. You have to learn to manage the pipeline, accelerating development of
selected compounds so you can reach the market more quickly, while at the
same time remaining ethical - in other words not cutting corners.'
In the battle to demonstrate the extent to which a drug is innovative,
pharmaceuticals groups are adding a new weapon to their armoury: health
economics. In order to guarantee premium prices for innovative products, the
drugs groups are looking to demonstrate the cost-benefit of new compounds.
'Previously you just had to demonstrate the drug's quality, efficacy and
safety. Now you have to show it is cost-effective,' says Mr Lauper.
The industry, for the most part, welcomes the opportunity. Some benefits are
easily demonstrated. SmithKline Beecham's Tagamet and Glaxo's Zantac both
allow stomach ulcers to be treated at home rather than using expensive,
potentially dangerous, surgery.
However, there is concern that drugs companies could be forced to negotiate
not only the traditional hurdles of safety, quality and efficacy, but a new
fourth - that of cost-benefit. The danger is that regulatory authorities,
currently only concerned with the safety, quality and efficiency of drugs,
will in future only licence medicines that also demonstrate they can save
costs elsewhere.
Meanwhile, marketing will continue to be vital. Drugs groups will need
access to worldwide marketing forces so they can maximise sales during the
short period when the drug's patents remain valid, says Mr Postle.
Several groups have been been able to increase their revenues significantly
by setting up joint-marketing agreements.
Wellcome, for example, has agreements to market Zovirax, its anti-viral
medicine, with Hoechst in Germany, Sigma Tau in Italy and Sumitomo in Japan.
Some small companies should be able to survive by creating niches, either in
research, using new technologies, or in marketing in specific therapeutic or
geographical areas, says Mr Alcraft.
The main losers will be those caught in the middle, he warns. Without
sufficient critical mass in research and development, they will have few
compounds and little experience in negotiating the necessary regulatory
hurdles.
In addition, they will have increasing difficulty attracting good
researchers.
Mr Alcraft explains: 'The problem for the medium-sized players is that
emotionally it is difficult to admit you aren't going to be the next giant.
The option of being a niche operator is open, but it's a tricky decision to
make.'
One solution for smaller organisations is to set up joint ventures to share
the costs of marketing and to increase revenues that will offset massive
expenditure on research and development.
Otherwise, one option for such groups is to merge. The main synergies appear
to be that marketing reach is extended and that cost-savings are achieved by
rationalising headquarters costs.
The pace of change is likely to prove variable. Many pharmaceuticals
companies are parts of larger chemicals groups.
In the short term, most main boards will be unwilling to give up their
high-performing pharmaceuticals divisions.
But in the long term, pharmaceuticals groups must gain critical mass, find
niche areas of specialisation or wither.
