FT  22 AUG 92 / International Company News: German bank hits back at
downgrading
COMMERZBANK yesterday became the second large German financial institution
within a matter of weeks to hit out at DB Research, the research arm of
Deutsche Bank.
Mr Ulrich Ramm, Commerzbank's chief economist, denounced DB Research's
conclusion that its earnings would fall by DM5 per share this year and next
because of its exposure to Hafnia, the Danish insurance company which
suspended payments to its creditors on Wednesday.
The downgrading from DB Research, based on the assumption that Commerzbank's
exposure to Hafnia was in the region of DM300m (Dollars 202.7m), helped
precipitate a near 7 per cent fall in Commerzbank's share price on Thursday.
Earlier this month, DB Research downgraded its forecasts for Allianz, the
Munich insurance company which had just issued disappointing figures for
1991. The sell note prompted a sharp fall in the Allianz share price - and
an angry response from Allianz.
'In its lack of knowledge of the actual situation DB Research has come to
the extreme and premature assumption that the quota of losses on credit to
Hafnia will be high,' Mr Ramm said. 'This looks extremely unlikely from the
point of view of the creditor banks.'
While DB Research downgraded its 1991 estimates from DM25 to DM22 per share
and next year's from DM27 to DM25, Mr Ramm said Commerzbank's own analysts
had as yet no reason to revise their estimate of their parent bank's
earnings. Mr Ramm pointed out that operating profits climbed by 17.5 per
cent to DM975m in the first six months of the year and that the bank was
extremely positive about business developments in the current half.
The two downgradings have led to speculation that Deutsche Bank itself has
been trying to encourage selling of shares in rival financial institutions.
Deutsche Bank denied this yesterday, saying that DB Research was independent
and its investment recommendations were not approved by the bank's
management board, no matter how sensitive.
Despite Commerzbank's good interim figures, it has a balance sheet weaker
than those of its competitors, not helped by an exposure of some DM560m to
Olympia &amp; York, the Canadian property group.
