FT  14 NOV 92 / Property: Flat owners roll out the welcome mat - A look at
legislation which will shift power from freeholders to leaseholders
Disaffected leaseholders will soon, it seems, have something to celebrate.
Legislation going through parliament will give many of them the right to own
their properties outright.
The Housing and Urban Development Bill, which amounts to a radical shift in
power away from freeholders, passed its second Commons reading earlier this
month in a blaze of controversy.
Advocates such as Sir George Young, housing minister, said it will abolish a
'feudal and unstable' leasehold system. Backbench critics described it as a
Robin Hood Bill, which gave leaseholders the right to rob their landlords.
Under the legislation, which is due to become law next summer, many
landlords will be forced to sell their freeholds. Of the 750,000
leaseholders expected to benefit from the new law, many are flat owners who
live in London and on the south coast. But the law will also embrace
relatively expensive houses, mainly in central London, that were excluded
from leasehold enfranchisement legislation in 1967.
The logic behind the legislation is two-fold: it will tackle the problem of
wasting assets and it will give leaseholders more control over their
property.
The predicament of wasting assets arises because lenders are loathe to grant
mortgages on properties with leases of less than 70 years. That makes them,
in effect, unsellable. This problem is intensifying because large numbers of
houses began to be converted into flats with 99-year leases during the
1960s.
Equally important is the proposed shift in power towards leaseholders, who
complain they have limited rights over their property despite having paid a
full price for their lease. 'It is unfair that a Pounds 500 freehold
exercises control over a Pounds 100,000 flat, giving leaseholders all the
'obligations of ownership but only the limited rights of tenants'', says the
Enfranchisement League, one of many pressure groups that has urged reform.
Specifically, the measure will allow flat owners to take the management of
their property into their own hands. Previous attempts to give leaseholders
more control over the management of their property, such as the Landlord and
Tenant Act 1987, have largely failed. Leaseholders have often found
themselves powerless when they are faced with landlords and managing agents
who are negligent or corrupt.
More controversially, leaseholders may gain financially from
enfranchisement. Critics of the new legislation argue that leaseholders will
be able to buy their freehold too cheaply, a claim hotly denied by
leaseholders. The Grosvenor Estate, the owner of much of London's Belgravia
and Mayfair and a vocal opponent of the Bill, believes that leaseholder's
windfall gains could be as high as Pounds 100,000.
Disputes over price seem inevitable. But unless the Bill is changed in
committee stage, the basis for calculating the cost of enfranchisement will
be three-fold.
First, the open market value of the property, which is calculated by
capitalising the value of the ground rent. Second, at least half the
'marriage value' of the freehold and leasehold interests. The marriage value
arises because the whole is worth more than the sum of the parts. Freeholds
with vacant possession (which may have, for example, development potential)
are worth more than the combination of the landlord's and tenant's
interests. Third, the landlord's costs and compensation for any potential
gains lost by the forced sale.
There may be an additional boost to property values as a result of
enfranchisement. Robert Orr-Ewing of estate agents Knight Frank &amp; Rutley,
said: 'In the early days, a freehold flat will have a rarity value which
will earn a premium.'
Values may be enhanced, even if a leaseholder does not take advantage of the
new law. 'Many purchasers of short leaseholds in the future will be
investors looking for added profit through the prospect of enfranchisement,'
says estate agent Savills. It believes that prospective gains will depend on
location. Marriage values in prime areas will be lower than in non-prime
areas, because short-lease values hold up more strongly when purchasers do
not need mortgages.
But the new law is bound to disappoint some leaseholders. The Commonhold
Flats Campaign, a lobby group, says that the government proposals will only
help 38 per cent of long leaseholders. (That said, in many of the cases
where long leaseholders cannot enfranchise, they may be able to extend their
leases).
Leaseholders will only be able to enfranchise if 90 per cent or more of the
floor area is residential, if two-thirds of the flats are on leases of 21
years or more and if two-thirds of those flats vote in favour of
enfranchisement. Moreover, the ground rent must be less than two-thirds of
the rateable value if the lease was granted before April 1 1990 or less than
Pounds 1,000 in Greater London or Pounds 250 elsewhere if it was granted
after April 1990. The aim is to exclude people who are renting rather than
leasing.
Exemptions include properties owned by the Crown, charitable trust housing
already let at a discount and conversions with four or fewer flats, one of
which is occupied by the landowner.
In any case, the new law will not be a panacea. Flat owners in large blocks
of flats may well find it difficult to agree on repairs and service charges
amongst themselves. 'In some cases the lack of professional 'caretakers' and
the added responsibility of repair and maintenance could discourage
potential purchasers especially those who are away from their property for
long periods,' says Ms Yolande Barnes, head of research at Savills.
Flat owners may also find it difficult to club together and buy the
freeholds of tenants who do not want to buy their flats.
Critics point to a plethora of other disadvantages arising from the bill.
The opportunity to buy leases of varying lengths may disappear, restricting
choice and pricing some people out of central London. The resurgence of the
rented sector may be set back by the fear of more anti-landlord legislation.
The appearance of some of the most exclusive parts of central London, which
currently benefit from the long-term stewardship of the 'great estates', may
deteriorate.
But set against the unwanted effects of this new law is the prospect of
halting the erosion of the value of leases and ending the hostility between
numerous leaseholders and their landlords. Even though the problems of flat
owners will not disappear as a result of enfranchisement, leasehold
enfranchisement will mean they have no one to blame but themselves.
