FT  18 SEP 92 / Management: Corporate America gets together to show it cares
 -An initiative to help employees with children and aged parents
Corporate America has just unveiled an important initiative to help
employees find adequate care for children and elderly parents while they are
at work.
More than 100 companies have joined forces and committed Dollars 25.4m
(Pounds 12.8m) to fund a range of child and 'elder care' programmes in 44
communities across the US. The move is being led by 11 of the largest
businesses in the US, including International Business Machines, American
Telephone &amp; Telegraph, Exxon, Motorola and American Express.
Schemes include the construction of childcare centres, training for
child-minders who look after children in their own homes, special programmes
to occupy school-age children during holidays and the organisation of
volunteers to visit aged relatives.
American companies which once shunned any role in their employees' family
lives have become much more involved in the area over the past three to four
years, due largely to the growing number of women in the labour force and
competition to attract and retain skilled labour of either sex.
The same pressures are evident in politics, with both houses of Congress
recently passing legislation which would require employers to give workers
up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave, with health insurance kept in force, to look
after sick family members or for their own medical needs, including
pregnancy.
President Bush is certain to veto the legislation on the grounds that such
leave should be negotiated by workers, rather than mandated by government.
But polls suggest the idea is extremely popular around the nation and it is
likely to become law if Bill Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee,
wins the November election.
The new corporate initiative represents a big leap forward: previously, each
company generally pursued policies on its own. The degree of co-operation
they have now agreed upon is unprecedented and is likely to set an example
many other businesses will follow.
Indeed, the founders of the venture are encouraging other companies to join
it. In a statement accompanying the initiative, the 11 leading companies
declared that 'dependant care is a primary concern of American business.
Our diverse workforce is increasingly populated by employees who must
arrange care for family members - young and old - in order to be fully
productive at work. Meeting the basic need for support of our working
families is one of the most critical issues we face.'
The basic advantages in pooling resources are seen as:
Economic and logistic. Individual companies have found that it is either too
costly, or their employees are too scattered, to make it worthwhile setting
up a programme in a particular community. When they join together, the
increased scale makes projects feasible.
A systematic approach. Until now, companies have tended to take a piecemeal
approach to dependant care issues, with each tackling just a few of the wide
range of problems faced by families. According to Fran Rodgers, chief
executive of Work/Family Directions, a Boston-based dependant care
consulting company, the new scheme 'attacks many problems at the same time'.
Community involvement. The new initiative draws in many local community
organisations and, while primarily designed to help companies' employees, it
is also meant to raise standards of childcare across the community. For
example, child-minders in some communities will be given training
irrespective of whether company employees use their services.
Companies involved in the scheme stress that it does not mean they
themselves are plunging into the dependant care business. The funds they are
contributing will be used as grants to help independent care providers.
The largest number of projects in the programme involve improving the care
of school-aged children when they are not safely in the class-room.
Many parents find some of their greatest difficulties are in finding quality
help for this age group, especially during school holidays, rather than
meeting the less complex needs of pre-school children.
However, in dollar terms, well over half of the Dollars 25.4m will be spent
on building or expanding childcare centres. Just Dollars 1.5m will go for
the care of the elderly, which is in many respects a trickier problem to
solve: parents often live some distance from their children and potential
difficulties are far more varied than those of children.
The initiative represents corporate America's strongest recognition yet that
companies which want to attract the best employees will need to pay much
more attention in the 1990s to helping staff find a balance between the
demands of a job and increasingly complex home lives.
