FT  12 SEP 92 / Blind justice for the world's wild creatures: The Greens
hold that all animal life is sacrosanct. But is emotion blinding us to the
hard facts of wildlife conservation?
IN SPITE OF the traumas of the Green Party, whose annual conference this
weekend is overhung by the resignation of half its executive committee, the
influence of nature conservationists has never been higher.
The Green movement's dilemma is that many of its proposals would require
higher prices, raised taxes; even an economy of zero growth. Fundamentalists
refuse to make the compromises which 'light' Greens think are needed to drum
up popular support. But can the movement's 'thou shalt not kill' philosophy
really apply to the conservation of wild animals?
Frequently in this debate, being 'wild' is not enough. Everybody loves a
fawn, and apparent defencelessness. Furriness is better media material than
scaliness - as zoo keepers know. Popular support for the cause of wildlife
is reinforced constantly by nature films, but many, alas, promote
sentimental attitudes which usurp rational decisions on wildlife management
based on practical knowledge.
In a recent television programme on Epping Forest, north east of London, the
footage was cut and mixed to show a deer calf being mothered in a
sun-dappled glade, the whole pretty scene approved by a watching fox and an
owl in a tree. Nature's dynamic had been turned upside down to provide
viewers with a syrupy - but dangerous - emollient.
The real story is very different. The countryside has never been so tamed,
so trimmed to suit the purpose of man. Yet it is increasingly alien
territory to urban visitors, so much so that a Berkshire farmer has been
instructed to remove scarecrows which were frightening ramblers.
To take another example, the number of Canada geese in London parks is
approaching crisis point. This fact produces columns of letters to
newspapers suggesting solutions which are disturbing in their blend of
concern for wildlife management - and their utter ignorance of that same
subject. The fact that the parks' vegetation is unable to support more birds
appears incomprehensible to most writers. Deceived by the park-keepers'
clever presentation of an artificial mix and density of waterfowl,
commentators are horrified when a goose cull is proposed.
In Noah's Ark we started with a myth of wildlife harmony; in doctored
television films (misnamed 'documentaries') we consolidate it. Once the
criterion for judging culls of birds and animals was 'sustainable
development': if a habitat could sustain only a limited population of a
particular species, culling would be acceptable. This is fast changing. The
World Wildlife Fund now opposes killing whales on the grounds that it is
simply wrong. But if this applies to whales, why not also to mackerel?
Humans have always given different values to different forms of wildlife.
Unfortunately, the attribution of these values is entirely anthropomorphic
and has nothing to do with objective standards. This tension between
sentiment, ideals and practicality is part of the problem facing the Green
movement. It makes it extremely difficult for man to play God with nature.
So, whales, seals and puffins are now described in conservation circles as
'charismatic' species. Whales, to be sure, are complex sentient beings whose
mystery is deepened by their faraway haunts. Puffins are probably complex
sentient beings too, but primarily they have pretty bills. But other equally
striking species - for example the red deer in Scotland - are currently
environmental 'bad guys' because they chew and destroy hardwood trees.
Then how should environmentalists take the life and death decision about
whether an animal deserves to be preserved or culled? The credentials of
each species oscillates wildly. Not long ago sheep and their grazing habits
were seen to be the principal enemies of heather moorland. Now sheep are too
closely associated with bankrupt or suicidal farmers to be a target.
There is frequently a hidden social criterion in the vogues of
environmentalism. Today in the UK the vast population of rabbits might seem
an uncontroversial target for suppression in order to protect the habitat.
Conservation bodies are silent about rabbits, not wishing to encourage
sport-killing. Rabbits can kill young trees even in spite of the fencing
which keeps bigger animals out - but then, so can field voles. A pogrom
against voles? Hardly.
In Africa, the best friend of natural bushland is the tsetse fly, which
spreads diseases affecting herbivores. Although cattle ranchers are trying
to eradicate the fly the malarial tsetse remains unchampioned, even though
its survival is vital to the African bush. Domestication has made the
destructive rabbit seem friendly; the valuable tsetse fly remains a hostile
alien.
The public idea of what makes an animal or bird ecologically 'good' have
much less to do with its true characteristics than with the human
perceptions of that animal or bird. The fox, for example, attracts sympathy
in spite of its undoubted destructiveness. Australia's 5m foxes have so far
eradicated 16 native species. Foxes are one of the few carnivores which kill
for fun, and joy-killing is a biological oddity. British sympathy with the
fox results from a stronger dislike of its horse-riding oppressors.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) has recently made a
brave decision concerning foxes. Its programme to reintroduce capercaillie
to its Highland estate of Abernethy was being frustrated by large numbers of
the birds' predators - foxes and crows. In spite of the problems of
persuading its 800,000-strong, mostly urban, membership of the rightness of
the policy, the society has decided to experiment with predator control.
Abernethy remains a sensitive case because it is in the Cairngorms,
presently the site of a complicated tug-of-war between developers,
traditionalists, and fringe Greens. There have been fierce protests at the
recent decision at Balmoral to fence out red deer in order to save the
ancient Caledonian pine forest of Ballochbuie. No one disputes the rightness
of the objective. But local conservationists have said that capercaillie and
other game will be killed flying into the deer fence. Nobody troubled to
look at the traditional use of deer fences in capercaillie forests, in which
heather was tied to the top wires so that the birds could see them. Local
game managers, approaching the job without prejudices, are one step ahead in
their use of wildlife-friendly anti-cyclone fencing, which pushes in when
hit, then bounces back.
Indeed, in spite of the silliness of the extreme 'dark' Greens, it is widely
recognised that in an environment created by man, man has a responsibility
to exercise control and to maintain healthy balances. This has produced some
ethical teasers. On one occasion the RSPB killed many predatory gulls, which
were multiplying in large numbers, in order to save a rare species of tern.
Recently, another rare tern colony has been protected from kestrels by
providing the predators with alternative food supplies.
These pro-active interventions would appear to make sense in a world too
often overheated by ill-informed sentimentalism. But what action is
appropriate on the Shetland island of Foula, where calcium and
phosphorous-starved sheep have been eating young seabirds? Do we have the
right to stamp on this evolutionary oddity, or not?
Moreover, the selective favouritism in our attitude to God's creatures is
never more strained than when under pressure from his premier creation: man.
In Canada, the authorities would yield position to few countries in their
commitment to species conservation and professionally-managed wildlife
systems. But the controls on hunting and fishing permits, the sale of game
meat and fish (both prohibited), and habitat protection apply only to white
Canadians. The native peoples - Eskimos and Indians - are exempted from both
seasonal hunting restrictions and from hunting quotas. A native person can
slaughter any animal, at any time, in any quantity, with any weapon.
The result of the free-for-all is that animals are killed - and simply
dumped. In Saskatchewan, thousands of slaughtered caribou were abandoned to
rot after only their tongues had been removed. Yet the freedom from hunting
restrictions in Canada is meant to be for 'subsistence' purposes. In
reality, practical wildlife management is being heavily compromised by this
exemptions system.
North Canadian peoples have also been the unfortunate victims of
ill-conceived animal welfarism from a distant continent. When the EC banned
harp and ring seal imports in the early 1980s, activists who had campaigned
for the ban deprived the Canadian Indians and Eskimos of their main trading
resource and condemned them to a shrunken existence.
One consequence of the ban is that seal populations, which were never in any
danger, have multiplied exponentially. Canadian fishermen complain that the
seals are now putting fish stocks under extreme pressure.
The seal issue has resonance for British fishermen, many of whom report that
grey seals are now following fishing boats out from harbour and chasing fish
as the nets draw them in. Sport anglers have had fish seized from their
hooks. But the government is powerless to act. The volume of protest against
the last government-initiated cull of grey seals in the late 1970s stopped
that cull and established that, regardless of what potentially harmful
biological imbalances developed, seals could no longer be managed rationally
in Britain.
This was an extraordinary debacle. The grey seal was not rare, was neither a
commercial nor sport species, was only being culled to protect the livings
of local fishermen and is, biologically-speaking, the most savage marine
predator of its size. Its dewy-eyed facial resemblance to a labrador was
said to be the chief reason for its power to stir public sympathy.
This is just one example of the drift of public attitudes to wildlife:
towards the view that no wild creature should be used for any human purpose.
This essentially quixotic and romantic ideal could only arise from an
affluent and urban society. It represents the ultimate detachment from
nature, for it follows that we must grow, in increasingly artificial
conditions, all dietary protein. This development is rushing ever onwards,
with the growth of genetically-refined farmed red deer, bison, elk, salmon,
lobsters, halibut, and so on.
We call the evolution from harvesting wild stocks an escape from barbarism
and believe we are being conservationist. Meanwhile, we labour harder to
provide more naturally-produced foodstuffs, simulating wild conditions while
at the same time eschewing products taken from the wild.
The irony is that the original trappers and hunters - the killers - were the
ones with the true, hard-earned knowledge of wildlife. They were the humans
with a vested interest in the conservation of wild species, for next year's
crop, and the next generation, depended on it. Ours - the would-be
conservationists - is ceasing to.
