FT  07 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Company doctor for Lep if banks approve
refinancing plan
MR DAVID James, who is known for his corporate rescue work, is to become
chairman and chief executive of Lep Group, the freight forwarding and
security company, if its banks and shareholders approve a refinancing plan
involving a Pounds 180m debt-for-equity swap. Lep's shares rose 4 1/2 p to
14 1/2 p.
In the last two years Mr James has been involved in the financial
reconstructions of both Eagle Trust, the mini-conglomerate embroiled in the
Iraqi supergun affair, and Davies &amp; Newman, owner of the Dan-Air airline. He
expects to devote half his time to Lep.
Mr James said he was confident Lep's operating subsidiaries would survive if
the refinancing went through, though he would have to look at the strategy
for the parent company once he joined the board.
Lep's problems began to emerge a year ago when some off-balance sheet
property finance came on balance sheet and the company's debt rose to Pounds
400m. Last autumn Lep admitted that its debt had risen to Pounds 470m,
profits collapsed and a standstill agreement was signed with its banks. In
January Lep announced there would be substantial write-offs relating to its
property exposure and a debt-for-equity swap was suggested.
It is now proposing that Pounds 180m of its Pounds 530m debts should be
converted to equity. Details of the conversion have yet to be fixed but
given the company's market capitalisation of Pounds 20m the banks are likely
to end up with a substantial portion of Lep's shares.
There may be an opportunity for existing shareholders to buy some of the
shares issued to the banks. ADT, the security group, holds 27 per cent of
Lep's equity.
Interest payments would be deferred on about Pounds 130m of debt, and
facilities extended for another three years. Banks would also put in new
money to finance working capital.
A meeting of shareholders to consider the proposals is expected in May. Mr
James would take up his role after that.
If the plan goes through, Lep would retain National Guardian Corporation,
its US security business which was put up for sale last year in an earlier
attempt to cut its debt. Mr John East, finance director, said that Lep could
not find a buyer prepared to pay the price Lep wanted for National Guardian.
National Westminster Bank is head of the eight-bank steering committee,
which has agreed the refinancing in principle, and there are another 22
banks in the group.
