FT  04 JUN 92 / Gwent (8): The valleys' new role - Robin Reeves on
successors to heavy industry
GWENT contains an abundance of valleys, from the Black Mountains in the
north of the county to the Wye Valley in the south. But for those who live
there, the Gwent valleys mean one thing - the coal-mining valleys of the
west of the county.
This part of Gwent was in the forefront of the 19th industrial revolution.
But the traditional iron, steel and coal industries having declined to a
shadow of their former importance, these particular valleys are having to
build new economic and social foundations.
The pressures of economic change in this part of Gwent are not new. A
sustained effort has been going for decades to diversify local employment
opportunities as the number of jobs available in coal and steel has
declined. The industrial estates along the Heads of the Valleys and at
strategic locations within the valleys themselves bear witness to the
progress those efforts have made over the years.
Long before garden festivals were thought of, the Rassau industrial estate
was carved out of the mountainside above Ebbw Vale by the fledgling Welsh
Development Agency to create a pole of attraction for new industries. It was
clear that thousands of new jobs would be needed once iron and steel-making
was ended at British Steel's Ebbw Vale works and the site confined to the
manufacture of tinplate. The closure of the 'heavy end' of Ebbw Vale in 1978
brought to an end more than 200 years of steel-making in the valley.
Over the past decade, the pace of industrial change has accelerated,
catapulting the Gwent valleys into a new era. In 1981, there were still at
least 5,000 men employed in the county's remaining deep mines. Today, deep
mining has ceased altogether; leaving just a few open-cast operations as a
reminder of the coal industry's former pre-eminence.
Nevertheless, diversification has being going ahead. The roll call of
Japanese, US and German, as well as UK companies, which have
long-established, successful operations in the area, is impressive. Some of
the smaller companies, particularly from elsewhere in the UK, may have been
initially attracted by the financial assistance available (the upper ends of
the valleys have long enjoyed development area status and the lower ends
intermediate area status).
But for every cowboy operation simply seeking to take advantage of the
grants available before moving on, dozens of others have put down firm roots
in the area, grown and prospered.
More inward investment is always wanted. But there is considerable effort
these days to encourage local enterprise. Torfaen Borough Council, the local
authority in Gwent eastern valley, has had considerable success in building
and letting starter business units on easy-in, easy-out tenancy terms and
'make and display' units which give tenants a shop window for their products
as well as manufacturing space. In spite of the severity of the recession,
none of its tenants has suffered a forced liquidation.
While inquiries for business starter units are running at record levels,
officials are uncertain whether this reflects the beginnings of an economic
recovery or the fact that morepeople fear being made redundant and are
therefore exploring the possibility of launching their own business
ventures.
One consequence of the ending of coal-mining - together with the long-term
programme of derelict land reclamation introduced in the wake of the Aberfan
disaster - has been the return of the Gwent valleys to their former natural
beauty. But while the natural environment has greatly improved, the same
cannot be said of some of the valley towns.
They have suffered the same lack of private investment in shops, offices and
other commercial premises as have the inner city areas of England.
A sustained drive has now been launched by the WDA, Gwent County Council and
other agencies to modernise and improve several of these centres and their
environments.
Work being carried out under urban development and regeneration programmes
includes a new town centre by-pass at Crumlin; improvements to retail
premises and the town centre environment at Blackwood and Newbridge; support
for new retail developments as well as a new bypass at Pontypool; investment
of Pounds 665,000 in 1992-93 town centre improvement in Abertillery; and
Pounds 400,000 in an major planning study of Tredegar, designed to revive
that town's economy.
Private sector pump-priming is essential if the Gwent valleys are to build
on the boost given to what promises to be another steadily developing
industry of the future - tourism.
There is an exceptionally rich industrial history. Blaenafon, at the head of
Gwent's 'Eastern Valley' is not just the location of Big Pit, the colliery
preserved as a museum to commemorate the South Wales coalfield, which now
attracts 160,000 visitors a year.
It was also at Blaenafon that Sidney Gilchrist Thomas invented the Basic
Open Hearth Process for steelmaking by showing that iron ore containing
phosphorus could be made into steel by lining the furnace with limestone.
This was a crucial industrial breakthrough in the 19th century, opening the
way for the development of the steel industry in the US (by Andrew Carnegie)
and in Germany where it is known to this day as the Thomas process.
The political history of the area is also colourful. The Chartists'
insurrection in 1839, in support of basic democratic reforms, when large
crowds marched down the Gwent valleys to Newport, to be fired upon by troops
and see their leaders seized and transported to Australia, is still
commemorated annually.
In this century, Aneurin Bevan, who was born in Tredegar, represented
neighbouring Ebbw Vale in parliament for over 30 years. His political
accomplishments, most notably the National Health Service which he
established as Minister of Health in the 1945-50 Labour Government, grew out
of his experience as a boy collier and miners' agent in the Gwent valleys.
Before long, people may begin visiting the area in search of the political
roots of two other political names associated with the Gwent valleys - Mr
Michael Foot and Mr Neil Kinnock. Mr Foot succeeded Bevan in 1961 as MP for
Ebbw Vale (called today, after boundary changes, Blaenau Gwent) and
represented the constituency at Westminster until the recent general
election. Mr Kinnock continues as MP for Islwyn (previously Bedwellty), a
constituency covering the bulk of Gwent's Western Valley which he has
represented since 1970.
