FT  10 FEB 92 / Leading Article: Keeping Nato upright
IF ONE message came through from the annual Wehrkunde (defence studies)
conference in Munich this weekend, it was that security is no longer, if it
ever was, purely a matter of armies and weapons. In the post-Cold War world,
political and above all economic action will often have a more direct effect
on people's security than military preparations.
Nowhere is this more true than in the transatlantic relationship. Arguments
between the US and its European allies over trade and other economic issues
are not new, but in the past they were overshadowed by the military
alliance, which both sides recognised as of primary importance. Now, with
the disappearance of the Soviet threat, this 'security glue' can no longer
be relied on. Europeans may think they no longer need American protection;
Americans, wrestling with severe economic and social problems of their own,
are tempted to make savings on overseas commitments.
In that context trade disputes can loom larger. American speakers at the
conference, from Vice-President Quayle downwards, stressed the vital
importance of the Uruguay round, not only for trade but also for the
maintenance of the alliance itself. Nothing, they said in substance, is more
useful to US isolationists than the spectacle of Europe adopting a
protectionist stance.
Failure to reach agreement before Easter will leave US presidential and
congressional candidates free to use America's trading partners - Europe as
well as Japan - as whipping boys in the election campaign, and this would
hardly improve the chances of sustaining a long-term US commitment to
European security.
Stable feature
That such a commitment is necessary was accepted by right and left alike at
the Munich conference. Nato is one reasonably stable feature in an
extraordinarily fluid European security scene. The Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe, whatever its longer-term role, is too sketchy a
structure in its present form to inspire confidence in states that see the
fate of Yugoslavia staring them in the face.
Yet, like a bicycle, Nato needs to move forward if it is to stay upright. As
one shrewd American observer pointed out, telling Americans that Europe
wants them to stay may not be enough, unless Nato can demonstrate that it
has a real task to perform in the new circumstances. And, since eastern
Europe's demand for security is the most vociferous, it is there that Nato
has to demonstrate that it has something to offer.
More cautious
Mr Manfred Worner, the alliance's secretary-general, suggested that it is
doing so, through the newly created North Atlantic Cooperation Council which
all ex-Warsaw Pact members and ex-Soviet republics have been invited to
join. He mentioned that the republics had contacted Nato to help them sort
out their quotas of conventional forces under the CFE Treaty. But he was
more cautious about offering them full membership or hard security
guarantees.
Yet that issue will have to be confronted soon. What has given the states of
post-war western Europe their unprecedentedly high level of security has not
been vague structures of co-operation but a firm commitment to each other's
defence, plus integration of their military command structures and (through
the EC) their economies, all based on shared democratic values, although
this last point was fudged when Greece, Portugal and Turkey were Nato
members with authoritarian governments.
In the new situation, all the states from Russia westwards are struggling to
adopt those values, and looking to Nato to help them achieve enough
stability, internal and external, to give them some chance of success.
Although Nato likes to think of itself as a mutual defence pact, rather than
a collective security pact guaranteeing its members against each other, the
fact is that it has done both. If it has really 'won the Cold War', as its
leaders like to proclaim, it should prepare to welcome as members all those
east European states that are ready to undertake the very serious
obligations involved.
