FT  16 DEC 92 / Russia - The Future of Reform: Gaidar's lost year: the agony
and the legacy
WHEN Mr Yegor Gaidar, the 36-year-old who launched market reforms in Russia,
was made prime minister a year ago he had one primary goal: to make change
irreversible through Polish-style shock therapy and sheer improvisation.
His successor as Russia's prime minister, Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin, is more
ambitious: he wants to halt the fall in industrial output (20 per cent this
year) and to 'civilise' what Mr Gaidar bequeathed him so that Russia 'has a
market and not a bazaar'.
He is unlikely to be able to do so, at least not in the near future. This is
because of what Mr Gaidar did achieve - and what he did not. His market
reforms - kick-started with price liberalisation - are, as he had hoped,
irreversible. But his attempts at financial stabilisation failed.
Monthly inflation is running at 33 per cent (close to the 50 per cent at
which point it is called 'hyperinflation'). The budget deficit is pushing 15
per cent of gross domestic product, close to the level last year when the
then Soviet Union's financial system had all but collapsed.
Thus Mr Gaidar's muddling through on financial policy could be followed by a
hyperinflationary nightmare if Mr Chernomyrdin tries to stop an
'impoverishment which the people do not deserve' by quickly wiping out the
arrears accumulated between enterprises without tackling their causes. The
only way this could be done would be by creating even more credit and
handouts, without discrimination, than is already the case.
'People would be made even poorer through hyperinflation,' says Ms Elena
Kotova, a Russian economist and former privatisation official now with the
World Bank.
She said price liberalisation was one of the factors making reform
irreversible, saying the government had already lost the tools it would need
to re-impose controls on prices, wages and centralised distribution of
goods.
While other economists disagree, saying some price controls could be
reimposed, the consensus is that Mr Gaidar's privatisation policy is the
jewel in the crown of his legacy, the only guarantor that reforms may be
slowed but not reversed.
Although the privatisation of large-scale enterprises has only just begun,
the legislation and mechanisms for its implementation are solidly in place.
Enterprises have spent months preparing privatisation plans. Citizens
holding vouchers entitling them to buy shares or exchange them for money
cannot now be told the programme is cancelled. Many directors see their own
success as being tied to taking their enterprises away from the control of
the state, despite the risks. Few have asked to be taken off the list of
enterprises to be sold off.
By contrast, the main shortcoming of Mr Gaidar's legacy - which has exposed
him to attack from conservatives - is that structural reforms have not yet
filled the vacuum created by the freeing of prices, trade, and wages.
Though shops created by the freeing of trade have helped improve supplies in
more remote parts of the country, the most irritating and visible sign of
change for many Muscovites is the little kiosks which sell imported liquor,
cigarettes and clothes at most street corners and the rich traders who race
around Moscow in expensive foreign cars.
The 'bazaar' of which Mr Chernomyrdin complained can be dealt with in only
two ways. So-called 'wild' trade can either be shut down or nurtured through
a long-term strategy proclaimed, but not started, by Mr Gaidar.
This includes the need for a tough industrial policy that will sacrifice
bits of industry that are using up resources that could be put into consumer
goods production and switching an overdeveloped military industry to
civilian uses. All Mr Gaidar did was slash procurement for military
industry, but far from disappearing, enterprises keep going, expecting - and
ultimately receiving - handouts from the government and central bank.
'As long as industry is not seriously restructured, the only sector where
market mechanisms come to play are in trade,' said one western expert. 'But
this quickly turns to speculation, making profits from reselling scarce
goods, rather than producing more of them.'
Another aspect of Mr Gaidar's legacy is the strengthening of a small
entrepreneurial class which is not only confident enough to display its
wealth but to lobby and influence authorities at both local and central
level.
Although the shoots of entrepreneurship are here to stay, they are fragile.
Their main failure so far is that lawlessness and bureaucracy are such that
they discourage ordinary people with good ideas from setting up their own
businesses.
All the evidence points to only one set of sensible policies for a man with
centralising instincts: a vigorous industrial strategy which allows for some
enterprises and sectors to close down, coupled with action to create jobs.
Mr Chernomyrdin has the political support which Mr Gaidar lacks, but whether
he will use it wisely is unclear.
