FT  19 SEP 92 / Rising tide of disillusion: The road from Maastricht has
been paved with miscalculation
The politicians who launched Europe towards political and monetary union
last December knew they were treading a narrow causeway. They did not
imagine, however, how quickly the waves of confusion and hubris would be
lapping around their ankles.
The road from Maastricht has been paved with miscalculation. Even if the
French vote No tomorrow, the journey towards European integration will not
come to an end. Yet the route will become more perilous - and the number of
countries determined to carry on may diminish.
From the beginning, uncertainty has been inherent in the treaty, reflecting
the pathwork of nebulously-worded compromises aiming to satisfy the demands
of the document's 12 signatories. Would Maastricht turn the European
Community into an intolerable 'superstate', as Lady Thatcher, the former UK
prime minister, has claimed, or mark the first step away from EC
centralisation, as stated by Mr John Major, her successor?
Would the treaty repair drawbacks in the 1987 Single European Act, which
established the way to a border-free 'single market', as President Francois
Mitterrand declared on French television a fortnight ago? Or would it
exacerbate these deficiencies, to the detriment of millions of Gallic
workers and farmers, as his opponents in the French referendum campaign
claim? Would it extend German monetary hegemony across Europe, as many
French voters fear - or would it allow the Paris government to get its hands
on the D-Mark, as many Germans (including the officials of the Bundesbank)
believe?
Confronted with these contradictions, as well as the Community's
ineffectiveness in dealing with challenges ranging from immigration to the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia, voters seem puzzled and disillusioned. In
the Netherlands - traditionally in favour of a federal Europe - 44 per cent
of voters are undecided about Maastricht, while more than half do not
understand the treaty, according to two recent opinion polls.
Just nine months ago, the Maastricht trail looked a lot less stony. At the
EC summit in the Dutch border town, Mr Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor,
projected fulsome confidence. He agreed a small private wager - six bottles
of wine from the Rhineland-Palatinate village of Gimmeldingen against a
crate of British vintage - that the UK would join economic and monetary
union (Emu) by the Maastricht timetable date of 1997 or 1999.
The German chancellor has again been trying to ease tension, claiming that
Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, told him that Britain would 'soon'
rejoin the exchange rate mechanism. In fact, the turmoil in the European
Monetary System has now sharply lengthened the odds against Emu being
established - and relegated to the realms of dreams the notion that Britain
could take part in it.
Everywhere, governments appear to have underestimated the degree of
deflation which the tough Maastricht Emu targets, together with high German
interest rates, would impose on European economies. The financial markets'
belief that these deflationary pressures would prove politically
unsustainable in the weaker currency countries has been the main factor
behind the ERM unrest.
Other misjudgments have been in the political sphere. Mr Mitterrand's
referendum gamble may by tomorrow night have blown up in his face. Compared
with the president's expectation three months ago of a sizeable Yes
majority, the best he can now hope for is a small margin in favour. That
would salvage the treaty. But, in a country which, with Germany, has been
the motor of European integration, such a grudging outcome would leave grave
doubts about whether the Community can maintain the drive forward.
The Danish government, presiding over an electorate habitually sceptical
about further integration, took another form of risk by holding an early
referendum in June. It chose not to wait for other countries to embark first
on the ratification trail.
The Danish No was spurred by a mixture of motives. Top of the list seems to
have been ordinary people's concerns about Community interference in their
lives - fears which are very similar to the worries expressed by many in
Britain.
Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the pro-Maastricht Danish foreign minister spent
the summer pondering why the Danes (by a small margin) turned the treaty
down. He believes he has now come up with an answer. 'The whole idea of
European co-operation has simply become too far removed from the daily lives
of our people. The Danes showed they were sick and tired of reading in the
newspapers or hearing on the radio every morning that new things had been
decided over their heads.'
Since Maastricht needs to be ratified by all 12 members, the Danish No
ensures that the treaty cannot become operational until next year, at least.
Even if it surmounts ratification hurdles elsewhere, the treaty will require
the blessing of another Danish referendum next spring.
Still more important than the legal quagmire it created, the Danish
rejection had a catalytic effect in spreading doubts elswhere. Crucially, it
suddenly became respectable in Germany for opponents of Emu to make public
their qualms about abandoning the D-Mark. The agonising over whether the
planned new European currency will be as stable as the D-Mark is likely to
be given a fresh public airing when parliamentary ratification starts in
Germany later this autumn.
Attempts to re-establish the ERM on a sound footing are unlikely to be
successful while the present strains and recriminations persist. For some
German critics, the writing is on the wall. Mr Hans Barbier, the economics
editor of the conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, yesterday signed
off a trenchant front-page article by declaring that the European Monetary
System was worthless. 'One should not be sad if (such systems) fall apart.'
With weaker currencies, led by sterling and the lira, now clearly detached
from the ERM's D-Mark-based 'hard core', the group of countries which could
participate in Emu has been reduced to no more than six: Germany, France,
the Benelux countries and, possibly, Denmark. If France votes No, even the
prospect of a slimmed-down Emu grouped around a Franco-German nucleus would
vanish.
One warning signal for the future has been the resurgence of national
antipathies. This week's articles in the British tabloid press about 'the
Bundesbank bullies' have been just one sign. Many Germans have been
irritated by the fears of German dominance which have played a large role -
in both the Yes and No camps - in the French referendum campaign.
Complaining about the anti-German overtones in France, Mr Rudolf Augstein,
the publisher of Germany's most important news magazine Der Spiegel, wrote,
perhaps somewhat drastically, this week: 'What worries us most is the fact
that the oft-proclaimed Franco-German friendship in practice hardly exists.'
If French voters - for whatever reason - ditch Maastricht tomorrow, the
Community will not suddenly lose its raison d'etre. In a speech in London on
September 7, Mr Major spelled out seven separate items on the Community's
agenda which would still require active attention even if the Maastricht
process failed: the single market, the EC budget, enlargement, links with
eastern Europe, the Gatt negotiations, and so on. If Maastricht is buried,
the Community would none the less need to make a giant effort to recover
from the shock. According to one maxim favoured by EC officials, the
Community is like a bicycle: the only way it can remain steady is by moving
forwards. This week, everyone's fear of toppling has suddenly intensified.
