FT  06 NOV 92 / Sugar goes ahead with plan to take Amstrad private
MR ALAN SUGAR, chairman and founder of Amstrad, the computer and satellite
equipment manufacturer, yesterday formally proposed to take the company
private again by buying back the 64 per cent of shares that he does not own
at 30p per share.
The Pounds 112.7m needed to fund the buy-out would be funnelled through
Amshold, a new holding company chaired by Mr Sugar. The money would come as
follows: Mr Sugar, a Pounds 19.5m loan; Amstrad, a Pounds 50m loan; and
Lloyds Bank, a Pounds 43.2m advance.
The share price is less than half the 80p at which he sold a 7.5 per cent
stake in the company in March 1991 to institutional investors. Amstrad
shares closed 1p up at 29p.
The announcement was greeted by the group's institutional investors with a
mixture of suspicion and resignation.
'There is always a lot of suspicion when listed companies are taken private
by their management,' said one investor who voiced concern that Amstrad did
not have any independent non-executive directors on its board.
Mr Sugar said yesterday that shareholders were unlikely to receive a better
deal. Since his preliminary announcement in September, there has been no
other bid on offer.
'The sceptics think that I am being opportunistic and trying to get
something for nothing,' Mr Sugar said.
But 'there is a lot of necessary action that has to be taken with regard to
Amstrad'.
Whether shareholders agreed to the buy-out or not, Amstrad would have to
shrink, which meant small profits for an unforeseeable future.
In response to criticism that he was buying back shares at a much lower
price than he had sold them last year, he said shareholders saw strong rises
in Amstrad shares immediately after he sold shares in 1983, 1985 and 1987.
'On balance the winners have been the shareholders,' he said.
In a letter to shareholders Mr Sugar admitted Amstrad's mistakes. It had not
been able to come up with a hit product to follow its highly popular
low-priced personal computer.
At the same time, as the company grew on the strength of its success, it had
failed to adopt a coherent international strategy and management structures
and systems appropriate to its size.
