FT  08 SEP 92 / The French Referendum: Business leaders united behind
Maastricht - almost / Chairmen of France's two biggest private-sector
companies vote No
THE heads of France's top companies today launch their campaign for a Yes
vote in the September 20 referendum on European union, marred by divisions
in their top ranks.
They will issue a manifesto signed by 115 industrial leaders belonging to
the Institut de l'Entreprise, an influential think-tank of top managers.
They including such heavy hitters as Mr Antoine Riboud, chairman of the BSN
foods group, Mr Raymond Levy, the recently retired chairman of Renault, and
Mr Jean-Louis Beffa, head of glass and pipes maker Saint-Gobain.
However, the list will be notable for the absence of the chairmen of
France's two largest private-sector companies, the deeply anti-Maastricht Mr
Jacques Calvet, at the Peugeot car group, and Mr Pierre Suard of Alcatel
Alsthom, the engineering and telecommunications giant, a recent arrival in
the No camp.
Critics of Mr Calvet and Mr Suard claim the pair, both close to the
right-wing political opposition, are mavericks. Yet they do represent an
important minority in France's business community.
As evidence of the split among France's company directors, a mid-August poll
of senior managers by Louis-Harris showed only 59 per cent in favour of
Maastricht. Mr Francois Perigot, president of the Patronat employers'
association, was revealingly cautious on the treaty last week, saying that
he would vote in favour, but he would give no orders to company directors.
This split may come as a surprise to some of their competitors, who feel
French industry should have nothing to lose from Maastricht since France is
one of the only two European economies - the other is Luxembourg - able to
fulfil the stringent criteria for monetary union.
So what are the arguments? Both Mr Suard and Mr Calvet fear that the
treaty's free-market policies will throw Europe open to their industrial
competitors without obtaining anything in return, possibly killing some
struggling strategic sectors. They are not alone, for the need to defend
some kind of industrial policy still runs strong on both sides of politics,
even though state interventionism has broadly been on the retreat in France
for the past decade.
'In some sectors, like electronic components, it is too late. The
Community's free market policy is suicidal, notably in the face of the
Japanese,' explained Mr Suard in a survey of top managers' voting
intentions. Mr Calvet - who, ironically, was once an adviser to the
pro-European former French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing - believes
unbridled competition from outside Europe, coupled with the budgetary
rigours imposed on some governments, would drive unemployment even higher.
Mr Calvet, who also warns of domination by the Brussels bureaucracy, traces
the growth of liberal economic policies in the EC to Britain's entry into
the community in 1973. He voted against British entry at the time and sees
it as 'the beginning of the disappearance of the EC in favour of a vast,
neutered, free exchange zone', which will be reinforced by the treaty.
Among Yes voters in France's boardrooms, currency stability is the most
commonly cited advantage seen in the Maastricht plan. 'This will place us on
an equal footing with the Americans and give us the world's top currency,'
predicts Mr Jerome Monod, chairman of Lyonnaise-des-Eaux-Dumez, the water
distribution-to-construction conglomerate. Economic and monetary
independence is no longer possible, he argues, as shown by France's own
failed attempt at a go-it-alone economic relaunch in 1981, followed by a
decade's convergence of interest and inflation rates towards those of
Germany.
Mr Jean-Rene Fourtou, chairman of Rhone-Poulenc, the state-owned chemicals
giant, adds that Maastricht 'is also the creation of a monetary union
founded on especially healthy principles: the fight against inflation, a
limit on budget deficits and mastering state debts. For Rhone-Poulenc, these
signify. . . better clarity in management.'
However, Mr Fourtou is being careful not to campaign among his employees,
for fear of inflaming the No vote. 'As in public opinion, the discrediting
of (official) power worries company heads,' he says.
The treaty's main shortcoming is a 'blind submission to monetary ideology',
says another business leader in the Yes camp, Mr Bertrand Collomb, chairman
of cement maker Lafarge Coppee.
But he nevertheless supports monetary union because 'no company can make
long-term plans in an integrated economic area unless the risk of exchange
rate variations between countries is finally got rid of.'
The European Monetary System, as it is now, does not guarantee such
stability. Once the single market is in place, Mr Collomb believes EC
governments should seek a 'more subtle' economic policy than the market
liberalism in the treaty.
Despite the rifts at the top, the impression that French voters will be
offered today is that the business establishment is on balance in favour of
monetary and political union, for simple economic self-interest. This
no-nonsense message could help bolster the fragile majority in favour of
European union, given that much of the French public's hesitation over
Maastricht appears to be rooted in distrust of the political establishment,
which has taken the lead in the Yes campaign.
