FT  23 JUL 92 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (2): The challenge; speed
invention and curb costs - R&amp;D
PHARMACEUTICAL laboratories come in many shapes and sizes. Grandest of all
is the Pounds 500m research centre now under construction for Glaxo in
Stevenage, 30 miles north of London.
The Glaxo labs - said to be largest building project in the UK after the
Channel Tunnel - will house 1,400 researchers when they open in 1994.
Having so many scientists working together on one site gives them all access
to the best possible range of expensive up-to-date equipment. There is a
danger, however, that bureaucracy will smother the imaginative approach that
is essential for developing innovative drugs. Glaxo will try to overcome
this by clever research management, to make the scientists feel they are
working in small units.
The opposite school of thought - that research flourishes best in genuinely
small groups - is illustrated by Scotia Pharmaceuticals, an emerging UK
company which specialises in drugs based on essential fatty acids.
Scotia has no more than 170 employees altogether. Yet it carries out
research and development on six widely separated sites: at Callanish on the
Isle of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides, Dundee on the east coast of Scotland,
Carlisle in north-west England, Writtle in Essex, Guildford in Surrey and
Nova Scotia in Canada.
Dr Iain Law who is in charge of R&amp;D at Callanish - surely the most remote
pharmaceutical laboratory in Europe - says he keeps in good touch with the
other facilities through visits from colleagues and through the weekly notes
written by all Scotia R&amp;D managers and circulated around the company.
All pharmaceutical labs, whatever their size and location, face a common
challenge: how to restrain the soaring costs of R&amp;D and at the same time
speed up the discovery and development of new drugs.
According to data collected by the Centre for Medicines Research in the UK,
worldwide spending on pharmaceutical R&amp;D increased by an average of 16 per
cent a year during the 1980s. The global total reached Dollars 24bn in 1990;
15 per cent of pharmaceutical sales. Almost half of the industry's R&amp;D
expenditure is in Europe, 36 per cent in the US and 15 per cent in Japan.
Unfortunately the rapid rise in R&amp;D spending has not produced a
corresponding increase in the flow of new drugs onto the market. The number
of medicines launched during the early 1980s averaged about 60 per year.
During the three years 1989-91 it was close to 40 a year. The number of new
drugs originating in Europe has fallen over the decade from 30-40 a year to
10-20 a year.)
The total time taken to develop each new drug has increased steadily since
the 1960s. The clinical phase - testing the drug on human patients - doubled
during the 1980s to reach an average of seven years. Trials are taking
longer because regulatory authorities are requiring more and more clinical
data, while doctors and their patients are becoming more reluctant to take
part. Companies are having to spend more time and money to recruit the
hundreds or even thousands of people they require to test each drug.
The industry is responding in two main ways: lobbying the authorities to
reduce the regulatory burden, and operating its R&amp;D effort more efficiently.
One way to ease the regulatory burden is to harmonise requirements around
the world, so that companies do not have to repeat tests unnecessarily to
satisfy authorities in different countries. This is already happening within
Europe through the EC.
On a global level, the first international conference on harmonisation in
Brussels last November was an important step toward bringing the US, Japan
and Europe into line. It was agreed then, for example, that routine 12-month
toxicity tests on animals should be abandoned in favour of six-month
studies.
But much more needs to be done, particularly to harmonise clinical
requirements. Complete standardisation is unattainable because medical
practice and social conditions vary so much around the world. The ultimate
objective is to retain only those differences that can be justified by
rational criteria.
At the same time companies are trying to improve the productivity of their
researchers, particularly in the pre-clinical phase which they can control
more closely than clinical trials. They are investing heavily in new
technology - ranging from computerised chemical databases to molecular
modelling graphics and automatic gene sequencing machines - to help the
scientists select and adapt compounds more rapidly for drug development.
Besides introducing new technology, the industry is changing the way it
manages R&amp;D. A good UK example is ICI Pharmaceuticals. 'We have redesigned
our approach to get the fastest possible answer to the question: Does the
drug behave in humans in the way we would predict from our laboratory
models?' says Dr Tom McKillop, technical director.
ICI is now consistently achieving its target of administering candidate
drugs to human volunteers within 14 months of their first synthesis - a
great improvement on the company's previous average performance of 30
months. At the same time, ICI is being much more ruthless in abandoning
compounds that do not live up to their initial promise. Dr McKillop says the
new regime is quite different to ICI's traditional approach which 'assumed
that every drug was going to succeed.'
