FT  15 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture (Week in the Markets): Precious
metals prices plunge
PLUNGING PRECIOUS metals prices gave market commentators an opportunity to
explore the racier reaches of their vocabularies this week.
'The bears have really got the bit between their teeth,' commented one
dealer as London gold and platinum prices fell by Dollars 8.10 and Dollars
16 a troy ounce respectively on Thursday. 'It came down so fast you would be
a mug to touch it,' said Mr Wiktor Bielski, analyst with Carr Kitkat &amp;
Aitken. In the aftermath the market looked 'horrible', he added, and Ms
Rhona O'Connell, of Williams de Broe, suggested that there were 'an awful
lot of shell-shocked people out there'. Mr Ted Arnold, metals specialist at
Merrill Lynch, seeing no strong buying on the horizon, thought Dollars 355
an ounce, a level last seen less than two weeks ago, 'now looks like the
Matterhorn'.
The pace of the decline slowed yesterday, though the technical correction
some traders had been hoping for failed to materialise. The 'bears', having
presumably let go of the bit, were still 'hovering' over the market, one
dealer told the Reuter news agency.
Gold's Dollars 2.80 fall on the day left the price at Dollars 335.45 an
ounce, down Dollars 15.50 on the week and only 256 cents above the 1992 low.
Contributing to the metal's weakness was a fall in the US Commodities
Research Bureau index, which is widely watched as an inflation indicator,
and Australian selling encouraged by the weakness of the Australian dollar.
But the main influence was the extreme weakness of the platinum market.
The platinum price slide began quietly enough with a Dollars 2.25 fall in
London on Monday to Dollars 375 an ounce. But the decline accelerated
overnight on the New York market, where the October futures position's
Dollars 8.30 fall to Dollars 370.30 an ounce broke a chart uptrend line.
Concern about sharp falls in equity values in Japan, the biggest buyer of
platinum, and improving hopes of the resumption of constitutional talks in
South Africa encouraged a continued bail-out by US investors as the week
progressed. As the South African hopes faded yesterday morning there were
suggestions that a pre-weekend rally was on the cards. But downtrend was too
firmly entrenched and New York platinum futures continued downwards. The
October position was at Dollars 343 an ounce in late trading, down Dollars
4.90 on the day and Dollars 35.60 on the week. In the afternoon the London
price had been fixed at Dollars 346.25 an ounce, down Dollars 31 on the
week.
The seasonal slackening in base metals demand during the northern hemisphere
summer was much in evidence at the London Metal Exchange this week. All
contracts except tin ended lower.
The sharpest fall was in lead, demand for which is generally slack at this
time of year as the replacement car battery market nears the low point of
its seasonal cycle. Cash lead closed yesterday at Pounds 329 a tonne, down
Pounds 5.50 on the day and Pounds 19.50 week.
The copper market dropped through the floor of its recent trading range in
mid-week but then found support at the equivalent of Dollars 2,480 a tonne
for three months metal. The three months price closed yesterday at Pounds
1,316.50 a tonne, down Pounds 10 on the week. In dollar terms the price was
Dollars 2,481 a tonne, down Dollars 31.50 on the week.
At the London Futures and Options Exchange cocoa and coffee prices were in
retreat. In the absence of a clear fundamental explanation traders
attributed cocoa's fall, which left the December delivery position Pounds 23
down at Pounds 644 a tonne, to bearish chart patterns and 'tired long
liquidation'.
London's robusta coffee market suffered by association with the New York
arabicas market, which came under pressure because of an over-supplied
situation that may be exacerbated by increased Colombian exports if reports
circulating this week prove correct.
In contrast, robusta supplies are tight, and London traders could find no
fundamental justification for this week's fall, which took the November
futures position to Dollars 723 a tonne, down Dollars 40 on balance.
In New York both cotton and orange juice prices were pushed to
life-of-contract lows during the week. Cotton was depressed by an estimate
in a US Department of Agriculture crop report that world production was
significantly higher than the trade had thought at about 16.5m bales. Orange
juice's weakness was influenced by reports of a big and early Brazilian
orange harvest and prospects of a bumper Florida crop.
 -----------------------------------------------
LME WAREHOUSE STOCKS
(As at Thursday's close)
tonnes
 -----------------------------------------------
Aluminium     +200   to   1,314,425
Copper      +1,750   to     251,350
Lead          +275   to     150,625
Nickel        +648   to      40,968
Zinc          +850   to     345,125
Tin           -110   to      14,635
 -----------------------------------------------
