FT  19 NOV 92 / Technology: Satellite patrol goes on farm alert
While European and US trade negotiators fight over oilseed subsidies, EC
officials are seeking to tackle a less controversial but highly practical
problem - how to police the subsidy payments made to farmers.
At the moment, claims are monitored by officials trudging around to check
that farmers are growing what they say they are. This is a daunting task,
since the EC grows more than 12m tonnes of subsidised oilseed. The problem
is about to be compounded by the introduction of 'set-aside' schemes under
which payments will be made for land taken out of production.
But a new weapon is now being used in the struggle to catch those farmers
who might try to wriggle round the rules - the satellite. Earlier this year,
the EC set up several projects to investigate the technical feasibility of
using remote sensing by satellite to verify subsidy claims.
From 1993, farmers will be able to claim subsidies for taking 15 per cent of
their arable land out of production in a scheme set up as part of the reform
of the Common Agriculture Policy. Although the scheme is voluntary, the
terms are such that most cereal growers are expected to participate.
In the UK, the pilot projects to monitor oilseed crops and set-aside land
are being carried out by the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) in
Farnborough in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food, responsible for processing UK claims.
The study involves the comparison of images of the land surface obtained by
the US Landsat and European Spot satellites with subsidy applications
received by the ministry. The NRSC receives the digitised satellite images
on computer tapes and these are fed into an image processing system which
produces the familiar satellite pictures of the ground.
Project staff at NRSC outline the fields which farmers say are set aside or
under oilseed on large-scale Ordnance Survey maps. These are then digitised
on to the NRSC's geographical information system.
A template of individual farms highlights the fields for which farmers are
claiming subsidies. The system also relates the co-ordinates of the farm to
the much larger area of the satellite image (each Landsat image covers 185
square kilometres and each Spot image 60 sq km) and overlays the template
exactly.
Bright yellow fields of oilseed rape in flower have become a familiar - and
some say jarring - sight in the UK. The satellite images are taken in the
infra-red part of the spectrum, so oilseed rape shows up as white rather
than yellow.
Set-aside land is more difficult to identify because the rules only specify
that the fields must have green cover. This could be confused with other
crops or pasture, and so interpreting the infra-red satellite images
requires trained analysts.
'There are a number of crops you can have in set-aside and the type of image
you get is a function of the time of year; for example, most cereal crops
show up as blue when they are young,' says Duncan Jenkins, project director.
The level of detail shown on the images does allow one green crop to be
distinguished from another by its structure. For example, a field of
sprouting green wheat looks different from a leafy cover such as clover.
Debbie Hindley, the project's applications specialist, says: 'We know from
the information supplied by the ministry which field we should be looking
at. To confirm that a claim is valid, we don't actually have to identify
each crop from its satellite picture.'
No one will be accused of making a fraudulent claim solely on the basis of
remote sensing. 'The aim is to throw up queries which will then be checked
on the ground,' says a ministry spokesman. But knowing that satellite checks
are possible will be a strong deterrent.
