FT  12 NOV 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Conga drums to
Christmas trees - Nikki Tait on the proliferation of US mail-order
catalogues
Fancy sending your in-laws a glockenspiel for Christmas? Or a glow-in-rain
umbrella? Or perhaps some 'dream-catcher' earrings? Then heaven forbid that
you should trudge the high streets and shopping centres in search of such
perfect presents. The US catalogue industry, reaching new heights of
inventiveness, would be happy to oblige.
The outpouring of glossy retail catalogues ahead of the holiday season in
the US is hard for non-residents to visualise. Officially, the industry
calculates that around 8,000-10,000 catalogues are in circulation, but the
unsolicited pile amassed by one Manhattanite over the past two months makes
the point more vividly. It is nine inches high, weighs 15 pounds and is
still growing.
In part, the popularity of mail order reflects North America's multitudinous
geography, with the result that postal shopping has long been more deeply
engrained in a US consumer's psyche than a European counterpart's.
Nevertheless, the industry's dimensions are still sometimes overlooked.
Today, around 96m people - almost half the nation's population - are
reckoned to do some shopping by catalogue and, according to the Direct
Marketing Association, they spent around Dollars 48.8bn (Pounds 32.3bn) in
the process last year, up from Dollars 35.7bn in 1987. But even catalogue
retailers are battling against a tougher economic climate. Consultants at
Deloitte &amp; Touche, for example, calculate that total catalogue sales were
increasing, year-on-year, at double-digit rates during the late-1980s. In
1990 and 1991, the annual growth rate suddenly plunged to around 6 per cent,
where it is forecast to remain for the rest of the 1990s.
Admittedly, this means that the catalogue sector is still faring better than
the retail sector overall, where turnover was essentially flat last year.
But it has come down to earth with a bump.
For consumers, this tougher trading environment has been largely beneficial.
As the battle for shoppers' dollars has intensified, retailers have stepped
up their marketing efforts, particularly in the holiday season when some
catalogue operators can land up to two-thirds of their annual sales.
Price-based promotional activity is an important element in this new game.
Last year, for example, a number of catalogue retailers offered discounts
ranging between 15 and 40 per cent if goods were ordered within a specific
period or before a certain date.
This year, even the classy Neiman Marcus 'Christmas Book' - as integral to
the holiday season as the Macy's Thanksgiving parade - makes concessions to
the recessionary climate. Four pages at the front of the catalogue are
devoted to gifts costing less than Dollars 25 and there are another four
pages of presents for less than Dollars 100.
But industry-watchers say that attention to price, while important, is only
part of the picture. 'Retailers are still hitting quite hard on price,'
comments Ginny Daly, at Daly Direct Marketing in Maryland. 'But what I've
really noticed this year is more emphasis on niche areas.'
There is no want of variation in the catalogues landing through US shoppers'
mail boxes. For example, a 'personics catalogue' - which allows customers to
make up personalised tapes from the wide selection of songs - jostles
alongside offerings from The Nature Company, where 'ultra-green' products
range from a seed-saving bird-feeder to fuzzy dinosaur Christmas tree
ornaments.
In the very best cases, these niche sales efforts gets combined with more
innovative sales techniques. For the past couple of years, 'Anyone can
Whistle', a small catalogue operation in upstate New York, has followed a
similar tack with tape cassettes. This operation is the brainchild of a
Woodstock-based manufacturer of wind-chimes, run by a trained percussionist.
The catalogue sells anything from conga drums to harmonica-filled Christmas
crackers - but the prize sales point is a free tape of the various
instruments in operation, neatly following the catalogue sequence.
Distribution is another area where improvements are coming thick and fast.
Already, rapid distribution services have transformed the sales
possibilities in certain markets.
Take flowers, for example - the most conventional of gifts, but usually
rendered unpredictable on delivery by the vagaries of a local florist. Now
Caylx and Corolla, a San Francisco-based catalogue operation born less than
four years ago, offers to ship direct from a couple of dozen growers to the
recipient's front-door.
The company's founder, Ruth Owades, admits that Federal Express, the largest
US express delivery company and responsible for nearly all the distribution,
is a key element to the formula.
Owades also acknowledges that ironing out packaging standards, delivery
constraints and acceptable pricing strategies was not easy. But today, for
under Dollars 40, you can have anything from nine stems of Christmas orchids
to a rosemary topiary tree.
Whether marketing wheezes turn into actual sales is another matter. Even the
hard-headed Owades, who sends out around 8m catalogues a year and claims to
implement the Christmas shopping for celebrities like David Frost, admits
that impressing the would-be shopper does not quite equate to securing his
or her custom. The art, she says wisely, is not how many catalogues
circulate, but how many orders they generate.
