FT  24 JUN 92 / Survey of Indonesia (15): A patchy record - Environment
Unlike Brazil or Malaysia, Indonesia has kept a low profile in international
environmental politics, but neither Jakarta nor the outside world can afford
to ignore the importance of the country's forests and seas for national
economic growth and for the global environment.
'Indonesia is probably the most important reservoir for biodiversity in
Asia,' says Ms Marty Fujita, director in Indonesia for the Nature
Conservancy organisation of the US. 'It's basically the Brazil of Asia.'
Indonesia, according to a draft biodiversity action plan for the country,
makes up 1.3 per cent of the earth's land surface but hosts 10 per cent of
its flowering plant species, 12 per cent of mammals, 16 per cent of reptiles
and amphibians, 17 per cent of birds and more than 35 per cent of fish
species. The human inhabitants of the archipelago use an astonishing 7,000
different kinds of fish as a source of protein, the report says.
Although the government has eschewed the confrontational tactics used by Dr
Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister of neighbouring Malaysia, in his
negotiations with foreign interlocutors, most Indonesians share his view
that economic development is more important than protecting the environment
for its own sake.
For Indonesians, therefore, the main question is not whether the country's
natural resources should be exploited, but whether the exploitation is
sustainable in the long term.
On paper, the situation does not look too bad. The export of timber products
is one of the country's largest foreign exchange earners and Indonesia has
already set aside a laudable 11 per cent of its territory for conservation
areas and has outlined an ambitious strategy which combines exploitation and
protection.
Of the total land area of 193m hectares, 144m ha are classified as forest,
of which 66m ha will be selectively logged, 48m ha will be preserved intact
and 30m ha is being removed to make way for agriculture, settlements and
industry.
Population growth is under control and the government has recently
established the environmental impact management agency (Bapedal) to enforce
environmental regulations which are in the process of being strengthened.
On the ground, however, Indonesia's environmental record is patchy at best
and its statistics questionable. Government agencies, even if they have the
will, lack the money and the manpower to enforce the law.
Two conflicts publicised by local pressure groups and reported in the
Indonesian press in the space of five days illustrate the problem. The first
concerned a government plan to convert a 35,000ha forest reserve in south
Kalimantan into a timber estate, instead of attempting to repair the damage,
on the grounds that it was already degraded. The second was about 4,000ha of
forest reserve in Bogor, Java, which had apparently been included in a
mining concession.
Across the country, mangrove swamps have been turned into prawn farms, coral
reefs have been dynamited and rivers have been polluted. Jakarta is
suffering from the sort of traffic congestion and air pollution now common
to several south-east Asian capitals.
The formation of the Indonesian Business Council for Sustainable Development
is regarded by some environmentalists as something of an empty gesture, and
the prompt naming of Mr Mohamad Hasan, a wealthy logging concessionaire and
associate of President Suharto, as one of the group's patrons, has only
reinforced that view.
Mr Emil Salim, State Minister of Population and Environment, believes
loggers are in a strong position 'because they are the number one foreign
exchange earner of Indonesia', but he rejects the suggestion that
businessmen such as Mr Hasan can bend the rules to suit them.
'That he has influence I agree,' Mr Salim said in an interview. 'That he
dictates policy I do not.'
Mr Salim points to water pollution control as evidence of the government's
seriousness in tackling environmental issues. Under the 'Prokasih'
programme, the government concentrated on industrial pollution of 25 rivers
in 11 provinces and agreed on effluent targets with thousands of companies.
After two years, 400 companies, some of them foreign, failed to meet the
requirements and were given a warning. Of those, about 50 continued to flout
their agreements and their names were published in the media. Court cases
against three companies were being prepared, Mr Salim said, and the
companies had asked for more time to comply.
Critics dismiss the whole process on the grounds that it is far too
accommodating towards polluting industries and sets only minimal
requirements. One Indonesian economist, asked whether companies were
becoming concerned about environmental pressures, replied bluntly: 'No.'
As in other developing countries, the environmental awareness of the urban
middle class is several steps ahead of the government's willingness or
ability to enforce adequate environmental controls. 'You notice it in
letters to the press,' says Mr Salim. 'People are more conscious, even
common people. If there is pollution, sometimes they raise hell.'
Indonesians and foreigners alike agree that 'sustainable development' is the
desired goal but it will take time to bridge the gap between Indonesian and
foreign interpretations of what is actually taking place at the moment.
Few outsiders would agree that Indonesian forests are being sustainably
logged and the World Bank has recommended the payment of higher fees by
concessionaires, the granting of concession terms longer than 20 years and
closer to the 35-year cutting cycle so that loggers have an incentive to
manage the forests prudently, and the introduction of interest-bearing
performance bonds to ensure the application of sustainable forest management
practices.
According to some environmentalists, Indonesia's growth rate of 6.7 per cent
in 1991 would be a mere 2.5 to 3 per cent if the depletion of the country's
natural resources were taken into account. But even if one accepts the
validity of such calculations, the difficulty for outsiders is that most
Indonesians, like the Thais before them, would say that economic growth
makes the depletion more than worthwhile.
