FT  08 OCT 92 / German doubts grow about single currency: Gap widens between
business and politicians over benefits of European monetary union
GERMAN business managers, unlike their national representatives, are
becoming increasingly sceptical about the advantages of a single European
currency, according to a new opinion survey.
Only 40 per cent of German enterprises questioned by the Ifo economic
research institute are now in favour of such a currency, compared with 60
per cent three years ago.
However, a growing number believe that it will be introduced for political
reasons, in spite of the apparent opposition of the business sector.
The results of the survey coincided with remarks from Mr Hilmar Kopper, the
chief executive of Deutsche Bank, suggesting that the EC should set its
sights on establishing a 'lean' monetary union, excluding some member states
until they meet entry conditions.
Mr Kopper said economic reason dictated that the formal deadline for
currency union - 1999 at the latest - could not be met. At the same time the
EC should re-examine plans for an automatic shift to a single currency later
this decade. Only three members, excluding Germany, so far met the
convergence criteria set down in the Maastricht treaty, he said.
German concerns about the pace and nature of monetary union coincided with a
new broadside at the unnecessary regulations emanating from Brussels,
published by the German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (DIHT), in support
of the campaign for greater 'subsidiarity' - or devolution of
decision-making - in the EC.
The DIHT singled out a series of directives from Brussels, such as the
package tour directive, the directive on time-share contracts, and the
European Commission recommendation on the regulation of insurance brokers
where it says regulation should be done at the national level.
The scepticism and criticism comes only two days after the leaders of German
industry publicly backed Chancellor Helmut Kohl in his ambition to press
ahead urgently with ratification of the Maastricht treaty, underlining the
obvious division between German public opinion and the Bonn establishment.
The Ifo survey shows that no less than 80 per cent of the businessmen
questioned believe that the treaty requires improvement. Of those, 7 per
cent want improvements in the provisions for political union, 24 per cent
economic and monetary union and 69 per cent want improvements in both parts
of the document.
The proportion who believe that 'our hard D-Mark cannot be replaced by
anything else' has risen from 35 to 49 per cent over three years. However,
there is a marginal fall - from 80 to 76 per cent - in the number who
believe that a European currency would be less stable than the D-Mark.
The Ifo researchers say German businessmen have always been more sceptical
about the advantages of the single currency than their EC partners.
Four-fifths of them already denominate all their cross-border trade in
D-Marks, and therefore do not suffer from exchange rate risks.
The DIHT insists rapid ratification of Maastricht is still most desirable.
But it backs the campaign for more subsidiarity.
