FT  05 SEP 92 / NHS managers' wage bill soars
MRS Virginia Bottomley, the health secretary, yesterday defended increases
of more than 900 per cent in salary costs of National Health Service
managers over the past five years.
Critics of the government argued that the increases proved NHS reforms were
adding to costs rather than directing resources to patient care.
Department of Health statistics show that general managers' salary costs
rose from Pounds 25.6m in 1987 to Pounds 251.4m last year. This is a much
sharper rise than for other groups of NHS employees - the medical staff
salary bill rose by about 50 per cent over the same period.
Mrs Bottomley said that for every Pounds 1 spent on managers the NHS spent
Pounds 43 on health professionals, and that compared with other
organisations the service was still 'relatively light' on managers. But, she
said, it needed good managers, and the employment of more managerial staff
had led to cuts in waiting lists.
The Institute of Health Services Management, which represents the managers,
said general management costs represented only 2.2 per cent of the NHS wage
bill.
The NHS did not begin introducing a conventional management structure until
the mid 1980s, and there are now far more staff in managerial grades. The
number of people classified as general and senior managers rose from 700 in
1987 to more than 13,000 last year.
The bulk of the sharp rise in the managerial salaries bill took place in
1990 and 1991 - the period in which the government's health reforms were
being introduced.
Some of the increase undoubtedly represents the more competitive market
salaries being offered by trust hospitals and health authorities to attract
chief executives, finance directors and other senior staff. Health
department officials say, however, that most of the rise can be accounted
for by existing NHS staff - such as nurses with managerial responsibilities
 -being transfered to the management payroll.
Mr David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, said it was an 'absolute
disgrace' that the commercialisation of the health service was leading to
public money being spent on higher salaries for senior managers rather than
on the care of patients.
Nupe, the public service union, said paperwork had 'multiplied
several-fold'.
