FT  15 APR 92 / UN spurns Tripoli's offer of Malta trial
LIBYA faces worldwide sanctions today, after the United Nations last night
brushed aside Tripoli's offer to put the two alleged Lockerbie bombers on
trial in Malta.
The 15-member UN Security Council rejected a Moroccan request in private
consultations in New York to delay sanctions to consider the Libyan offer.
The UN resolve set the stage for punitive measures, including an arms and
air embargo, against the North African state.
Sir David Hannay, Britain's ambassador to the UN, said sanctions would go
ahead unless Libya made a last-minute decision to comply fully with UN
demands  - which he considered 'extraordinarily unlikely'.
The UN wants the two men  - accused of blowing up the Pan Am jet over
Lockerbie in Scotland in 1988 with the loss of 270 lives  - surrendered for
trial in Britain or the US.
Malta said yesterday it would agree to Libya's request to put the men on
trial, provided all parties agreed to this.
But Sir David Hannay said Libya's proposal 'posed a condition which is
unacceptable to our governments, which is that the trial can only,
exclusively, take place in Malta'.
Earlier yesterday the International Court in The Hague rejected Libya's plea
to bar the US and Britain from taking punitive measures.
The court said Security Council Resolution 748 imposing sanctions should
override all other international agreements. President George Bush said this
was 'a very good decision'.
Libya defiantly isolated itself from the world yesterday by declaring a 'day
of mourning' and cutting external air and telecommunications links. The
national news agency Jana said this had nothing to do with sanctions but was
a mark of respect for 37 Libyans who died in US bombing raids in April 1986.
Most Arab states have indicated that they would reluctantly agree to fall
into line with the UN air embargo, although both Egypt and Tunisia are
planning to facilitate travel across their frontiers with Libya.
EgyptAir and Libyan Arab Airlines have agreed to begin shuttle services to
airstrips on each side of the Egypt-Libya border. Tunisia is making similar
arrangements.
Some 30 offices of Libyan Arab Airlines are expected to be closed worldwide
and Libyan diplomatic representation will be thinned out under the terms of
the UN resolution. The sanctions will not affect Libyan oil exports or
shipping services.
