FT  21 AUG 92 / Technology: Hands up for chiral - What oranges and lemons
are telling chemists about new drugs
What makes lemons smell different from oranges and caroway taste different
from spearmint? What gave thalidomide its tragic side-effects?
The answer is asymmetry. Most natural molecules can exist in two
mirror-image forms, like left and right hands, which may have very different
effects on the body.
Now chemical and pharmaceutical manufacturers are learning to do something
that nature has always done: make pure right-handed or left-handed molecules
 -called chiral isomers, after the Greek word for hand.
Chiral manufacturing is one of the fastest growing fields of industrial
chemistry. Pharmaceutical and agrochemical companies are switching from
traditional synthesis, which gives 50:50 mixtures of mirror-image molecules,
and making instead the pure isomer that works best as a drug or pesticide.
Almost all biological processes are chiral. A living cell normally responds
to only one isomer, just as a glove is designed to fit on either the left or
the right hand. Producers of flavours and fragrances have long known that
the distinction between mirror images is critical: for example R-limonene
smells of orange and its mirror image, S-limonene, smells of lemon.
Yet most of today's best-selling drugs are made and sold as a mixture of two
isomers. Often one is active and the other neutral. Occasionally the
unwanted isomer can cause harmful side-effects. The most tragic case was
thalidomide: one isomer was a tranquilliser and - as scientists discovered
too late - the other produced birth defects.
Chemists have distinguished between chiral isomers since the last century
but techniques are only now becoming available to apply the knowledge on a
large scale.
Pharmaceutical regulators, notably the US Food and Drug Administration, are
encouraging the industry to develop new drugs as single isomers, and some
companies are preparing to relaunch established drugs as one isomer. For
instance Boots of the UK is to make pure left-handed S-ibuprofen, the active
form of the painkiller ibuprofen which is now produced as a mixture with
inactive R-ibuprofen.
Sometimes two isomers of one molecule may produce different therapeutic
benefits. A good example is verapamil, a 'calcium-channel blocker' marketed
by Knoll, pharmaceutical subsidiary of the German chemical group BASF. The
drug's activity, which makes it a useful treatment for high blood pressure
and angina, is caused predominantly by the left-handed isomer L-verapamil.
Verapamil also has a powerful effect on reducing the drug resistance which
often develops in cancer patients during chemotherapy. The calcium-channel
blocking activity, which has until now limited the use of verapamil in
chemotherapy, is much lower in the right-handed isomer. Pure R-verapamil is
a promising compound for treating various types of tumour and is currently
undergoing clinical trials.
Switching to a single isomer can rejuvenate the commercial life of an old
drug, says Andy Richards, commercial director of Chiros, a Cambridge company
specialising in chiral chemistry. He estimates that 50 to 80 drugs -
approaching the end of their patent protection - are good potential targets
for a switch. The cost of developing a single isomer from a mixture ranges
from Dollars 2m to Dollars 15m, while the payback in additional sales is
projected to be Dollars 20m to Dollars 200m a year.
Pharmaceuticals are the most valuable application of chirality. Pure isomers
of synthetic chiral compounds represent about 5 per cent of drugs on the
market and 40 per cent of drugs in development. Sales of the 'chiral
intermediates' required to manufacture them are worth more than Dollars 500m
a year now, according to industry estimates, and could grow five-fold over
the next decade.
Agrochemicals are the second-largest user of chiral chemicals. Other
important applications are in flavours and fragrances and in electronics
(liquid crystal displays depend on the ability of chiral compounds to twist
polarised light).
The agrochemical industry faces environmental pressure to switch from
mixtures to single active isomers. This immediately halves the amount of
pesticide that farmers need to spray on their fields.
ICI of the UK has led the production of pure chiral agrochemicals. Its
subsidiary ICI Fine Chemicals is making 1,200 tonnes a year of
S-chloropropanoic acid (S-CPA), an intermediate which can be used to produce
pure isomers of several important herbicides. Some goes to ICI Agrochemicals
but most is sold to competitors.
The key to the process is an enzyme which ICI produces from genetically
engineered bacteria. When the enzyme is applied to a mixture of CPA isomers,
it specifically converts right-handed R-CPA, to lactic acid. That leaves
behind the S-CPA which is needed for herbicide production.
Natural enzymes are a favourite tool of chiral synthesis because they
distinguish between mirror images, whereas conventional chemical synthesis
produces both in equal amounts. For example, ICI Fine Chemicals has
identified 20 to 30 enzymes that could be used to reduce ketones to chiral
alcohols - an important step in pharmaceutical synthesis.
Several start-up companies specialise in chiral chemistry, making
intermediates and working with pharmaceutical groups to develop new
compounds. They include Chiros and Oxford Asymmetry in the UK and Sepracor
and Celgene in the US.
Oxford Asymmetry focuses on chemical methods of chiral synthesis, rather
than the enzymatic or biological techniques favoured by most others. Steve
Davis, research director, has developed an ingenious series of small
molecules (which he calls chiral auxiliaries) for use in building up chiral
compounds 'like a piece of molecular scaffolding.'
Sepracor, based in Massachusetts, is systematically developing single isomer
versions of drugs currently sold as mixtures. It has filed patent
applications for more than 40, including Glaxo's recently introduced Zofran
(anti-emetic) and Serevent (anti-asthma), and was recently awarded its first
important US patent - for the left-handed version of Eli Lilly's best
selling anti-depressant Prozac. That could leave Sepracor in a strong
commercial position after Lilly's original Prozac patent runs out in 2001.
