FT  03 NOV 92 / Survey of Oil and Gas Industry (6): North Sea mid-life
crisis - Britain's offshore activity has passed its peak
SOME say the North Sea oil industry is suffering a mid-life crisis from
which it will soon recover; others that it has begun a terminal decline.
The signals are, admittedly, confusing. Events such as the lay-off of 1,300
workers at McDermott Scotland's construction yard near Inverness have hit
the headlines, along with warnings of further redundancies amid gloomy
forecasts of workloads for UK yards over the next two years. MPs and some
oil companies have called, unsuccessfully, for a change in the North Sea tax
regime to bring forward new developments.
Mr David Bramley of consultants Arthur D Little says the likely lack of
interest in this year's 14th UK licensing round could be something of a
watershed in the evolution of the North Sea, marking its transition into a
mature and ultimately declining production area.
On a more positive note, two surveys in August forecast a bright future.
Grampian Region Council's Update of Oil and Gas Prospects said the North Sea
would see substantial activity and production for at least 25 years, even
though overall levels of employment might fall. More than 90 new fields were
likely to be developed in that time, 15 in the next two and a half years.
Arthur Anderson Petroleum Services predicted capital spending in the North
Sea in the next three years would be almost Pounds 18bn, 55 per cent more
than in the previous three years. Oil production was predicted to reach
another peak of between 2.5m and 2.8m barrels a day by 1995.
Gas production was seen rising steadily from 5.1bn cubic feet a day to 9.2bn
cubic feet a day by the end of the century, when it would account for 45 per
cent of offshore output.
An earlier survey by County NatWest WoodMac identified 57 probable
developments already on the books, with recoverable reserves of 2.3bn
barrels of oil and 14,300bn cubic feet of gas.
Oil companies, too, claim to be positive about the North Sea. Mr Chris
Gibson-Smith, chief executive, Europe, of BP Exploration, told a Financial
Times conference on the future of the North Sea earlier this year that he
believed it would have 'at least two decades more of active life'. The
majors stress that it will continue to be a mainstay of their programme
despite their moves into frontier areas.
They say the North Sea is a known quantity, with a stable political
situation and a tax regime that has been relatively supportive of new
developments and of exploration investment. It also benefits from a
highly-developed infrastructure.
These advantages contrast with the political risks, the lack of
infrastructure, and the local hazards - ranging from bandits in Colombia to
unexploded mines in Vietnam - they confront in frontier regions.
But there is no doubt the nature of the North Sea is changing. While most
industry experts believe there are at least 10bn barrels of oil yet to be
discovered, the average size of new field discoveries has declined
dramatically from the 2bn-barrel giants of the early 1970s to 50m barrels or
less today.
'It is the same for all exploration provinces in the world,' says Mr Harold
Hughes, director-general of the UK Offshore Operators Association. 'You find
the big ones first, but then you are down to the needle in a haystack
variety.'
In a climate of low oil prices, many new fields are on the fringes of
economic viability. To develop them will call for important changes in oil
companies' working methods to cut costs - which have increased considerably
in recent years - from the exploration stage right through to production.
This may explain the slight uncertainty that hangs over the industry. Mr
Gibson-Smith said he thought the oil industry had 'not yet completed the
process of adjustment to marginal economics and sector maturity. Much of the
recent activity has been a function of earlier expectations and decisions.'
Operators are, however, starting to adapt.
They are already making use of recent advances in technology that should
make development of presently marginal fields possible in the future.
At the exploration stage, this means increasing use of three-dimensional
seismic surveys to produce more accurate geological models of oil and gas
structures than has ever been possible before and increase the effectiveness
of both appraisal and development drilling.
More precise information also aids the effective use of another
technological development: horizontal drilling. A single horizontal well can
be many times as effective as a traditional vertical well, and in itself can
make the difference between a field being economic or uneconomic to develop.
There are other ways in which field developments will change. The days of
giant platforms with 200-strong crews - and of several manned platforms
exploiting the same field - are numbered.
Shell/Esso's Gannet field development, 112 miles east of Aberdeen, is a good
example. Three subsea satellites, instead of the three separate platforms
originally envisaged, are tied back to a single large deck capable of
processing 50,000 barrels of oil and 180m cubic feet of gas a day but with
an operational crew of only 20 people.
Shell is also de-manning all but three of its 17 platforms in the southern
gas basin. On the Leman field, the North Sea's first producing gas field
launched in 1967, the number of crew living offshore will be halved by 1996,
with gas processing moved from satellite platforms to central compression
complexes.
Mr Chris Fay, managing director of Shell Expro, has said such changes in
practice meant Shell was likely to cut about 4,700 offshore and onshore jobs
by the end of the decade.
In addition to subsea satellites and unmanned platforms, the industry is
expected to make more use of floating production facilities. Amerada Hess
has led the way with its Angus development, a field of less than 10m barrels
being exploited through the Petrojarl, a specially-modified floating
production, storage and offloading vessel.
Mr Sam Laidlaw has a vision of floating production vessels criss-crossing
the North Sea by the end of the decade, being reused on different fields.
Independents Kerr McGee, Clyde, Santa Fe and Aran recently purchased the
ship-shaped Tentech floating production vessel with which they hope to
develop the 100m-barrel Gryphon field in under a year. Many independents
believe the changing nature of the North Sea makes it less attractive to the
majors, while they can benefit by taking more flexible and innovative
approaches.
At the same time, however, the era of custom-designed platforms - which,
industry insiders admit, were sometimes over-designed - is coming to an end.
More standardisation and streamlining of platforms and equipment will be
necessary to cut costs.
Working practices and inter-company attitudes will also have to change to
bring costs down, analysts say. In what could prove a model agreement, eight
companies with interests in six adjacent blocks in the Clair area - Amoco,
BP, Chevron, Conoco, Elf, Enterprise, Esso, and Mobil - agreed last year to
drill appraisal wells and carry out future work on a joint basis.
Mr Bramley of Arthur D Little says companies are becoming more willing to
talk to one another and share information, and have been cooperating in
benchmarking exercises to compare their costs.
However, despite the overall decline in field sizes, some believe the days
of the giant discoveries may not be entirely over. There is still the
possibility, says Mr Sam Laidlaw, of 'looking for a needle in a haystack and
finding the farmer's daughter'.
