FT  04 SEP 92 / Management: Second opinions on health reform - Keeping up
the pressure for change in Britain's NHS is not proving easy
The great reform in Britain's National Health Service, designed to stimulate
efficiency through internal competition, is doomed to collapse within the
next four years into cosy, bureaucratic arrangements that militate against
change.
That will, at least, be the case if a simulation exercise played by health
professionals in the NHS's East Anglian region proves correct. The exercise
found that close links soon developed between health authorities and
particular hospitals, with the attractions of familiarity and the status quo
proving stronger than the competitive opportunities of playing the market.
Having won the fight for the reforms against political opposition and
introduced them in an initially sceptical NHS, ministers recognise that they
still have to maintain the momentum for change. Even if the East Anglian
exercise does not prove an exact portent of the future, keeping alive the
spirit, as opposed to the mechanics, of the changes may not be easy.
The separation of healthcare purchasing from its supply - the
purchaser-provider split - has been achieved. But contracts between
purchasers and providers are negotiated by managers who, until last year,
were colleagues in the old-style NHS. They share the same origins and
culture, and in some cases, the same offices. In many parts of the country,
there is only one local hospital with a natural catchment population.
In spite of the fury that accompanied the introduction of the reforms,
perhaps not so much has changed after all. Although the financial structure
is different, real competition does not always seem to be the driving force.
The possibility of the reforms simply replacing one bureaucratic structure
with another is not only exposed by the East Anglian simulation; some
academic research points to the same conclusion. A study by Bristol
University school for advanced urban studies found that the NHS market
structure, far from being competitive, was 'closer to a bilateral monopoly,
with a single purchaser and at best a few providers'.
The school's Julian Le Grand recently told the Social Policy Association
conference that the extent of competition would depend on the willingness of
patients to accept treatment at more distant hospitals. But a study
conducted in Sheffield suggested that 38 per cent of patients were not
prepared to travel at all, while another 36 per cent were willing to journey
no more than 10 miles for treatment.
If patients cannot be relied upon to contribute to competitive pressures on
the NHS, it becomes all the more important that the service has a management
structure which offers the best chance of achieving the intentions of the
reforms.
So far, the most evident management changes have been in the hospitals,
where doctors are becoming more involved in managerial decisions and
managers of self-governing trusts enjoy decision-making autonomy unknown
before last year.
But the NHS's bureaucratic structure - based on district health authorities,
regional health authorities and a central management executive reporting to
an NHS board and ministers - remains as it was before the reforms. Some of
this is about to change.
A working group of the NHS executive is examining the management structure
and will report to Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, soon. Bottomley has
warned that the service must not 'slip back into the old ways of monolithic,
oppressive over-planning'. Andrew Foster, NHS deputy chief executive, says a
solution based on modern management approaches points to a lean structure at
central and intermediate levels.
The 14 English regional health authorities are unlikely to emerge from the
review in their present form. Once responsible for running region-wide
services as well as allocating funds to district authorities, they look
increasingly vulnerable now that services are based on a direct relationship
between districts and hospitals. With most hospitals and other services
likely to become self-governing trusts by the middle of the decade, some
form of management structure between trusts and Whitehall needs to be
retained. But trust managers fear that giving this responsibility to the
present regional authorities would be to nudge the service back towards the
monolithic over-planning feared by Bottomley.
John Greetham, chairman of St James's University Hospital, Leeds, and of the
NHS Trust Federation which represents managements of self-governing trusts,
believes regions should be replaced by a smaller number of scaled-down
bodies. He argues that there also needs to be a new approach to the
allocation of capital to maintain the dynamic of the reforms.
'In the old-style NHS, regions allocated capital. They did this on the basis
of a strategic over-view, nepotism, special pleading and political
pressures. You are bound to get bureaucratic and political fudging if an
organisation distributes capital like this.'
Greetham believes the way forward is to allow rival trust hospitals to bid
for new, region-wide capital projects on a competitive basis. 'Competitive
bidding would encourage trusts to devise more imaginative and cost-effective
ways of meeting needs. This would not always be by putting up new buildings
 -it could be a high-technology mobile unit serving several hospitals.'
On the purchaser side, Charles Marshall, general manager of Newcastle health
authority - a job he will soon be leaving to run London's Middlesex and
University College Hospitals - agrees that in the past, funding priorities
have too often been set by powerful, established hospitals. The reforms
shift this power towards purchasing authorities, and many are beginning to
involve the public in discussions about priorities.
Newcastle has set up user groups from among patients to help determine
priorities, although Marshall stresses that 'we must listen to the public
but are paid as managers to take difficult resource decisions'. Health
authority managers must make these decisions, aware that they are now
'advocates for the patient rather than defenders of particular hospitals'.
The reforms - introduced at speed because of political pressures - still
leave many uncertainties for managers. GP fund-holders, for example, are
favoured by ministers because their ability to purchase hospital treatment
on behalf of individual patients introduces genuine market-style choice into
the NHS.
Too many fund-holders exercising market-style choice, however, can unbalance
the equally pressing need for district health authorities like Marshall's to
plan health provision around agreed priorities. One solution, he suggests,
might be for groups of GP fund-holders to use the health authority as their
purchasing agent.
Another question for the future concerns whether it makes sense for district
health authorities and family health service authorities - which run the
family doctor and community services - to retain their separate identities.
In an innovative development in the NHS's Trent region, both sets of
authorities - while retaining separate identities by law - have decided to
blend their accounting, information and support services and will begin
appointing joint staff.
Restructuring the NHS's bureaucracy will never evoke the same passions as
the introduction of the reforms - or the uproar that will break out later
this year when the government faces decisions over whether to close famous
London hospitals.
If the warnings of the East Anglian simulation exercise are correct,
however, getting the shape of the management structure right may hold the
long-term key to whether the reforms meet their objectives.
