FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (2): Is aluminium
key to future? - New Materials
FROM next year a pioneering, Dollars 70m plant at Soest, near Dusseldorf in
Germany, will start supplying Audi, Volkswagen's prestige cars division,
with aluminium extrusions, castings and other components. These will be
turned into skeleton-like 'spaceframe' bodies for Audi's next-generation V8
saloon.
From then on, the world's motor industry is likely to start learning in
earnest just how serious a rival aluminium is likely to be for traditional
steels when it comes to the production of car bodies in anything other than
token volumes. Until now, aluminium has been used as the integral body
structure, almost exclusively for low volume and mainly expensive specialist
cars or racing cars, typified by Aston Martin or Honda's NSX. Alternatively,
it has been used as body cladding, in the form of unstressed panels, on
vehicles like the Land Rover.
The Soest plant, however, will have the capacity to produce spaceframe
components for up to 100,000 cars a year, with Audi as its first customer.
It is described by Mr Paul O'Neill, chairman of Aluminium Company of America
which is building it, as 'the single most significant programme Alcoa has
ever developed for, and with, the auto industry'.
Alcoa has spent ten years of joint research with Audi to develop the systems
and processes for what amounts to a new approach in vehicle body production,
and one expected to require, if not new forms of assembly plant systems and
techniques, then potentially considerably altered ones.
That Audi is able to contemplate such a programme at all is due to the
development, over the past decade, of new aluminium alloys, vacuum pressure
casting and extruding processes and robotic welding techniques. How well
they work in practice will determine whether Audi is right in its professed
belief that, with environmental concerns mounting, aluminium-bodied cars are
the way of the future, because of their light weight - and thus reduced
consumption of fuel - and the ability of aluminium to be totally recycled.
According to Audi design chiefs, the spaceframe body of the next V8 saloon
is likely to be up to 40 per cent lighter than its predecessor's steel body.
Alcoa's AIV (aluminium intensive vehicle) system has at its core the
production of a frame of extruded members making up the 'bones' of the
spaceframe, joined at nodes to aluminium castings and reinforced by
structural panels of aluminium, such as bulkheads, floor and inner wings.
Indications are that while adapted robotic welders will play their usual
role in joining the extrusions and castings, the structural panels will be
adhesive-bonded or mechanically fastened, perhaps both, to the spaceframe,
diminishing the role of multi-welders.
Other companies have been researching intensively the potential for bonding
instead of welding. The UK's Rover Group,formerly BL, and Aluminium Company
of Canada (Alcan), for example, developed jointly a volume manufacturing
process for aluminium-bodied cars which, in the mid-1980s, was originally
intended to become the next Metro.
The system involved the production of aluminium pressings from rolled sheet
and their joining together by a combination of spot welds - but many fewer
than on a conventional steel body - and toughened epoxy resin adhesive. As
Dr David Kewley, Rover's chief engineer, advanced technology and materials,
points out in a study, Towards the Aluminium Car, produced by the Aluminium
Extruders' Association, "it would have been the next Metro, but it was a
hell of a risk to take. We decided we would rather be an excellent second
with the technology than a mediocre first'.
Rover is unlikely now even to be second, having suspended its work on such
structures, as concerns about its privatisation and other preoccupations
changed the course of its history. But Alcan's work with other
manufacturers, including Volvo and General Motors, has continued. Indeed,
the aluminium industry increasingly is arguing that the fundamental auto
industry scene is shifting from one in which the aluminium companies have
had actively to promote their potential, to a demand-pull from the car
makers themselves. 'The auto companies are beating a path to our door",
according to Alcan's chairman, Mr David Morton.
With the Alcoa/Audi project, development of the spaceframe members has
required the creation of thin-wall die-casting techniques, as well as the
development of heat treatable alloys capable of withstanding the stresses
involved in a vehicle frame, including crash-worthiness.
Many obstacles still stand in the way of an early, wholesale substitution of
steel with aluminium in car bodies for the volume market - not least the
initial high cost of the material itself. If they are overcome on a large
scale, it will not necessarily be good news for that part of the
manufacturing industry which traditionally has supplied the dies and other
tooling for the several hundred pressings which typically make up the
monocoque bodies of current steel cars.
One of the attractions of the Alcoa project for Audi is that only about 100
individual parts are needed to make a spaceframe body, meaning fewer dies
and casting and thus sharply reduced tooling costs. Such developments have
prompted a recent study by consultancy group, Brook Hunt Associates, to
forecast that the use of aluminium for body parts will grow by more than
eight times between 1990 and and the end of the decade, to more than 100,000
tones a year. When other aluminium components, such as gearbox casings and
cylinder heads, are taken into account, it expects more than 1m tonnes a
year to be used in cars by 1997-98.
