FT  25 JUN 92 / Big cloud over tobacco: The US Supreme Court filters a layer
of smoke obscuring state liability laws
THE US Supreme Court ruling on smokers' lawsuits has hung, like an ominous
black cloud, over the tobacco industry for 15 months. Yesterday, it knew the
worst: the nine justices of the highest court in the US decided by 7:2 that
smokers can sue tobacco companies under state liability laws.
Despite the emotion surrounding smokers' suits, the Supreme Court was
dealing with a narrow, but fundamental, legal principle - the relationship
between state and federal laws in the US. Given the record of the judges it
was likely a majority would be loath to pre-empt the authority of the states
entirely.
The case on which the decision is based is Cipollene v. Liggett et al. Mrs
Rose Cipollene, a life-long smoker, sued three tobacco companies after
having a cancerous lung removed in 1983. She died in 1984, but the suit was
pursued by her husband and when he died, her family continued the fight.
The Cipollene case was remarkable among the raft of smokers' suits because
it progressed - at least briefly. In 1988, a Newark-based jury awarded Mr
Cipollone Dollars 400,000 on the grounds that the Liggett tobacco company
had misrepresented the risks of smoking in its advertisements for
Chesterfield and L&amp;M cigarettes. Although the jury found contributory
negligence on Mrs Cipollone's part, this was the first verdict requiring a
tobacco company to compensate the family of a smoker who had died of cancer.
Two years later, however, the award was overturned by a federal appeals
court. The court concluded that jurors had been allowed to consider Mrs
Cipollone's smoking habits after 1966 - when the federal law requiring
health warnings on cigarettes packets came into force - but not the tobacco
companies' post-1966 marketing practices.
This question of whether federally mandated warning labels protected tobacco
companies from personal injury claims under state liability laws came to
dominate the debate, with more contradictory rulings ensuing in other
courts.
With a fundamental judicial issue at stake, the Supreme Court agreed to
intervene in early 1991 - a move, incidentally, supported by both the
tobacco companies and the Cipollene plaintiffs.
But, for all the jubilation in the anti-smoking camp yesterday, it remains a
moot point how far the Supreme Court ruling will advance smokers' suits.
Only two justices - Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas - said they would bar
all suits under state liability laws, the other seven offered a range of
views on what type of claims are precluded by federal labelling law, and
which are not. This should provide the lawyers with plenty of grounds for
argument in the future.
Secondly, as the tobacco companies have noted all along, the ability to
bring state liability cases to court, does not automatically mean that they
will be won. The tobacco industry has mounted skillful defence tactics in
the past - and arguments such as contributory negligence will doubtless
resurface.
