FT  04 JUN 92 / Promise outweighs pain for hard-pressed Czechs: Anthony
Robinson previews the republic's election
FROM the grimy industrial town of Teplice, just 20km from the German border,
elections this weekend to the parliament of the Czech republic look like a
one-horse race.
Larger than life-size portraits of a sternly paternal Vaclav Klaus, federal
finance minister and leader of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), dominate
squares and billboards. The local ODS party offices, in the turret of a
heavily German-baroque mansion, are staffed with two paid officials and
equipped with computer terminals, fax machines and copiers.
Across town a battered red tin sign marks the closed campaign offices of the
communist party, led by Mr Jiri Svoboda. Next door a sign on the social
democrat office, in a similarly run-down block, says it keeps regular office
hours but is also closed.
The former Palace of Culture has been converted into the Palm Beach Disco,
and Czech and foreign cars line the streets. But there are complaints that
life has got harder and people less friendly since market reforms brought
higher prices, rising unemployment and unaccustomed insecurity.
Time after time, however, after complaining bitterly, people like Mrs Vera
Vachudova, with two small boys and a husband now self-employed after losing
his job, said they would vote for Mr Klaus as 'the man who will make things
better'.
In Prague and the other big towns and cities 'left-wing' parties such as the
communists and the social democrats led by Mr Walter Komarek are expected to
gain about 10 per cent of the vote each, reflecting historical allegiances
dating back to the pre-war republic. But if Teplice and the other smaller
industrial towns are any guide, voters in the Czech lands seem likely to
vote decisively in favour of persevering with the painful economic and
social changes which bring with them the promise of future prosperity and
re-integration into the community of Europe.
Czechs and Slovaks will be voting this weekend both for republican
parliaments and a new federal parliament. The results are being watched for
signs of a possible split between the two regions as Slovak politicians make
louder noises about breaking away from the federation.
Around Teplice, in the former Sudetenland, annexed by Hitler after the 1938
Munich agreement and forcibly cleared of ethnic Germans after the war, the
full ugliness of Soviet-style economic planning is clear.
The valleys are choked with fumes from hundreds of tall chimneys that have
reduced life expectancy to four years below the national average and killed
forests in the hills which mark the German borders. Once elegant city
centres have been allowed to crumble. Workers brought in to work in the
glass, cement, steel and engineering plants are housed in serried rows of
identical flats and the entire region is dotted with coal or lignite-fired
power stations surrounded by kilometre-long waste dumps.
Surrounded by the evidence of recent failure and past prosperity it is
difficult to detect nostalgia for the old regime or much interest in the
'third way' gradualism and mixed economy thinking espoused by Mr Komarek of
the social democrats.
Over the last two years the number of heavily laden trucks thundering past
the town to and from the German border, which also marks entry into the
wider EC market, has risen dramatically. One of the town's biggest
employers, Sklo-Union, the country's biggest glass company, was one of the
first state enterprise to form a joint venture with foreign investors. The
company, now 67 per cent owned by Glaverbell, a Belgian glass company
controlled by Asahi glass of Japan, has cut 1,500 jobs but invested heavily
and raised sales by 25 per cent.
Success stories such as this have made north and western Bohemia prime areas
for foreign, largely German, investment. For voters here, an election result
that reassures foreign investors and guarantees future prosperity appears to
be more important than the question of future relations with far-off
Slovakia.
In Prague, Mr Vladimir Dlouhy, the federal economics minister who heads the
Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA), expects to form a market reform orientated
coalition government with Mr Klaus's party and others after the elections.
He says that the crisis over Slovak demands for greater national sovereignty
is largely due to mistakes by Czech politicians.
'I think we would live better if we stayed together. But it would be better
to arrange a civilised divorce than an unworkable federation,' he argues in
a way which reflects a growing Czech willingness to contemplate a split
which public opinion polls show the majority of Czechs and Slovaks still
oppose.
