FT  30 MAY 92 / Bank backs taping of dealers' phone calls
THE BANK of England yesterday backed the practice of tape-recording
telephone calls made by dealers in some of the City's biggest financial
markets, but rejected a call from MPs to make it compulsory.
The Bank said yesterday it 'strongly recommends' taping, and it will require
banks and brokers that do not tape dealers' telephone calls to explain why.
Compulsory taping was urged by the Commons Treasury and Civil Service
committee last year after its investigation into how up to 35 local
authorities came to have about Pounds 88m deposited with Bank of Credit and
Commerce International at the time it was shut down last July.
The councils had deposited the money through money brokers, who act as
intermediaries in the wholesale financial markets. Some councils complained
that the brokers should have warned them about the risks of leaving their
cash with BCCI.
While investigating those claims, the MPs called for compulsory taping to
help prevent disputes about the terms on which deals are done. Taping is
common in fast-moving markets such as foreign exchange and derivatives, but
less common in the equity market and the wholesale money markets - through
which institutions such as banks and local authorities invest surplus cash.
The Bank said compulsory taping would go against the philosophy of its code
of conduct for the foreign exchange and wholesale deposit markets, which was
based on best practice rather than obligation. The cost might also be
prohibitive for some institutions, it said.
Under the Bank's code of conduct for brokers and others in the wholesale
financial markets, it is up to local authorities and others to satisfy
themselves about the credit-worthiness of institutions they deal with. The
MPs said that was not made clear enough, and urged that the code be
'rewritten more precisely so the current opportunities for misunderstanding
are removed'.
A revised code of conduct issued yesterday makes clear that local
authorities and other principals in the market are entirely responsible for
their own actions and cannot rely on brokers' views. The bank also said it
would distribute the code more widely, including to international users of
the London markets, as MPs had asked.
In a further change to its code, the Bank has warned brokers and banks to be
wary of companies using the foreign exchange markets to hide losses that
they would otherwise have to report to their shareholders. It was prompted
by concerns expressed by regulators in Japan, the US and Germany.
The abuse involves companies that have arranged a forward currency deal
extending the expiry date, so that any losses on deals are delayed until
after their balance-sheet date. Such 'window-dressing' allows them to hide
losses. Banks that are asked to extend expiry dates on deals - a practice
which is becoming increasingly common - should satisfy themselves about the
purpose, the Bank says.
