FT  02 APR 92 / Glaxo's head of French operations leaves company
GLAXO'S president of French operations, Mr Edwin Nathan, has left the
company, following a breakdown in relations between the British group and
the French government over the pricing of Imigran, its new migraine drug.
Glaxo refused to give reasons for his move. He was in charge of negotiations
with the French government for Imigran.
Last month, he told a French newspaper that in exchange for a high price for
Imigran, Glaxo would construct a FFr1bn (Pounds 100m) factory in France, set
up a research and development centre or co-market the drug with Sanofi, the
French pharmaceuticals group. Such deals are common in France though are not
normally referred to in public.
He told Les Echos, the French financial daily: 'The different ministers are
dragging out the negotiations, perhaps in order not to take risks before the
next elections.' He pointed out France was one of the last European
countries to license Imigran.
Two weeks later, the French government ordered an investigation into the
ethical, legal and medical acceptability of methods used by Glaxo to market
Imigran. It set up a commission to decide whether to ask the European
Commission to investigate possible abuse of market position.
French officials said they were concerned that Glaxo was generating public
pressure on the government to license the drug.
In particular, they were irritated by the number of articles about Imigran
in consumer magazines.
France traditionally has low pharmaceuticals prices, but has among the
largest per capita consumption of drugs in Europe. France spent 8.7 per cent
of its GNP last year on healthcare, the second highest spending in Europe
after Germany. Drugs represented 17.3 per cent of its health budget.
Glaxo has a strategy of charging high prices for innovative products. The
group, like other pharmaceuticals companies, is finding it hard to maintain
prices for existing products in Japan and Europe. In the US, many have been
forced by political pressure to introduce voluntary price freezes or
promises not to increase prices above the rate of inflation.
Mr Nathan is to be replaced by Mr Christopher Adam, Glaxo's commercial
director. He was Mr Nathan's predecessor in France.
