FT  09 APR 92 / Playing for high stakes on the picket line: The strike at
Caterpillar, America's number two industrial exporter, is entering the
end-game
A discordant honking of car horns, echoing this week through the
early-morning streets of Peoria, Illinois, heralded the moment of truth in
the most crucial test of US organised labour in a decade.
The horns, blaring out along the route to Caterpillar's factories and
headquarters in this archetypal Mid-Western city, were one way that striking
workers at the world's largest marker of earth-moving equipment tried to
deter suspected strikebreakers from crossing their picket lines. In a touch
of modernity, the strikers also trained video cameras on the factory gates.
After a five-month stand-off, the Caterpillar stoppage has entered the
end-game, thanks to a management ultimatum that striking members of United
Auto Workers union had to return by last Monday or face losing their jobs to
replacement workers. Few of the 12,600 strikers have gone back, but the
company is gambling that many will return in the days and weeks to come.
If they do, it will mark a grave setback for the UAW, still one of the most
powerful unions in a country that has seen a remarkable diminution of
organised labour over the past two decades.
The knock-on effects could be tremendous. Other companies with UAW workers -
notably the Detroit-based motor industry - would try to use the defeat to
extract concessions. And employers across the US would be encouraged to
adopt a tougher negotiating stance with unions.
But if the workers do not return, Caterpillar, the second-biggest US
industrial exporter after Boeing, could be badly hurt. The outcome is finely
balanced, and with such high stakes on both sides neither is likely to cave
in easily.
The dispute centres on three inter-related issues which have become central
to management-labour tussles over the past decade: so-called 'pattern
bargaining'; management's right to replace striking workers with non-union
staff; and the role played by organised labour in hindering or helping
American competitiveness.
The UAW has used pattern bargaining in negotiations with US auto companies
for decades. The idea is to negotiate a favourable labour contract with the
company most willing to make concessions and then make the others match the
terms. Such deals used to be common in several industries, including steel
and tyres, but have become less so over the past decade.
The Detroit motor groups, fearful of losing market share through a prolonged
strike, have gone along with the system but now want to break out. They face
ferocious competition in a recessionary market from more efficient and
largely non-union Japanese plants which have mushroomed across America.
General Motors, in particular, which lost about Dollars 7bn at the operating
level in North America last year, is anxious to slim down and introduce more
flexible working practices. But the UAW has rejected the company's attempts
to renegotiate the 1990 labour contract, due for renewal next year.
The UAW also wants Caterpillar to 'pattern bargain' and agree to terms on
pay, conditions and job security similar to those it reached last year with
Deere &amp; Co, another large US equipment maker.
But Caterpillar, which went along with pattern bargaining in the past,
argues that it can no longer afford it. It maintains that its labour costs
must allow it to compete with its main international rival, Japan's Komatsu,
rather than other American businesses.
The union rejects such arguments, saying that international competitiveness
is more a result of shrewd management, employing efficient manufacturing
processes. It claims, instead, that its members are being asked to forgo
benefits which the company can afford. 'Global competitiveness is a code for
bottom-line greed,' says one union organiser.
It is the management's threat to bring in replacement labour that touches
the rawest union nerve. President Ronald Reagan's use of this tactic to
defeat the government-employed air traffic controllers in 1981, set the tone
for a decade of anti-unionism in the White House. The strategy has since
been successfully emulated by several leading companies, most recently
Greyhound, the bus line.
In the US, the right of management to replace workers is not unfettered: a
company found guilty of unfair labour practices can be forced to re-hire
sacked strikers. The union movement is lobbying Congress for stronger
protection, but is unlikely to be successful.
Caterpillar would find little problem in recruiting workers, since
unemployment is high in both Peoria and the company's other manufacturing
centres in Illinois. It began placing newspaper advertisements for staff
this week and was flooded with telephone inquiries.
It is now anxious to resume production, with or without the UAW, in view of
the upturn in the US economy expected in the second half of this year. Its
inventories are very low - about 80 per cent down on pre-strike levels,
according to one estimate.
'Caterpillar doesn't want to be stuck in a strike' just as orders begin to
come in, says Mr Tobias Levkovich, an analyst with Smith Barney Harris
Upham, the US securities company. In the last UAW strike at the company in
1982-83, which lasted seven months and was the longest in the union's
history, the management was caught short as the seasonal construction
business picked up, and was forced into a compromise settlement.
However, in using replacement workers, lacking the complicated skills of its
existing workforce, Caterpillar risks a decline in the quality of its
products and a loss of market share and customer loyalty. And if it
ultimately settled with the UAW, labour relations would be soured for years.
Although the union has few cards left to play, it has not ruled out idling
the remaining 3,400 UAW members still working at Caterpillar's parts and
warehousing operations. Beyond that there remains the outside possibility of
concerted action by other unions, fearful for their future. Leaders of two
other big unions, the steelworkers and the Teamsters, have already said the
Caterpillar strike is crucial to the future of the labour movement.
Such comments come against the background of a steady erosion of union power
in the US. Over the past two decades the movement has suffered a precipitous
fall in membership to a level one academic recently described as 'ghetto
unionism'. Only 16 per cent of the non-agricultural workforce belonged to
unions in 1990, down from nearly 30 per cent in 1970.
Reasons for the weakening of organised labour include the decline of heavily
unionised traditional industries; and shifts of business from the unionised
north to the cheap-labour south, and from manufacturing to the fragmented
service sector, where unions have difficulty recruiting.
The question now is whether America's unions can carve out a new role for
themselves in an era when complicated new manufacturing techniques demand
greater flexibility in work practices and more co-operation between
management and labour.
But management and unions at Caterpillar, like their counterparts across the
US automobile and equipment industries, are set in their confrontational
ways. 'Pulling together' is not a message playing well in Peoria this week.
