FT  28 OCT 92 / Rail switch for Channel ruled out
BRITISH RAIL and the government have firmly ruled out the possibility that
Britain's railways could be converted to take bigger Continental freight
trains after the opening of the Channel tunnel.
This means most Continental freight traffic will continue to enter Britain
by road after the tunnel's opening, much of it transferring from rail on the
French side of the Channel.
The decision will come as a blow to environmental lobbyists and others
supporting moves to encourage a transfer of freight from road to rail.
The Department of Transport said even a limited programme of converting
Britain's main rail routes would cost between Pounds 3bn and Pounds 4bn, and
the country's railways would be unable to justify such an outlay after
privatisation.
The government has reviewed the options for converting the routes following
an undertaking given to the Commons transport committee earlier this year.
Although the width between the rails in Britain is the same as on most
European railways, Continental freight wagons are mostly too wide and too
high to run on BR's tracks without crashing into platforms, bridges and
trains coming in the opposite direction.
When the Channel tunnel opens BR's biggest market for cross-Channel freight
will be the 2m lorry trailers a year at present carried by ferry.
SNCF, the French national railway, is spending FFr1bn (Pounds 122m) to
upgrade its principal routes between now and 1997 so its freight trains can
give piggyback rides to lorry trailers.
Britain's loading gauge, or track clearance, is too small to allow this.
Instead, BR hopes that UK/Continental freight carriers will use swap bodies
 -containers which can be lifted from lorry trailers to rail wagons for the
main part of their journeys.
More than 90 per cent of Continental swap bodies can be squeezed on BR's
tracks if special small-wheeled wagons are used. The technology requires
expensive mechanical handling equipment wherever the road/rail transfer
takes place, and the cost can be justified only for very long distances.
The result is that most UK/ Continental freight operators are likely to
choose the cheapest option of using road transport in the UK, crossing the
Channel by ferry or the Eurotunnel shuttle. If they switch to rail at all
most will wait until they can load lorry trailers on rail wagons in Calais.
The Department of Transport said it was not feasible to upgrade UK freight
lines to take piggyback wagons, although new lines such as the Channel
tunnel rail link would be built to accommodate them.
