FT  22 SEP 92 / Survey of Belize (8): Streams of history - Stephen Fidler
discusses the diverse ethnic mixture
TWO important developments are putting strains on the traditional harmonious
relations between Belize's diverse ethnic groups.
In the last decade, the country has absorbed between 30,000-40,000 migrants,
the equivalent of 20 per cent of its population, from elsewhere in central
America. Meanwhile, emigration to the US continues among Creoles, the group
that traditionally dominates the business and political elites.
These changes are having a profound impact on the country's economy and its
demographic make-up. The new settlers are putting pressure on the
overstretched hospital, social and education systems.
The ancestors of the Creole population carved out what in 1862 became the
colony of British Honduras from an Hispanic hinterland. But as a result of
the growing numbers of settlers, they fear that they are 'losing their
country' to Spanish speakers who form a majority of the population.
The migrants have, however, provided this sparsely-populated country with an
important resource, agricultural labour, which has underpinned the last
decade of growth. The Creoles have no tradition of agricultural work, partly
because they were discouraged from doing so by the British who were solely
interested in the region's logging potential, and prefer better-paying jobs
in management, transport and government.
Remittances from Belizeans in the US - amounting to an estimated Dollars
15m-17m a year, about 4 per cent of gross domestic product - also help to
balance the country's chronic trade deficit. But the emigration deprives the
country of many of the most promising products of its education system and
one-third of all Belizeans now live in the US.
Forty-four per cent of the population is under 15 years of age. A priority
for the government, according to the prime minister, Mr George Price, is to
encourage Belizeans to stay at home. But it will be a tough task. Just as
Belize's relative wealth provides an irresistible attraction to the poor
peasants of neighbouring Guatemala - Belize's per capita income is more than
double Guatemala's Dollars 900 a year - so the prospects of riches in the US
(whose per capita income is more than 10 times that of Belize) will continue
to lure Belizeans.
The country's main ethnic groups are as follows:
Creoles: this group now makes up slightly less than 30 per cent of the
population, according to the 1991 census, published this month. Speakers of
English and an English-derived patois, they are descendants of slaves
brought over from Jamaica and baymen, the British who settled around the Bay
of Honduras. They are concentrated around Belize City, where they make up
about 68 per cent of the population.
Mestizos: now the largest group, the mestizos account for just under 44 per
cent of the population, compared with 33.4 per cent who defined themselves
as of mixed blood in the previous census in 1980. This group, which speaks
Spanish as a first language, is largely descended from the mixed-blood
Mexicans and Mayan indians who fled Mexico in the 19th century. Their
numbers are being supplemented by more recent migrants, escaping conflict
and poverty in other parts of central America.
Garifunas: concentrated in the Stann Creek area to the south of Belize City,
the Garifunas are the descendants of mixed-blood Africans, Carib indians and
Europeans, who arrived in the area in the 19th century. Speaking English and
a language of their own, the Garinagu, as they call themselves, make up
about 6.6 per cent of the country's population, according to the 1991
census.
Mayans: people who define themselves as Indian or Mayan make up 14.6 per
cent of the population, according to the latest census. They are
concentrated in northern, western and southern Belize and form several
groups, some of whose languages are mutually incomprehensible. While an
effort is under way to preserve their culture, many are adopting Spanish or
English as a first language.
Mennonites: This group of fair-skinned Europeans began arriving from Mexico
and Canada in the late-1950s, seeking freedom of religion and freedom from
state interference. Concentrated in the north and north-west of the country
and retaining their German language, they make up 3.1 per cent of the
population. Easily recognised by the men's dark trousers and check shirts
and the women's long dresses and headscarves, the Mennonites have made
significant contributions to the country's agriculture.
