FT  23 JUN 92 / World Trade News: Brazilian economy paces Mercosur's tariffs
timetable / A look at prospects for a S American customs union
DOUBTS are surfacing about whether Mercosur, the proposed customs union
which groups Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, can meet its ambitious
targets.
Under the March 1991 Treaty of Asuncion, which created Mercosur, member
countries began cutting tariffs last November as the first stage of a
step-by-step reduction of all internal tariff barriers.
They are scheduled to disappear by the end of 1994, when a customs union
should be in place with a common external tariff, likely to be above 10 per
cent. After that, negotiations are scheduled to start towards a common
market.
The Argentine economy minister, Mr Domingo Cavallo, raised a furore last
month when he voiced doubts about whether these targets could be met. The
big question, he suggested, was the ability of Brazil to stabilise its
economy.
Although the subsequent fuss forced the minister to backtrack on his
statement, the state of the Brazilian economy is Mercosur's biggest problem.
The Brazilian government's lack of success in bringing down inflation and
stabilising the economy suggests it will remain so for some time.
The concern is that an unstable Brazilian economy will be reflected in sharp
fluctuations in exchange rates and therefore in the competitiveness of
Brazilian industry. The impact of these swings on Brazil's trading partners
will be amplified by the abolition of tariffs.
The concern of some Argentine businesses is heightened by their government's
own exchange rate policy. Argentina has achieved a measure of economic
stability by fixing its currency to the US dollar since April 1991. With
Argentine retail price inflation running well above US levels, there are
worries anyway about Argentine competitiveness.
The Brazilian government position is still that 'the timetable is going to
be fulfilled.'
This is even though the potential advantages to the other members - Brazil's
economy is well over five times the size of the other three combined -
suggests Brazil's commitment to the customs accord may be weaker than the
other governments. As one senior Argentine official said: 'We have to
concede that Mercosur is probably much more important to us than it is to
Brazil.'
However, Brazil's new foreign minister, Mr Celso Lafer, has said: 'We think
of Mercosur as a platform for our competitive insertion into the world.'
Mercosur's importance, say senior officials, is as an instrument for
transforming the economy and improving competitiveness.
Brazilian officials insist that the timetable for tariff reduction is
already in place, and not for negotiation. They point out that a protocol on
dispute settlement was adopted in December, and that 1992 priorities include
practical issues such as hastening deregulation of transportation.
There are other difficulties, including fears that the impact of tariff
abolition is yet to be understood and that Brazil's industry constitutes a
threat to its neighbours.
The decision to aim for across-the-board tariff reduction, rather than a
product-by-product approach, was aimed at weakening the influence of lobbies
seeking protection for specific industries and at lending credibility to the
liberalisation policies.
However, according to Mr Winston Frisch, professor of economics at the
Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro: 'Given the existing productivity
differentials in some sectors, it is difficult to believe that the timetable
will be met in full as programmed. The likely outcome will be a revision of
the 1994 deadline to meet the structural adjustment problems of sensitive
products to a more realistic time frame.'
Mercosur has also decided to negotiate as a group with the US, with which it
has a framework agreement as a first step towards a free trade accord. There
are worries in Argentina that this means Brazil will slow the pace of the
group's negotiations on an FTA with the US. Moreover, the expansion of the
group to include Chile is likely to be delayed by Chilean worries about the
effect of Brazilian economic instability.
With or without Mercosur, general reductions of tariff levels are already
stimulating intra-regional trade. The potential for growth is significant:
only 15 per cent of Brazil's trade is with the rest of Latin America, of
which 9 per cent is with other Mercosur countries.
Brazilian officials expect trade between Brazil and Argentina to rise to
Dollars 4bn this year, up 30 per cent on 1991. Trade within the Mercosur
region expanded from about Dollars 1.6bn in 1985 to Dollars 4.9bn in 1991.
Brazilian exports to Mercosur countries totalled Dollars 2.3bn in 1991, up
77 per cent on 1990.
