FT  13 JUL 92 / Survey of Japan (4): Appetites dampened - End of the
consumer boom
ANOTHER WORLD is the name of the foreign luxury goods section at the main
Tokyo branch of Mitsukoshi, the prestigious Japanese department store.
It served as a thriving bazaar for the 'Heisei aristocrats,' those who made
their fortunes from rising stock and land prices in the late 1980s and who
took their title from the new emperor's reign that began in 1989.
But foreign luxury goods manufacturers and Japanese retailers are now
confronting another world from the one two years ago when conspicuous
consumption was in vogue and expensive imported items were eagerly bought.
The bursting of Japan's bubble economy has dampened the appetite among
consumers for French jewellery, German sedans or Italian suits.
The declining interest in branded products has hurt European makers of
luxury goods particularly hard because they were the main beneficiaries of
the spending boom. Ms Mami Toyonaga, an analyst with the Japan External
Trade Organisation (Jetro), said: '1989 and 1990 were the years of the EC
brandname.'
Imports of European luxury goods have dropped sharply since then and were
largely responsible for the 9.2 per cent decline last year in EC exports to
Japan of Dollars 31.8bn, according to Jetro.
Works of art and antiques from France, which accounted for half of the art
objects shipped from abroad to Japan, fell by 80.9 per cent to Dollars 539m.
Imports of jewellery from the EC slipped by 14.1 per cent to Dollars 374m,
while diamonds and other precious stones from Belgium and the Netherlands
declined by 11.2 per cent to Dollars 608m.
Imports of luxury cars from the EC fell by 16.1 per cent to Dollars 1.75bn,
while European clothes suffered a drop of 11.2 per cent to Dollars 1.35bn.
EC furniture declined by 8.9 per cent to Dollars 318m while handbags and
luggage dipped by 2.5 per cent to Dollars 714m. This trend has continued for
the first four months of 1992, with only European executive cars making a
slight recovery; imports growing by 9.6 per cent.
It is not only European luxury goods producers who have been affected by the
passing of the brandname fad. Japanese department stores that heavily
promoted imported products suffered profit falls last year. Mitsukoshi
blamed the decline in art and luxury purchases for its 43 per cent drop in
pre-tax earnings to Y10.9bn for fiscal 1991, a result that forced it to
delay plans to expand its store network.
Mitsukoshi now has a large inventory of Impressionist paintings and other
European art that it bought at the height of a market that was mainly driven
upward by Japanese investment. The value of Mitsukoshi's collection has
subsequently fallen and it is waiting for a recovery in prices, which could
take several years, before offering it to the public.
It is one indication that Japanese consumers have become price-conscious.
European luxury goods companies in Japan realise that they can no longer
sell their products on snob appeal. A high price tag was once considered an
advantage in attracting Japanese consumers who wanted to impress neighbours
with their wealth.
European luxury goods makers have now changed their marketing strategy by
promoting the brand name as a guarantee of good quality and design rather
than as a status symbol. They are also cutting their prices or introducing
lower-cost products.
'Although the Japanese consumer used to purchase the brand rather than the
product, quality has become the most important consideration and the
competitiveness of price is another key factor,' says Mr Guy Leymarie,
president of Cartier Japan. 'It proves that Japanese consumers have rapidly
matured in their buying habits.
'Sales of big-ticket imported items have fallen, but there is a rise in
sales of imported goods at the lower price end of their respective product
segments. Japanese still want brand name products, but at a cheaper price,'
explains Mr Yoichi Kimura, a Jetro researcher who has helped compile a study
on popular imported products.
Prices for some foreign jewellery brands at Mitsukoshi, for example, have
been reduced by 10 per cent, which has improved sales of jewellery costing
less than Y1m.
The promotion of less expensive car models, rather than price cuts, has
resulted in BMW of Germany and Volvo of Sweden suffering smaller sales
declines than other European car makers in Japan. BMW is concentrating on
marketing its entry-level 300 series, while offering low-interest vehicle
loans. Volvo is introducing its 850 GLT model, which is Y1.5m less than the
top-of-the-line 960 model. 'We have to adjust to the new price situation,'
said Mr Hans-Olov Olsson, president of Volvo Cars Japan.
More attention is also being paid to regions outside Tokyo, which was the
centre of the imported goods boom. 'Although Tokyo has only 20 per cent of
the population, it accounts for 40 per cent of the luxury goods sold. But we
see growth potential in other areas,' explains Mr Osamu Tanegashima,
director of operations of BMW Japan. Sales of BMW sedans are on the rise in
Osaka and Nagoya, although they remain depressed in Tokyo.
Louis Vuitton is also concentrating on a regional marketing strategy instead
of cutting prices to improve sales. Indeed, the company took the risky step
last year of raising prices by 5 per cent. Although sales consequently fell
by 10 per cent to Y39bn in 1991 and are expected to decline by 5 per cent
this year, company officials defend the decision.
The company wants to maintain the high profit margins that exist in the
Japanese market, which accounts for almost 30 per cent of Louis Vuitton's
total sales. Prices for Louis Vuitton products in Japan are 45 per cent
higher than in France. Officials also worry that price reductions would harm
its brand image. Louis Vuitton hopes that the opening of new outlets in
Kyushu and western Honshu will curb the sales decline next year and set the
stage for a recovery.
Other European luxury goods companies are also focusing on the top end of
the market. 'Sales of products in the middle price range have gone down, but
sales are growing in the upper and lower ends of our product segment. This
means that our sales will stabilise in 1992 after doubling between 1988 and
1991,' says Mr Leymarie. 'There are still enough clients who have the money
to buy our best jewellery in the knowledge they are making a sound
investment.'
Mr Didier Handache gives a Gallic shrug at the mention of Japan's economic
troubles. The importer of the French Venturi sports car says the country's
financial woes are having little impact on sales of the expensive vehicles,
which cost between Y12m and Y16m.
He predicts instead that sales will triple to 40 cars this year. There are
plans to open a showroom soon in downtown Tokyo, which will display a new
model priced at Y20m.
'We are aiming for the absolute top of the pyramid; people who are immune to
the bubble economy,' says Mr Handache, who counts among his customers
baseball players and actresses. 'There are always people who can afford such
luxuries.'
