FT  07 OCT 92 / People: Barber for Invesco MIM in UK
The new chief executive of the UK unit trust arm of Invesco MIM is Stephen
Barber, who returned in May after five years with the group in Tokyo having
clocked up some notable successes in helping to break into the protected
world of Japanese fund management.
Barber arrives at a time when the British unit trust industry is
exceptionally depressed, and as Invesco MIM, as a group, is fighting to
re-establish credibility after its involvement with Maxwell and the
investment trust Drayton Consolidated. Lord Stevens recently stepped down as
chief executive of Invesco, to be replaced by Charles Brady, who is
understood to be putting in place a generally less high-risk investment
strategy.
Nicholas Johnson, responsible for all the group's business outside America,
had previously also been chief executive of Invesco MIM Unit Trust Managers,
with Barber's appointment (made before Lord Stevens stepped down) reflecting
a desire to strengthen the operating heads of individual divisions.
Barber, 37, a fluent Japanese speaker who spent one Christmas holiday in
Tokyo translating 50 pages of domestic investment trust industry rules from
Japanese into English, helped Invesco MIM this year to become the first
foreign firm to win a Japanese corporate pension account, and the group is
also now the largest of just four foreign firms licensed to sell investment
trusts.
Retail investors have not necessarily been deterred by Invesco's highly
publicised problems, Barber contends; recent surveys of independent
financial advisers show 'extremely low levels of awareness'. His main
priority, however, is a defensive one - 'to retain business' - and to build
as conditions improve. He thinks lessons learnt in Japan - notably that
'client is king' - will help in defining a modified UK approach.
Barber has had to wait until now to gain regulatory approval for his
appointment - a process slowed by the fact that he had been out of the
country since the vast body of new securities regulation had been
implemented in the UK.
*****
Rowley Ager, company secretary, is appointed to TESCO's board with
responsibility for treasury, and Terry Leahy, formerly commercial director
for fresh food, becomes main board director for marketing.
*****
Philip Sellers, a former finance director of British Rail, has taken over as
chairman of Inner City Enterprises, a development company specialising in
inner city development. He is a director of POSTEL Investment Management, a
director of Etam Group and non-executive chairman of CSL, a financial and
management consultancy.
*****
Nicholas Butler has been appointed company secretary of JOHN FOSTER &amp; SON on
the resignation of Graham Creswick.
*****
Graham Wallace, finance director of GRANADA Group, has been appointed chief
executive of Granada UK Rental, on the resignation of Tom Cole.
*****
Alastair Thomson is appointed finance director of Jowetts; Stephen Clark is
appointed commercial director, Nigel Knighton, works director and Ray
Schofield, finance director of Watmoughs Ltd; Barry Smith is appointed a
director of Watmoughs Graphics; David Rigby is appointed finance director of
Chantry Web; all are subsidiaries of WATMOUGHS (HOLDINGS).
*****
Mike Schlumpf has been appointed deputy md of CYANAMID OF GREAT BRITAIN; he
returns to Gosport from Cyanamid's Nordic subsidiary in Stockholm where he
was md.
