FT  11 NOV 92 / Survey of Corporate Treasury Management: From back room to
mainstream - The treasury function has come to be recognised by companies
big and small as a vital component in financial planning and control.
However, the debate about whether the department should be run as a cost or
a profit centre continues
CORPORATE treasury management, once the domain of back-office boffins, has
come to be recognised as a vital part of a company's financial structure.
Responsibilities range from handling relations with the company's banks and
arranging cash transmissions to hedging exposure in foreign currencies and
raising outside finance. Depending on the size of the company, these
dealings may be handled by anyone from the chairman to the company
secretary, but Mr Derek Ross, a partner at accountants Touche Ross,
estimates a company needs to consider hiring a full-time treasurer when
turnover reaches Pounds 200m to Pounds 250m.
Even in small companies without an identifiable treasury operation, the
treasury function exists. At large companies such as BP, the treasury
operation is the size of a small bank.
The loss of Pounds 150m on foreign exchange dealings by the treasury
department of Allied-Lyons, the UK food and drinks group, proved a vivid
reminder of the danger of losing control of corporate treasury operations.
The Allied-Lyons debacle helped start a trend for greater integration of
treasury operations, with stronger ties to the main board of the company.
Greater efforts are being made by many to keep the treasurer in the
mainstream, with large groups, such as BP and Unilever, putting line
managers in charge of treasury operations. The job of the treasurer is to
'keep the company's options open, so it can launch a new product or open a
new factory,' believes Mr Gerald Leahy, director-general of the Association
of Corporate Treasurers.
Recessionary pressures have also reinforced the importance of strong
treasury operations, with funding or liquidity difficulties threatening to
bring many companies down. Mr Leahy, believes the recession has re-focused
attention on the core role of the treasurer: 'If there is no cash, there is
no business,' he points out.
Large, top-rated companies can still gain financing in the public bond
markets, but there has been a shift away from some of the complex structures
used for funding in the 1980s, such as multi-option facilities and puttable
convertible bonds, as companies try to rebuild banking relationships.
Banks themselves, however, are strapped for cash, and have become
increasingly cautious about corporate lending, following a series of huge
losses on the Canary Wharf development in London Docklands, the Maxwell
empire and elsewhere. Pressure on bank capital, owing to the imposition next
year of new capital adequacy standards by the Basle committee on bank
supervision, a grouping of international bank regulators, has further
constrained lending. The structure of the capital requirements, which
requires smaller amounts of capital to be set aside for sovereign than for
corporate loans, has also discouraged lending to companies.
'Until the banks get back to lending money again, we may not have a recovery
(from recession in the UK),' Mr Leahy observes. 'Medium- and smaller-sized
companies are being crucified. Entrepreneurial companies which were
encouraged to borrow money through bank credit lines and overdrafts during
the 1980s are now being told to repay.'
The practice of recalling funds from over-extended companies, which borrowed
heavily in the credit boom of the 1980s, effectively putting them out of
business, has, indeed, become increasingly common. In addition, many viable
businesses have come under threat, as a result of the withdrawal of banks
from the market. Many foreign banks have, for example, pulled out of the UK
market, after offering aggressive rates to gain business in the 1980s and
some of these bank lines have proved difficult to replace.
Many corporate treasurers now take a dim view of bankers' attitudes, though
when banks were competing for their business at cut-throat rates in the
1980s, treasurers were keen to squeeze the last basis point from a deal.
Many companies have now established stronger lines of communication with
their bankers, so that the bank can be kept informed of any potential
cash-flow problems.
Greater attention to bank relationships, and an unwillingness to rely too
much on short-term debt, are among the ways in which companies have become
more risk-sensitive. Company treasurers have also become more concerned
about credit risk. While some companies have suffered because of their own
declining credit-worthiness, other companies have begun to focus on their
own exposure to credit risk. In the swaps market, companies are paying more
attention to the counterparty risk of agreements with lower-rated banks.
They are also more careful about which banks they lend money to, in the form
of bank deposits, following the collapse of BCCI last year.
More importantly, there is now a strong focus on how companies control their
own financial risks. Now that company boards are paying greater attention to
treasury policy, careful consideration is being given to a wide range of
issues, such as how to define risk, what constitutes speculation, and what
qualifies as hedging.
Company boards are no longer content to leave treasury to the experts.
Experience has shown that it is important for senior management to be aware
of the risks the treasury is running, and the nature and purpose of deals.
Equally, treasury managers are learning how to see their financing
techniques in the context of the company's overall balance sheet.
Auditors themselves are learning to come to grips with the complex financial
products now routinely used in treasury management.
The debate about whether a treasury department should be run as a cost
centre or a profit centre also continues, though opinion appears to be
moving against the profit-centre approach. Many treasurers are dubious about
how objective any analysis of profitability can be, since other parts of the
group are obliged to process financial transactions through the treasury.
Another argument is that a cost-centre approach can create a more
speculative culture, closer to a bank trading room, which is inappropriate
for what is essentially a service for other parts of the company. However,
the argument between the profit-centre and cost-centre approach should not
be allowed to obscure the fact that a cost-centre treasury can lose as much
money as a profit-centre, if controls are inadequate.
The application of stringent controls has become more urgent as a result of
the increasing use of complex derivative products by companies. The losses
at Allied Lyons stemmed from the unusual practice of writing currency
options, which can lead to unlimited losses. Usually, only banks, which
manage their risks on a continuous basis, take on that sort of exposure. But
most treasurers of large companies buy options and are involved in swap
transactions, often with complex 'bells and whistles' attached.
Concern about practices within treasury departments has also reached
institutional investors in companies' shares, since treasury practices can
have substantial impact on company profitability. The head of Prudential
Portfolio Managers (PPM), one of the largest institutional investors in the
UK stock market, recently called for greater disclosure of corporate
treasury policies in companies' accounts. A working party is being set up by
the ACT, involving the Association of British Insurers, the National
Association of Pension Funds and the Accounting Standards Board, to develop
guidelines on the appropriate levels of disclosure of corporate treasury
management activities.
Mr Hugh Jenkins, of PPM, complained that, in the accounts of many of the
largest listed companies, reports on corporate treasury matters are 'minimal
in most cases', even though the report and accounts is the correct medium
for such disclosure.
Only a few UK companies, including RTZ and Courtaulds, describe their
treasury activities, including interest rate and currency exposure
management policies, in any detail.
The greater degree of interest in treasury matters, coupled with a broader
understanding, is widely seen as a positive development for the treasury
management business.
'The sophistication of financial management techniques will challenge
further the abilities of company directors to keep up with developments in
areas such as treasury management and information technology,' Mr Roger
Davis, head of audit at Coopers &amp; Lybrand, wrote in a recent article in the
FT. It is a challenge which, not before time, company directors and others
are now trying to meet.
