FT  15 DEC 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Italy (10): A
story of little change - Obstacles to concentration among savings banks
'IN SPITE of generous fiscal encouragement, our banking system has shown
scarce propensity to concentration. This might lead one to believe that
directors' personal prospects have in some cases prevailed over the
interests of the banks' owners,' Mr Guido Carli told the Italian banking
association ABI earlier this year.
Mr Carli, former governor of the Bank of Italy and treasury minister,
probably had the casse di risparmio (savings banks) in mind. The Amato-
Carli Law, enacted in July 1990, aimed at a radical reorganisation of
Italian banking's large public sector.
However, mergers between casse have not occurred, despite exhortations from
the central bank. Three years ago there were 75 casse and seven monti di
credito, which are included in the savings bank category. At 80 today, the
total has changed little.
Savings banks have 29 per cent of deposits in the Italian banking system and
24 per cent of lending. But most casse are small. The 10 largest together
have about 2,200 branches. The others have networks with an average of about
35 branches.
'The Bank of Italy's encouragement of mergers has encountered resistance,'
admits Mr Edoardo Fattorini, general manager of the savings banks'
association, Acri. But he says that the authorities are right in aiming for
a banking system with larger banks as small institutions are unable to
provide the range of services and financial products that customers demand.
What strategies are therefore open to the large number of small casse?
Takeovers and mergers are the obvious path to competitive size. But there
have only been a handful. Five years ago the Cassa di Risparmio di Roma took
over the Molisana savings bank after this had run into difficulties. Two
years later the Cassa di Risparmio di Verona Vicenza e Belluno acquired the
troubled Ancona savings bank.
Mergers are now in prospect between the casse of Parma and Piacenza, and
those of Pesaro and Fano.
Diffident towards mergers, Italy's casse are trying two other forms of
togetherness. 'One is the creation of holdings. The other is the acquisition
of minority stakes by large casse in smaller institutions,' explains Mr
Fattorini. Both have been made possible by the Amato-Carli Law, which
allowed the casse to spin off their banking operations into separate joint
stock corporations from the parent foundations or associations.
The first holding was established by seven Tuscan casse and monte di credito
at the end of last year, bringing into a single organisation some
activities, such as data processing, training and import/export services,
that were previously undertaken independently. A second holding, the Gruppo
Bancario Casse Emiliano Romagnole, was formed in July. This links six
institutions in Emilia Romagna and has the task of co-ordinating, directing
and developing unified strategies in various operating sectors of the
constituent banks.
In the acquisition of minority stakes, the trail is being blazed by the
Gruppo Cassa di Risparmio di Roma, which controls Banca di Roma, and by
Italy's biggest savings bank, Cariplo. Milan-based Cariplo already has
equity interests in 12 casse in central and southern Italy. 'In this form of
concentration, the large cassa provides the sophisticated services and
products that are beyond the capacity of its smaller partners,' explains Mr
Roberto Mazzotta, Cariplo's chairman.
When reorganisation of Italy's savings banks became a talking point in the
second half of the 1980s, there was concern among the small casse that they
would be swallowed by Cariplo and the large institutions. Mr Mazzotta,
chairman of Acri as well as Cariplo, has tried to calm these fears,
emphasising the importance of maintaining local identities.
'There is no reason why small and medium-sized casse should disappear. They
have very strong links with their areas of operation, particularly with
local bodies, small businesses and the family sector,' he says. It is not
unusual for a cassa to hold more than 50 per cent of its local market.
They have had many years in which to carve out their shares. The monti di
credito were established in the 15th century to combat usury, providing
loans to the poor against assets deposited as pledges. The casse are more
recent. The first were set up in the 19th century in northern Italy by the
Austrians.
Perhaps their deep local roots have contributed to the casse's reputation
for highly politicised boardrooms. Mr Mazzotta explains that mem- bers of
the boards of the found- ations or associations that control the banking
joint stock corporations are appointed by local governments.
Chairmen are appointed by the CICR interministerial committee for credit and
savings, though there will be a referendum next spring to abrogate the law
which empowers central government to appoint savings banks' chairmen. 'It
seems certain to be approved by the electorate, thereby returning the power
of appointment to local authorities,' says Mr Mazzotta, adding that this
will enhance local autonomy.
It is easy to understand why politicians should be so inter- ested in these
levers of power. There are recent cases of casse running into difficulties
because of politically-directed lending. Bank of Italy statistics show that
the savings banks have worse default figures than other categories (6.1 per
cent of lending against 5.1 per cent for the system overall).
But Mr Fattorini says that there are reasons for this. The close ties to the
family sector have led to higher provisions against consumer credit
activity. Also, the casse are more rigorous in classifying their
non-performing loans.
Political interest in appointments to the banks' boards is, however,
probably as much in profit distribution as lending management. Before the
Amato-Carli Law, the casse retained part of profits for capital reinforement
and distributed part in beneficence. Little has changed. The new foundations
and associations obtain dividends from the banking joint stock corpor-
ations and use these for charity and good works, giving scope for tending
local political constituencies.
There has been speculation about public offers of shares in the casse.
Indeed, Mr Mazzotta hopes that there will be widespread share ownership with
involvement by instit- utional investors. But Acri's chairman would not like
to see the existing control disappear. 'There should be no takeovers.
Stability should be guaranteed by the foundations and associations.'
However, some people believe a real shake-up is needed, rather than
stability.
Mr Mazzotta talks of arriving at three or four large groups in the next five
years. But in making retention of local character the main priority, and in
satisfying the politicians' appetite for boardroom power, Italy's casse have
dodged the reorganisation issue.
One hundred years ago Italy had 200 savings banks. Their number was sharply
reduced by legislation in 1926 which made mergers obligatory. Perhaps Mr
Carli should have included a similar measure in the Amato-Carli Law.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                THE MAIN SAVINGS BANKS (FIGURES IN LBN)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Total   Customer   Net      Operating
                  assets   deposits   equity    income    Branches
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Cariplo          108,504    71,278    6,650       958       505
Torino            32,142    18,571    2,376       188       299
Verona Vicenza
  Belluno         20,060    10,898    1,830       409       237
Firenze           15,417     9,722    1,010       236       195
Sicilcassa        15,297    10,408      467        36       238
Padova Rovigo     13,776     7,336    1,333       326       143
Genova Imperia    10,981     7,053      605        99       147
Bologna           10,598     5,377    1,031       193        88
Carimonte         10,015     6,637      792        75       122
Calabria Lucania   8,952     6,989      396         2       150
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Il Mondo
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
