FT  18 DEC 92 / Israel action threatens peace talks
THE FUTURE of the Middle East peace negotiations was thrown into doubt
yesterday as Israel expelled about 400 Palestinians to Lebanon, bound and
blindfolded, in spite of international protests.
The Palestine Liberation Organisation said in Tunis that Palestinians would
suspend taking part in the peace talks until the deportees were allowed to
return.
In an unprecedented mass expulsion, the Israelis drove most of the deportees
across the border in convoys of buses, while 32 were flown out in a
helicopter. The expulsion follows the kidnapping and killing of an Israeli
border policeman earlier this week.
Opponents went to court to try to stop the expulsions, but the deportees -
accused of belonging to militant Islamic groups - were taken over the border
as soon as Israel's High Court approved their deportation.
Last night they were still trapped in snow-covered terrain in the
Israeli-controlled security zone of southern Lebanon after Lebanese troops
had drawn up with orders to stop them going deeper into Lebanon.
Outraged Palestinian leaders and the Syrians boycotted the last day of their
current round of talks with Israel in Washington in protest at the
expulsions. But President George Bush, seeking to keep the US-backed peace
process alive, hosted separate meetings at the White House with teams
representing Israel and its adversaries, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the
Palestinians.
The US State Department condemned the deportations and said it had urged
Israel not to go ahead with them. In Little Rock, Arkansas, President-elect
Bill Clinton said he was concerned the expulsions 'may go too far and
imperil the peace talks'.
Mr Bush said: 'I am confident the new administration is going to want to see
the peace talks continue. It has got to go forward.'
But Mrs Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian spokeswoman, said: 'The peace
process. . . is on the brink of disaster.'
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, ordered the expulsions in
retaliation for violent attacks on Israeli forces by the Hamas Islamic
fundamentalist movement, culminating on Tuesday in the murder of the
kidnapped paramilitary border police officer. It is by far the largest
peacetime expulsion by Israel since it captured the West Bank and Gaza Strip
in 1967.
The deportees were kept tied and blindfolded for almost 20 hours in 22 buses
at the Lebanese border while civil rights lawyers tried in vain to win a
court order halting the action.
The Israeli government said the deported Palestinians could appeal against
the decision once they were in exile and could return home after not more
than two years.
Mr Rabin brushed aside protests, saying the expulsions were necessary to
crack down on Hamas.
'We said we would wage a war against terrorism as if there were no peace
negotiations and engage in peace negotiations as if there was no war against
terrorism.'
Saying the alternatives were to introduce the death penalty, destroy
Palestinian homes or allow soldiers greater freedom to open fire in the
occupied territories, Mr Rabin added: 'We chose the way which involves the
least violation of human life and property.'
Palestinians said the expulsions went beyond the harsh policies of the
previous government led by the Likud party and undermined the credibility of
Mr Rabin's commitment to peace talks.
The decision 'shows that the Labour government is capable of taking more
repressive measures than the Likud,' said Mr Sari Nusseibeh, an adviser to
the Palestinian delegation.
The decision was supported by ministers from Labour's left-liberal Meretz
coalition partners who had strongly opposed the 66 previous deportations
carried out during the five years of the Palestinian uprising, or intifada,
in the occupied territories.
