FT  11 JUN 92 / Survey of US Finance and Investment (1): A four-letter word:
debt - Corporate America has been undergoing a restructuring of its balance
sheet over the past year, swapping the heavy debt burden of the 1980s for
equity or fixed income paper with lower rates of interest
the most important change in US financial markets over the past two years -
is continuing apace as the nation adjusts from the financial excesses of the
1980s.
Helped by a stock market boom and falling interest rates, US companies have
been rushing to issue new equity and cut their debt, or refinance their
existing borrowings on more favourable terms.
Most have been able to do so in an orderly fashion, yet others facing
cash-flow crises have had to seek the protection of the bankruptcy courts
for their restructurings. Companies which have filed for Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection since the start of the year include Macy's, the New
York-based department store chain, and parts of Olympia &amp; York, the Canadian
property group.
These trends still have some way to run. The wave of corporate bankruptcies
seems past its peak, and should continue to diminish if the US economy
sustains its slow recovery from the 1991 recession. But this will doubtless
be accompanied by some further high profile disasters. The Olympia &amp; York
debacle is a reminder of the extreme fragility of the North American
property market.
The substitution of equity for debt is also incomplete. After all, 1991 was
only the first time in eight years that US corporations issued more stock
than they retired. But the pace of change could slow as the year advances:
investors are getting more choosy about the equity they buy and the stock
market is looking very generously valued.
There could be a substantial market correction over the next few months,
especially if the trend of interest rates begins to rise consistently, a
development which could also stem the flow of debt issues.
Nevertheless, the net effect of these changes will eventually be a much
healthier US business environment, as well as some very fat fees for the
Wall Street investment banks and law firms which, cynics note, also reaped
handsome rewards advising their clients during the great debt and takeover
booms of the 1980s.
Wall Street enjoyed bumper profits in 1991, thanks largely to the flood of
new issues, and sustained this through the first quarter of this year.
However, one house was conspicuously absent from the feast: Salomon
Brothers, which was hit last August by a scandal over its behaviour during
auctions of US treasury bonds. That led to a change of the company's top
management and a long investigation by the Securities and Exchange
Commission which ended last month in Dollars 290m of fines and restitution
for Salomon.
While the SEC investigation continued, many companies were unwilling to give
Salomon a mandate to lead-manage share issues, or advise on delicate
takeover work, and the firm's profits suffered accordingly. Still, even
Salomon recorded its third most profitable quarter in the first three months
of this year.
America's commercial banks, while enjoying no such profits bonanza, are at
least slowly emerging from the crisis they faced when the US plunged into
recession and the property and leveraged buy-out bubbles of the 1980s burst.
The banks have ingested large doses of medicine, including heavy bad debt
provisions, slashed dividends, the sale of non-essential assets and large
cuts in their bloated operating costs. And they have been greatly aided by
the Federal Reserve's easing of interest rates, which has allowed them to
improve their net interest margin - the difference between what banks pay to
borrow funds and what they charge to lend money.
Mr Gerald Corrigan, president of the New York Fed, noted recently that the
vast majority of the big US banks' risk-based capital ratios are now well in
excess of the minimums set by the Bank for International Settlements, 'a
result many observers would have regarded as unreachable only a few years
ago'.
But despite tentative signs that some regional banks are becoming more ready
to add to their loan portfolios, the banking recovery is likely to remain
subdued, because of the severe problems still facing the property sector.
A key question for the banking industry over the next two years is whether
efforts to reform the US banking system, which largely came to nothing in
1991, will get a second wind following November's presidential election.
Bankers are hopeful that Congress might permit branch banking across state
lines, which would allow the industry to rationalise its cost structure,
although abolition of the long-standing ban on banks entering the securities
business still seems far away.
Whatever the politicians' decision on inter-state banking, the industry will
continue its consolidation wave in an attempt to cut costs and improve
efficiency. The past year has seen a sharp increase in this trend, with
mergers bringing together New York's Chemical Bank and Manufacturers
Hanover, California's BankAmerica and Security Pacific, and the South's NCNB
and C&amp;S Sovran.
Wall Street's mergers and acquisitions experts, the investment banking
glamour boys of the 1980s, must be very thankful to the banking sector for
all these marriages, since takeover activity in general has fallen sharply
over the past two years.
The corporate raiders who made much of the running in the 1980s are now
largely discredited and cannot raise funds readily, while many industrial
companies are more concerned to improve the efficiency of their businesses
rather than make large acquisitions.
The deals that do go through are all agreed - there has not been a big
hostile bid in the US for a year - and tend to be medium-sized, strategic
acquisitions. One source of such deals over the next few years will be the
US defence industry, which is in the early stages of a tricky
rationalisation in response to declining Pentagon spending on hardware.
These trends have meant a withering of the size and prestige of Wall
Street's mergers and acquisitions departments, and a concomitant increase in
the influence of advisers on debt, equity and other instruments, as well as
corporate restructurings.
Total US financing volume reached a record Dollars 586bn in 1991, up 88 per
cent on 1990, itself a record year, and the trend continued in the first
quarter of this year, with Dollars 216bn of new issues, some 37 per cent of
last year's total.
Apart from heavy issuance of debt and equity, the market has also seen
continued growth in asset-backed securities - instruments which rely on cash
flow from pools of assets, such as credit card receivables, to pay investors
principal and interest.
For issuers this market provides not only easily available funds - even for
those with otherwise problematic credit ratings - but a means of taking
assets off the balance sheet and improving capital ratios. It is hardly
surprising that banks have been the largest issuers, though the
strengthening of their balance sheets was probably the main cause of a first
quarter slowdown in new issuance.
At the same time, Wall Street is busily trying to bring to the market
innovative new debt and equity products, many of them designed to relocate
or reduce risk.
The past year, for example, has seen a resurgence of interest in 'hybrid'
debt securities which combine conventional borrowing instruments with
derivatives such as swaps or options.
But for all this activity, many analysts doubt that the coming decade can
hope to match the extraordinary boom in financial innovation of the past
two.
As Mr Merton Miller, Nobel prize-winning economist at the Chicago Business
School, pointed out recently: 'In the avant-garde academic literature of
economics and finance today, few signs can be seen of new ideas and concepts
like those that bubbled up in the 1960s and 1970s and came to fruition later
in specific innovations.'
