FT  24 FEB 92 / Generators accused of overcharging
THE ELECTRICITY industry is overcharging consumers for the power generated
from coal, according to Mr Malcolm Edwards, commercial director of British
Coal.
His criticism has intensified the pre-election row over electricity prices,
and follows a strongly worded statement from Mr Frank Dobson, shadow energy
secretary, that consumers are not benefiting from electricity privatisation.
Mr Edwards said: 'The generators now have a perfectly legitimate way of
fixing the market.' They were pushing up the price of coal-fired power and
keeping the profit. If they would admit that coal could provide competitive
electricity, British Coal would be saved from the likelihood of having to
close all but a dozen pits, he said.
Mr Edwards said the old coal-fired power stations of England and Wales could
produce electricity at between 1.8p and 2.2p a unit.
This meant that the two electricity generators could easily offer the
regional electricity companies, which supply consumers, power at 2.5p a
unit, 'and make a perfectly reasonable profit'.
Instead, he suggested, they were offering power at closer to 3p a unit, and
keeping the difference.
He admitted that coal stations could not sell at 2.5p if they used British
Coal's coal at an average present price to the generators of 185p a
gigajoule, or unit of energy from coal. But British Coal would only need to
cut the price to 'a perfectly respectable' 160p to make coal-fired
electricity at 2.5p feasible. At 160p, Mr Edwards said, British Coal would
not be forced to close many pits.
Mr Edwards said he believed the generators could be deliberately keeping
electricity prices high, because they were committed to building new
gas-fired power stations, which he estimated would produce power at closer
to 3p. They would then close the old coal stations.
The generators hit back at Mr Edwards, saying they could not sell power more
cheaply and survive.
National Power said: 'We are not closing anything that is cheaper than the
new stations, only the older, smaller stations.'
The company said it would not invest in new gas stations that would produce
power at 2.8p or above, and suggested that electricity from its stations
would be closer to the 2.62p price charged by Nuclear Electric, whose
auction of electricity contracts broadly sets the market price. Some large
customers could get prices of closer to 2.2p, if they avoided peak-demand
periods, the company added.
It pointed out that it had to cover the cost of fitting scrubbing equipment
to old power stations to comply with environmental legislation and the cost
of plant it had to keep in reserve to ensure customers' lights did not go
off. 'Our results show we have not been profiteering,' the company said.
PowerGen said that present British Coal prices translated into electricity
at 2p a unit, before the cost of labour, capital, maintenance and other
services.
The company said: 'When investors in this company purchased it for Pounds
1.8bn, it was not on the assumption that it was going to convert British
Coal into electricity and nothing else.'
It added, however, that some independent gas-fired projects which had
purchased gas expensively would probably not be able to produce electricity
much below 3p.
