FT  06 JUN 92 / Man in the News: Hired gun of haute couture - Karl Lagerfeld
Karl Lagerfeld is one of the world's most famous fashion designers. He is
also a very astute businessman. It was, after all, his accountant who told
American Vogue that he had been blessed with 'un chromosome de plus'.
This week Mr Lagerfeld - and his admiring accountant - discovered how much
that extra chromosome was worth. Dunhill, the UK luxury goods group, paid up
to Pounds 16m to buy Karl Lagerfeld, the fashion business that bears his
name, in the middle of one of the worst recessions that the luxury goods
industry has known.
Mr Lagerfeld himself will not receive a penny. Dunhill has bought the
Lagerfeld business from Revillon, the private French company that owned it.
'Kaiser Karl', as the fashion press calls him because of his imperious air,
is one of the new breed of freelance fashion designers who do not invest in
their labels but are paid a fee to design for them. He has said that he
'hates empires' and that he does not want 'the responsibility' of being an
employer.
This arrangement will continue under Dunhill, which has also signed Mr
Lagerfeld - for another undisclosed fee - to return to his old role as chief
designer of Chloe, another Paris fashion house in the Dunhill stable.
Dunhill has done the deal at a difficult time. The whole luxury goods
industry has suffered in the recession, but fashion has been one of the most
vulnerable sectors. The Karl Lagerfeld shops in London (which were not owned
by Revillon) went into receivership earlier this year.
Lord Douro, chairman of Dunhill, purports to be unperturbed. Dunhill, he
says, needed 'a designer of Lagerfeld's stature' to relaunch Chloe and it
also wanted to acquire another Paris fashion house.
Nor was Lord Douro deterred by the fact that the workaholic Mr Lagerfeld,
53, also works as a free lance designer for a number of other fashion
houses, including Fendi of Italy, Steilman of Germany and Chanel in Paris.
'He told me that there was still a side of his creative personality which
was unfulfilled,' he said.
Indeed it was the spectre of Chanel's success - and Mr Lagerfeld's role in
its revival - that persuaded Dunhill to expand its fashion interests at a
time when the market was so depressed.
Mr Lagerfeld has helped to turn Chanel into one of the world's most
lucrative luxury goods groups. He was poached from Chloe in 1983 by Mr Alain
Wertheimer, who had taken over Chanel - by dint of firing his own father -
nine years before. When Mr Wertheimer arrived, Chanel was a floundering
fashion house living off the memories of its founder, Coco Chanel, and her
sartorial triumphs in the 1920s, and was selling its perfumes in downmarket
retail outlets.
Memories were not enough. Mr Wertheimer realised he had to bring back the
glamour of Coco's heyday. He pulled the perfumes out of their downmarket
outlets and looked for a designer who could restore the house to its former
glory. Finally he chose Karl Lagerfeld.
Usually when designers join an established fashion house they stamp their
own style on it. Mr Lagerfeld's approach was different. He chose to
appropriate the classic elements of 1920s Chanel - chunky tweed suits,
quilted bags with chains - and to reinterpret them for the 1980s.
What he did was to apply the post-modernist principle of mixing historical
motifs with contemporary forms, then popular in art and architecture, to
fashion. He also created very sellable clothes. The Chanel suit became the
status symbol for successful women - and wives of successful men - in the
1980s. They loved the short skirts, which showed off their aerobics-toned
legs. They adored the big buttons, with their distinctive double C insignia,
that told their friends where they had bought the suit and how much they had
paid (at least Pounds 1,250).
Chanel now sells biker boots for Pounds 700 and costume ear-rings for Pounds
500. Its flagship store on the Rue Cambon in Paris is so packed with
Japanese tourists clamouring to buy its quilted leather bags that it has
'rationed' them to no more than three bags per person.
Nobody knows exactly how much money Chanel makes. As a private company it
can, and does, refuse to disclose financial details. The best estimate is
that it has annual sales of Pounds 500m and profit margins of at least 20
per cent. Mr Lagerfeld is said to be paid a fee of Dollars 1m for each of
the four Chanel collections he designs every year.
One of the ironies of the fashion industry is that most of this money comes
not from clothes, but from accessories - scents, shoes, bags and biker
boots. Four out of five purchases at Rue Cambon are accessories. Mr
Wertheimer's masterstroke was to use the allure of the fashion collections
to sell them.
No designer is better at creating that allure than Mr Lagerfeld. He plays
the publicity game to perfection. The glossy magazines are filled with
(generally flattering) features of 'Kaiser Karl', the 18th-century buff with
his signature pony-tail, his passion for Louis XV furniture, his penchant
for hand-written notes and his horror of telephones.
Even his tantrums are faithfully reported. There are the super-models he
hires and fires. The muses whom he adores and then abandons. There is the
sad story of Ms Kitty D'Alessio who, as head of Chanel in the US, introduced
him to Mr Wertheimer only to be ousted by her former protege.
This is the reputation that Dunhill is buying, by acquiring the Lagerfeld
label and bringing the Kaiser back to Chloe.
It hopes to replicate the elan, but it is not going to be easy. Karl
Lagerfeld left Chloe to take his starring role in Chanel's success story in
1983 when the economic environment was overwhelmingly positive. He is
returning to Chloe in a much more competitive climate, when the luxury goods
industry is struggling. Extra chromosome or not, even the appeal of the
Lagerfeld name was not enough to save its London shops from the receivers.
