FT  11 MAR 92 / Economic woes dent peace-time hopes of Lebanese: The main
union claims government policies are 'anarchic and inflationary'
NEARLY a year and a half after the end of the civil war Lebanon's hopes for
rapid reconstruction and a return to commercial and banking prominence in
the Middle East have faded.
In the space of two weeks, the Lebanese pound lost 30 per cent of its value
and inflation rocketed. At the start of the month, the main Lebanese trade
union called for sit-ins and demonstrations to protest against government
economic policies it calls 'anarchic, inflationary and impoverishing'. A
general strike on March 6 was widely observed, reflecting the general
discontent.
European Community foreign ministers have blocked Dollars 86m in aid because
of the continued detention in Lebanon of two German hostages. Hospitals have
stopped accepting medical insurance pending a revision of inadequate payment
schedules. Lebanon has even requested it be exempted from its annual Dollars
550,283 Arab League dues because of economic difficulties.
Mr Omar Karami, Lebanon's prime minister, has accused the US of provoking
the crisis by blocking foreign aid and opposing military sales which would
strengthen the Lebanese army. But Lebanese are almost unanimous in blaming
their pro-Syrian government for the debacle.
'Searching for lost confidence,' read a front-page headline in the
French-language daily L'Orient Le Jour, summing up the country's despondent
mood. 'Every Lebanese knows the weakness of a worm-eaten administration
which, like a cadaver, feeds a cloud of parasites through its own
decomposition,' the paper said. 'Caught in a vicious circle. . . the more
the state flails about like a drowning man, the deeper it sinks.'
The government continues to spend far more than it collects in taxes, ) and
this coupled with its inability to attract reconstruction aid or increase
state revenue are at the heart of the crisis.
The Lebanese government is the largest employer in the country, spending 50
per cent of its budget on salaries and another 40 per cent on servicing the
public debt.
The root causes of the crisis have long been present: war-ravaged
infrastructure, an import-based consumer economy and a cumbersome government
bureaucracy.
But the runaway inflation and currency depreciation of the past few weeks
were sparked off by two official moves, both announced on February 19: the
central bank's decision to let the Lebanese pound float freely against the
dollar and an across-the-board 60 per cent private sector pay rise.
Fighting between Israelis and Lebanese militiamen in southern Lebanon that
same week further aggravated the downward spiral.
The Banque du Liban (BDL) had since mid-1991 stabilised the pound at about
LPounds 880 to the dollar. But worsening conditions late last year forced
the BDL to spend up to Dollars 400m in foreign currency reserves to support
the pound. Faced with further depletion of its remaining Dollars 856m in
reserves, the BDL decided to cease intervention on currency markets. After a
steep fall three weeks ago, the pound has stabilised at LPounds 1170 to the
dollar.
An emergency economic plan announced by the government simply reiterated old
promises to limit government spending and increase state revenue. Interest
rates on treasury bills were raised to more than 18 per cent, providing the
government with cash but swelling the public debt, which now represents 57
per cent of the BDL's assets.
The policy of increasing taxation on consumer items such as fuel and
cigarettes - and even collecting income tax  - has done little to encourage
Lebanese who enjoy negligible basic services and have seen prices shoot up
some 40 per cent in two weeks. The ministry of posts and telecommunications
this week ordered Lebanese citizens to pay phone bills by the end of the
month or have their lines cut. The telephone system barely functions and no
bills have been delivered for the past four years.
Even the price of arabic bread, the basic food staple here, was officially
increased by 32.5 per cent at the start of the month. In spite of last
month's pay rise, the official minimum wage still stands at just over
Dollars 100 per month, a ludicrous amount in a country where prices can
rival those of Europe.
The pay rise was within days neutralised by the depreciation of the pound
and concomitant inflation.
None the less, plans for a multi-billion dollar 'Manhattan of the Middle
East' to be built on the ruins of downtown Beirut continue under the aegis
of Lebanese-born Saudi millionaire Rafiq Hariri's 'Council for Development
and Reconstruction'. Positive political developments, such as the liberation
of the two German hostages, progress towards an Israeli withdrawal from
southern Lebanon or even the successful holding of parliamentary elections
(vaguely promised for this summer or autumn) could bolster the confidence
that is now so sorely lacking.
But the decline of recent weeks has at least temporarily confounded those
Lebanese who claimed their dynamism, entrepreneurial fervour and free-market
economy would suffice to raise Lebanon from the ashes of war.
