FT  25 MAR 92 / Foreign Affairs: Cost of Russia's Falklands - Stalemate over
Japan's northern territories must end
A British diplomat visiting Argentina recently was talking about Russia and
Japan. He explained that the main obstacle to better relations was Russia's
continued occupation of the Japanese 'northern territories', seized by the
Red Army in the last days of the Second World War. It was hard, he added, to
see why Russia was so determined to hang on to them: a handful of small,
windswept, almost uninhabited islands, of no economic importance except as a
means of claiming an enlarged fishing zone.
For some reason, his audience began to giggle.
The cost of retaining the Falkland Islands is not an issue in the British
election campaign, though perhaps it should be. We are, after all, in the
middle of commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Argentine seizure of the
islands and the war to win them back. Memories of that struggle and of those
who died in it are too fresh for any political party to risk reopening the
subject.
The cost of hanging on to the Japanese islands certainly should be an issue
in Russian politics. Japan has made no attempt to recover them by force, and
is most unlikely to do so, but has been firm and consistent in refusing to
accept the fait accompli of 1945. It restored diplomatic relations with
Moscow in 1956, and by the late 1970s had become one of the Soviet Union's
leading trading partners in the west.
It has even been willing, in the current crisis, to provide humanitarian aid
for the Russian population. But there is still no peace treaty between it
and the Soviet Union (or Russia), and Japan has drawn the line at economic
aid. Economic and political issues, it says, cannot be separated.
Russia is desperate for economic aid. There seems to be something like a
consensus in the west that it should get it. Two weeks ago, when former US
President Richard Nixon's memo denouncing the US's 'pathetically inadequate
response' to the Russian crisis became public, President George Bush did not
reply that much more generous aid would be inappropriate, but said, in
substance, that the US was broke and the effort to help Russia must be a
multilateral one.
In any such effort, Japan would be expected to be a significant contributor.
The Japanese are well aware of this and talk unofficially of putting up
one-third of a putative multinational fund which could total as much as
Dollars 100bn. But, they say, there must be a solution to the islands
problem first.
So the islands may be the key to Russia's economic future. What is holding
President Boris Yeltsin back from a deal? A mixture of pride, principle and
politics. National pride makes it hard for any country to yield territory
just because it is strapped for cash.
The principle involved is that the territorial settlement at the end of the
Second World War should not be questioned, because there are too many cans
of worms to be opened - especially the borders of Poland, east and west. Yet
it is highly questionable whether the islands can be regarded as part of
that settlement. The Soviet Union only declared war on Japan on August 8,
1945 - two days after the bombing of Hiroshima - apparently with the sole
object of helping itself to Japanese territory.
Japan did, in the San Francisco Peace Treaty of 1951 (which the Soviet Union
refused to sign), 'renounce all right, title and claim to the Kurile
islands'. But the treaty did not define the limits of the islands.
It is reasonably clear that Japan understood the phrase to refer to the
islands it acquired by an exchange of territory with Russia in 1875, and not
to the islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri, Shikotan and the Habomais, none of
which had ever belonged to any country other than Japan before 1945. It is
these latter islands which Japan still regards as its own 'northern
territories'.
Politically, Mr Yeltsin is constrained by the vested interests of some
15,000 Russian civilians who now live in the islands - many of them
providing services to the military garrison - and by the views of the armed
forces, who regard the islands as strategically important.
The rest of the world has so far taken little interest in the dispute. It is
time for that to change. If Russia's economic salvation is indeed a matter
of global security (which, given the size of the country and the weapons it
contains, it surely is), and if this dispute is holding up a global effort
to help Russia, then there must be a global interest in finding a way round
it.
Japan, it seems, is not in a hurry to obtain physical possession of the
islands. It wants its sovereignty to be recognised. That leaves scope for
compromise on timing, and for mediation by a third party whom both sides
would trust. Another job for the US secretary of state, Mr James Baker,
perhaps?
