FT  26 SEP 92 / Markets: Insurance dividend gone with the wind - Wall Street
IT IS ONE of those curious cases of bad news being good news. On Thursday,
Continental Corporation, which ranks 12th among US property and casualty
insurers, announced that it was slashing its dividend for the first time
since 1853 and taking Dollars 320m of pre-tax charges, mainly because of
catastrophe insurance policy losses.
The culprits were Hurricane Andrew, which tore through Florida and Louisiana
last month leaving some Dollars 20bn of damage, and Hurricane Iniki, which
has just devastated one of the Hawaiian islands.
The company also said it would withdraw from the reinsurance business, and
from its relatively small international operations, to concentrate on its
core business. These actions would account for Dollars 120m of the special
charges.
Continental's stock plunged by nearly 19 per cent on the day. The shock to
the market was particularly severe because Continental's traditionally high
dividend has made it attractive to investors.
Even as Continental was plunging, the rest of the insurance sector began to
rally smartly. The reason: analysts argued that its dividend cut was the
firmest evidence yet that the property / casualty insurance cycle might at
last be changing for the better. High quality reinsurance stocks, such as
General Re, rose particularly strongly.
'I don't think anybody can say until three or four months from now that the
turn occurred on September 24,' said Frederick Sandburg, an analyst at
Kemper Securities, 'but the stocks are trying to tell you this is a
significant event.'
Property / casualty business insurance premiums in the US have fallen by
around 40 per cent over the past five years as companies have engaged in
aggressive rounds of price-cutting. The growing belief is that the weaker
companies, reeling from Andrew and Iniki, will be forced to put up rates to
rebuild depleted capital, and that others will happily follow suit.
There have been plenty of false dawns before. Several US catastrophes, such
as last spring's Los Angeles riots, have been hailed as the turn in the
cycle, but the sheer scale of this year's hurricane losses means that the
time may have finally arrived.
Only the day before Continental's move, the mighty Prudential Insurance
Company of America quadrupled its estimate of losses from Hurricane Andrew
to more than Dollars 1bn, which led Standard &amp; Poor's the rating agency, to
put the group's top-notch triple-A credit rating on review.
Another straw in the wind, suggesting the cycle may have turned, was an
announcement at the start of the week that Primerica, the financial services
group run by Sanford Weill, was to take a 27 per cent stake in Travelers,
one of America's largest life insurers, with a sizeable property / casualty
business as well.
Travelers went on a real estate lending spree in the 1980s that has left it
with one of the worst property portfolios in the industry. It has spend
months looking for an investor who would inject cash into the business and
bolster its credit ratings, which have fallen worrying close to losing
investment grade status.
Enter Weill, regarded as one of the canniest investors on Wall Street. He
spent the 1960s and 1970s putting together a group of small brokerages which
he sold to American Express for over Dollars 900m in 1981, and he has spent
the last few years building the Primerica group into one of America's most
profitable financial services businesses.
He has bought his stake for a good price - less than half stated book value
 -and he will clearly be playing a big role in revitalising the insurance
company: Primerica will get four seats on the 16-person Travelers board and
Weill will chair the company's finance committee. Wall Street liked the deal
and Travelers' stock soared.
But even with his magic touch, Weill faces a long battle to turn Travelers
around. He too is betting that the insurance cycle is on the turn. That is a
powerful endorsement of Wall Street's hunch.
While insurance stocks soared, the week saw the automobile sector move out
of favour as analysts weighed up further signs of a painfully slow US
recovery and a flagging European market.
The equity market as a whole continued to be buffeted and bewildered by the
wild currency gyrations in Europe, mounting fears of disappointing third
quarter earnings, and growing uncertainty over the presidential election,
amid signs that Ross Perot might be about to re-enter the race. Yesterday
morning brought another batch of bearish economic statistics.
But while all these chills winds send the market twirling and dipping, it is
still groping for a clear sense of direction.
 -------------------------------
Monday     3320.83  -   6.22
Tuesday    3280.85  -  39.98
Wednesday  3278.69  -   2.16
Thursday   3287.87  +   9.18
Friday     3250.32  -  37.55
 -------------------------------
