FT  05 NOV 92 / US Election (The Results): Waiting for Perot to plot path -
The independent's value still unproven
WITH the election over, Mr Ross Perot left the American people as much in
doubt as ever over what he wanted and what he had achieved.
The Texas billionaire's 19m votes - almost exactly 19 per cent of the total
cast in the presidential contest - were not enough to win him a single vote
in the electoral college, but enough to erase the label of 'quitter' that
had stung him after he temporarily withdrew from the election in July.
Mr Perot won more than a quarter of the vote in the western mountain states,
and pushed Governor Bill Clinton into third place in Utah. In Maine, he came
third with 30 per cent, one percentage point behind President George Bush.
The tally left unanswered questions: Was Mr Perot the voice for a fleeting
anger at the system, or for a deeper set of concerns? Were his supporters
driven by his message or lured by his homespun wisecracks? Will he press on
with his campaign? Will his movement fall apart if he does not?
In conceding victory to Mr Clinton on Tuesday night, Mr Perot seemed to
promise to keep up the fight.
'Is this the end or just the beginning? Stay together and you'll be a force
for good for our country and our children. We'll keep it intact,' he told
his supporters at an election-night party in Dallas.
Yesterday morning, however, his son appeared to presage more of a withdrawal
 -somewhat along the lines of his two-month absence from the presidential
campaign this summer - while he waited to see how the new Clinton
administration was performing.
'He said he hopes President Clinton would get these problems fixed and there
wouldn't be a reason for Ross Perot in (the election of) 1996. If he has to
become active again to fix problems, he'll do it, but every year is
different. We'll just have to wait and see,' Mr Ross Perot Jr said.
There is clearly a constituency for a leader or group of leaders focused on
the issue that was at the centre of Mr Perot's campaign: the fast-growing
federal budget deficit.
Two former senators from New England - Republican Mr Warren Rudman,
co-author of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit limitation law, and Democrat
Mr Paul Tsongas, candidate for his party's presidential nomination this
spring - have launched a group which will concentrate on the deficit issue.
Neither man has a quarter of Mr Perot's personal electricity, but neither
has his delusions - and each has four times his perseverance.
Some see Mr Perot lending a hand to the new Clinton administration on some
ad hoc task force - possibly in education, his main area of concern after
the deficit.
But he could be destined to follow the path of the black Democrat Mr Jesse
Jackson, a permanent outsider with a devoted following whose role in US
political life is to criticise, not to do.
