FT  16 JAN 92 / Adviser warns of Russian power struggle threat
RUSSIAN economic reform could be destroyed 'within weeks' if the power
struggle within the Russian leadership is not resolved in favour of the
cabinet of ministers, the chief foreign adviser to that cabinet said
yesterday.
Professor Jeffrey Sachs, a Harvard economist and architect of Poland's
recovery plan who who works closely with Mr Yegor Gaidar, deputy prime
minister in charge of economic reform, said in an interview that 'it is fair
to say that there is a power struggle, and on it depends the success of the
reform programme'.
He blamed the Russian central bank's credit policies for the disastrous
state of Russian finances and said the bank had refused government and
International Monetary Fund officials access to its books.
'The west must understand what is happening. If the struggle is not resolved
in favour of a tight monetary policy, then the programme is in jeopardy. The
issue is very urgent - it is a matter of a few weeks,' he said.
Prof Sachs was speaking against a background of rising opposition to the
price and other reforms which began with the new year. Mr Ruslan
Khasbulatov, chairman of the Russian parliament, has called for the
government to resign and for President Boris Yeltsin to 'stand aside' as
head of the cabinet of ministers in order to safeguard his presidency.
At the same time, Mr Georgy Matiukhin, chairman of the central bank, has
strongly criticised the western advisers, including Prof Sachs.
Prof Sachs said that 'the bank has not merely been a passive player in
issuing credit to cover the budget deficit. Over the past year it issued
hundreds of billions worth of credits to commercial banks and enterprises at
an interest rate of 6 per cent - an absurd rate at a time of high inflation
. . . Even now it has no policy on credit for this year'.
The west had so far barely supported the 'courageous actions' of the Russian
government, Prof Sachs said, adding that next week's conference in
Washington on humanitarian aid to the Commonwealth of Independent States
must be expanded to include urgent consideration of structural assistance.
'I estimate that the west must give between Dollars 15bn (Pounds 8.3bn) and
Dollars 20bn this year - to support the balance of payments and Dollars 5bn
as a stabilisation fund for rouble convertibility.'
The proposed agenda for the conference failed to take account of the
economic realities in Russia, Prof Sachs said. 'In the past year governments
and banks pulled their money out of Russia: they woke up to what was
happening and killed their credits. It means that this government has almost
no funds. It is in a desperate position.'
Although the west's recognition that Russia must be admitted quickly to the
IMF was encouraging, he said that: 'Russia will need more than the IMF could
give, and (will need such aid) before it is admitted to it. The west cannot
shelter behind the IMF and the World Bank.'
Prof Sachs dismissed the tide of complaint against the vastly increased
prices, and the taxes levied on enterprises, as 'yak yak yak'. He said: 'The
government did not cause inflation: by releasing prices it merely brought
inflation into the open - inflation which had been caused by the credit
policies of the bank.'
Leyla Boulton in Moscow writes: Mr Yeltsin yesterday repeated a warning that
Russia could introduce its own currency if neighbouring Ukraine, the second
richest state, abandoned the rouble. 'We would not introduce a Russian
currency if some of the republics were not trying to outstrip us. We are
watching them and we have some information where and how Ukraine is printing
its banknotes', he said.
Ukraine takes dim view of colourful coupons, Page 2
