FT  25 SEP 92 / Technology: Hammer and icicle - Andrew Baxter explains how
Finland's rock bashers are sharpening up their skills
Hard rock is a favourite subject among the employees of Scandinavia's
construction and mining equipment companies, but they are unlikely to be
discussing the latest heavy-metal band to hit the nightspots of the Nordic
region.
For Europe's most northerly engineering companies hard rock is the ground
under their feet. Producing equipment to drill, hammer or crush it is a
challenge which, once overcome, can provide a passport to success in world
markets.
Nowhere is that more important than in Finland, where the frozen terrain has
bred a number of equipment producers which have benefited in export markets
from the expertise necessary for their equipment to survive the battering it
takes at home.
For Finnish companies such as Rammer, which makes hydraulic hammers, Lokomo,
which produces crushing equipment, and the rock-drill and underground loader
producer Tamrock, exporting is now more important than ever.
The local market - down by 70 per cent or more over the past two years,
depending on the sector - makes the UK equipment sector look like a beacon
of prosperity. But even in good times Finland has been too small a market to
support engineering companies' product development spending, and forced
companies to look overseas.
Not everywhere outside Scandinavia has such hard rock, however, and the
Finnish suppliers have had to spend heavily to manufacture a range of
products suitable for all environments or to convince prospective purchasers
of new uses for their hard rock equipment.
The Finnish engineering sector has been through considerable upheaval over
the past decade, but manufacturing is emerging as a key weapon in equipment
producers' attempts to build on their hard rock foundations and remain
competitive internationally despite being tucked away in a corner of Europe.
In Lahti, the provincial Finnish town best known as a ski-jumping centre,
production of small hydraulic hammers has undergone a quiet revolution since
1990 when Rammer's new automated factory was opened. The factory is one of
around 40 flexible manufacturing systems in Finland, with three
manufacturing and assembly cells grouped around an automated warehouse
system into which raw materials are fed. The critical hammer parts are
produced by computer-controlled machining centres and robots and matched
with subcontracted parts, with final assembly mainly by hand.
According to Olli Vartiainen, a production expert at the Rammer
manufacturing company Bretec, production times have been reduced from four
weeks to one week, and Rammer's new 20-series hammers have been 'designed
for manufacture' from the start. But other important advantages of the new
system have been increased flexibility and technical quality. The factory
was planned to handle six hammer variations, but is now producing more than
40, he says.
The new system is timely for two reasons. Following a reorganisation this
year, Bretec (short for breaking technology) has become a manufacturing unit
within Rammer Detec, a holding company ultimately owned by Outokumpu, the
big Finnish mining and engineering group.
The Rammer sales company has become a Bretec customer, a system which keeps
everybody on their toes. But the new factory has also allowed the group to
exploit what Pekka Heikkonen, Detec president, sees as an important change
over the past two to three years in the relationship between hammer
manufacturers and producers of the excavator to which hammers are normally
attached. 'Excavator manufacturers never used to be interested in the
attachment business, but now they are,' he says. 'If they sell an excavator
with attachments as a package, they can get more added value per unit.'
But each excavator company has different design priorities, and none wants
to become involved in manufacturing hammers, so companies such as Bretec,
which is making hammers for Caterpillar, have an opportunity so long as they
can respond to several different customers at the same time.
In the past two months Tamrock, based in Finland's third city of Tampere,
has also opened a new factory producing rock-drills. For Tamrock, Finland
represents only 2 per cent of sales, and the company has expanded from its
base in hard rock drilling into all grades of rock and earth-drilling where
different methods apply. That requires investment in the latest flexible
manufacturing technology to maintain the company's competitiveness, says
Markku Varjoranta, marketing communications manager.
But perhaps the biggest transformation in manufacturing methods and culture
has occurred at Lokomo, also based in Tampere, which was founded in 1915. On
a site which over the years has produced a huge range of mechanical
equipment, production has been concentrated on Lokomo's crushers and
manufacturing cells installed over the past decade.
Overall, says Kauko Hinkkanen, workshop manager, manufacturing lead times
have been reduced from six-12 months to just eight weeks. 'That's very
important for us, because with so many variations and options, forecasting
is very difficult,' says Pekka Pohjoismaki, area manager.
As at Rammer, Lokomo machines the critical parts of its crushers itself, but
has taken the unusual decision to retain its own foundry. Keeping Lokomo
Steels, the biggest steel foundry in Scandinavia, is not just a question of
ensuring access to large, high-quality castings. Since 1982, the foundry has
built its future around 'vacuum steel' which has low levels of impurities.
The extra-tough vacuum steel allows Lokomo to use lighter castings for its
rock crushers, but also gives the foundry a strong position making castings
for water-turbines, diving bells and other equipment where steel strength is
crucial. 'Vacuum steel is the reason why we are still alive,' says Tapio
Saari, Lokomo Steels project manager.
