FT  15 MAY 92 / World Trade News: Nynex plans Japan-UK fibre optic cable
A CONSORTIUM of international investors, led by Nynex, the north-east US
regional telephone group, is considering installing the world's longest
undersea fibre optic telecommunications cable, costing Dollars 1bn (Pounds
565m) and stretching from Britain to Japan.
The group will outline plans next week to officials from many leading
telephone companies. It aims to hold a further meeting in the autumn, to try
to persuade the companies to buy capacity on the cable.
Nynex stressed that the project was still in the early planning stages, with
details of the cable's route, landing points and financing still to be
worked out.
Other members of the consortium are Marubeni, the Japanese trading company,
Dallah-Al Baraka, a Saudi Arabian bank, and Gulf Associates, a New
York-based firm specialising in Middle Eastern business.
Some 95 per cent of the telecommunications traffic between the UK and Japan
currently goes by satellite. The only cable linking the two regions via the
Middle East is one between Singapore and France. This is a co-axial cable,
which is less efficient than fibre optic cable. However, a second fibre
optic cable is being built.
The proposed Nynex cable would have much greater capacity than the Singapore
ones. Its 120,000 circuits would be capable of carrying 600,000 simultaneous
conversations. Fibre optic signals are much clearer than satellite ones, and
do not suffer from time delays.
The Nynex venture, known as Fibreoptic Link Around the Globe (Flag), would
aim to complete the cable in 1996. It would have 14 landing points along the
route.
Nynex, one of the 'Baby Bell' telecommunications companies formed from the
1984 anti-trust break-up of American Telephone and Telegraph, has been
conducting feasibility studies for two years.
The move follows its failure to get US approval for a transatlantic cable
between the UK and New York, because of the strict anti-trust court rules
governing the 'Baby Bells'. These rules would not apply to a cable which did
not land in the US.
