FT  10 MAR 92 / Red Army officers helping to establish Azerbaijani forces
OFFICERS of the former Red Army are helping to set up an independent
Azerbaijani army as tension between the republic and neighbouring Armenia
escalates.
At the same time, international efforts to halt the slide to war are
increasing, with Iran calling on the United Nations yesterday to impose an
arms embargo on Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Evidence in Baku, the Azerbaijani capital, points to a chaotic dissolution
of the Soviet military and - the situation most feared by the Commonwealth
of Independent States' general staff - the incorporation of parts of it into
new, potentially hostile armed forces.
Azerbaijan and Armenia are close to open warfare over the disputed
Armenian-dominated enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, where Armenian attacks have
forced most of the 40,000 Azerbaijanis who live there to flee. Azerbaijani
opinion has been inflamed by reports of massacres of civilians, including
alleged slaying of hundreds of people at Khojaly, an Azerbaijani town in
Nagorno-Karabakh.
Azerbaijani nationalist groups, growing in power since the resignation last
week of the relatively moderate President Ayaz Mutalibov, are calling for
the immediate creation of an army of 30,000 men.
The Azerbaijani government and CIS general staff are negotiating the
handover of equipment belonging to the 4th Army, based in Azerbaijan,
following the refusal of the Azerbaijani government to take part in a united
CIS force.
Units of the 366 infantry regiment pulling out of Nagorno-Karabakh are
reported to have deserted to the Armenian side.
In separate interviews yesterday, a Ukrainian colonel based in Baku and two
former Russian military personnel said they were creating groups which would
both train soldiers for a new Azerbaijani army and form a corps of
volunteers from other republics.
Colonel Alexander Slusarev, a military instructor based in Baku, who heads
the self-styled 5,000-strong Union of Ukrainian Officers serving in
Azerbaijan, said his organisation would ask the Ukrainian government for
permission to work under contract for the Azerbaijani Ministry of Defence to
trainan independent army.
He also claimed that weapons were being made available to Azerbaijanis by
the CIS army. At the same time, he charged senior military commanders with
shipping to Russia military equipment which should remain in Azerbaijan
pending its handover to the republican government.
Confirming this, Mr Niazi Ibrahim, deputy chairman of the Azeri Popular
Front - the main opposition nationalist grouping - said CIS commanders had
no control over the sale of weapons by their men to Mafia groups in
Azerbaijan. 'The army itself is a mafia in this sense,' he said.
Col Slusarev, who spoke in the presence of Mr Ibrahim, said he was in
constant contact with nationalist groups.
Mr Isa Gambarov, a member of the ruling National Council of the Azerbaijani
parliament and head of its foreign affairs committee, as well as being
leader of the 'independent Azerbaijan' party, said yesterday that the
country would welcome co-operation on military matters with Ukraine - which
like Azerbaijan, is now building its own armed force.
The interview with Mr Gambarov in his office in the Azerbaijani parliament
was interrupted by the appearance of Mr Vladimir Kozlov, a former Soviet
officer, and Mr Vladimir Malinov, a former Soviet soldier. They said they
had the permission of Mr Tahir Aliev, the Azerbaijani defence minister, to
form volunteer units to help serve in the disorganised groups which make up
the Azerbaijani military and which are now trying to contain Armenian
attacks near the borders of Nagorno-Karabakh.
They have opened a recruiting office in Baku, where they hope to enrol
officers and men serving with the 4th Army who wish to remain in military
service with security of housing and an income.
