FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (8): Shares are
buffeted by the hurricane - These are highly nervous times, with uncertain
currency markets, and not the moment for investment heroics. Stay in, or
very close to, cash and the wholesale money markets
SEPTEMBER WAS the roller-coaster month of the third quarter.
Thin trading volumes in most equity markets, over the July-August holiday
weeks, had left bourses bumping along at or near their bottom levels -
though Tokyo did manage a 6 per cent rise in one day in August, on the
unveiling of the Japanese government's stimulatory package.
Then, in September, the Bundesbank shaved fractions off two key German
interest rates, and virtually every European equity market took off. It
didn't last.
Tensions within the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) had already been
apparent on foreign exchange markets early in August, and they came more
sharply into focus immediately ahead of the French vote on the Maastricht
treaty.
The currency hurricane started in the days before the French vote, hitting
first the Italian lira and then the Spanish peseta. The big assault caught
sterling and the British apparently by surprise (despite the writing on the
wall), and the pound quit the ERM, thus jettisoning the sheet-anchor of
economic policy.
The equity markets reacted perversely, at least initially. The currency
turbulence saw shares fall sharply in Italy and Spain, and rise steeply in
the UK on the immediate analysis that Britain was now free to pursue
economic policies to tackle its deep recession and away from the currency
constraints of the ERM (see below).
It took only a couple of days for more rational minds to focus on the
negative factors, including the risk of higher UK inflation and continuing
poor corporate results and dividend payouts.
But at least the pound's devaluation came to the immediate rescue of
sterling portfolio managers. Their total return over the third investment
quarter, measured by the FT Actuaries World Index, showed a relatively
healthy 9 per cent; for dollar investors, the outcome was a meagre 2.1 per
cent. Currency considerations were well and truly back into the
international equity investment environment. They will persist in the final
quarter of 1992, while the tensions within the ERM may very well bring a
fundamental shift in investor strategy, certainly for European funds.
The economic and monetary convergence foreshadowed in the ERM had persuaded
many fund managers to take a fresh look at bonds, at the expense of their
equity holdings, encouraged by the so-called debt convergence theory.
Asset-allocation committees ended the third quarter in semi-permanent
session, though the dismal performance of most equity markets in the first
few days of October did not provide them with much guidance.
Hard-pressed sterling investors in Japan did have something to justify a
half-cheer during the July-September period. The Japanese market produced a
return of more than 20 per cent, after the two miserable previous quarters;
and the Nikkei index on September 30 was up a fifth on its six-year low, hit
on August 18 this year. (Relief for portfolio managers, who increased their
exposure to Japan around the start of the year remains limited, however,
because that market is still more than a quarter down since the start of
1992).
Other highlights of the quarter? Not too many, in fact. Switzerland
performed well, yielding a total return to sterling investors of some 18 per
cent, and 11 per cent for dollar holders. Belgium, too, had a good quarter
for British investors, but dollar holders on Wall St had a return of just
over 3 per cent.
I am afraid that this column's advice for the final quarter is no different
from that proffered for the last two: stay in, or very close to, cash and
the wholesale money markets. These are highly nervous times, with uncertain
currency markets and no time for investment heroics.
One marginally encouraging note for some will come at the end of the year,
when the results of the 1987 stock market crash drop out of long-term
performance statistics, allowing fund managers to skew their promotional
shots. These will not tell you that cash was generally king over the whole
period; but can they conceal the fact that London, on October 5, had its
largest fall since the Black Monday shakeout five years ago?
