FT  24 DEC 92 / State of the Art: The verbiage of creativity that is. . mad,
bad and dangerous to use - Opera, it's all in the production / In plain
language, one might call stagings of opera that placate tradition-minded
audiences conservative, and those that outrage them radical
OPERA, in recent decades the growth-industry among the performing arts, has
over the period accrued its share of critical buzzwords - those
concept-adumbrating abstract nouns and adjectives, mad, bad, and dangerous
to use, which nevertheless sound with relentless frequency in current
discourse about and around the medium.
Before coming to grips with them, however, we need to pinpoint exactly which
branch of the operatic industry has caused greatest verbal proliferation. It
is certainly not the Arena Mega-Event, that newest diversion of the operatic
mainstream. Neither is it the regular arrival of new works guaranteed to
renew the opera-house repertory.
Such an arrival simply has not happened. As a result, new opera has been
marginalised in the post-Second World War era. Minimalism (a concept Andrew
Clements deals elsewhere on this page) is the single operatic neologism to
gain wide usage in recent times. This is exemplified principally by the
theatre-works of Philip Glass and John Adams. Needless to add, both Glass
and Adams are reputed to dislike the minimalist label greatly.
It is, rather, in response to developments in opera production that certain
words have been encouraged to assert themselves. They are employed in the
differentiation of production styles, and can be seen as essentially
variants on the age-old theme of the conservative-radical division. In plain
language, one might call those stagings of opera that placate
tradition-minded audiences conservative, and those that outrage them
radical. But of course, it all goes much further than that. Indeed, the
elucidation of such divisions via relevant catchwords could serve as a rough
guide to production styles in postwar opera.
On the one hand, there is the text-faithful or (in German) Werktreu
approach. It has found many and various forms: notably, Luchino Visconti's
fastidious re-evocation of grand Romantic opera-theatre (at its grandest in
Covent Garden's celebrated 1958 Don Carlos); Franco Zeffirelli's scenically
grandiose, intellectually unambitious developments of the Visconti line (the
New York Met's current Turandot, a hugely expensive, splashy operatic
spectacle, is perhaps its ne plus ultra); Peter Hall's physically restrained
but deeply scrutinised Glyndebourne Mozart stagings of the 1970s; and
recently, Peter Stein's physically mercurial harmonisations of words and
music for Welsh National Opera - Otello, Falstaff, Pelleas.
All these theatre-men have exhibited very different stylistic traits; the
link is a belief in that the score and libretto must be interpreted 'as is',
rather than dramatically re-worked or in some other way stood on its head.
On the other hand, there is the radical approach. The umbrella word
'interventionist' has proved particularly useful hereabouts, suggesting as
it does a producer's act of consciously interposing his interpretative ideas
and responses into the process of artistic reproduction and communication.
Operatic interventionism, a many-mansioned construction, can fairly be
reckoned to have its foundations in the struggles of postwar German opera
houses to cope with a tradition deeply damaged, if not entirely destroyed.
The first of these was at Bayreuth, where from 1951 onwards Wieland Wagner
staged his grandfather's operas in abstract form, stripped of almost all
stage property and Wagnerian stage direction; this amounted to a profoundly
significant purging of the Teutonic-Romantic trappings associated with the
Wagner festival in its Nazi heyday. This was, perhaps, the purest form of
postwar operatic modernism in production; in the former East Germany,
however, very different responses to the cultural crisis inherited from the
Nazis were being explored - and these were to have much longer-lasting
impact on the wider world of opera.
At the Komische Oper in East Berlin, Walter Felsenstein was developing his
concept of 'realistic music theatre', based on close-knit ensemble work long
rehearsed and minutely motivated. His heirs - Gotz Friedrich, Joachim Herz
and (though never a Felsenstein disciple) Harry Kupfer - took these
principles and meshed them with Brecht's theory of 'epic theatre', in
particular his discipline of the 'alienation effect' that disengages an
audience from 'culinary' pleasures in order to engage it on intellectual
argument.
As these three figures developed their careers in the West, in the early
1970s, so controversy began to attach itself to their neo-Brechtian
productions, often with a strong 'political' slant. Friedrich's 1976 Ring at
Covent Garden and Kupfer's 1981 Fidelio for WNO are key examples; so was the
1976 Bayreuth Ring of the Frenchman Patrice Chereau. A different sort of
interventionism has been practised by the former Brecht associate Ruth
Berghaus, whose mining of a libretto for psychological and political
associations has been couched in a theatrical language bordering on the
worlds of painterly surrealism and the Theatre of the Absurd equally.
It is in description of Berghaus's vision - she was the house-goddess of the
Frankfurt Opera from 1977 to 1987, and has worked widely in Europe (though
far too little in Britain) - that operatic criticism has often been tempted
to borrow the philosophical and/or literary terms 'post-structuralist' and
'deconstructionist', in a tentative attempt to pinpoint the creative
tensions, ironies, contradictions, discontinuities and textual
confrontations elicited by such a mode of opera production. Such terms have
also been used in reference to David Alden (the American noted for his
English National Opera stagings of Mazeppa, Boccanegra and Masked Ball) and
the Germans Hans Neuenfels and Alfred Kirchner.
The reaction to neo-Brechtian or Berghausian opera has got under way, though
it is by no means clear-cut or chronologically orderly. Again, a term
borrowed from other disciplines - 'postmodernism' - has been used to
describe it. If one offers Nicholas Hytner's famous ENO productions of
Rienzi (1983) and Xerxes (1985) as examples, or more recently those of Das
Rheingold and Die Walkure (Scottish Opera) by Richard Jones, it is because
they seem to exhibit similar artistic impulses.
Among them one may mention the profusion of cross-cultural references and
allusion, often of a highly witty and self-conscious manner, the
determination to escape the trappings of ideological didacticism, and the
use of the proscenium-arch frame as a space which can be filled in
surprising, funny, zany, whimsical ways, with objects and images gathered
magpie-fashion from anywhere and everywhere. Gilbert Adair's self-proclaimed
'snappy definition' in a recent Sunday Times - 'the postmodern is the
postmortem of the modern' - certainly seems apt to the Richard Jones view of
opera. But where that will lead, and what terms will be affixed to the
relevant critical signposts, is anyone's guess.
