FT  09 JUL 92 / Airbus wins Dollars 5bn order in US: United Airlines deal
expected to safeguard British Aerospace jobs
BRITISH Aerospace and the European aircraft industry received a strong boost
yesterday after United Airlines, the second largest US carrier, placed a
Dollars 5bn (Pounds 2.6bn) order for up to 100 Airbus A320 jets.
This latest breakthrough in the US by the European Airbus consortium comes
at a time when the aerospace industry is struggling to win commercial orders
while facing a steep decline in defence sales.
Airbus beat off a tough challenge from Boeing, its US rival and traditional
supplier of jets to United.
The order is expected to safeguard jobs at Airbus's four partners, including
BAe, which builds all the wings for Airbus aircraft. In the UK, 35,000
people are involved in the Airbus programme. The deal is also important for
Rolls-Royce, a partner in the engine group chosen to power the United A320s.
It provides some relief to the two UK groups in a week when the uncertainty
has increased over the future of the Pounds 20bn European Fighter Aircraft
project, in which both BAe and Rolls-Royce are involved.
BAe is a 20 per cent shareholder in Airbus, along with Aerospatiale of
France (37.9 per cent), Deutsche Aerospace (37.9 per cent) and Casa of Spain
(4.2 per cent). Rolls-Royce is a partner in the IAE consortium whose V2500
engine will power the United airliners. The UK content of the A320s United
is acquiring amounts to 32 per cent of the value of each aircraft.
The order is also seen as a confidence boost for the twin-engine narrow-body
aircraft, the advanced technology of which has regularly been the subject of
controversy centring on the safety of its sophisticated 'fly by wire'
computerised flight control systems.
United's order was 'a strong vote of confidence in the A320 and its
attributes', Mr Jean Pierson, the Airbus chief executive, said last night.
Under the agreement, United is acquiring 50 A320s under a long-term leasing
deal with options on an additional 50. The first aircraft is scheduled to be
delivered to the US carrier in November 1993.
Airbus is understood to have put together what industry officials described
last night as 'very attractive financing' to win the deal against Boeing.
One official suggested Airbus had offered United 'an extraordinary
opportunity'.
Although details of the financing were not disclosed, the contract is
understood to be very flexible.
Boeing said last night it was 'extremely disappointed' by United's decision
not to choose its Boeing 737-400 twin-jet aircraft instead of the rival
A320.
'We made a very attractive offer and went as far as prudence would dictate.
Obviously Airbus could do more,' Boeing said.
With the United deal, firm orders placed for the A320 now total 701
aircraft.
