FT  07 APR 92 / International Company News: Commerzbank to raise capital
COMMERZBANK, Germany's third largest bank, is planning to hold two large
capital raising issues later this year or early next year.
According to a bank spokesman last night, the bank is likely to be launching
an issue of options and profit-participating certificates within the next
few months.
Later this year the bank is likely to issue a minimum of 2m new shares.
Assuming a share price of DM200 per share - compared with a closing price of
DM258 yesterday - the bank would raise DM400m (Dollars 242.4m) from the
issue.
The bank said it will be seeking permission from its shareholders to issue
up to 8m new ordinary shares together with convertibles and options with a
total market value of DM1.5bn. Details are likely to emerge at today's
annual press conference.
This would make it possible for the bank to raise over DM3bn, but it is
extremely unlikely it would raise this at once. It is usual for German
companies to obtain shareholder approval for issues which are then made use
of over a period of years.
The bank said last night it wanted the facility in place to increase
management flexibility in the years ahead. A full equity issue was
'probable' before the end of the current year, although the precise amount
to be raised would depend on business developments and the government's
capital adequacy plans.
The spokesman said that an issue of DM100m of nominal shares was the minimum
to be expected. If Bonn decided that Tier one capital should stand at 5 per
cent of total assets, rather than 4 per cent as required under European
Commission legislation, Commerzbank would be obliged to raise more than
this.
The bank said yesterday that total operating profits for the group rose by a
third last year. The increase in operating profits - which include the
results from own-account trading - compares with the 23 per cent increase
announced yesterday by Dresdner Bank and the 16.5 per cent increase posted
by Deutsche Bank last week.
Commerzbank did not disclose what operating profits were last year, although
further details are likely to emerge at today's results press conference.
They amounted to DM1.6bn for the first ten months of 1991 but were not
disclosed in 1990.
The bank said yesterday that the profits had been used to build up its
internal reserves.
