FT  27 FEB 92 / Civil servants alarmed by tendering drive
THE EXTENT and speed of a review of prospects for putting more Civil Service
work out to competitive tender, and the possibility of conflicts of
interests on the part of management consultants carrying it out, is worrying
Whitehall.
The FDA senior civil servants' union said its members were 'seriously
worried' about the use of consultants.
It was concerned at the procedures for hiring them and that the timescale
was too hasty.
A white paper last November revealed the government's intention to identify
more opportunities for putting work out to competitive tender. Departments
and executive agencies were to be set annual 'market testing' targets,
starting this year.
The Treasury unit responsible for the targets is believed to have urged
departments to use private firms and consultants to investigate the
potential for market testing. It has given them until the end of next month
 -a week before the most likely election date - to report, so that targets
can be set.
An internal Department of Social Security memorandum states: 'Departments
are required to use private firms or consultants to look at work being
performed by their staff.'
The DSS has appointed Price Waterhouse to evaluate areas of its work to be
put out to tender.
It is not known how many companies have been engaged, but about half of all
government departments are understood to have appointed management
consultants to draw up targets for market testing. Other departments have
asked private sector procurement experts to advise them, or plan to put
their own proposals for market testing to private sector panels.
It was also feared that consultants engaged to advise government departments
might have private sector clients capable of bidding for the work, causing
potential conflict of interest.
Ms Elizabeth Symons, FDA general secretary, said: 'It is extraordinary for a
government to be acting in this way only days before a general election. We
know nothing of safeguards against a conflict of interest.'
The work will generate welcome additional fee income for hard-pressed
consultancies, but is unlikely to provide a bonanza. Most will have only
five or six weeks to complete the initial work of helping to decide which
departmental services might be suitable for market testing.
Nevertheless the management consultants could be offered additional work
once it was decided to put services out to competitive tender. This could
include writing the terms and conditions of an invitation to tender,
evaluating tenders and perhaps helping internal candidates prepare their
bids.
