FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (10): Plans for
high-speed parcels train - The tunnel will open a new route to Europe
THE ALTERNATIVE route to Europe, which the Channel tunnel will eventually
provide for courier and express business, is the subject of intense
discussion and speculation.
Global express operator DHL has announced that it is seeking partners in a
venture to set up a European parcels train, to run through the tunnel.
The company has been negotiating with British Rail and its French and
Belgian counterparts, SCNF and SNCB, for some time, though DHL's chief
executive, Patrick Lupo, has refused to discuss in detail the nature of the
talks.
'We see a great opportunity in terms of express traffic going through the
tunnel when it is fully operational,' he said. 'It has to be a high-speed
rail link, but the critical factor is that it is the optimum speed to
provide the transit times customers require. If other parties are interested
in this, we would like to hear from them.'
Mr Lupo said the transport minister ought to encourage such export traffic.
The UK manufacturing base, he said, required a transport infrastructure that
would merge more effectively with that on the continent.
DHL is no stranger to letting the train take the strain. Later this year, it
plans to switch its air and road operations between its Brussels hub and
Paris to an overnight rail service. The company is investing Dollars 1m to
build its own terminal at Paris La Chappelle station, and to modify rolling
stock for air express sorting.
Neil Firth, network planning manager, Europe and Africa, said: 'A train
allows you to do something while you are in transit - sorting and
administrative activities. The move towards trains is also a defensive move,
to cover the geography that a truck can. There are also lots of pressures,
environmental and practical, in getting slots and operating out of airports
at the moment.
'The economics are that a train is roughly the same cost as an aeroplane.
There is a difference with a train, in that, as volume grows the incremental
costs become smaller in the longer term, which is strategically much
better.'
The European parcels train, which, according to Mr Firth, would be an
18-carriage TGV, purpose-built to run through the Channel tunnel, would
operate some time after the tunnel was opened.
Andrew Wilby, business manager for Channel tunnel parcels, European
Passenger Services, said British Rail envisaged two European parcels trains,
which would each carry 176 tonnes of express freight:
'They will contain roller beds for carrying containers, which is aircraft
technology - the trains, in effect, will be wingless aircraft. They will
make the journey to Brussels airport in around three hours, just the sort of
time-frame within which an aircraft works.
'However, a train is going to be considerably cheaper, and I understand they
are more reliable than aircraft. . . When an aircraft is grounded because of
fog or snow, it tends to be incapacitated for a long time, whereas a train
would probably be just an hour late.'
British Rail's Red Star, which handles 6m parcels a year, uses air and sea
to carry consignments across the Channel. It has a same-day service from
London to Amsterdam, Brussels, Paris and Rotterdam. When the Tunnel opens,
it plans to run a same-day scheduled service to Paris and Brussels, on the
back of passenger trains.
Roger Harrison, Red Star's public affairs manager, said: 'There is no doubt
that the Channel tunnel will be a boost. The capacity for sending light
freight and documents will be quite extensive. On top of this, an hourly
train service across the Channel will give flexibility - and, of course, a
train is reliable as it is less prone to the effects of adverse weather
conditions such as fog as aircraft are.'
Consignments on trains from London's Waterloo station will be carried under
bond, in total security until they reach Paris and Brussels.
'The train journey time will be three hours to Paris and under three hours
to Brussels, with customs clearance post-1992 making deliveries well within
a working day,' said Mr Harrison. 'The inter-city trains have to be a
winner, because they provide three key factors - reliability, capacity and
frequency.' Mr Wilby said the tunnel would give operators an alternative
international route in a market that was growing by about 20 per cent a
year.
He emphasised that the express services which would use the passenger trains
would not be an open system, and that Red Star would be acting as agent for
private operators.
'Security is of prime importance,' he added, 'and there will be a barrier to
couriers who want to just board a train with parcels. Regulations will have
to be strictly enforced.'
Paul Jackson, of Triangle, specialist management consultants to the freight
and transport industry, said the tunnel offered the industry much potential:
'The main advantage of using a train is being able to sort out packages
while they are in transit. There are also some congestion problems with jets
at various European airports and rail offers an alternative.'
The Red Star retail product would be given a great opportunity, but 'it is
worth remembering that you have to be as good as your railway partners on
the Continent. If the railways got their act together, I believe there would
be a real threat to the European parcels industry.'
'There is no doubt that this is an exciting time for the industry, but it
also could be a difficult one, because the difference between theory and
practice is one of the widest in the whole transport system.'
