FT  13 AUG 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Traders shrug off intervention
THE US DOLLAR slid towards DM1.4600 against the D-Mark yesterday, despite
Tuesday's extensive intervention by major central banks in support of the
currency, writes James Blitz.
In afternoon US trading, the dollar was at DM1.4630, only 20 points above
the level at which central banks had intervened on its behalf 30 hours
earlier. It closed at DM1.4632. The action looks increasingly as though it
was ill-timed. Some analysts also believe the fundamental factors
undermining the dollar are so great that intervention may be abandoned
altogether. Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Yamaichi International in
London, says: 'Given the sluggish nature of the recovery, the US authorities
may be tempted to forget intervention and let the market take the dollar
down itself.'
Indicators suggesting that the differential between US and German interest
rates will widen further, making it too expensive for dealers to be long of
dollars, dragged the US currency down. The prospect of another cut in US
interest rates was sharpened by poor housing completion figures, which
dropped 3.2 per cent in June, after rising 12.8 per cent the previous month.
July's US producer price figures showed the absence of any inflationary
pressures, rising only 0.1 per cent. Tuesday's comment from Mr Nicholas
Brady, the US Treasury secretary, that another interest rate cut cannot be
ruled out, hung over the market.
Conversely, the Bundesbank dangled the prospect of another Lombard rate rise
by draining a large amount of liquidity from the German money market. By
withdrawing DM2.4bn in its weekly security repurchase agreement, the
Bundesbank kept call money just below the Lombard rate level of 9.75 per
cent. Dealers still cannot rule out a German rate hike after France votes in
its referendum on Maastricht in September.
Dollar weakness dragged sterling down  1/2 a pfennig against the D-Mark to
finish at DM2.8225 at the London close. Rumours of Mr Norman Lamont's
resignation as Chancellor helped push the currency down, but they later
proved unfounded. The lira continued to make the recent cut in Italian
interest rates look ill-judged as it dropped to L758.0 against the D-Mark
from a previous close of L756.3.
The market's interest was otherwise focused on the Australian dollar, which
sank towards the USDollars 0.71 level against the US currency despite more
intervention from the Reserve Bank of Australia. The RBA again bought the
'Aussie dollar' at USDollars 0.7180 yesterday, but the currency was quoted
at USDollars 0.7150 in London at 1215 GMT. Fears of a cut in Australian
interest rates are driving the currency down.
