FT  03 OCT 92 / Care reform funds win approval
MRS VIRGINIA BOTTOMLEY, health secretary, yesterday announced funding
arrangements for next year's community care reforms which social services
directors and political opponents acknowledged were reasonable in the
present state of public expenditure.
She surprised delegates to the local authorities social services conference
on the Isle of Wight with an announcement that, in the early years of the
reforms, part of the finance will be subject to 'ring fence' protection to
ensure that it is spent on community care rather than on other purposes.
Next April, local authorities will become responsible for co-ordinating a
policy designed to help elderly and handicapped people to remain in the
community rather than have to enter institutions. Spending on keeping people
in private residential and nursing homes has soared from Pounds 10m in 1979
to about Pounds 2.5bn now.
Although the position of people already living in residential homes will be
unaffected, money that would have been spent on accommodating further people
will be transferred from the social security budget to local authorities.
Under the proposals, English local authorities will receive Pounds 539m in
community care grants in 1993-94 - Pounds 399m transferred from the social
security budget and a further Pounds 140m towards the start-up costs of the
new system. Sums transferred in lieu of social security expenditure that
would have been incurred under the existing system will rise to a cumulative
Pounds 1.050bn in 1994-95 and Pounds 1.568bn in 1995-96.
The government had decided, Mrs Bottomley said, that in the crucial early
years of the new policy, the new elements of community care finance needed
temporary ring-fencing.
All Pounds 539m in 1993-94 will be protected. After that, protection will be
restricted to the additional funds transferred from the social security
budget in 1994-95 and 1995-96. In that way, ministers hope to guarantee that
funds earmarked for community care are actually spent on the reforms.
Mr Toby Harris, Labour chairman of the Association of Metropolitan
Authorities' social services committee, acknowledged that Mrs Bottomley had
fought 'a substantial battle to get the figure she has announced'. The AMA
believes, however, that there is a Pounds 200m shortfall in the Pounds 399m
due next year arising from differences in government and AMA calculations of
the rate of growth in people needing residential care.
Mr Peter Smallridge, director of Kent Social Services and chairman of the
Association of Directors of Social Service, said the immediate reaction of
social services directors was that Mrs Bottomley had done well to secure the
proposed level of funding and protection.
The government says the Pounds 399m transferred from social security must be
spent in the private and voluntary sectors. Mrs Bottomley said the reforms
were not intended to become 'a trigger for a great expansion of
local-authority-operated services'. The government hopes the funding changes
will lead the private sector to open up domiciliary and day care facilities.
