FT  28 OCT 92 / Geneva negotiators present draft constitution for Bosnia
NEGOTIATORS at the Geneva conference on former Yugoslavia yesterday
presented a draft constitution for Bosnia-Hercegovina aimed at preserving
the territorial integrity of the republic and preventing it from being
divided into three separate cantons.
However, it is unlikely that the constitution will persuade Mr Mate Boban,
head of Bosnia's Croat forces, and Mr Radovan Karadzic, leader of the
republic's Serb forces, to stop the fighting. Last year, both men, backed by
the republics of Serbia and Croatia, agreed to cantonise Bosnia as a means
of eventually annexing Croat- and Serb-controlled regions to these two
republics. The plan, which would have left the Moslem population with an
insignificant slice of Bosnia, was tacitly endorsed by Lord Carrington,
former chairman of the EC-sponsored peace conference on the region.
Mr Fred Eckhard, spokesman for the co-chairmen of the Geneva conference,
yesterday said the document was 'a unique constitution' that would provide a
framework for the preservation of Bosnia-Hercegovina's sovereignty, based on
the concept of a central government with about 10 regional governments
having authority over language, education, police and law enforcement.
Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, the United Nations and European Community
chairmen of the conference, said the constitution would be 'subject to very
strong' human rights provisions. However, it remains unclear how the
constitution will be implemented, or how it could end the war in Bosnia.
Negotiators at Geneva have repeatedly warned Serbia and Croatia they will
not tolerate any carve-up of Bosnia, saying that sanctions on Serbia would
be maintained, and even imposed on Croatia if the latter tried to annex the
Croat-held region of western Hercegovina.
Growing pressure on Croatia has led to tension between Croatian President
Franjo Tudjman and Mr Boban. This partly explains why Croat forces in Bosnia
have stepped up their campaign against the Moslems to consolidate their grip
over a large swathe of Bosnia before the constitutional principles are
implemented.
