FT  27 NOV 92 / Technology: Stalking the enemy within - Thousands of people
die every year from infections that resist antibiotics. Clive Cookson
continues a series on drug discovery by looking at new ways of killing germs
Infectious diseases are re-emerging as a serious threat to health in
advanced industrialised countries, the US National Academy of Sciences says
in an alarming new report. A particular cause for concern is the growing
resistance of microbes to antibiotic drugs.
The NAS report follows a series of calls by American microbiologists and
epidemiologists for an end to the 'era of complacency' about infectious
illnesses.
'The medical community and society at large have tended to view acute
infectious diseases as a problem of the past,' said Robert Shope of Yale
University. 'But that assumption is wrong. We claimed victory too soon.'
The drugs industry is listening to such views - and is attracted by the
growing commercial potential of antibiotics. Their sales are now
accelerating fast, after a sluggish spell in the 1980s. Stewart Adkins, a
pharmaceutical analyst at Shearson Lehman, estimates that the worldwide
market for antibiotics was worth Dollars 20bn (Pounds 13bn) last year, 12
per cent up on 1990. 'Drug resistance is the key driver of the market,' he
said.
Soon after penicillin came into use in the 1940s, microbiologists began to
find resistant strains emerging, as a simple result of selective evolution.
If any bacteria survive a course of antibiotic treatment, they will be the
ones with natural resistance, while their more susceptible sisters are wiped
out.
However, pharmaceutical researchers managed to avert a penicillin resistance
crisis by discovering new classes of antibiotics - cephalosporins,
tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, carbapenems - which doctors could use
instead.
As bacteria became resistant to one drug, doctors could prescribe another.
But for some bacteria, this approach has come to the end of the road. All
over the world, people are dying as a result of infections which do not
respond to any of the 160 different antibiotics on the market.
The problem has been exacerbated by excessive use. Although antibiotics
attack bacteria rather than viruses, there are still many doctors willing to
prescribe broad-spectrum antibiotics to patients with ill-defined symptoms
that are almost certainly viral in origin. And the veterinary industry has
contributed by dosing farm animals with unnecessary antibiotics.
Estimates of the total cost of antibiotic resistance in the US range up to
Dollars 30bn a year. Organisms in which resistance is a serious problem
include Streptococci, Staphylococci, Enterococci, Pseudomonas, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and many others. They cause a horrifying range of diseases,
from pneumonia to meningitis.
People are most likely to fall victim to a resistant organism when they go
into hospital. In the US, 5 per cent of patients - some 2m people - pick up
infections they did not have when entering hospital, and more than 20,000 of
them die every year, according to the NAS report. 'Every year,
hospital-acquired infections account for between Dollars 5bn and Dollars
10bn in additional medical-related expenses.'
Meanwhile, drug companies continue to develop novel antibiotics for use
against microbes that are resistant to the old ones.
Several promising newcomers come from Japan. Lorabid, discovered by Kyowa
Hakku and just launched in the US by Eli Lilly, is the first in a new class
of oral antibiotics with a broad spectrum of activity, the carbacephems.
Pharmaceutical analysts say Lorabid could be a Dollars 1bn-a-year
blockbuster for Lilly, the leading US antibiotics manufacturer.
In the UK, ICI has high hopes for meropenem, discovered by Sumitomo and
developed as an Anglo-Japanese collaboration. Meropenem - due to be launched
in Europe in 1994 - belongs to a related class of antibiotics, the
carbapenems, which also have a very wide range of anti-bacterial activity.
But SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-US group, has taken the lead in tackling
resistance head on. Bacteria protect themselves against many antibiotics by
producing an enzyme called beta-lactamase which destroys the antibiotic
before it has a chance to destroy them. After a long search SB found a
substance, clavulanic acid, which inhibits the production of beta-lactamase
in bacteria.
SB combined clavulanic acid with amoxyllin, a well-established derivative of
penicillin, to create Augmentin. Augmentin cures a wide range of infections
that are resistant to amoxyllin itself and its sales are rising rapidly.
This year or next, Augmentin is expected to overtake Lilly's Ceclor and
become the world's best-selling brand of antibiotic.
According to SB, no resistance to Augmentin has yet emerged. But the drug is
by no means powerful enough to deal with all bacteria, and SB scientists are
developing other combinations of antibiotics and beta-lactamase inhibitors,
which promise to be more potent and wide-ranging.
At the same time, several small pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies
are working on more radical solutions to the resistance problem. They are
using natural peptides - small protein molecules produced by living
creatures such as frogs, insects and bacteria themselves as a chemical
defence against microbes - as a basis for developing alternative
bacteriocidal drugs.
These peptides, which go by various names such as bacteriocins, magainins
and cecropins, work in a quite different way to conventional antibiotics.
They kill bacteria by 'punching holes in their cell walls so that their guts
spill out,' as David Guttman, chief executive of Applied Microbiology, puts
it. It is far more difficult for bacteria to evolve resistance to this
external attack than to antibiotics, which interfere with their inner
workings.
Applied Microbiology, a biotechnology company based in New York, is
developing drugs based on nisin, a peptide produced by Lactococcus bacteria
in milk to kill off competing microbes. Nisin is manufactured in the UK by
Aplin &amp; Barrett - now owned by Applied Microbiology - and has been used as a
food preservative for 30 years without any resistance emerging.
By combining nisin with chemicals known as chelating agents, scientists at
Applied Microbiology have created powerful drugs with a broad spectrum of
anti-bacterial activity. One target is Helicobacter pylori, an important
cause of peptic ulcers.
Magainin Pharmaceutical, based in Pennsylvania, is focusing on defensive
peptides which frogs secrete from their skins. The company's first magainin
drug, a topical antibiotic for skin infections, started human clinical
trials last month.
In the UK, Proteus is using computer-aided molecular design techniques to
change the structure of the peptides, so as to make them more potent and
longer-lasting than the natural chemicals. Its drugs have shown promise in
laboratory tests but are not yet ready for human trials.
A limitation of many peptides is that they are broken down by the human
digestive system and therefore cannot be taken by mouth to give a systemic
effect. But Magainin is developing modified versions which could be systemic
antibiotics. And Jay Moorin, chief executive, is excited about a recently
discovered molecule, squalamine, which circulates in the blood of sand
sharks. 'It is the broadest spectrum natural antibiotic we have every seen,
and it's absorbable orally,' he says.
Entirely new antibiotics such as squalamine may help to turn back the tide
of infectious disease in the next century. Until then both the human and
animal health sectors must learn to curb their excessive use of antibiotics.
An article on drugs to treat depression will appear shortly before
Christmas.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD SALES OF TOP 10 ANTIBIOTICS
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
1991 estimate
Product            Originator            Principal brands   Dollars bn
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Ampicillin         SmithKline Beecham    Many               2.00
Amoxicillin        SmithKline Beecham    Many               1.40
Cefaclor           Lilly                 Ceclor             1.10
Amoxicillin-
Clavulanic acid    SmithKline Beecham    Augmentin          0.90
Ciprofloxacin      Bayer                 Cipro              0.85
Ceftriaxone        Roche                 Rocephin           0.80
Erythromycin       Abbott                Many               0.80
Cefuroxime         Glaxo                 Zinnat/Zinacef     0.65
Cefalexin          Lilly                 Many               0.60
Ceftazidime        Glaxo                 Fortaz             0.60
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Michael Barber &amp; Associates
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
