FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Growth dependent on drugs - Zeneca's hopes
for the future
THE FUTURE of pharmaceuticals is critical for Zeneca, Imperial Chemical
Industries' biosciences company, given the bleak immediate outlook for
company's agrochemicals and speciality chemicals businesses.
The company's drugs pipeline has been criticised for being thin, with few
new chemical entities. However, in a presentation yesterday described by
analysts as up-beat, Mr David Friend, pharmaceuticals chief executive, said
extending the number of new diseases that existing products could treat was
more important than introducing new drugs that could generate only limited
sales.
Mr Tom McKillop, research and technology director, considered the
pharmaceuticals pipeline to be the most promising for many years. The
division aimed to bring a new chemical entity for licensing each year. There
would be no new compound launched next year, but Zeneca expected to receive
seven new US drug approvals and make nine new submissions.
Four drugs were in regulatory development, said Mr McKillop. These included
Merrem, an antibiotic, Casodex, an anti-cancer agent, Accolate, an asthma
drug, and a compound called 204636, designed to treat schizophrenia.
Analysts said the last two, which had been briefly described last year, were
extremely promising but were some way from launch.
Mr Friend said profit growth presented the division with a singular
challenge because of the rapid collapse in sales of Tenormin, the heart drug
and the world's fifth best-selling drug. The rapid decline had been in spite
of the preparations made well in advance of the expiry of its US patents.
He admitted the 12 generic versions of Tenormin had captured about 50 per
cent of the market within a year, instead of the expected two years.
Tenormin had proved the largest ever target for generics, he said.
ICI's own generic version had generated some sales until April, when prices
had deteriorated. A programme called Wellspring, designed to create customer
loyalty, had proved a rather limited defensive strategy.
Mr Friend said there were signs that the generics' progress was decelerating
and Tenormin would end up with more than 25 per cent of the market.
He added that the division should be back on its normal growth track by
1994. The group was far less dependent upon a single product and would be
far more stable in the long-term.
Meanwhile, Zeneca's new drugs had progressed well, said Mr Friend.
Diprivan, the world's most important anaesthetic by value should generate
sales this year of about Pounds 140m, an improvement of approximately 50 per
cent. It enjoyed 65 per cent of the worldwide market for intravenous
induction of anaesthesia. The company was looking to introduce the drug into
the market for maintaining anaesthesia and sedation.
Zoladex, a cancer treatment, should generate revenues of Pounds 100m this
year, a rise of about 50 per cent. The group said it hoped to gain approvals
for the drug to treat hormonal tumours and benign gynaecological conditions.
The market was becoming increasingly competitive, Mr Friend warned, but
efforts to find a longer-acting formulation remained a high priority.
