FT  29 SEP 92 / International Company News: DKB moves staff to help
restructuring at Kankaku
DAI-ICHI Kangyo Bank, Japan's largest commercial bank, is planning to
dispatch staff to Kankaku Securities as part of a restructuring programme
begun by the troubled second-tier broker.
The move by DKB is an indicator of closer ties between medium-sized Japanese
brokers and their patron banks, which may receive approval next year to
enter the securities business. The banks consider that these links to
brokers will provide longer-term opportunities for expansion.
Meanwhile, Japan's Ministry of Finance yesterday announced a relaxation of
the formula used to calculate brokers' capital adequacy. It will allow
brokers to count subordinated loans as capital and has eased assessment
guidelines on publicly-traded shares and operating costs.
Most brokers have reported a sharp fall in their capital ratios over the
past year, and the ministry's decision will allow them to avoid
embarrassment for the first half, ending this month.
By the ministry's standards, warning signals are triggered when the capital
ratio passes below 200 per cent; brokers with 150 per cent or less are
forbidden from opening new branches; and the ministry is supposed to begin
daily monitoring of a broker at 120 per cent.
At the end of March, three of Japan's 14 largest brokers were below 200 per
cent - Sanyo Securities, Cosmo Securities, and Yamatane Securities  - while
Kankaku reported a ratio of 212 per cent, down from 240 per cent in the
previous year.
The ministry, attempting to restore public confidence in the industry, said
the new standard for calculating operating costs - 25 per cent of the
preceding 12 months' costs, instead of 25 per cent of the previous financial
year - would reflect the brokers' attempts to reduce expenses in recent
months.
None of Japan's top 14 securities houses expects to make a profit in the
first half, and several of the 10 second-tier brokers have announced
restructuring plans, including Yamatane Securities, which is receiving staff
and assistance from Sakura Bank.
While Kankaku has indicated that its 5,300 staff will be reduced by 20 per
cent, the company is still expecting a Y18bn (Dollars 146m) loss for the
first half. Like other second-tier brokers, it is burdened by heavy
investments in computer systems far beyond its requirements.
As part of the assistance package, DKB is likely to share the costs of a
Y45bn computer centre commissioned by Kankaku in the late 1980s, when the
company had visions of challenging the leading Japanese brokers. Badly
bruised by weak prices and turnover on the Tokyo market, the company has
dropped those ambitions and is now planning to close branches.
DKB is also considering a proposal to employ some of Kankaku's systems
engineers in its own subsidiaries, as well as sending managers to the
brokerage, possibly including a member of the bank's board, a move that
would strengthen the relationship between the two institutions.
Earlier this month, Kankaku announced the promotion of Mr Yoichiro Kato,
vice-president, to the presidency with effect from October 1, as part of the
brokerage's rationalisation plans. Mr Kato was sent to Kankaku from DKB in
June 1991 to take up the post of vice-president.
