FT  24 DEC 92 / German president urges easier citizenship laws
MR Richard von Weizsacker, the German state president, yesterday criticised
attitudes in the country which, he said, condemned people 'born among us' to
remain 'forever foreign'.
In a moving Christmas address to the nation, he praised the contribution of
immigrants to the German economy, and urged that they be given the chance to
be German citizens, even with dual nationality.
Mr von Weizsacker said that the Turkish woman and two girls who died in a
neo-Nazi arson attack in the town of Molln in November should not sim-ply be
labelled 'three Turks'.
'Ten-year-old Yeliz Arslan, who died with her relations . . . was born among
us, and never lived anywhere else,' he said. 'Our media simply called them
three Turks.
'That expression, based solely on their passports, already suggests they
should remain forever foreign. Yet those three in Molln belonged to us]'
His address was issued as reports came of a new attack on Turkish migrant
workers, in which a 29-year-old woman and her 24-year-old brother-in-law
were injured when a firebomb, disguised as a parcel, exploded in their
faces.
Police said the parcel was left on the doorstep of the family home, in a
Cologne suburb, but there was no immediate evidence to link the attack with
extreme rightwing violence.
Mr von Weizsacker, who was pelted with eggs and other missiles by leftwing
radicals last month at a rally against racism in Berlin, used his
traditional Christmas message to make an outspoken appeal for a relaxation
of Germany's strict naturalisation laws. His plea marks the first time that
such a senior figure has identified Germany's narrow definition of
nationality - and not simply rightwing extremism and uncontrolled
immigration - as a contributing factor to xenophobia.
'Of course we want to feel at home in Germany,' he said. 'But are we clear
enough ourselves about just who is contributing to making sure that our home
works well?'
He cited the numbers of foreign workers in valuable jobs in the city of
Munich: 20 per cent in the hospitals, more than a third in restaurants,
almost 50 per cent of mechanics and metalworkers, and more than 70 per cent
of the city's street cleaners.
'We are very happy to take advantage of what foreign workers have been doing
here for decades,' he said. 'It would be both inhuman and stupid if we were
to try and exclude them from our society.
'If we were to make it easier for those who wish to acquire German
nationality, then we would be improving their situation. It is in our own,
German, interest.'
His appeal touches on an sensitive issue for Germans, who have maintained a
definition of nationality since 1913 based on blood. Outsiders applying for
naturalisation have to fulfil stringent requirements and renounce any other
nationality.
Germans appear unmoved by recession threat, Page 2
Inflation hits six-month high in Germany, Page 2
