FT  19 OCT 92 / Ford aims to recapture fast-fit business
FORD expects its dealers to have 100 fast-fit service outlets in the UK by
the end of this year as the start of an effort to recapture business lost to
big independent operators such as Kwik-Fit Euro, Halfords and hundreds of
small garages and traders.
The chain, operating under the name of Rapid Fit, will be established on a
pan-European basis with the UK playing the main pioneering role. Mr Steve
Webb, Rapid Fit's manager, said about 60 outlets had opened and 314 of
Ford's 1,000 UK dealers had so far applied to join the scheme.
The company wants dealers to improve their small share of the fast-fit
market for the 5.8m Ford vehicles up to 10 years old on UK roads. Ford
calculates that this business is worth Pounds 387m annually but that its own
dealer network has only 7 per cent of it.
The two most valuable areas in the fast-fit markets are tyres and exhausts,
which account for Pounds 224m of the total, but Ford dealers have only 2 per
cent and 3 per cent shares respectively.
Without the fleet business and regular service and repair work on newer cars
 -where there is a strong motive to use franchised dealers because of
warranty and related considerations - much of Ford's dealer network might by
now be in substantial financial difficulties because of the drop in sales of
new cars over the past few years.
Ford calculates that after-sales activities on average account for 78 per
cent of dealers' profits - most of it derived from the Pounds 400m to Pounds
500m of after-sales business calculated to lie outside the fast-fit sector.
The problem facing Ford's dealer network is common throughout the industry.
Vauxhall, General Motors' UK subsidiary, and Opel, its German sister
company, have already launched a similar operation, called Masterfit, which
is also being spread throughout Europe.
Both new operations, focusing on quick service and aggressive pricing,
represent a belated response to criticism which grew throughout the 1970s
and 1980s that the franchised trade charged excessive prices and provided
poor levels of service in comparison with specialist fast-fit operators.
The Ford programme has altered in emphasis since it was first conceived in
the late 1980s. It was thought then that the chain would comprise large,
purpose-built sites independent of dealerships and catering for all makes of
cars.
The outlets now being established, however, are on much more modest scale.
They are mostly on dealers' existing premises and the ability to cater for
all makes of cars is no longer being stressed.
As Mr Webb acknowledged, when the dealers' share of work on Ford cars is so
small, it is seen as more relevant to regain the loyalty of owners of Ford
vehicles.
Ford itself has invested Pounds 5m so far in organising the chain and
providing support services to the dealers.
About 200 Ford dealers are now selling tyres, the first stage in becoming a
Rapid Fit outlet. Mr Webb claims that this is already proving a marked
success. Last year dealers had a 2 per cent share of the replacement tyre
market for Ford cars and this is expected to rise to 15 per cent this year.
Apart from tyres, the outlets are involved in replacement exhausts,
batteries and fixed-price servicing - with some outlets also involved in
work on brakes, suspension, clutches and cooling systems.
Ford expects about 100 Rapid Fit dealers to begin operating in France over
the next two years, with a smaller number planned for Spain.
Germany, in spite of being Europe's largest car market, is not included
because, according to Ford, most German motorists have a preference for
using dealers rather than independents.
