FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (13): New investment incentives -
Chalons-sur-Marne, capital of the Champagne-Ardenne region
LIKE many other provincial towns across France, Chalons-sur-Marne has seized
the opportunity offered by decentralisation of local government in recent
years to initiate a wave of investment.
Chalons-sur-Marne, capital of the Champagne-Ardenne region, badly needs to
invest to attract private sector industry to counterbalance its
uncomfortably heavy dependence on public sector jobs.
Accordingly, Chalons-sur-Marne will early next year open a 56-hectare
business park at Les Escarnotieres, just outside the town, which will offer
a range of tax, social security and job creation incentives for arrivals.
Further ahead, there are plans for a FFr400m to FFr500m freight airport, due
to be one of Europe's largest, on the site of a military airbase at nearby
Chalons-Vatry, jointly funded by the town, the chamber of commerce and
private sector banks. The project has run into resistance from Aeroports de
Paris, the French airports authority, unwilling to see freight business move
from Orly to the provinces. However, the city authorities are optimistic,
thanks to promises of support from the European Commission. If successful,
the scheme is due to open by the end of 1995.
The airport project is also, incidentally, an example of the surprisingly
close co-operation between the Communist-run city and the conservative
controlled Chamber of Commerce - 'it is essential that we work together to
provide the best tailored solutions for companies,' says Mr Christian
Bernard, the chamber's manager.
The region and the Marne departmental councils are also controlled by the
right, but despite these political differences there is broad agreement with
the city on local planning and economic development.
Chalons-sur-Marne is doing its utmost to play on its geographical advantages
to attract businesses to the area. The town's great asset is to be
positioned on the junction between France's main west-east motorway - half
way from Calais to the German border - and the country's main southern
motorway from Paris to Milan.
The southern route, the A26, follows the line of the ancient Via Agrippa,
indicating that the town has a historic claim as a distribution centre. It
is no accident that distribution companies fill eight pages of the local
telephone book, including Harris Distribution, the UK group which opened a
depot there last year.
A combination of historical accident and design means that 40 per cent of
Chalons-sur-Marne's workforce is employed by the state. Big local state
employers include France Telecom, the post office, the SNCF rail board and
the regional and Marne departmental offices.
'We are a town of civil servants, which means we are relatively prosperous,
but have a weak industrial base,' explains explains Mr Pierre-Yves Danion,
economic adviser to the Communist mayor, Mr Jean Reyssier.
This has cushioned Chalons-sur-Marne from the decline of traditional
industries which have badly hit neighbouring areas like the Vosges, so that
it has an unemployment rate of 9 per cent, well below the national average.
Yet it is only too conscious that this cushion could deflate at a time when
central government is looking for new ways to control its budget deficit. As
a result, the town hall is badly short of business tax, a locally levied
payroll and turnover charge which forms an important part of its funding.
This, argues Mr Danion, is another example of how central government has
shifted more responsibility to local authorities without giving them the
full means to exercise their new role.
