FT  10 SEP 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Banking on nice
little earners / A look at selling financial services
Over the last decade, Britain's high street banks and building societies
have stopped thinking of themselves as suppliers of services and begun to
call themselves retailers.
As a result savings accounts, insurance policies, mortgages, and credit
cards are all routinely referred to as products. But if they are products
being sold to the public by retailers, should they have their own brandings?
Unlike most retailers, banks and building societies normally sell only their
own products and the primary purpose of their marketing is to attract
consumers to a particular organisation. That at least is the classical view.
One of its strongest defenders is Halifax, the UK's largest building
society.
'The society's marketing is designed to ensure that each product contributes
to a central theme and that they do not have a life of their own which may
create confusion in the consumer's mind,' says Dick Spellman, Halifax's
general manager of marketing.
Spellman's strategy concentrates on a strong central branding designed to
convey the message that Halifax is the industry's giant and that as far as
savers are concerned, there is strength and safety in numbers.
'For us, the brand can only work if it is recognised by large numbers of
people over time,' he says.
Halifax tries to instil consumer recognition by giving its products names
with an 'X' in them. 'We try and imbue the 'X' into product names such as
Apex, Extra, and Maxim, and get them to feed off each other,' says Spellman.
Nationwide, the second largest society, last year made a much more radical
attempt to stand out from the pack. Its excursion into designer advertising,
to create brand awareness for the organisation as a whole, was short-lived.
The television-watching public was baffled by black and white shots of a son
travelling by bus through Fiji while reading a letter from his father back
in England. 'The campaign increased awareness for us but it was unexpected
from a building society,' Nationwide says.
Subsequently it has concentrated on trying to build up its image as a
friendly provider of home loans, and does not try to encourage specific
brand names for its products. Its latest advertising campaign is modestly
entitled 'Our Customers'.
'There is a number of good name brands in financial services but none of
them can do without the name of the home organisation in front if it,' says
Nationwide. However it concedes that some strong sub-brand names have
succeeded and points to Barclaycard as one of the best.
Flexaccount, the cheque book current account Nationwide launched in 1987,
came close to developing into a brand in its own right, but that reflected
the fact that Nationwide was promoting the first mass-market,
interest-bearing cheque book current account which required an especially
emphatic marketing drive.
Most other large building societies have followed the same course. Woolwich,
Alliance &amp; Leicester, and Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester do little more than
promote awareness of their names. National &amp; Provincial has gone slightly
further by adopting a mascot, a cheerful but sightless bee, to symbolise it.
Building societies generally like to promote a slightly antiquated and
changeless corporate image to signal to potential customers how secure they
are.
However, one building society has struck out on a different course. Leeds
Permanent, Britain's fifth largest building society, believes in developing
strongly branded products. In complete contrast to the solid images others
are promoting, Leeds Permanent has utilised the appeal of wide-boy Arthur
Daley in its advertising.
Alongside its own corporate branding and logo, relaunched two years ago, it
has promoted a savings brand name - 'Liquid Gold', a current account which
combined high interest rates with instant access.
'Our share in the savings market for Liquid Gold is something like twice our
overall market share,' says Chris Chadwick, commercial director at Leeds
Permanent.
Leeds Permanent's other savings products 'are merely products with a name
and have not been developed,' he says. About Pounds 20m has been spent over
five years developing Liquid Gold. The society is now planning to spend more
than Pounds 3m promoting Homearranger, a mortgage with a range of back-up
services intended to make life easier for the customer.
The clearing banks have had a mixed experience with the branding of
products. Midland Bank has quietly retreated from the high profile branding
of the late 1980s for its Vector, Meridian, and Orchard current accounts.
The credit card world provides a particularly striking illustration of the
way in which strong product brandings can come into conflict with changes in
the market.
When the credit card market opened up in the late 1980s, Barclaycard began
to issue MasterCard products as well as Visa. Barclays was able to launch a
new Barclaycard MasterCard product without much difficulty, but Connect, the
Barclays debit card, does not belong to the family.
The consortium of high street banks which issue the rival Access brand hit
even greater problems. The Access branding distracts from the card-issuer's
identity. The banks have greatly increased the prominence of their logos on
both the credit cards and the monthly statements to customers, but some
Access customers still do not realise that their card is part of their
banking relationship with NatWest, Lloyds, Midland or Royal Bank of
Scotland.
Access is also a UK-only branding: outside the UK, customers have to learn
to respond to the MasterCard global brand name or in countries such as
Germany, to the Eurocard brand name.
Worst of all, the shared Access branding means that the public cannot
differentiate between the services being offered by each individual member
bank.
