FT  06 JUN 92 / Hanson plans to float Jacuzzi as part of Pounds 700m asset
sale
HANSON, the Anglo-US con-glomerate, is planning to sell most of its non-core
businesses, which it values at more than Pounds 700m.
In a departure from its traditional method of selling companies, Hanson is
considering floating off majority stakes in its US non-core businesses,
which include Jacuzzi, the whirlpool bath and hot tub manufacturer, and
Beazer's US housebuilding interests.
Mr David Clarke, chief executive of Hanson Industries, the company's North
American arm, yesterday said, as well as Jacuzzi, the US companies earmarked
for disposal had been packaged into three groups of housebuilding, consumer
products, recreation and leisure.
Hanson is likely to keep a small stake in the four groups, which are valued
by its advisers at more than a Dollars 1bn (Pounds 546m).
In the UK, Hanson has earmarked small consumer and industrial companies
worth about Pounds 200m for trade sales.
The disposals, which are expected to begin shortly, are designed to allow
Hanson to concentrate on the management of seven core businesses which it is
keen to expand. They are Peabody Coal, Cavenham Forest, Beazer USA, Grove
Industries and SCM Chemicals in the US and Imperial Tobacco and building
products groups, including ARC and London Brick, in the UK.
The US flotations will be the first since Hanson's controversial flotation
of 52 per cent of Smith Corona, the typewriter manufacturer, for Dollars 21
a share in July 1989.
Shortly after the flotation, which raised Dollars 386m for Hanson, Smith
Corona announced a deterioration in its sales, and the share price collapsed
to Dollars 5. Yesterday in New York they were trading at 9 5/8 .
Lord White, chairman of Hanson Industries, said: 'The lesson to be learnt
from Smith Corona is that the offer price was pitched too high.'
Mr Clarke said the four groups contained strong brand names, such as Tommy
Armour golf equipment and Farberware cookware, with earnings growth
potential.
He believed the publicity surrounding the flotations would be good for
Hanson, which is aiming to increase the proportion of US-based shareholders
from 21 per cent to 30 per cent in the next few years.
