FT  25 JUN 92 / Glasgow (8): A lot to offer - Tourism
TOURISM has been one of the key elements in the renaissance of Glasgow.
In 1982 there were 700,000 visitors to Glasgow, many of them day trippers.
By 1990 the number had risen to 3m. Of these, 1.5m were staying visitors
with an average stop of two nights. Around 500,000 were from abroad.
It has been estimated that the total tourist 'spend' in that year was Pounds
217m accounting for 10 per cent of tourist spending in Scotland as a whole.
In terms of foreign visitors, the amount spent was Pounds 109m or half the
total. This accounted for almost 20 per cent of the Scottish average.
Glasgow became the third most popular short break destination in the UK
after London and Edinburgh.
According to the Greater Glasgow Tourist Board 22,000 people in Glasgow were
employed in tourism in 1990 out of a labour force of 350,000. This figure
does not include the self-employed and represents 6.3 per cent of the
workforce.
How has this transformation come about? Admittedly, 1990 was exceptional,
marking Glasgow's designation as the EC City of Culture and last year,
visitors again dropped back a little.
But the City of Culture year was only a stage in a concerted drive by the
Labour-dominated city council to diversify the city's economy.
First, it would spruce up the city centre. Second it would develop retailing
at all levels. Third it would win inward investors from financial services,
government departments and high technology companies. Finally, there would
be an attempt to exploit its rich cultural heritage to attract visitors.
Glasgow claims to have the largest cultural infrastructure in the UK outside
London and has some 200 cultural and performing arts organisations.
The authorities' attempts to increase tourism received a lift from set-piece
events such as the Glasgow Garden Festival in 1988 visited by more than 4m
people in five months.
Then there was the City of Culture year in 1990. Some 3,700 events of
different sizes were staged throughout the year. A report on the year's
impact on Glasgow, by Professor John Myerscough, an economist specialising
in the economic impact of culture, concluded that: 'The initiative generated
a positive net economic return to the regional economy of Pounds 10.3m to
Pounds 14.1m. Extra employment arising from Glasgow 1990 was estimated at
5,350'5,580 person years.' The year of culture also attracted about 600,000
extra visitors. But although culture spearheaded the campaign to develop
tourism it was not the whole story.
The much brighter image of Glasgow had attracted the general leisure tourist
before 1990. The shopping/hotel/ restaurant infrastructure was well
developed by 1990. The speciality shopping in Prince's Square and the
Italian centre are both appealing to an international audience.
Americans started to add Glasgow to London, Stratford and Edinburgh on their
list of cultural destinations. International visitor numbers were further
boosted when, under the government's open skies policy for Scotland, Glasgow
airport won the right to operate transatlantic flights, ending the monopoly
held by Prestwick. There are now daily flights between Glasgow and
destinations in the US and Canada.
Glasgow is increasingly seen as a starting place for trips to the Highlands,
to the Robert Burns country in Ayrshire and Dumfriesshire, to Loch Lomond
and the golf courses of St Andrews and Gleneagles.
The Greater Glasgow Tourist Board claims that 'Greater Glasgow is the only
destination in Western Europe that can boast 13,000 beds, a purpose-built
conference and exhibition centre and international airport all within 15
minutes of each other'.
The Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre can house concerts for 10,000
and has seen performers as diverse as Pavarotti and Paul Simon in recent
years. But its main function is to house trade shows and conferences in its
five halls.
Business visitors are another important element of Glasgow's tourism drive.
There are a number of four star business hotels like the Holiday Inn and
Forte Crest. Next April the city will get its first 5-star hotel with the
opening of the Glasgow Hilton.
The 300-room hotel costing over Pounds 36m will include a grand ballroom for
up to 1,000 people, a specialist conference centre and 11 boardrooms.
Mr Ronald Roy , the chief executive of the Greater Glasgow Tourist Board and
Convention Bureau, reckons the importance of business tourism should not be
underestimated. He says, 'rounded up I estimate that about half the Pounds
200m-odd Glasgow earns from tourism comes from business visitors,
particularly conferences'.
