FT  15 APR 92 / Survey of Monaco (6): Privacy eludes royal family - The
Grimaldis
WHEN Hello], the most gushing and garrulous of Britain's gossip magazines,
recently polled its readers on whom they considered to be their favourite
'celebrity' and 'Hello] cover star', the name of Princess Caroline of Monaco
came close to the top of every list.
In any other year it would have been entirely predictable that the
Chanel-clad Caroline with her glossy good looks and penchant for the Paris
fashion shows should have appeared in such a poll. But Hello] had polled its
readers little more than a year after the sudden death of her husband, Mr
Stefano Casiraghi, in a power boat race.
Princess Caroline had spent that year as a recluse. She had retreated with
her children to a tiny village in rural Provence. She had cropped her hair,
worn mourning black and, on the very rare occasions when she did appear in
public, she had done so bereft of make-up and hidden behind a pair of
sunglasses.
In short, she had done everything she could to signal to the world at large
 -and the paparazzi in particular  - that, devastated by the death of her
husband, she needed peace and privacy.
But privacy is elusive for Monaco's royal family. Princess Caroline and the
other Grimaldis have lived their lives in a blaze of publicity and the glare
of paparazzi flashes. So much so that Caroline has been as hounded by the
press in her Provencal retreat as she was when a feted figure at Paris
parties and Monte Carlo galas.
It was not always thus. The Grimaldis and their domain, a rocky stretch of
Riviera coastline, were dismissed as yet another anachronism of the European
aristocracy until April 1956 when Prince Rainier III, Monaco's 33rd
sovereign, married Miss Grace Patricia Kelly, the Hitchcock blonde who was
one of Hollywood's most stylish movie stars.
More than 1,600 journalists and photographers descended on Monaco for their
wedding. They, and their successors, have haunted the Grimaldis ever since.
At first, Prince Rainier and Princess Grace turned the press attention to
their - and Monaco's  - advantage.
In 1949, when the 26-year-old Rainier took the throne, Monaco was seen, as
the writer Somerset Maugham put it, as 'a sunny place for shady people', as
a glitzy, gambling centre for the sleazier end of the Cote D'Azur sybaritic
set.
If the new prince was to secure its future he needed to clean up Monaco's
image and to revitalise the economy to stem the flow of emigres to the US
and France.
Rainier did this by turning his principality into the sort of place where
the seriously wealthy would want to live and visit. In short, Monaco was
restyled in the image of his wife, Princess Grace, with her blend of
American affluence and Hollywood glamour.
Her old friends - Frank Sinatra, Cary Grant and Gregory Peck  - flocked to
see her as she inaugurated hospitals, theatres, flower festivals and charity
balls. The European and American press covered it all.
Monaco became a haven for sun-loving taxphobes and middle-aged millionaires.
It is, or so says Tatler magazine, 'a place where every August you wear your
wealth to the Red Cross Ball and for five hours there is more money in
diamonds and gold under the sliding roof of Le Sporting than anywhere else
on the continent'. Monaco's new residents and visitors have transformed the
economy, creating a thriving financial centre with Dollars 10bn of deposits
lodged in its bank vaults and a flourishing tourist industry with employment
and business opportunities for the indigenous Monegasques.
Rainier and Grace seemed prepared to accept the glare of press attention as
the price to be paid for stability and prosperity. But as their children -
Albert and Stephanie, as well as Caroline  - grew older, the price became
higher and higher.
The Grimaldis live in a world where photographers camp outside their Paris
apartments, where journalists hire para-gliders to fly over their country
home hoping to catch the princesses sunbathing topless, and where the
paparazzi throw tacks on to roads hoping to stop their cars.
Everything they do - from Prince Albert cocooning on a yacht with the latest
in his long line of blondes, to Stephanie hurling obscenities at journalists
as she speeds away in her sports car, and Caroline sobbing at her husband's
funeral - is splashed all over the gossip pages. There are even small
photographic agencies in France and Italy that survive simply by preying on
the Monaco royal family.
Over the years the Grimaldis have given the press everything. There have
been the tragedies - the dramatic deaths of Grace and Stefano haunted by the
curse of the beautiful Flemish girl betrayed by one of Rainier's womanising
predecessors who vowed 'Never will a Grimaldi find true happiness in
marriage'. There have been the scandals - the failure of Caroline's first
marriage, Albert's cast list of blondes and, of course, Princess Stephanie.
The youngest of the Grimaldis has been God's gift to the paparazzi. Caroline
may have had a wild time in her 20s, but she is now cast by the press as the
'good girl', the devoted wife and mother who knuckled under to take Grace's
place as the first lady of Monaco after her mother's death. Luckily for the
gossip columns, her sister, Stephanie, has been only too adept at filling
the empty role of 'bad girl'.
Stephanie has had even more boyfriends than Albert has had blondes. She
seldom seems to wear a bikini-top. And she can always be relied upon to reel
out of night clubs in the not so early hours of the morning. She has also
led a more public life than her siblings, having pursued brief careers as a
fashion designer, a model and then recording a pop single.
When her latest perfume, L'Insaisissable (The Unpossessable), came out,
glossy magazines were peppered with quotes from her former boyfriends saying
'when it comes to being fickle she's a professional' and 'men are just toys
to her'.
There is a serious sub-text to all this. The Grimaldis are absolute
monarchs. Prince Rainier not only rules the principality, advised by his
counsellors, but his family sets the tone.
Rainier is now in his 70s and, still haunted by the memory of his wife's
sudden death, he is said to want to abdicate to clear the way for Albert and
spend more time with his grandchildren.
Only he knows whether he will feel able to do so while his son and daughters
are still being splashed all over the gossip columns and preyed upon by
photographers armed with telephoto lenses.
