FT  07 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Europe's Italian job
AS EUROPEAN leaders prepare for their emergency summit meeting in Birmingham
next week, they risk paying insufficient attention to the crisis in one of
the EC's most important members.
Italy is not the only EC state suffering a haemorrhage of market confidence,
a plummeting currency and intense difficulties over public spending. But its
problems, in these and many other respects, make those elsewhere in the
Community look manageable. Unless the Birmingham meeting gives a convincing
show of support for Mr Giuliano Amato, the country's weak but courageous
prime minister, those problems could lead to such instability as to blow
open the EC's southern flank.
In the three weeks since the lira and the pound were swept out of the
exchange rate mechanism, other EC governments have been tempted to leave
Italy to cope with its crisis alone. In some quarters there has been
Schadenfreude at the self-inflicted wounds of a country which has for years
been bankrupt in all but name; in others, relief at seeing an end to the
make-believe of a state with a budget deficit nearly triple the EC average
aspiring to join a monetary union within seven years.
These reflexes are understandable but wrong. Italy is a signatory of the
Maastricht treaty and one, unlike Britain, clearly intent upon rejoining the
ERM as soon as possible. This will not prove easy, but Italy has the right
to expect that its partners will do everything they can to make it possible.
Bold first step
At the same time, Mr Amato and the Italian parliament have an urgent
domestic agenda before them. First, parliament must approve the 1993 budget
presented last week - by Italian standards a bold first step, yet only the
minimum required if the state is to retain control over its finances.
The problem is that parliament is suffering from legislative indigestion and
shows little sign of being ready to approve the measure before the end of
November. With the lira under attack and a minor bank run last week, that is
too casual a timetable.
The currency's effective 20 per cent devaluation against the D-Mark is in
turn fuelling inflationary pressures and stirring unrest among the trade
unions. Next Tuesday there is to be a four-hour general strike in protest at
austerity measures, and union pressure is mounting for Mr Amato to reverse
one of his best achievements: the agreement to end Italy's system of
automatic wage indexation, the scala mobile.
A fresh explosion in wage demands would leave the government's budgetary
strategy in ruins, destroy its hopes of EMS re-entry for the foreseeable
future and bring closer the twin spectres of hyperinflation or default.
Parliament and the unions need to realise that Italy faces a national
emergency in which heavy sacrifices are required.
Unrelieved turbulence
Equally, the government cannot allow itself to become paralysed while
waiting for approval of the budget. It needs to get on with sorting out the
tangled affairs of state-owned enterprises in readiness for privatisation, a
process which is still generating more confusion than confidence.
With markets in a state of unrelieved turbulence, Mr Amato needs above all
to explain his policies clearly, to steer them through parliament with the
maximum dispatch and to make it clear to Italy's European friends what they
can do to help.
He has already asked the EC for a substantial standby loan to boost the lira
and sustain confidence in plans for its return to the ERM. But he has failed
to provide a proper explanation of what he wants the money for, and the
suspicion persists that any loan would be used simply to repay the
Bundesbank for funds it advanced during the ill-fated effort to prop up the
currency last month.
Other Community governments are unlikely to accede to this request without a
fuller idea of, and greater confidence in, Mr Amato's overall strategy. But
neither the Italians themselves nor their partners should underestimate what
is at stake. Italy is a founder member of the Community. It has always
measured itself by European standards and, unlike Britain, has never
contemplated any alternative identity. If it is now found wanting, the
psychological effect will be profound. Even the unity of the state could no
longer be taken for granted.
