FT  16 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Tate deal hinted
HINTS that Tate &amp; Lyle was negotiating with PepsiCo over new sweetener
contracts sent Tate's shares forward smartly late in yesterday's trading
session. Analysts said Tate had confirmed yesterday that it is supplying
PepsiCo, although it had refused to give any details on the new
arrangements.
Some observers speculated that, with the intense price war in the sweetener
market continuing, any new contract prices would probably have been tightly
squeezed, and that volume levels could be affected by the recession and the
poor US summer.
However, others said that Tate, which has been making a spate of
presentations, had declared itself confident of maintaining sweetener volume
levels this year. The shares, steady for most of the session, ended 5 1/2 up
at 397 1/2 p.
Views on Cadbury
Cadbury-Schweppes shares were attracting widely differing views yesterday as
County NatWest downgraded the group and moved it to its sell list, while
Smith New Court opted to change from seller to buyer. The food manufacturer
has been hosting a number of presentations recently, a factor which has
undermined the shares as some brokers have been said to have found little to
be enthusiatic about.
After seeing the group yesterday, County moved from a buy to a sell,
slimming its earnings per share figure for this year and trimming its
profits estimate for next year by Pounds 4m to Pounds 382m. The house blamed
continuing weakness in the European soft drinks market.
UBS Phillips &amp; Drew was also said to be selling the stock yesterday.
However, Smith said it had heard nothing from Cadbury to change its view
that the shares were 'within 5 per cent of a good buy', particularly for
long-term funds. The stock fell 11 to 441p.
Water placing
The placing of Welsh Water's 14.9 per cent stake in South Wales Electricity,
with the former taking a Pounds 17m profit on its investment, was the
trigger for a steep rise in Welsh Water shares. South Wales Electricity
stock, on the other hand, fell sharply as lingering hopes disappeared that
the 15 per cent stake could have been used as a platform for a takeover bid.
The stake, comprising 15.1m shares, was placed jointly by County NatWest and
Cazenove, via a series of agency crosses executed at 460p a share.
Welsh Water acquired the bulk of its shareholding during the first few
trading sessions following privatisation of the regional electricity
companies in December 1990, adding the rest early in the following year. The
water company hoped to forge links with its fellow Welsh utility with a view
to cost savings but was rebuffed.
South Wales Electricity slipped 8 to 473p on 31m traded, while Welsh Water
closed 16 higher at 529p, albeit after extremely thin turnover of 391,000
shares.
Rumours abounded in Hillsdown as the shares advanced, closing 10 in front at
122p. One version had the food group warding off a bid, another that a
company would make a statement today on recent volatility in the shares.
Neither story found much credibility with analysts, who suggested that
rumours often circulated ahead of Hillsdown's closed period.
The world's biggest mining group, RTZ, fell 18 to 623p after a profits
forecast downgrade by Smith New Court.
Smith cut its profits estimate for 1993 by Pounds 40m to Pounds 50m from
Pounds 490m and its earnings per share prediction by 4p to 45p.
The implications of a meeting hosted by Swedish pharmaceutical group Astra
hit Glaxo and the shares closed a net 19 lower at 791p.
Astra presented data which suggested that the use of its drug Losec,
combined with an anti-biotic, had managed to wipe out ulcers in trial
patients for at least 20 months. Analysts said it was too early to argue
that Glaxo's anti-ulcer drug Zantac, which accounts for half of the group
profits, would be badly affected.
Wellcome receded 3 to 1021p in spite of a confident annual statement.
Grim news from Petrofina and Total continued to overshadow the oil sector,
but BP managed a small midsession rise before easing back to close unchanged
at 224p after reports that it may have made an oil discovery west of the
Shetland Islands.
The rumoured discovery would be the second in the area since Amerada Hess
about a year ago. Lack of official confirmation of the find was attributed
to the 14th oil licensing round due to take place next year.
BZW's buy recommendation continued to drive Burmah Castrol shares higher,
with the stock closing a further 15 up at 693p on 1.1m traded. BZW cited
Burmah's ability to achieve 5 per cent per annum real earnings per share
growth and its strong cash flow. 'The shares deserve a premium rating and we
see fair value at 750p to 800p,' said BZW's oil team.
Shares in Channel tunnel operator Eurotunnel were hit early in the session
and were down 17 at 323p, the day's worst, after TML, the tunnel's
constructor, said talks about cost overruns had once again broken down.
Bargain hunting and reports from the company that an arbitration ruling on
the dispute may be possible in the second half of next year helped the stock
recover some of the ground lost. The shares closed a net 11 off at 329p
after trade of 1.3m shares.
Vodafone ran up 8 to 417p after the Arena GSM consortium, led by Vodafone,
won the third licence to operate a mobile phone network in Australia.
The 17 per cent rise in profits at Sanderson Electronics had been discounted
and the shares dropped sharply to close 46 off at 226p. Profit-taking was
also evident in Electronic Data, which retreated 35 to 475p.
Recent high-flyer Tadpole Technology recorded another see-saw session. The
shares, which were placed at only 65p two weeks ago and spiralled upwards to
touch 240p early on Monday before coming under persistent selling pressure,
fell a further 13 to 166p yesterday.
Electronic component issues were strongly supported amid hints of a couple
of broker buy recommendations, Diplomasurging 17 to 382p and
Electrocomponents 11 to 364p.
Another profits downgrading, this time from County NatWest, depressed
English China Clays, leaving the shares to close 15 lighter at 400p.
Gestetner hardened a penny to 150p, with Inchcape, 3 firmer at 498p, once
again mentioned as a bidder for the office and photographic equipment
distributor.
In motors and engineers, Kwik-Fit moved 5 ahead to 101p, as speculation that
retail group Kingfisher would soon launch a bid for the motor repair company
returned. Siebe appreciated 5 to 404p, a closing five-year high. Also wanted
were Charter Consolidated and GKN. The former moved forward 18 to 570p,
while GKN gained 4 to 433p.
Talk that a buyer was sniffing around Hammerson sent the 'A' shares forward
23 to 277p, although analysts were generally dismissive.
Franco-British paper group Arjo Wiggins Appleton continued to attract
profits forecast downgrades. Yesterday it was SG Warburg which hit the
shares by turning seller, moving its 1993 estimate to well below the market
consensus and cutting back its dividend estimate. The house believes Arjo
will make Pounds 125m next year. The shares fell 9 to 132p.
Specialist printing group Wace plunged 25 to 52p after announcing a profits
warning and Pounds 37m write-down. Hoare Govett cut to a loss of Pounds 34m
for 1992 against a previous profits forecast of Pounds 15m. For 1993, the
house came down by Pounds 8m to a profits estimate of Pounds 11m.
Queens Moat Houses retreated 2 1/2 to 37p after one of its joint brokers,
BZW, reduced its forecasts.
The stores stocks were depressed, the CBI survey doing the damage to
sentiment. Burton stood out, up 4 1/2 to 66 1/2 p with 12m traded, as talk
of poor trading was considered overdone.
A squeeze helped P &amp; O jump 17 to 476p. A shortage of stock was also
reported in Associated British Ports, where the shares closed 18 up at 348p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (64).
AMERICANS (4) Bell Atlantic, Bowater Inc., Lowe's, Varity, BUILDING
MATERIALS (1) Wolseley, BUSINESS SERVICES (2) ISS-INTL. Serv. B, Serco,
CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (1) Sheriff, ELECTRICALS (2) Denmans, Jones
Stroud, ELECTRICITY (1) Scot. Power, ELECTRONICS (7) Diploma, Electrocomps.,
Farnell, Micro Focus, Misys, Sage, Tunstall, ENGINEERING GENERAL (3) Carclo,
Halma, Siebe, FOOD MANUFACTURING (2) Nestle (Br), Do (Reg), HEALTH &amp;
HOUSEHOLD (1) UniChem, INSURANCE COMPOSITE (1) Royal, INSURANCE LIFE (2)
Britannic, Refuge, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (12) Abtrust Prfd. Zero Pf., Drayton
Blue Chip, EFM Inc. Zero Pf., Flmg. Emrg. Mkts., Flmg. Inc. &amp; Cap. Zero Pf.,
Gartmore Scot. Zero Pf., Jupiter Euro. Zero Pf., M &amp; G Inc. Zero Pf.,
Majedie Invs., River Plate Zero Pf., Scot. Natl. Zero Pf., TR Tech. Stppd.
Pf., MEDIA (7) CIA, City of Lon., EMAP, Flextech, News Intl., Telegraph,
Watmoughs, METAL &amp; METAL FORMING (1) Tinsley (E), MISCELLANEOUS (2) Birkby,
Danka, OIL &amp; GAS (2) Burmah, Shell 7pc Pf., OTHER FINANCIAL (2) Caledonia,
Cattle's, OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (1) Charter Cons., PACKAGING, PAPER &amp;
PRINTING (3) Bowater, Dorling Kindersley, Ferguson Intl., PROPERTY (2)
Slough 6pc Cv. '03, Waterglade, STORES (2) Burton, GUS, TEXTILES (1)
Dewhirst, TRANSPORT (1) Tibbett &amp; Britten, WATER (1) East Surrey.
NEW LOWS (30).
BUILDING MATERIALS (1) Needler, BUSINESS SERVICES (3) BNB Res., Comac, Lep,
CONGLOMERATES (2) Goode Durrant, Reece, HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (1) Crown
Eyeglass, HOTELS &amp; LEISURE (2) Farringford, Zetters, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (2)
German Smllr. Co's Wts., Lon. &amp; Strathclyde, MEDIA (4) Birkdale, Chiltern
Radio, TV-am, Yorks. Tyne-Tees, MISCELLANEOUS (1) Pittard Garnar, MOTORS (2)
ERF, Volkswagen, OIL &amp; GAS (2) Lasmo Ops., Oceonics, PACKAGING, PAPER &amp;
PRINTING (2) Sappi, Wace, STORES (1) Colorvision, TEXTILES (1) Campari,
TRANSPORT (1) TIP Europe, MINES (5) Anglo Amer. Coal, Deelkraal, Durban
Deep, Hartebeest, Invernia West.
Other market statistics, Page 29
