FT  04 FEB 92 / Philippine parties forge new alliances ahead of poll
NEW ALIGNMENTS are being forged among the Philippines' diverse political
groups as the Friday deadline for registration for the May national
elections nears.
Over the past few days the Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino (LDP), the
strongest political grouping, has received a double boost.
First, a former chief justice of the Supreme Court, Mr Marcelo Fernan,
announced he would be its vice-presidential candidate.
Mr Fernan, previously regarded as a strong contender for the presidency,
should boost the stock of LDP standard bearer, House Speaker Ramon Mitra. Mr
Mitra had lagged behind in popularity polls in recent months.
Yesterday, the LDP cause got further support from an unlikely ally - the
opposition Nacionalista Party of Senator Juan Ponce Enrile and former
senator Arturo Tolentino.
Although its members are currently split in three camps, the NP
Enrile-Tolentino wing will form a coalition with the LDP for the May
elections, in exchange for slots in the ruling party's line-up of candidates
for the Senate, House of Representatives and local government positions,
which are also at stake.
Mr Fidel Ramos, the former defence secretary who is the preferred candidate
of retiring President Corazon Aquino, has meanwhile declared as his running
mate Mr Emilio Osmena, the governor of Cebu province. Cebu has won national
admiration for sustaining a buoyant economy amid a slowdown in most parts of
the country. Mr Osmena's leadership is widely credited for the Cebu success.
However, the Cebu governor will be pitted against his younger brother,
Senator John Henry Osmena who has also just been drafted as the
vice-presidential candidate of Mr Eduardo Cojuangco under a separate wing of
the NP. The Osmena family enjoys a substantial following in the southern
Philippines, but the brothers' decision to run for the same position under
rival banners could split this support to the benefit of the other
candidates.
The family feud dates from the early 1970s when Mr John Osmena campaigned in
the US for support for the then newly imposed martial-law government of
former President Ferdinand Marcos. The Osmenas had opposed the re-election
bid of Mr Marcos in 1969, and Mr John Osmena's U-turn did not sit well with
the family.
There was a rapprochement in the mid-1980s when Mr John Osmena returned to
the Philippines and campaigned in Cebu against Mr Marcos.
The affiliation of Mr Fernan and Mr Osmena with the two main political
groups has narrowed the field of likely presidential candidates to eight.
Another prominent politician from Cebu, Mr Antonio Garcia de Escano, a
successful businessman and also currently a member of the Cebu provincial
board, is being considered as running-mate of presidential candidate,
Senator Joseph Estrada, who gained popularity originally as a movie actor.
Others who are expected to file candidacy bids by this weekend are
Vice-President Salvador Laurel, former immigration commissioner and
agrarian-reform secretary Miriam Defensor Santiago, and Mr Marcos' widow
Imelda.
