FT  23 JAN 92 / Treaty with Prague set for signing soon
GERMANY'S treaty of good neighbourliness with Czechoslovakia, delayed in
ratification by conservative German demands for recognition of property
claims in the former Sudetenland, will be signed by Bonn unchanged before
the end of February.
The decision marks a victory for Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Mr Hans-Dietrich
Genscher, his foreign minister, in facing down a threatened revolt by the
Bavarian-based Christian Social Union (CSU), junior partners in the ruling
coalition.
The argument and delay had threatened to irritate relations with
Czechoslovakia, where Germany is by far the largest foreign investor.
But the CSU won a sop yesterday with the agreement of its coalition partners
to adopt a German parliament resolution to strengthen the property claims of
former Sudeten Germans, without affecting the text of the treaty.
The treaty itself makes no provision for any outstanding property claims,
recognising the territorial integrity of Czechoslovakia, and the
inviolability of its borders.
Under the present restitution law in Czechoslovakia, property confiscated
before 1948, when the communists took power, cannot be given back. to former
owners. This has angered the 2.5m Sudeten Germans expelled from
Czechoslovakia in 1945, mainly because their former properties are now being
auctioned to local citizens under a small-scale privatisation programme.
It is still unclear what the German parliamentary resolution will say,
although Mr Genscher's Free Democrats (FDP) are equally determined it will
do nothing to alter the 'spirit or meaning' of the treaty, let alone its
text.
Bavaria, homeland of the CSU, is also the German state where the majority of
former Sudeten Germans moved after World War II. They have since campaigned
for property restitution, and see the new friendship treaty as a serious
blow to their hopes.
Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister and CSU leader, has backed what he calls
the 'justified demands of the Sudeten Germans'. But Mr Kohl and Mr Genscher
have been more concerned to put German-Czechoslovak relations on a friendly
footing, especially in light of Germany's rapidly reviving economic
interests there.
