FT  06 FEB 92 / Philips to buy 25% stake in Whittle for Dollars 175m
PHILIPS, the Dutch electronics group which is steadily expanding into the
software side of the consumer electronics industry, is paying Dollars 175m
for 25 per cent of Whittle Com-munications, the US media company.
Philips will acquire its shares mainly from Time Warner, the US media group
whose holding will fall from 50 per cent to 37 per cent, and from Associated
Newspapers of the UK, whose stake will fall from 33 per cent to 24.6 per
cent.
The Dutch company plans to increase its holding to 33 per cent by the end of
1994, with the additional price to be determined by Whittle's financial
per-formance.
Mr Chris Whittle, the US company's founder and chairman, will reduce his
holding from 11 per cent to 8.5 per cent, while the combined shareholding of
senior management will decline to 4.9 per cent from 6 per cent.
For Philips, which launched its new 'interactive' compact disc player, CD-I,
in the US in late 1991, the deal marks a further step in its quest to wed
its electronics hardware with software such as music, videos, consumer
information and educational programming.
Over the past year, for example, Philips has steadily been building up a
network of investments in video-rental chains in continental Europe, the US
and the UK.
Whittle, which is based in Tennessee and has annual sales of around Dollars
210m, produces a daily news programme called 'Channel One' that is already
screened in 9,000 US high schools. The 12-minute broadcasts include two
minutes of advertisements.
It also makes and sells magazines and videos for doctors' waiting rooms and
hospitals.
Philips said it would work with Whittle on evaluating the feasibility of
setting up a network of new schools in the US.
'The involvement in Whittle will bring substantial new impetus for the
development and application of consumer-oriented electronic technology,' Mr
Jan Timmer, Philips president, said.
Duracell, the US battery maker, is forming an alliance with Toshiba Battery
of Japan and Varta Battarie of Germany to develop nickel metal hydride
(Ni-MH) rechargeable batteries.
All three have individually invested in researching Ni-MH battery technology
and will now co-ordinate their development activities.
