FT  11 FEB 92 / Parliament and Politics: Cook seeks end to tax relief on
private treatment - National Health Service
LABOUR yesterday challenged ministers to end tax relief on private health
care and spend the savings on the National Health Service, as the NHS moved
to the centre of pre-election campaigning.
The government also focused on health, announcing a record drop in long-term
hospital waiting lists.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow health secretary, promised that a Labour government
would spend the Pounds 50m saved by the tax-relief abolition on cancer
patients, providing both additional medical posts and new equipment.
Labour would use the money to 'end the disgrace that has left Britain with
fewer cancer specialists than other European countries, and older cancer
equipment than some Third World countries', he said.
Mr William Waldegrave, health secretary, told a conference of health
authority chairmen and managers that in the three months to December the
number of patients waiting more than two years for an operation fell by
13,822 - the largest quarterly fall recorded.
He said that, as in the current year, there would be Pounds 39m spent on
reducing waiting lists in 1992-93. The money would be used to target
long-wait patients, 'especially in areas and specialties where there are
particular bottlenecks'.
He also announced that Pounds 4.2m would be provided to fund projects
specifically designed to improve the quality of care at NHS hospitals.
Mr Cook welcomed the additional resources to tackle waiting lists, but
accused the government of 'fiddling' the numbers by making it more difficult
for people to get on to the waiting lists in the first place.
He also questioned how sensible it was to address the issue purely in terms
waiting time, rather than in terms of clinical judgments.
Publishing a paper giving details of 'underfunding, commercialisation and
privatisation' in the health service, Mr Cook said there had been no
fundamental change in the government's approach to the NHS with the change
of prime minister, in spite of Mr John Major's repeated assurances that he
would not privatise the NHS.
He repeated that Labour would end GP fund-holding, abolish trust hospital
status and end the internal market in the NHS. Instead there would be a new
structure for a public health service. Labour intends to publish its plans
for the NHS later this month.
Mr Cook clashed with Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health minister, over
Labour's claims that the 188 per cent increase in the number of people
taking out private health insurance was evidence of 'creeping privatisation'
in the health service.
Mrs Bottomley said there was a big percentage increase in the number of
people insured by the main private health providers in 1979 and 1980. She
said this arose from the winter of industrial action in 1978-79.
