FT  30 MAY 92 / How To Spend It: A good omen - rude waiters
there will be no problem in knowing when the recession is really over. The
signs will be there, as significant as the Star in the East. 'Shopkeepers
will abandon their strange new mantras 'Can I help you' and 'Would you like
to order one?' and revert to the familiar 'Sorry, we're just closing' and
'If you don't see it we haven't got it.'
If that be a good litmus test - and I cannot think of a better one - the
recession still has a little way to go but some early warning signs are
beginning to emerge. It is getting harder to catch the assistants eye in
some shops, a waiter in one smart London watering-hole is beginning to adopt
a snooty 'what do you mean what is blackened carpaccio?' tone and a friend
complains that having spent Pounds 180 on trousers at a chic London shop she
could not get them altered in under two weeks . . . three swallows, not yet
a full-blown summer but I sense that something somewhere is beginning to
stir. On the fashion front there is a flurry of new happenings and openings,
all of which speak at least of optimism if not yet concrete results.
At Harvey Nichols in London's Knightsbridge they seem to have been
especially busy - over from the US they are bringing the oh-so-chic
collection of Kleinberg Sherill handbags, belts and other must-have
accessories.
To those unfamiliar with the Kleinberg Sherill line, it is a newish (started
in 1983) company which kicked off with a little collection of five alligator
belts (all alligators authorised, of course) and great sterling silver
buckles. Not cheap, at anything from Pounds 250 to Pounds 895 a time, they
took off from the start, being snatched off the counters at Neiman Marcus,
I. Magnin and Bergdorf Goodman as fast as they arrived.
Belts are still a big seller, one of the special features being that the
buckles are removable so that they can be used with any other Kleinberg
Sherill belt. Many of the original motifs developed as buckles, like the
'love knot' and 'rope stitch' appear time and time again. They turn up,
paired, as earrings, are worked into the embroidery of a silk evening clutch
bag, are sculpted as a buckle, are worked into belts and incorporated into
clasps in the handbag range.
The handbags for summer come quilted in jewel-bright colours - fuschia,
scarlet, butter yellow, aquamarine blue and for evening the same brilliant
colours come in silk. These are all gutsy, extrovert accessories - designed
to set off a silk dress, a flamboyant suit, to bring a flash of colour to a
plain black dress. But they are quality-made and prices are high. Little
roped quilted bags start at Pounds 300, the belts at Pounds 250.
Down in the basement there is a whole raft of new collections in the
contemporary menswear department - Byblos, Dolce e Gabbano, Kenzo, Adolfo
Dominguiz, all worth checking up on for the chap who likes to dress in an
utterly contemporary yet classy way. These are the creme de la creme of
modern menswear, so once again do not expect bargain basement prices - what
designers like these provide is excitement coupled with quality.
The collection of so many of the best and brightest together in one
department offers a marvellous opportunity for the chap to compare and
contrast them. Anybody wondering just what it is that one of these new-wave
designers could possibly do for him that Savile Row cannot has a marvellous
chance to find out.
Great excitement in London's Old Bond Street where a splendiferous new
five-floor flag-ship Versace emporium has opened at no 34 - 35. Anybody who
knows the Versace style - and those addicted to that new opiate of the
nation, Hello] magazine, will not have been able to avoid full exposure to
his lines - will not be expecting anything quiet, restrained or understated.
Here the full panopoly of the Versace style has room to runs its untramelled
course - whether it be a richly coloured silk scarf, a glittering
gilt-embossed handbag, some ribboned shoes or gilt-studded jeans - here is
the place to find them. Ascot, I predict, will never be the same again.
