FT  02 OCT 92 / Personal View: ERM - the way back
Is there a way out of Britain's ERM dilemma? Sterling clearly cannot go back
in the near future to the full discipline of the ERM as it currently stands.
But it is doubtful that a purely domestic monetary policy will carry
credibility and provide the necessary discipline. I believe it is possible
to devise a genuine new discipline which is not unacceptably constraining by
an imaginative adaptation of the ERM structure.
The problems are, however, real. After the D-Mark, sterling remains the most
widely traded currency in Europe. And the confidence that the ERM is a
quasi-fixed exchange rate system capable of defying market forces has been
dented. We need to find the best way forward for sterling and perhaps some
other currencies which provides the advantages of exchange rate stability
while recognising these difficulties and allowing for change without
disrupting the EMS system.
We should consider seriously the idea of a modified link between the core
ERM members and currencies such as sterling through a flexible band system.
The UK would agree with the other EMS members a central rate and 6 per cent
band for the pound with the usual access to the various EMS financing
facilities. The obligation agreed would, however, not be to respect that
band unconditionally but to treat it as an exchange rate target.
By agreeing a central rate through the EMS the British government would be
signalling its intention to hold sterling to this level in its day-to-day
financial management in the same way as other ERM members. But in the event
of exceptionally disruptive markets the government could allow sterling to
move outside the parity band for a limited period.
Thus in the event of severe speculative pressures the pound could be allowed
to move outside the parity band without Britain being obliged to intervene
in the markets or raise interest rates to protect the pound. And Britain's
EMS partners would then also be required to undertake open-ended
intervention to support the pound.
But this exceptional flexibility would be limited in time. Over the
following period of perhaps 30 days the UK authorities would be obliged to
ensure that sterling moved back inside the original parity band or to seek a
realignment. Thirty days would provide ample time for short-term speculative
pressure, such as that which occurred before the French referendum, to play
itself out and for more stable market conditions to return. The Bank of
England would be more effective in turning the tables on speculators if the
markets could not be sure that every flurry would automatically be
counteracted. It would have the freedom to choose the best moment to
intervene effectively to restore the exchange rate within the parity band.
But if it was clear that more fundamental forces were at work the option of
a formal realignment would remain open. This would be agreed collectively
within the EMS mechanism, as now.
The advantage of such a flexible band outside the EMS core is twofold. It
provides a political means of ensuring that currencies which are unable to
participate at present in the EMS narrow band would remain politically
committed to the EMS system. Britain should continue to benefit from the 14
years of EMS management and participate fully in the system's development.
Economically, it offers the advantage of providing the exchange rate
discipline necessary for an effective monetary policy. The markets would
know the government's exchange rate target, which would carry more
credibility because it could not be changed unilaterally. But the
flexibility to deal with speculative crises would also be there. That
increase in credibility would also allow interest rates to be reduced more
rapidly than could otherwise be the case.
The UK's search for an alternative monetary lodestar in the 1980s ended in
failure. It was possible to do whatever political pressures dictated and
rely on one or other interpretation of the range of indicators to justify
it. This led to an increasing reliance on the exchange rate as the key
indicator - and then to membership of the ERM.
If this way forward were to be adopted, as UK inflation continues to decline
and the economy recovers the way would be open progressively to strengthen
the ERM link, consistent with the three-stage Emu process. The arrangement
could be agreed for a limited period, as a way to ease the reinsertion of
sterling into the central ERM disciplines.
The benefits which the ERM has provided to Europe are immense. But as we
have seen the ERM has limitations inherent in any partially fixed exchange
rate structure. We now need to increase the ERM's flexibility without
weakening its attractions for those able to move further towards fixed
exchange rates and a single currency. A revision of the ERM on these lines
would enable us to strengthen the EMS as an exchange rate structure for the
whole Community and to continue together towards economic prosperity in
Europe.
The author is EC vice-president
