FT  09 OCT 92 / Ukraine emerges as a power to be reckoned with
UKRAINE'S emergence as one of Europe's main military heavyweights is shown
starkly in the International Institute for Strategic Studies' (IISS) latest
Military Balance.
The break-up of the Soviet Union has left Ukraine with an air force of about
1,100 combat aircraft, more than any Nato country in Europe and more than
twice as big as any of Moscow's former Warsaw pact allies.
Although Ukraine's armed forces, at 230,000, are smaller than those of
Poland, its holdings of tanks and armoured vehicles are bigger than those of
any European nation after Russia and Germany. This is set to remain so after
reductions in heavy land weaponry and aircraft are completed under the
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty.
Ukraine and Russia have an unresolved dispute over strategic nuclear
weapons. This has now been given a new twist by Russia's surprise decision
to claim jurisdiction over all the former Soviet Union's nuclear weapons.
Ukraine has reacted angrily to the announcement by Marshal Yevgeny
Shaposhnikov, head of the Commonwealth of Independent States joint forces,
that he was ready to turn over all the weapons to Russia immediately.
The IISS has had to reorganise radically the material contained in its
annual publication - which for more than 30 years set out a balance of
forces between east and west - to take account of the abolition of the
Warsaw Pact and the disintegration of both the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia.
In the Middle East, the institute has revised upwards its estimate of the
artillery strengths of both Iran (increased from 1,000 to more than 1,300
heavy guns) and Iraq (1,200 instead of 1,000). Recorded additions to Iran's
air force include 10 modern Russian MiG-29 fighters (part of what is
reported to be a much larger purchase), a similar number of Su-24 attack
aircraft and 12 Chinese F-7 fighters (an updated version of the Soviet
MiG-21).
Iraq's army strength is estimated at 29 divisions, half the number in
existence before the 1991 Gulf conflict. These include seven Republican
Guard armoured and mechanised divisons, compared with four reported a year
ago. Naval capability is expected to be minimal for several years, although
more Iraqi naval vessels survived the war than was originally thought, the
IISS says.
The Military Balance 1992-1993; IISS/Brassey's; Pounds 35/Dollars 55.
