FT  30 OCT 92 / The president crows, but the economic news is not all good:
The latest US statistics
AFTER months of gloomy economic news, President George Bush finally had
something to crow about this week: official figures indicating that the US
economy grew at an annual rate of 2.7 per cent in the third quarter, far
above the projections of most forecasters.
As Mr Bush correctly pointed out, this was the 'sixth straight quarter of
growth', following a brief nine-month contraction triggered by Saddam
Hussain's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
Is he right to complain that the US media are unfairly exaggerating US
economic weakness? Is a strong recovery finally under way?
The growth figures certainly should not be taken at face value. Few analysts
believe the Bush administration tried to massage the numbers, but most agree
that various special factors accounted for much of the increase. The advance
estimate of gross domestic product is based on incomplete data - only one
month in the case of some components of GDP  - and is often heavily revised.
The main driving force was consumer spending, which grew at an annual rate
of 3.4 per cent after a 0.1 per cent fall in the second quarter. This was
well in excess of growth of family incomes and reflected a sharp decline in
the savings ratio - from 5.3 per cent to 4.5 per cent. It thus does not look
sustainable, particularly in the light of extremely weak consumer confidence
figures this month.
Other anomalies included an increase in defence spending at an annual rate
of 7 per cent (which cannot be maintained, given the medium-term plans to
cut the military budget), a blip in business equipment spending, mainly on
computers, and optimistic assumptions about the September trade deficit.
Growth was also lifted by a rebuilding of corporate inventories at a pace
that may not be sustained this quarter.
Allowing for distortions, the economy probably grew at an underlying rate of
1.5 to 2 per cent in the third quarter, roughly in line with the average
growth over the past six quarters. The good news is that GDP has finally
surpassed its pre-recession peak; this means the National Bureau of Economic
Research should shortly be able to specify the month when the recession
officially 'ended'. The betting is that this will be April or May of last
year.
The bad news is that the recovery since then has been the slowest since the
second world war, with GDP expanding at about a third the average rate.
Confidence is down because employment has failed to recover in line with
output: about 1.5m fewer workers are employed in non-agricultural businesses
than before the recession began - a startling change after the rapid
employment growth of the 1980s. The official unemployment rate is 7.5 per
cent, substantially higher than when the economy stopped contracting last
spring.
The figures, moreover, confirm the popular impression that people are not
better off than when Mr Bush was elected four years ago. Real per capita
disposable incomes - the best guide to living standards - have been static
since 1989, a sharp contrast after growth of 16 per cent in the preceding
seven years.
Having made a sluggish recovery, where does the economy go from here? The
economic data are still hard to read. A modest revival of monetary growth,
fitful signs of life in the housing market and an erratic decline in weekly
claims for unemployment insurance are good omens. But they appear to be
offset by negative trends.
Industrial production has fallen in three of the last four months.
Employment fell in August and September. The Purchasing Managers' Index, a
guide to the health of manufacturing industry, has dipped below 50 per cent,
signalling contraction of factory output. Durable goods orders have fallen
in the latest three months. Retail sales have flattened out, car sales are
weak, and consumer confidence is close to historic lows, having declined for
four months running.
Most economists expect a poor fourth quarter; thereafter expectations differ
sharply. Mr David Levy, a forecaster at the Jerome Levy Economics Institute
in New York state, says the economy will slip back into outright recession
next year.
'We are looking for a contraction of GDP in the first half, possibly a quite
steep fall.' Mr Levy believes the economy was supported this year by a
modest fiscal stimulus, reflecting an extension of unemployment benefits and
Mr Bush's decision to reduce income tax withholding rates. The effects of
this stimulus, however, are fading while US exports are being hit by a
global economic slowdown.
Mr Levy's views may sound extreme but, last December, he was one of very few
economists to predict a troubled year for the economy in 1992. Mr Levy
believes the US is caught in a 'contained depression' that will last much of
the 1990s.
Ms Gail Fosler, chief economist at the Conference Board, a business analysis
group, takes a diametrically opposed position. She predicts a weak fourth
quarter but expects a sharp rebound next year.
'High operating rates and exceptionally low inventories and backlogs have
set the stage for a radical reorientation of the economy toward growth and
inflation, in response to tax cuts and spending increases after the
election.' However, Ms Fosler concedes that the US 'does not have the
investment base in place' to achieve sustained increases in living
standards.
Most forecasters occupy a middle ground. Mr Edward McKelvey, a senior
economist at Goldman Sachs, believes corporate restructuring in the face of
intense global competition will continue to sap consumer confidence and
restrain job growth. J P Morgan, the New York bank, takes a similar view.
Both of these blue chip forecasters are thus predicting sluggish growth at
least until the second half of next year.
Wags say the US is experiencing an economic form of purgatory. It has
emerged from the hell of recession, but its past sins seem to preclude an
early admission to the heaven of rapid, sustained growth.
