FT  15 FEB 92 / Private View: The art of science - Prof Richard Gregory
describes a cultural failing
SCIENTISTS feel they have become the Cinderellas of British culture, left in
rags to sweep the hearth while smart society gets dressed to go to the
opera.
'It is extraordinary, isn't it?' said Professor Richard Gregory, inventor,
neuropsychologist and philosopher. 'Science is an alien culture completely
separate from the main culture of our country.
'Yet I think science is the great adventure of the human race. I really do.
It's the only adventure which has gone on for thousands of years pretty well
continuously, exploring the nature of the universe and our place in it.
'It changes its assumptions, it's flexible, it has a great deal of
tolerance, it's totally international. If someone discovers something in,
say, Cambridge it's known in Peking the next week. It transcends all the
barriers and the boundaries. Yet it's not fully appreciated.'
Prof Gregory was striding round the flat he occupies in a grand terrace high
above Bristol, showing off his collection of antique scientific instruments.
The professor has a grasshopper mind; he is always one jump ahead of you.
His mental leaps are connected, but by the time you have seen the connection
the professor has jumped again. When explaining a difficult idea he has a
charming way of adding 'don't you think?', as if he were talking to
Einstein.
After he settled down I asked him why arts and sciences had become divorced.
'One answer is that science is jolly difficult. You've got to sit down and
think. You've got to know a lot of facts. You've got to build up mental
models because it's all beneath the appearances. Science is also inherently
more difficult to communicate.'
But surely people are interested in things like personal computers and
mobile telephones, I said.
'They're excited by the gadgets but not by how they work. I suppose you
could say the same about opera and ballet: they're more interested in the
result than in the process. Science is very much a process, a matter of
techniques and procedures.'
He agreed that scientists were partly to blame for their falling prestige:
specialists digging their own little tunnels had lost sight of the broad
horizons; they were bad at explaining themselves to the public.
Do you think there is still some theological resistance to science?
'Yes, I do. I think the idea of the old man up in heaven who has planned it
all and looks at us with a kindly eye is still popular. I personally don't
find it plausible as an explanation of the origin of the universe. I want to
know who his grandfather was, where he comes from.
'The idea of a universe evolving, like natural selection, is much more
attractive. But it does mean we've got to find our own significance, by our
own activities. Personally I don't think the universe has got an origin.
Much better to say that time never had a start.'
Has the bias against science increased in your lifetime?
'That's probably true, certainly as far as teachers are concerned. I mean, a
professor at one time had a real standing in the community. Now there is an
antipathy to a great deal of science, probably since the atom bomb. After
all, we did produce a horrendous weapon. Science has produced some
incredibly dangerous toys. You can't call people silly for being frightened
of that.'
Scientists were on a kind of toboggan ride. To stay on and try to steer the
toboggan required courage, but it was not surprising if other people felt it
was a ride they didn't want to be on.
'This is the drama of our times,' he added.
Should we be worried about genetic manipulation, for example?
'It seems to me that any tool has its dangers. If you've got a chisel you
can cut your thumb. At the same time if you haven't got tools you are a sort
of a child, really. You can't do anything. We've simply got to learn to cope
with the dangers.
'And that's why we need science education so much now. If you're a
politician and you don't understand, say, the half-life of radioactivity,
how can you talk to the experts?' This ignorance, he thinks, is dangerous
for our democracy.
So if science lacks political support, I asked, is that due to the ignorance
of politicians?
'Frankly, I think it is. There are far too few MPs who understand science.
You don't need to have a very detailed knowledge: you need a sort of
hand-waving understanding of the basic concepts.' (From his work on mind and
brain, Gregory concludes that there are two kinds of thinking, the rapid,
intuitive sort which results in 'hand-waving' explanations, and the slow,
sequential sort which he calls 'handle-turning'.)
Meeting Gregory, it is easy to see why he gets invited on to television. He
is full of bounce as well as brains, and he looks - anyway to the arts
graduates who run the BBC - as a boffin should look. His hobby is punning
(he thought of 'absinthe makes the heart grow fonder' before he saw it in a
Christmas cracker) and his favourite author is PG Wodehouse. Humour is like
scientific invention: 'A good joke puts things together in a new way.'
He was almost predestined to be an inventor-scientist rather than a
laboratory technician. His father was a leading astronomer and one of his
paternal ancestors devised a reflecting telescope two years before Isaac
Newton.
From the RAF, Gregory won a scholarship to read philosophy at Cambridge
after the war. There he was taught by Bertrand Russell (but missed
Wittgenstein by two weeks). He stayed on to lecture in experimental
psychology, moved to Edinburgh to help set up a pioneering artifical
intelligence laboratory, then came to Bristol University as professor of
neuropsychology.
Here, inspired by Francis Bacon's utopian New Atlantis of 1627, he set up
his 'Exploratory', a working museum of gadgets to demonstrate scientific
phenomena. Modelled on the San Francisco Exploratorium founded by Frank
Oppenheimer, it has produced offshoots all over the UK.
Gregory's work on perception and has taken him into the painter's world
(with Ernst Gombrich he produced Illusion in Nature and Art). So I asked him
whether there was any connection between the scientist's and artist's
approach.
'I personally think they're pretty different: the effort to communicate is
different from the effort of thinking something out. You could say arts are
evocative, evoking experiences in other people, where science is
explanatory. The good teacher has to be both.'
Aren't they both forms of problem-solving?
'Yes. But I think they're different kinds of problem.'
What about the use of illusion in the arts?
'I think illusions are the key to a great deal of how perception actually
works. Cognitive illusion leads you right into the depths of the mind. It
shows how mind takes off from physical reality. It shows how we create.'
Does creativity link the two?
'Yes, undoubtedly. I think creativity is the key to the whole thing, why
some people are creative and others are not.'
How do you account for inspiration?
'One often sort of bumbles about, playing around with an experiment.
Suddenly the penny drops and you have a bright idea. Then trying it out is
immensely exciting, because you really are playing a game against nature and
you don't know how it's going to work out.
'In most scientists' lives it only happens five or six times. But when you
know this new fact, for about a week or so, and nobody else does, it's quite
nice.'
Gregory's most recent inspiration led, with the help of a colleague in
California, to a useful discovery about how the brain fills in the blind
spot in the human eye. His best, he said, came when he was involved in the
American moon landing programme and discovered, very suddenly, how to get
pictures of the moon without atmospheric disturbance. (The solution was to
give the telescope camera a 'brain' to instruct its eye, human fashion.)
Can a person's bias towards arts or sciences be explained scientifically?
'I think there are different abilities: some have strong visual imagery,
some are good at amassing lots of data and building up generalisations,
others can remember names of, say, all the fossils but never have a
generalisation in their lives. We're not exactly the same - which is why
it's nice having lots of friends.'
Whatever a person's bias, Gregory thinks the intuitive mode of thinking, the
system of mental models or patterns, is 'vitally important.' It is the
essence of the way we think, understand, create, and make decisions about
the world. Intuitions are not necessarily true: they must always be
inspected by the other part of the brain. This theory, he says, has
important educational consequences.
You mean we are failing the intuitive side of our children?
'I think you're saying something very important. It's easy to examine on
something like arithmetic or essays which are logically set out, because you
can compare one with another. Intuition is extremely difficult to test: it
takes individual teaching.
'Developing people's intuitive understanding and then training them to test
their intuitions is what it's all about: to be educated, to be effectively
creative you need an extra stage of testing. It's a very expensive way of
educating but to my mind it's essential. You've got to nurture that creative
cauldron.'
I think Professor Gregory had dealt with my question - but my mental
processor is still chewing over the answer.
