FT  23 NOV 92 / Re-take the refugee test: Europe
Euro-sceptics jeer that the European Community has failed the test of the
Yugoslav crisis. They say it proves that the far-reaching ambitions of the
Maastricht treaty are wildly unrealistic. Europe could not hope to put
together a common foreign policy, and might as well abandon the attempt.
Reality will not let us off so lightly. The sceptics seem to be misled by
some school-games paradigm: the hopelessly unco-ordinated are excused from
taking part in the football team. But they should look instead at the
pitiless academic discipline of the French lycee which admits no such
excuse.
The fact that the Community has failed so far does not mean that from now on
the Europeans are excused. On the contrary, we are now paying for our
failure with a 'redoublement'; we must re-do the course again and take the
exam until we pass.
The problem is that now the exam is much more difficult, and the syllabus
has been vastly expanded. At first the military experts told us there was
nothing to gain and everything to lose by trying to intervene in this civil
war. It would involve very large forces, unpredictable but probably large
casualties, an uncertain and probably unrealisable political strategy, and a
commitment of indefinite duration.
In the face of this kind of dire risk assessment, politicians quail.
Unfortunately, they failed adequately to weigh up the costs of not
intervening in the crisis.
What we have instead is a massive flood of refugees from the war zone, which
is already threatening the political stability of German society, and which
will certainly get worse, in Germany or elsewhere. We thought we could stay
out of trouble by not getting involved. This was a mistake; the trouble has
come to us, in their hundreds of thousands, and we cannot avoid it.
We certainly cannot avoid the flood of refugees by playing cynical and
hypocritical bureaucratic games. Refugees claim political asylum because
this is their only plausible escape route. So the German political
establishment prepares to rewrite the constitution to limit the access of
asylum seekers; and the British government sets up new and Kafkaesque
obstacles to frustrate them.
If they want asylum in Britain, they must have a visa. However, they cannot
secure a visa, because Britain has no consulate in Bosnia; in any case the
government will refuse a visa if it is for asylum. But even if the consulate
in Vienna were to grant a visa, the hard men at Heathrow are empowered to
cancel it. This is Catch-22 in spades.
So when Mr John Major, the British prime minister, says in parliament: 'With
the best will in the world, we simply cannot take everyone who, for
understandable reasons, wants to leave Yugoslavia,' he is adopting a
hypocritical posture. The British government is not showing the best will in
the world, and probably would prefer to take no Yugoslav refugees at all.
This is not an option, however. All west European countries will take large
numbers of unwanted refugees, willy nilly, legally or illegally, because of
the scale of the problem. There are already large numbers of illegal
immigrants from various parts of the world in all members of the Community,
because they cannot in practice be kept out; and the numbers will
undoubtedly rise after the easing of internal frontier controls between
member states under the single market next year.
Tighter rules in Germany will be intended to keep more people out; but all
land frontiers in Europe are highly permeable, and the German government
will be deeply reluctant to incur the shame of mass expulsions. Britain is
slightly protected by geography, compared with Germany or France, but only
slightly. There is no security in the Channel.
No useful purpose is served by a myopic focus on the legal definition of
what is or is not a refugee. It may be true that most of those who are
fleeing the war, the destruction of their homes and the deaths of their
relatives, are not 'really' refugees under fear of persecution, in the
strict meaning of the term in the 1951 Geneva Convention. But the argument
is essentially beside the point. When 500,000 people are already displaced
in the rest of Europe and 2m inside ex-Yugoslavia, it is foolish of Western
governments to pretend the problem can be made to vanish by being defined
out of existence.
In any case, it is not easy to apply asylum laws as rigidly as governments
would like. Much less than a tenth of those who seek asylum in Germany or
Britain finally secure that status; but in both countries most applicants
manage to stay permanently, either legally, on some other grounds, or
illegally, by disappearing into the undergrowth.
Trying to halt the war refugees at the frontier is now no longer an option
for the rest of Europe. The longer the members of the Community insist on
limiting their military intervention in Bosnia to the minimal escort of aid
convoys, the more certain it must be that the tide will turn into a flood.
The only way of limiting the flow is to go to the source, and take
sufficient military action on the ground to make it slightly more possible
for some of the persecuted minorities to continue to live in their own
country. Europe cannot avoid responsibility, however much it would prefer to
do so.
