FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (6): Catastrophic legacy -
Polluted air and waters are a common challenge
CLEANING up the pollution in the Baltic Sea is an issue on which there is a
common concern among all the countries along its shoreline.
Northern Europe's sea and air are endangered mainly because of long-term
environmental neglect displayed by industry and the public authorities in
the Soviet Union, Poland and East Germany from the end of the 1940s.
The Baltic is naturally vulnerable to pollution since it is the largest
brackish water basin in the world with only a slow and irregular saltwater
exchange from the North Sea via the narrow, shallow straits through Denmark.
As a result its salinity is too high for most freshwater organisms but too
low for the majority of salt water species.
Natural problems have been worsened by decades of inadequate sewage
treatment in the eastern Baltic countries whose rivers discharge untreated
human and animal effluent into the sea.
There are a number of particularly severe pollution areas. In north eastern
Estonia oil shale mining has left a legacy of pollution around the towns of
Kohtla-Jarva with an estimated 350m of untreated water pumped out of the
mines annually.
The large scale industrial areas around St Petersburg, Upper Silesia in
Poland and Ostrava in the Czech lands have also been major sources of air
and water pollution.
The Gulf of Riga, once an unspoilt beauty spot, has 160m tonnes of untreated
waste water pumped into it every year while Kaunas in Lithuania has no
sewage purification facilities.
Poland is the worst polluter of the Baltic through the rivers Vistula and
Oder.
Joint efforts to deal with the Baltic's environment started in 1974 when a
general agreement was signed on protection of the marine enivronment.
But it was not until 1988 that the riparian states signed a convention in
Helsinki committing them to halve the total effluent discharge into the sea.
Earlier this year came the launch of the Baltic Environmental Action
Programme in Helsinki. This estimates it would cost Ecu18bn over the next 20
years to clean up the area.
Poland, as the worst single polluter, has 40 'hot spots' which need
expenditure of at least Ecu4bn. A further Ecu30bn will be needed for
feasibility studies for the highest priority projects.
'There is a plan but so far there is no money', says Mr Rune Ericsson of
Greenpeace, the environmental pressure group.
Some support is expected from the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, the Nordic Investment Bank as well as the World Bank but
ordinary loans will be difficult to obtain because of the Baltic countries'
poor credit rating.
There is special concern in the Baltic area about nuclear contamination from
the power stations of the former Soviet Union.
Ensuring the safety of the Soviet built light-water gas cooled nuclear
reactors at Sosnovy Bor just outside St Petersburg and Ingalina in Lithuania
is of vital importance for the whole region.
Both these plants arouse widespread concern. In March there was a radiation
leak at Sosnovy Bor; in September there was a leak at Ingalina.
Ever since the Chernobyl disaster in the Ukraine in 1986 northern Europe has
been sensitive to the dangers of nuclear fall-out from the east and both
Sosnovy Bor and Ingalina are Chernobyl type reactors.
During the 1980s, the anti-nuclear movement grew strongly in the Nordic
countries and although Sweden has put off plans to phase out its own more
secure nuclear plants by 2010, there remains considerable doubt about the
long-term use of nuclear power as an energy resource in northern Europe.
This autumn members of the Finnish Parliament voted unexpectedly for a
motion that ruled out any expansion in nuclear power in Finland despite the
demands from Finnish industry for construction of a fifth nuclear plant.
Finland is also concerned about the Russian pressurised water reactors on
the Kola peninsula in the far north close to its border.
Nordic governments would like the Soviet reactors on the fringes of the
Baltic to be closed as soon as possible. But that seems unlikely because of
the lack of cheap sources of alternative energy in Russia and Lithuania.
A group of senior Nordic politicians called last week for the investment of
SKr600m to improve the safety of Sosnovy Bor and Ingalina. But Sweden's
environment minister, Mr Olof Johansson, says it will require a much wider
European commitment than that of the Nordic countries to deal with a
situation which could potentially threaten the whole area. Last year, the
European Community earmarked about Ecu50m to improve nuclear safety in the
former Soviet Union.
Moves to improve rather than shut down the eastern nuclear plants would help
to provide much-needed work for western construction and maintenance
companies and ensure access in the east to the more superior nuclear
technology available in the market economies around the Baltic.
