FT  13 MAY 92 / Survey of West Norfolk (6): Versatility the key to success -
The port of King's Lynn
THE PORT of King's Lynn has weathered the recession better than many. It has
just received the biggest single investment for 100 years and its diversity
and versatility have been the key to the port's ability to weather the
economic storm.
In April a new Pounds 3m quay was opened by Associated British Ports, owner
of the port, and by August a Pounds 1m Leibherr crane from Austria should be
in place. For Mr David George, manager, these are tangible signs of his
company's confidence in the port's future.
Port traffic totalled just over 1m tonnes in 1991 compared with 1.35m tonnes
in 1987.
'Even though there's a recession we've held our own. It was very nice to get
above the 1m mark in a very difficult year, and this year we've got off to a
good start,' Mr George says.
'The strength of the port is that we can handle anything and are blessed
with lots of equipment.'
The new Riverside Quay, built entirely with ABP money, was constructed on
schedule by May Gurney and Co of Norwich. ABP has firm belief in investing
for general infrastructure development - 'trade has grown steadily over the
last 40 years, the east coast is building traffic levels and we want to keep
our share.'
ABP also spent Pounds 500,000 on a new transit shed last year.
'Because the new berth is on the river, we can bring up ships which cannot
come through the lock which has a maximum beam of 13.8m. That's all right
for most short sea ships, but the dock can only accommodate a 3,000-tonne
cargo. On the river, beam will be no problem, ships can go to a better
length and we can go up to a 5,000 tonnes cargo, depending on the tides.
It's a big leap forward. Our strength is being well-placed in the Wash,
central for business - this is one of the reasons we have the confidence to
invest; we want our share of the next 10 to 20 years' growth.'
Unusually, ABP retained control of stevedoring at the port after the
abolition of the dock labour scheme in 1989, when it cut the number of
employees from 120 to 53: all are on personal contract, industrial relations
are good and productivity has improved.
The port exports almost exclusively grain and sugar beet pellets. Imports
are fertiliser and animal feed, which go largely to the agricultural areas
of West Norfolk and Cambridgeshire, timber and steel for the Midlands and,
crucially, 18,000 Skoda cars a year. The cars, and Zetor tractors, are
brought in by Washbay Line, a customer of the port for 40 years, and
conveyed to a Skoda factory one mile up the road where they are finished
before distribution to dealers. Washbay Line runs a twice weekly service to
Hamburg and its two adaptable vessels were purpose-built for King's Lynn's
docks.
The general trading areas for the port are the former Soviet Union and
various Baltic states, through Denmark, Belgium, the Netherlands, northern
France and Spain. Steel comes from Italy, fertiliser from Africa, timber
from Archangel in Russia, and the new quay is expected to expand this
business.
The versatility of the port, Mr George says, has proved vital to its growth
 -'the strength of the place is that we can handle anything - we're blessed
with lots of equipment and we are not dependent on heavy manufacturing, we
are a one voyage charter port.'
ABP owns 88 acres of land and would like a lot more, but it is constrained
by the geography of the port. There is only three acres spare at the end of
the dock, but any further letting would have to be to a port-related
activity.
Mr George sees ample room for improvement in the road transport links to
King's Lynn, particularly along the east-west corridor - 'the case is
proved, but investment in roads comes from the south and is not scheduled to
reach us until the year 2000.'
Diversity is the keyword for Mr John Latus who runs Anglia Shipping, which
he sold to Anglian Agricultural Merchants in 1987 and bought back in
November 1991. A shipping agent who handles chartering, haulage and
warehousing, he takes pride in the company's ability to do anything and
everything.
'Business has been good in the last three years because our diversity has
enabled us to swap from one thing to another without difficulty. The new
quay will open up business opportunities for us.'
Anglia Shipping also brings in timber from Scandinavia and Russia, a
seasonal trade which usually starts in March but which this year has been
delayed until May because of Russia's foreign currency shortage. Mr Latus is
confident that trade with the former Soviet Union will survive despite its
present problems.
A 70-strong Fisher Fleet operates out of the port, all shrimpers, mussel and
cockle dredgers, employing about 200 men in what has become a rapidly
changing industry as directives from the EC have forced through new working
practices.
Mr Chris Beach, deputy clerk of the Eastern Sea Fisheries Joint Committee,
with which all the boats are registered, has witnessed the change - 'fishing
practices had hardly changed from medieval times to about 10 years ago, but
now, with the advent of new shellfish hygiene rules from Brussels, the UK
has had to come up to date.
'Fishermen used to go shrimping twice a week, cook them at sea and negotiate
with the customer - now they're tied to a processing plant but it will take
all the shrimps he can get, so it has meant an end to boom or bust for the
fleet.'
The 12-mile channel into the Wash and the pilotage for ships coming into the
dock are controlled by the King's Lynn Conservancy Board, under the steady
hand of Mr Maurice Kiddle, general manger and clerk. The board also owns
South Quay, leased by King's Lynn Silos, which last year exported 100,000
tonnes of grain.
