FT  11 JAN 92 / Tough Serbs of Croatia stand by old rivalries: Judy Dempsey
talks to the leaders of the self-proclaimed republic of Krajina
THE men from Knin appear as hard as the limestone in this wretchedly poor
part of south-western Croatia.
Accused of trying to scupper the UN peace plan, the leaders of the
self-proclaimed republic of Krajina, a Serb-inhabited area of Croatia, are
quick to defend their position.
'We oppose the deployment of any peace-keeping forces in Croatia,' Mr Lazar
Macura, Krajina's minister of information, said yesterday.
The UN peace plan, agreed by Croatia, Serbia, and the federal army,
envisages the complete withdrawal of the army from Croatia, the disarming of
Croat and Serb paramilitary units, and the deployment of 10,000 troops in
three regions in Krajina.
'What we object to is that the troops will only be sent to Krajina, and not
to other parts of Croatia where Serbs should be protected,' explains Mr
Macura. 'Furthermore, we and our people will not disarm, if the Croats do
not simultaneously disarm.'
Mr Macura - the right-hand man of Mr Milan Babic, a dentist, and leader of
the Krajina republic - says he has no guarantees that the Croats will not
'kill us Serbs. We have to defend ourselves against these Croats.'
The Serbs in this part of Croatia have a long military tradition. They
migrated to the region in the late 14th century, and then defended the
Austro-Hungarian empire against incursions by the Ottoman empire.
'We even killed Serbs fighting on the Turkish side in our defence of
Vienna,' says Mr Macura. 'We were loyal citizens and border guards of the
Hapsburg Empire.'
Nor will the people of Krajina give up their independence, and live in an
independent Croatia.
The population of Krajina, wedged between the Adriatic coast and the
ethnically-mixed republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina, is now less than 380,000,
since the Croats, who accounted for 15 per cent of the total inhabitants,
have fled the region over the past year.
What upsets Mr Macura, Mr Babic, and other Krajina Serbs is the growing
feeling of betrayal by Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the president of Serbia.
'We received assurances that Serbia would support us, but now Milosevic has
signed the UN agreement,' he explains. 'Yes, Milosevic has betrayed us.'
Mr Milosevic threw his weight behind Mr Babic last year in his determination
to stem Croatia's move towards independence, protect the 600,000 Serbs in
Croatia against discrimination, and create a greater Serbia. Serbia pays
Krajina's pensioners and its unemployed. But now Mr Milosevic, fighting for
his political survival, is trying to force Krajina into accepting the UN
plan.
Mr Macura believes the federal army will not betray the Serbs in Krajina. 'I
hope the army will be disobedient to Milosevic,' he says, adding that
General Ratko Mladic, the recently appointed federal army commander in Knin,
may now defend the Serbs.
Officials in the Croatian government are determined not to allow Krajina to
secede from an independent Croatia. Although the region is barren and
impoverished, Knin, the capital of Krajina, is regarded as part of Croatia's
history. It was once the seat of one of Croatia's kings.
Today, the existence of Serb Orthodox and Croat Catholic churches testifies
to the rivalry between the two ethnic communities, each of which wants to
claim Krajina as its own, now and in the future.
No ceasefire, and no UN plan, is likely to end this rivalry.
