FT  18 FEB 92 / Judge in Blue Arrow trial fuels legal row: Four receive
suspended sentences amid calls for review of how fraud cases are handled
THE Blue Arrow trial judge yesterday joined calls for a review of how large
fraud cases should be handled in the courts as he gave suspended sentences
to the four financial advisers convicted of conspiracy to defraud over the
1987 rights issue.
Mr Justice McKinnon warned that trial by jury in these cases would be at
risk unless the burden they imposed on everyone involved was reduced.
Mr Jonathan Cohen, Mr David Reed and Mr Nicholas Wells, former County
NatWest executives, were all sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment, suspended
for two years. Mr Martin Gibbs, a former Phillips &amp; Drew director, was
sentenced to 12 months, suspended for two years.
All four were convicted last Friday of conspiracy to defraud over their
handling of the rights issue after a trial lasting more than a year and the
most expensive criminal prosecution ever held in the UK.
There were sighs of relief at the sentences from relatives and friends in
the packed public gallery at a court in the City. Mr Justice McKinnon said
the four had not planned to break the law. He denied they were getting off
lightly.
The judge's uncompromising remarks about the handling of the case will add
to demands for a radical rethink of how complex City fraud cases are dealt
with by regulators and the legal system.
He said the trial had placed an unacceptable burden on everyone concerned,
including the jury. He told the court: 'What is beyond all doubt is that all
involved in this case have had to endure what no one in our courts should be
called upon to cope with. Many lessons will have to be learnt from this
trial about the proper way these cases are presented if trial by jury is to
survive in cases such as these.'
Although Mr Justice McKinnon said he was not apportioning blame for the
length of the trial, his remarks were widely seen as critical of the Serious
Fraud Office which brought the prosecution.
Despite the jury's decision to convict the four men, the judge made no costs
order, leaving the SFO to fund its Pounds 1.9m prosecution. Lawyers saw this
decision as highly unusual.
Mr Wells and Mr Gibbs both left the court without making a statement. But Mr
Jonathan Cohen, County's former chief executive, told reporters: 'This has
been a devastating week for me and my family. I reiterate that no action
that I sanctioned I felt would prejudice anyone, but I realise that the jury
reached the conclusion that I must have done.
'There are many things I would like to say about the bringing of this
prosecution, but I have been advised that since I am going to appeal in the
hope of clearing my name it would not be appropriate to comment at this
time.'
All four men confirmed their intention to appeal against their convictions.
Should any of them succeed in overturning their convictions, any return to
City careers would depend on convincing regulators that they were fit and
proper people to re-enter the City.
The judge's decision not to imprison the four convicted men was not
unexpected since all had been allowed home on bail after being convicted.
Mr Justice McKinnon said the four were guilty of a serious offence since
many millions of Blue Arrow shares had been bought at the falsely inflated
price following their decision to support the issue secretly themselves.
They had not acted for personal gain nor intended others to lose. They had
acted under pressure and from a desire to help Blue Arrow, their client, and
their own companies.
Ms Mo Mowlam, who speaks for Labour on City matters, said the outcome of the
trail represented 'a waste of Pounds 35m of taxpayers' money' and the
suspended sentences showed 'how unfairly and how unjustly the system is
working'.
