FT  27 FEB 92 / UK Company News: Barclays cedes top spot in profits league -
The reasons behind the bank's downturn
BARCLAYS remains the UK's biggest bank, measured in terms of both the market
value of its shares and the value of its assets.
But yesterday it ceded the title of the UK's most profitable bank to Lloyds.
In 1991, Barclays made pre-tax profits of Pounds 533m - 30 per cent down on
the previous year - compared with the Pounds 645m disclosed earlier this
week by Lloyds.
Part of the reason for Lloyds surpassing Barclays was that Barclays' control
of costs in 1991 was less rigorous than its peers. Both Lloyds and National
Westminster reduced the ratio of their costs to income during the year.
But for the second year in succession, Barclays' cost-income ratio rose. In
1989, the ratio was 64 per cent. It rose to 65.7 per cent the following year
and was 67.8 per cent last year.
A direct comparison with Lloyds' ratio, of 61.8 per cent, is not altogether
fair on Barclays', because the two banks consist of very different
businesses. But Sir John Quinton, Barclays' chairman, said that the trend at
his bank was 'disappointing'.
Part of the reason for the rise at Barclays was that two overseas banks
which have been recently acquired - Merck Finck in Germany and Europeene de
banque of France - were included in the figures for a full year for the
first time. Both of these banks have significant running costs, but their
income levels are not yet substantial enough - though Sir John stressed that
they were both profitable and that he was optimistic about their prospects.
However, he conceded that even without a range of 'special factors', the
cost income ratio would still have risen. Part of the reason was that
Barclays made a far higher pay award to staff last year than Lloyds did. Mr
Peter Wood, finance director, said that the result of this was that costs of
running the UK network of branches rose 11 per cent in the year.
Sir John said that the staff salary increase in the current year was only 3
per cent, less than Lloyds. He was therefore hopeful that the cost income
ratio would improve.
Having been the most expansionist of the UK's biggest banks in the past few
years, Barclays is now putting a renewed emphasis on cost-control and
profitability.
Mr Andrew Buxton, managing director, stressed that businesses incapable of
making a satisfactory return would be closed or sold. He said that about
Pounds 100m of capital would be released as the bank reorganised its finance
company division, called the Mercantile group of companies. He said
Mercantile would withdraw from providing loans which are marketed by other
organisations - third party loans - and from financing purchases of
equipment by small companies. He also said that in the US the bank was
moving to 'become a wholesale bank (providing services to big companies) and
out of the middle market and the retail market'.
It is understood that the bank is therefore keen to sell one of its US
operations, Barclays Bank New York, which has capital of some Pounds 100m.
Mr Wood said he was working on a project to improve the bank's management
control systems, so that the bank has an improved grasp of the true
profitability of individual services and products. Such management controls
have to date eluded most of the big UK banks.
Nonetheless, Sir John applauded the progress of some divisions during the
year. The financial services division, which includes life insurance
operations, pushed up profits from Pounds 181m to Pounds 214m. Profits of
Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the investment bank, rose from Pounds 5m to Pounds
61m.
There was also a recovery at the Barclaycard operation, Central Retail
Services, which returned a profit of Pounds 46m compared with a loss of
Pounds 4m, thanks to the introduction of charges for credit card holders.
These profits were, however, less than half what the division has made in
the past.
On the other hand, losses on loans took their toll of three divisions.
Profits of the UK banking operations fell from Pounds 324m to Pounds 119m.
The Mercantile companies made a loss of Pounds 126m, compared with profits
of Pounds 2m. The US operations lost Pounds 217m, down from a Pounds 20m
profit.
As a result the group's earnings per share fell from 24.7p to 15.2p.
