FT  30 APR 92 / Survey of Relocation in The UK (16): A centre for advanced
communications - Northern Ireland now claims to have one of the most
advanced fibre-optic telecom networks in Europe
A PERSON dialling directory enquiries in London might be somewhat bemused
these days to find the operator answering in a broad Ulster accent. The
reason is that around 10 per cent of all London directory enquiries, or
40,000 calls per day, are now routed through Portadown, 20 miles outside
Belfast. Thanks to fibre optics, 200 operators in Northern Ireland, linked
to a computer database in Sheffield, can do the job more cheaply and as
efficiently as a similar number in London.
Northern Ireland now claims to have one of the most advanced fibre-optic
telecommunications networks anywhere in Europe. It is one of the chief
selling points that Northern Ireland's Industrial Development Board (IDB) is
keen to impress upon visiting business executives curious about relocation
or inward investment in the province.
British Telecom's Pounds 100m investment in the network, which began five
years ago, and is continuing with an additional Pounds 40m per year in
upgrading, has converted all the trunk routes to optic fibres. The system
can thus cope with high density data transmission and conference networking.
A BT spokesman says that the network puts Northern Ireland on a par with
London and other leadinging European capitals 'with the difference that the
network extends throughout the province. No opportunity for inward
investment need be lost for the lack of advanced telecommunications.'
'It cuts away this idea of peripherality,' says Ms Janet McIver the director
of the Northern Ireland Business Centre in London, an IDB marketing arm. She
says that the transfer of 'back-office' data processing activities to
Northern Ireland is now a prime focus of IDB's marketing effort.
'This has been our main success story in the British market and is a very
important and exciting possibility for the future,' she says. Around 1,500
jobs have been created in Northern Ireland in the past two years as a result
of relocation of data processing activities.
Besides BT, the UK's Department of Social Security has relocated its claims
processing to Belfast from its offices in seven London boroughs including
Brixton and Lewisham. Five hundred staff process some 160,000 claims per
week. The passport office is processing nationwide passport applications out
of Belfast.
In the private sector, Nationwide Anglia is processing UK mortgage accounts
out of Northern Ireland, and Prudential Assurance has transferred its UK
life assurance claims processing activities to Belfast.
Mr Keith Bedell-Pearce the chief executive of Prudential Financial Services
says: 'A combination of staff shortages and the fact that we were simply
running out of space at our Reading offices forced us to look for
alternative solutions.'
He adds that the choice of Belfast has been an 'outstanding success.'
Better-qualified staff availability, and low personnel turnover has meant
that the same volume of work is now being handled by fewer employees - 'the
cost of recruitment, induction and on-going training is minimised,' he says.
Computer training begins at an early age in Ulster's schools. Some 500
graduates in computer studies emerge from Ulster's two universities each
year. Together they provide a large pool of computer-literate labour. Ms
McIver says that wage costs in the data processing industry are some 10-20
per cent lower in Northern Ireland compared with UK.
Relocation of manufacturing industry has been less of a success story than
in the services industry, although according to Mr John McGuckian, the newly
appointed chairman of IDB, 'for internationally mobile projects we are
competitive with anywhere.'
Capital grants of up to 30 per cent are available, as well as additional 20
per cent grants in high unemployment areas of Northern Ireland.
Assistance is also available for R&amp;D, training and marketing and certain
relocation costs of staff and Mr MrGuckian says 'we pride ourselves on our
after-sales service. Some of our best envoys have been those that have
already established themselves here.'
AVX, a leading electronic components manufacturer last year chose the port
of Larne in Northern Ireland, as the base for its European distribution
centre.
According to Mr Greg McMahon, AVX's European Distribution Manager, 'far more
important than geography in a distribution operation these days are
management skills - skills in inventory control, in negotiating the most
efficient and economical form of transport, and in meeting the precise
requirements of customers.'
Company executives who have moved from the mainland to Belfast point to the
good schools, cheaper housing, (as much as half the cost of that available
on the mainland), and uncongested roads as well as the variety of outdoor
leisure activities - such as golf, sailing, hill-walking and horse-riding -
that are available within 30 minutes' drive of Belfast.
Their surprisingly sanguine view of the 'troubles' perhaps has something to
do with the police statistics which reveal that the risk associated with
terrorist-related crime in Northern Ireland is substantially less than the
risk of being a victim of violent crime in most cities on the mainland.
Mr McGuckian comments: 'It is true we are a divided community, but enormous
efforts are being made to solve that problem. The reality is that it has
little or no impact on running a successful industry here.'
Trying to convince outsiders of that though is IDB's most formidable task,
and no-one doubts that political stability would provide the 'missing
ingredient' to make Northern Ireland a highly attractive region for
relocation. Fresh hopes for a political solution await the next round of
inter-party talks, due to begin next month.
