FT  29 SEP 92 / Letter: Reflections to allay investors' unease at venture
capital fund manager's fees
Sir, Norma Cohen's article, 'Investors query the rewards of risk: Unease
over fees for venture capital fund managers' (September 22), presents a
misleading view and is also unbalanced in that it does not contain any
meaningful response from the venture capital side. I hope you will allow me
to present that case.
I will not comment on the guidelines governing personal investment by
venture capital managers except to say that several venture capital houses
do adopt this mechanism. Indeed, it is sometimes favoured by investors as a
device to 'focus the mind' of the venture capitalist - who will benefit in
the case of successfully realised investments, but lose his money entirely
in the event of failure.
The position with fees and the widespread practice of 'carried interest' is
one where one is unlikely to achieve consensus, since it is an issue of the
pricing of a service. As an industry, we recognise that our comparatively
high management fees are an inevitable consequence of the specialised nature
of our investment activities.
As you rightly acknowledge, a venture capital fund nowadays typically
includes a hurdle rate, ie the carried interest benefit does not accrue
until all capital plus an agreed return is repatriated to investors. Again,
this long-established mechanism tends to encourage exceptional performance
on the part of the venture capitalist and is often insisted upon by
investors, since it creates a community of interest between the venture
capitalist and the investor.
Where I must take issue with your views is in the apparent lack of
understanding of the role of a venture capital manager, particularly in
management buy-out investments.
The comments from John McCrory reflect the skills needed: those of Mr Anslow
as reported are extraordinarily naive. Our industry recruits senior
executives from industry, as well as from the various professions, so that
we can effectively carry out the analysis, selection, completion and
realisation of investments. To complete any unquoted equity investment, be
it start-up or MBO, will take anything from one to three months' full-time
work on the part of the venture capital manager. The difference does not end
there; a high degree of skill and effort is required in the subsequent
monitoring of the investment.
It is true that venture capital has achieved good returns in recent years,
but it is a long-term business and is obviously vulnerable to the economic
cycle.
Premium returns are of course required to match the higher risk profile, and
at the BVCA we are endeavouring to compile accurate figures showing
aggregate returns for the UK venture capital industry covering a meaningful
period to assist investors.
R Hollidge,
vice chairman,
British Venture Capital
Association,
3 Catherine Place,
London SW1E 6DX
