FT  03 JAN 92 / Breathtaking silence from the US
THE historic decision to liberalise prices in Russia and other members of
the Commonwealth of former Soviet republics has met with breathtaking
silence in the US.
At first glance this is surprising. Successive US administrations have urged
Soviet Russia to abandon communism and adopt free markets. Therefore,
President Boris Yeltsin's willingness to take steps which President Mikhail
Gorbachev shunned ought to have prompted widespread applause.
But the Bush administration remains fearful of backing a programme it
believes is technically flawed and President Bush has so far refused to
stake any significant political or financial capital on Mr Yeltsin's
reforms.
Some conservatives in Washington have criticised the White House for failing
to state more clearly its support for Mr Yeltsin. Instead, there have been a
spate of leaks about Central Intelligence Agency reports outlining the risk
of social chaos this winter in reaction to economic reform.
The administration, however, prefers to stress its willingness to provide
humanitarian aid such as food and medicine, to be co-ordinated at an
international conference of donor nations in Washington on January 20.
In defence of their own passivity, US officials point out that no one is
sure what the effect of the price reform will be, whether it will create
regional or local food shortages, or, more probably, lead to brief but
painful hyperinflation.
Another cause of scepticism is the quality of Mr Yeltsin's young reform
team. Although men such as Mr Yegor Gaidar, Russia's deputy prime minister,
draw praise for political courage, doubts remain about their knowledge of a
market economy and ability to overcome resistance to reform within the old
communist bureaucracy.
One informed observer commented that the Yeltsin/Gaidar plan was 'very weak'
on budgetary questions, while the monetary aspects were 'non-existent'.
Another senior US official was privately critical of the Russian plan,
saying it did not address important questions such as realistic prices for
energy.
Despite the criticism, officials point out that price liberalisation has
galvanised the administration to support full membership of the
International Monetary Fund for Russia, and other reformist republics, as
soon as possible. This includes the US Treasury, which opposed membership
for the former Soviet Union last autumn.
Full IMF membership would confer the power to borrow funds, in conjunction
with a full reform programme. This prospect is 'some way off', according to
those involved, but that does not prevent important technical advice being
given to the republics at present.
