FT  01 MAY 92 / International Company News: Wall Street's qualified
revolution: The impact of changes to the private placement market
Two years after its introduction, Rule 144a, which Wall Street hoped would
revolutionise the US private placement market, is seen to be only a
qualified success.
Rule 144a was a revision to US securities law that exempted big investment
institutions trading privately-issued corporate securities in the secondary
market from the onerous requirement of registering them with the Securities
and Exchange Commission.
The SEC and the investment banking community hoped that by making it much
easier for institutions to re-sell private issues, foreign companies would
come to the US private placement market to tap a pool of investors that had
been widened by the exemption from registration requirements.
In improving the liquidity of the secondary private markets, proponents of
144a hoped that the yield premium usually demanded by institutional buyers
of 'unregistered' private securities would fall. With more US institutions
willing to buy the securities, and with investors likely to demand less
exacting yields for securities that were widely tradeable, foreign companies
would stampede towards the US private placement market. That was the theory.
The stampede never materialised, although foreign issuers have come to the
US in reasonable numbers, lured by access to a fresh pool of capital.
According to IDD Information Services in New York, almost half of the 419
deals completed under 144a (or about Dollars 10.7bn of the Dollars 26.6bn
raised) since its introduction in 1990 have been issued by foreign
companies. The UK has been the main source of business, followed by
continental Europe and Latin America, particularly Mexico.
Mr Vikram Pandit, head of equity syndicates at Morgan Stanley in New York,
says: 'Rule 144a has been a success because it has achieved what it set out
to do - open up the ability for anyone to come to the US (private placement)
market.' Yet the liquidity shortage continues to dog the private markets,
even with 144a. On the equity side, there are two reasons why.
First, the electronic trading systems that proponents of 144a hoped would
provide the foundation for a liquid secondary market have been a failure.
Investors found that the first trading system, Portal, which was set up by
the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), was user-unfriendly
and cumbersome. People quickly stopped using it, and for the past year it
has been undergoing an overhaul, and awaits relaunch.
The New York and American stock exchanges, which committed themselves to
building a trading system for 144a deals, are both awaiting SEC approval for
their systems.
Second, critics of 144a say the SEC was too restrictive in granting its
registration exemptions only to qualified institutions, those with at least
Dollars 100m invested in securities.
Mr Stephen Cooper, partner with New York law firm Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges,
says the SEC limit 'circumscribed a universe of prospective buyers that was
too small to achieve true market liquidity'.
The drafters of 144a may have aimed the rule at the wrong target. A large
segment of the private market is made up of US insurance companies. Insurers
invest in private placement issues because, in exchange for illiquidity and
complexity, they receive premium rates, which can be locked in for the long
term.
Improving liquidity, simplifying the deals and lowering yields, therefore,
has no appeal for insurers which run 'buy and hold', not trading, accounts.
They have not bought 144a securities because they do not fit their
particular risk-reward profile.
As for the rest of the private market, it is made up primarily of mutual
funds, and they remain reluctant to get involved in 144a deals, especially
on the equity side, until secondary market liquidity has been firmly
established.
So if liquidity has been a problem, how has nearly Dollars 27bn been raised
under 144a since its introduction two years ago?
On the equity side, the bulk of the issues have originated abroad. Yet few
foreign issuers have come to the US to raise private capital in a
stand-alone issue. Those equity issues that have been completed by overseas
companies under 144a have generally been arranged alongside offerings in the
home market of the issuer. This is because US investors will only buy the
securities if they know a secondary market for the stock exists in the home
country of the issuer.
On the debt side, investment bankers have overcome the lack of liquidity
with some clever financial engineering.
To make private issues more attractive to a wider group of investors, an
increasing number of private deals have been designed so that they mimic the
qualities of public deals - the idea being to appeal to investors who
normally shun private issues because of the lack of a secondary market.
To overcome public investors' fear of illiquidity, deals have been put
together that are, in effect, underwritten private issues.
This is not the contradiction it might seem. Broadly defined, an
underwritten 144a deal is a private placement in which an investment bank
takes on an entire issue of unregistered securities from an issuer on a firm
commitment basis (such as in a public deal), and immediately resells the
paper to qualified institutional buyers.
Issuers like underwritten private deals because they appeal to a much wider
group of investors, the chances of an issue being sold at the right terms
are higher, they get their money quicker because the deals can be completed
rapidly, and the pricing is generally more favourable than on a traditional
private placement.
For their part, public investors go for underwritten private 144a securities
because the investment bank that 'underwrites' the deal guarantees a liquid
secondary market for the securities.
Ironically, these underwritten private deals end up virtually
indistinguishable from public deals. Investment bankers even make the
documentation in private issues, the 'offering circulars', look just like
the prospectuses used in public deals.
This may not be what the SEC had in mind when it drew up 144a, but
considering that the aim of the rule was to bring the chief quality of the
public market, liquidity, to the private market, who is complaining?
