FT  02 SEP 92 / Survey of Aerospace (31): Japan and US widen their lead -
Lord Tombs, of Rolls-Royce, talks to David Fishlock on the race for new
materials
A WARNING that British industry is failing to heed overseas competition in
an area that underpins much of manufacturing industry comes from one of its
leading technologists.
Lord Tombs of Brailes, the outgoing chairman of Rolls-Royce and a Fellow of
the Royal Academy of Engineering, believes Japan and the US are pulling
ahead with the next generation of engineering materials. These are the
materials from which engines and high-duty machinery of every kind will be
made in the 21st century.
They will supplant the steels on which engineers have relied for 200 years
because of such advantages as temperature and corrosion resistance, low
weight and eventually lower cost, Lord Tombs says.
Collectively, they are often known as engineering ceramics. They bear scant
relationship, however, to the brittle substances with which the potter
works. But like clay they come from some of the most abundant elements on
earth, and so are intrinsically very cheap. As with the potter's art, their
intrinsic value depends on the skill invested in shaping and forming the
engineering ceramics.
The Japanese, for example, have a project to build an entire diesel engine
from ceramics, says Lord Tombs. Rolls-Royce is already testing ceramic
aero-engine parts made in Japan for possible use in its jet engines. Lord
Tombs believes that there is a fundamental difference between the
engineering ceramics and today's high-duty engineering materials that could
make it very difficult for British companies to retrieve the situation once
they have begun to rely on overseas suppliers.
With today's materials, it doesn't much matter where the engineer buys his
bars or sheets of steel. He adds the value in his design office and with his
machine tools.
With ceramics the situation is quite different. So intimately are
formulation, design and manufacture interwoven, the material supplier will
provide finished and certified parts. And initially they will be those parts
most crucial to enhancing the performance of engines, by allowing them to
run hundreds of degrees hotter.
As Lord Tombs tells it, an eminent British civil engineer first drew his
attention to the similarity between the kind of ceramics aero-engine
designers covet for such parts as turbine blades, and reinforced concrete.
Strands of steel firmly embedded in the cement enormously strengthen what
otherwise would be a very inadequate material. Skilfully reinforced, it is
perfectly possible to use concrete to construct a pressure vessel or a ship.
Like reinforced concrete, an engineering ceramic is a composite material.
Very strong fibres, whiskers or fabrics of one substance are firmly embedded
in another, to impart the metal-like properties such as tensile strength
that ceramics normally lack. Performance will depend crucially on the
integrity of that bonding and how the bond survives when the going gets hot.
Will one substance start to dissolve in the other? Or attack and corrode it?
Three decades of trying to harness these infuriating materials have
convinced Rolls-Royce engineers that success can lie only in an integrated
approach to development, design and manufacture of a particular part. The
material stockist will have no role in marketing engineering ceramics.
A team of leading UK industrialists with special interests in new
engineering materials found recently that Japan already enjoys a lead in the
development of ceramic components. 'If you want to buy ceramics today, Japan
is the place to go,' says Lord Tombs. But the US also has a huge national
effort co-ordinated by the Pentagon, he says.
By comparison, Britain's effort is miniscule, led, he believes, by
Rolls-Royce 'still feeling our way along the ceramic route'. For the past
three years the company has supported a special programme at Warwick
University, conducted by its Advanced Ceramic Centre. Here a
multi-disciplinary team of a dozen specialists in materials, design and
manufacture have been learning the art and science of making aero-engine
parts of ceramic.
About a score of other universities, notably Swansea and Birmingham, are
involved. 'We are probably spending more than anyone else in Britain,' says
Lord Tombs - around Pounds 10m a year, he estimates. Lord Tombs believes the
novelty of the technology and the strategic importance to British industry
warrants an urgent national effort on engineering ceramics. He wants DTI to
back an 'enabling club' of major potential users, such as Rolls-Royce,
British Aerospace, GEC and other engine makers, 'to get people thinking
about advanced materials'.
What is lacking, he says, is any general awareness of how easily British
industry could lose out to overseas rivals. What is needed, he says, is 'a
central push'.
