FT  25 FEB 92 / Survey of Conferences and Exhibitions (1): Long haul to
recovery - The international conference and exhibition industry has had a
tough year as a result of the Gulf War and recession. But there are signs
that the market in the US and UK may be picking up, with trade fairs doing
well. David Churchill looks at prospects for the coming year
THE CONFERENCE and exhibitions industry, after what has probably been its
worst-ever year, still faces a far from rosy 1992. Visitors to International
Confex, the main trade show for the conference and exhibitions business
which opens at London's Earls Court today, will know only too well how far
the recession has forced companies to cut back on this sector of marketing
communications.
A survey, published today, of conference organisers in over 200 of Britain's
largest companies indicates a worsening of demand this year, with fewer
events. Those that are held are likely to involve fewer delegates than
usual.
The survey, carried out by the Meetings Industry Association and London's
government-owned Queen Elizabeth II conference centre, found that 40 per
cent of corporate organisers of meetings expected to hold fewer events this
year, with only 26 per cent expecting to hold more. The rest thought the
level of activity would be the same.
But seven out of every 10 companies polled also believed that conferences
would be shorter this year, while virtually all agreed that competition
among conference venues would be fierce.
Ms Deborah Carlton, managing director of Blenheim Events, which is
organising the Confex trade show, says that the 'feedback we have had seems
that while there may be light at the end of the tunnel, we still have a
difficult year ahead.'
This view is shared by others in the conference sector. 'While conference
and incentive travel is a valid marketing tool for many companies, it has
been an area of significant cutback in 1991 and there is no sign of an
expenditure uplift in 1992,' says Mr David Hackett, managing director of
conference organiser the Travel Organisation.
But the exhibitions side of the sector seems to have been less hard hit.
'People are using exhibitions in a more determined way to find out the best
deals on offer in the most cost-effective way,' suggests Mr John Glandfield,
a director of the Earls Court and Olympia complex.
Mr Neville Buch, chairman of the publicly-quoted Blenheim Group, the largest
UK exhibitions organiser, reports that the median attendance at its UK
exhibitions last year was 20 per cent higher than for the same events in
1990.
'We feel that the brand leaders in particular markets which use our
exhibitions are not only slow to feel the effect of the recession but also
seem to be fairly fast in responding to the beginning of its end,' he says.
Yet in both the conference and exhibitions businesses, international
activity is the key to the sector's recovery. 'There is considerable
strength of demand from overseas clients, particularly multinational
companies,' says Mr Paul Swan, managing director of conference production
company Spectrum Communications.
Ms Carlton of Confex points out that there is an increased international
presence at this year's London trade show. 'This indicates how aggressively
European and long-haul destinations are marketing themselves to UK buyers,'
she says.
International affairs are also benefiting some niche sectors of the
industry. Mr Neil Thomas, managing director of Hawskmere Conferences, says
that 'the degree of legislation coming out of Brussels means that there is
considerable interest in the sort of specialist tax and financial
conferences we mount.'
The true state of the conference and exhibitions business, however, is
shrouded by its fragmentation. The meetings business ranges from small
internal management and training conferences held within companies to those
held at specialist venues or in hotels.
Corporately-run conferences can be used to communicate to target groups:
such as a new product launch or investor presentation. The conference
business also encompasses the large-scale trade association meetings and
government-inspired conferences. An important part of the business is
travel, with conferences often used as a thinly-veiled cover for an
incentive trip to motivate staff or reward distributors.
Exhibitions also are fragmented, with the main ones held in major venues
such as Earls Court or Birmingham's National Exhibition Centre, but with
many smaller ones held in hotels and as part of conference venues.
Estimates of the size of the industry vary, but the most recent value placed
on UK conference activity is some Pounds 6bn a year, calculated by
management consultants Coopers &amp; Lybrand Deloitte. That suggests the sector
is several times larger than previously thought, mainly due to taking into
account small meetings held in hotels and other venues.
The latest figures on spending on exhibitions, calculated by the
Incorporated Society of British Advertisers, suggest that the recession was
already being felt in 1990; some Pounds 761m was spent by British companies
 -a decline of 9 per cent over 1989 and the first time in two decades that
exhibition expenditure had fallen. But spending by international companies
on UK exhibitions rose from Pounds 240m to Pounds 252m.
International conference and exhibition delegates are a key engine of growth
for the industry, according to the British Tourist Authority. 'The actual
expenditure by conference visitors is only the tip of the iceberg,' says Mr
Peter Glover, head of the BTA's business travel department. 'The income to
Britain also includes pre- and post-convention tours and visits, as well as
spending by accompanying visitors during the conference itself.'
BTA figures show that in 1990 (figures for 1991 are not yet available) the
number of international conference visitors to Britain topped 300,000 for
the first time. Moreover, average spending by conference visitors at Pounds
600 was higher than that by the average visitor (Pounds 428) and the average
business visitor (Pounds 488).
The growth of international conference and exhibition activity has spurred
UK venues to upgrade or develop their facilities. Birmingham has put itself
firmly on the international conference scene with its new International
Conference Centre, opened by the Queen last year.
The Earls Court and Olympia complex in London, the UK's most popular venues,
is now concentrating on improving its infrastructure (better access roads
and an improved tube service from Earls Court to Olympia) over the next five
years rather than adding new space.
But the UK industry faces considerable competition for the large-scale
meetings, not only from established continental venues (and newer facilities
such as that offered by Euro Disney) but also from further afield. Hong
Kong, which two years ago opened its new convention centre, will this summer
play host to its largest-ever conference - some 25,000 members of the Lions
Club International.
Much of the growth in the industry, however, is expected to come in the
1990s from small-scale meetings of up to 100 participants. It is these
groups which the leading international hotel chains such as Forte, Hilton,
and Inter-Continental are targeting with special conference packages aimed
at offering a better service for conference groups than hotels have
traditionally provided.
The long-term threat to the growth of international conferences, however,
remains the increasingly sophisticated tele and video conference technology.
The restrictions on international travel during the Gulf War gave a
substantial boost to this style of communication. However, few within the
industry are seriously worried: face-to-face meetings at conferences or
exhibitions give most executives benefits that they will not want to give up
lightly.
