FT  06 MAR 92 / Brittan attacks critics of EC line on mergers
SIR LEON Brittan, the EC's competition commissioner, yesterday launched a
strong counter-attack against his critics on two fronts - rejecting calls
for an independent European merger authority, and warning against the
creation of monopolistic 'Euro-champions' through mergers.
In a speech to a mainly German audience at a competition symposium in
Innsbruck, Austria, Sir Leon said that to wave through anti-competitive
mergers would be to subject European industry to 'a cruel deception'.
It was better to follow the Japanese example and encourage fierce
competition on the domestic market, he added.
Sir Leon's speech was partly aimed at his colleague Mr Martin Bangemann, the
EC industry commissioner, who is from Germany, and at Mr Wolfgang Kartte,
head of the German cartel office, who represent the two sides of the debate
on competition and industrial policy.
Mr Bangemann - who hit out last month at the influence of competition
'ayatollahs' on EC policy - believes that Sir Leon should sometimes take a
more lenient and less legalistic attitude to borderline merger cases.
Mr Kartte, for his part, has attacked the Commission for not being rigorous
enough.
In a passage obviously aimed at Mr Bangemann, who is also responsible for
the single market, Sir Leon said that the Commission's 17-month-old merger
control task force would continue to examine takeovers according to the
existing market situation. 'You cannot just assume, because we would wish it
that way, that the whole of the European Community is the true market for a
product,' he added.
Mr Bangemann has repeatedly criticised Sir Leon for recommending rejection
of the proposed Franco-Italian takeover of De Havilland, the Canadian
aircraft manufacturer, last October.
To the dismay of the Italian and French governments, the Commission voted to
block the takeover, although Mr Bangemann opposed the decision.
The controversy over the De Havilland case also revived calls for a merger
control authority which would be independent of the Commission, in the same
way that the German cartel office is independent of the Bonn government.
But Sir Leon said yesterday that the decisions of an independent EC
authority would still have to be approved by commissioners or ministers, who
would then have 'an open invitation' to exercise their political power.
