FT  17 NOV 92 / Scope of probe into arms for Iraq is widened
THE government last night announced wide-ranging terms of reference for the
judicial inquiry into Britain's defence trade with Iraq. But as Mr John
Major set out to quash claims of a cover-up, it emerged that senior
ministers had been preparing to relax the arms trade restrictions just two
weeks before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
The prime minister said Lord Justice Scott's inquiry would not be restricted
to Matrix Churchill and would be free to delve into related issues such as
the Supergun affair. He emphasised it would be free to focus not just on
'arms questions', but on 'decisions taken on the prosecution of companies
and on public interest immunity'.
'All ministers who are called will give evidence,' Mr Major said. In
addition, civil servants would be instructed to co-operate and all papers
called for would be made available. Lord Justice Scott, who was appointed
last week to head the inquiry, would be free to decide on the publication of
his report and of evidence taken from witnesses.
But the government is likely to face fresh questions over Matrix Churchill
following confirmation by senior Whitehall officials last night that
ministers agreed just two weeks before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait to relax
restrictions on defence-related sales to Baghdad.
The decision, taken at a meeting on July 19 1990 chaired by Mr Douglas Hurd,
the foreign secretary, was not implemented because it was overtaken by the
outbreak of hostilities on August 2. The agreement was subject to the
approval of Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the then prime minister, and would have
been announced to parliament.
The ministerial meeting was the culmination of more than two years of
Whitehall battles over guidelines set out in 1985 by the then foreign
secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, to prevent Britain from arming either side in
the Iran-Iraq war.
It was called at the request of the Department of Trade and Industry, the
government department which consistently backed the sale of Matrix Churchill
machine tools to Iraq even after it was shown they were used for military
purposes.
The officials said that the ministers at the July 19 meeting - representing
the cabinet's overseas and defence committee - agreed that the rules should
be relaxed to take account of the peace accord between Iran and Iraq.
Downing Street has refused to divulge the names of the other ministers
present at the talks, but said that Mr John Major, then chancellor, did not
attend.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, yesterday launched a
fresh series of allegations about the extent of the prime minister's
knowledge during his time as foreign secretary and chancellor.
Mr Cook supported his claims with documents from the Matrix Churchill trial,
but failed to provide more than circumstantial evidence linking Mr Major to
the events outlined in the documents. Downing Street emphasised that Mr
Major had been concerned to make the terms of reference for the inquiry as
wide as possible, but said it was still open to Lord Justice Scott to seek
to extend them further.
Opposition MPs dubbed the terms of reference 'unsatisfactory' and complained
that the powers of the judge to enforce witnesses to attend were
insufficient. Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, said the inquiry would not
look at whether ministers misled parliament, or require evidence to be given
on oath or in public. Nor would it have powers to force former ministers to
co-operate.
Earlier, Sir Nicholas Lyell, attorney general, indicated in the Commons that
current or former ministers could expect to be prosecuted if evidence that
they had committed criminal offences came to light.
Cook keeps up pressure, Page 10
Joe Rogaly, Page 18
Observer, Page 19
