FT  21 OCT 92 / Mexico bows to pressures on peso
MEXICO has unexpectedly accelerated the maximum rate at which the peso can
devalue against the dollar, from 20 to 40 centavos a day, thereby reversing
a long-held policy of steadily reducing the daily slide in the currency. The
change will take effect from today.
The increased slide to an equivalent of 4.6 per cent a year will only apply
to the price at which pesos are sold, or the effective ceiling on the
exchange rate: the price at which the peso is bought will continue to be
fixed at 3,056 pesos per dollar.
But the effect will be to increase the volatility of the peso in the foreign
exchange markets, and lead to a faster devaluation of the average exchange
rate.
'The government is accepting the pressures on the peso in the foreign
exchange market,' says Mr Roberto Barrera, head of research at Invermexico,
a brokerage. 'In one sense it is a reversal, but in another the decision
addresses concerns of investors, and clears up uncertainty.'
The announcement on exchange rate policy reflects recent weakness in the
peso. It came earlier than investors had expected, an indication of the
government's need to act quickly before currency dealers gained the upper
hand.
A government official said: 'The increased slide to some extent pays
attention to concerns that the exchange rate is overvalued. But the change
is largely insignificant. If we cannot hold a slide of 2.4 per cent, we
cannot hold 4.6 per cent.'
Above all 'the change in exchange rate policy is complemented by other
important changes that are aimed to get inflation to 7 per cent next year'.
The government will announce, as part of the annual renegotiation of the
wage and price accord, that electricity and petrol prices will rise by up to
10 per cent next year, minimum wages by 7 per cent and contractual wages by
a maximum of 10 per cent. This will be the first time the wage accord will
explicitly cover contractual, rather than just minimum, wages.
Mexico's inflation rate is expected to be about 12 per cent this year,
suggesting that in real terms the peso would have appreciated by about 6-7
per cent against the dollar, had current annual devaluation been maintained.
The current account deficit is likely to top Dollars 20bn (Pounds 11.6bn)
this year, or more than 6 per cent of GDP.
