FT  13 JUN 92 / Life peerage for Jeffrey Archer
BEST SELLING author and former Conservative MP Mr Jeffrey Archer becomes a
life peer in today's honours lists, in which political nominations for
working peerages coincide with the Queen's birthday honours.
Mr Andrew Lloyd Webber, who arranged the Tories' election campaign theme and
threatened to leave the UK if Labour won, is among the 33 knights on the
birthday honours list, for services to the arts.
Industrialists honoured include two from the 'beerage' - Mr Alick Rankin,
chairman of Scottish and Newcastle, and Mr Anthony Tennant, chairman of
Guinness.
Mr Alan Cockshaw, chairman of AMEC; Mr Desmond Pitcher, chief executive of
Littlewoods; Mr Colin Southgate, chairman of Thorn EMI; and Mr Roy Watts,
chairman of Thames Water, also become knights.
Mr Archer joins four Tory MPs who stood down at the last election on the
working peers list, together with four Labour nominees, including Mr John
Eatwell, economic adviser to Mr Neil Kinnock, and Professor Raymond Plant,
who chaired Labour's commission on electoral reform.
Mr Victor Cooke becomes the first Ulster Unionist working peer: the Liberal
Democrats were not offered a place on the list.
Working peers are nominated on the basis that they will attend the House of
Lords regularly to take part in the processing of legislation. Today's list
somewhat redresses the balance from last week's dissolution honours list, in
which most of those going to the Lords were former Tory cabinet ministers.
Among the political honours in the 943 awards on the birthday list, Mr Alan
Beith, the Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesman, becomes a privy counsellor,
while there is a life peerage for Sir Bernard Braine, until the election the
MP with the longest continuous service. The political knights include Mr
Ivan Lawrence MP, who narrowly missed being appointed to Mr John Major's
administration.
Dame Elisabeth Frink, the sculptor, becomes a companion of honour, and Mr
Anthony Kenny, president of the British Academy, becomes a knight. Mr Louis
Blom-Cooper QC, former chairman of the Press Council and author of the
Justinian column in the Financial Times, is also knighted.
Mr Ian Botham and Mr David Gower, two England cricketers, become OBEs, for
services to the sport, while Mr Clive Lloyd, the former West Indian captain,
is made a CBE for services to cricket and for public service in Lancashire.
Mr Michael Caine and Miss Prunella Scales become CBEs for services to
acting.
Women make up nearly a third of those honoured in the birthday list,
although the proportion falls to little more than a quarter if the lowest
class of award - the British Empire Medal - is excluded.
The Queen's birthday honours and list of working peers, Page 9
