FT  23 MAY 92 / Pisa's lean times may be over: After 800 years, tower's tilt
must be stopped
THE WORLD'S toughest corset is being fitted on a very special customer, the
Leaning Tower of Pisa.
This week, workmen began to place 18 thin steel bands round the base of the
white marble tower as an emergency measure, to contain the stress on the
14,530 tonne structure. In its 800-year history as a leaning tower, this is
the first time such direct assistance has been necessary.
The emergency measures do not stop here. The group of 14 international
experts overseeing the fate of the tower this week agreed to a scheme to
stabilise the monument's famous incline. 'We are going ahead with the
placement of 600 tons of lead slabs at the base of the tower,' says Prof
Michele Jamiolkowski of Turin Polytechnic, head of the experts' commission.
The lead will be placed on the north side, opposite the tilt, will cover
about a quarter of the tower's circumference and will be about three metres
high.
'This is an experiment in controlled subsidence,' says Prof Carlo Viggiani
of the University of Naples. 'Imagine the tower is resting atop a mattress:
if you press down on one side of the mattress, the tower will move.'
By putting pressure in this way and eventually using perhaps 1,000 tons of
lead, the experts believe the 58.3 metre-high tower can be not only
stabilised, but pushed back to lessen its tilt.
The tower has been closed since January 1990, when the rate of tilt was
inexplicably found to have increased from 1.2mm to over 1.3mm a year.
Although infinitesimal, the 750 tonne belfry at the top has moved nearly a
quarter of a metre from the vertical in the last 100 years. The accumulated
deviation is now close to 5.5 metres and there were fears the building would
either topple over or break up under the stress of the increased tilt.
After all the past false alarms and eccentric proposals, one of which
suggested propping up the tower with a Coca-Cola bottle, the government was
sufficiently concerned to appoint an international body of experts and set
aside funding for a rescue operation.
'We may have been slow to go ahead with these emergency measures, but our
commission has no proper secretariat and we have had to cope with Italian
bureaucracy,' says Prof John Burland of London's Imperial College.
Prof Burland says it is the first time co-ordinated multi-disciplinary
scientific research has been carried out on the tower. His computer
simulations on the movement of soil have been instrumental in the decision
to employ lead weights. 'These emergency measures now give us time to think
of longer-term solutions,' he says.
The experts, the 17th commission since 1298, are working on the premise that
the tower must continue to be seen as leaning and free-standing. Indeed,
this is one of the rare instances in conservation where a monument's defects
are being consciously preserved.
Thus, the experts have ruled out dismantling the tower and rebuilding it or
following the suggestion of a Chinese engineer who claimed great success in
righting pagodas. They want to strengthen the tower and reduce the tilt
slightly.
The main difficulties concern the ground on which the tower stands, in the
magnificent Campo dei Miracoli alongside the cathedral. The water table,
traditionally close to the surface, has fallen in recent years, and this is
believed to have affected the tower's incline.
The experts are now talking either of preventing further access to the water
table around the tower by city users or of creating an underground barrier
which would maintain a constant water level around the tower.
A final solution is likely to take at least three years, and Mr Sergio
Cortopassi, Pisa's Socialist mayor, is anxious to keep pressure on the
politicians in Rome who control the purse-strings and the bureaucratic
short-cuts.
'Pisa without the Leaning Tower would not be Pisa,' he says.
