FT  25 AUG 92 / Leading Article: The rising cost of health care
THE GOVERNMENT'S difficulties in controlling rising health care costs in the
UK are well illustrated by the spending figures published today by the
Office of Health Economics. This year's total for spending on health looks
likely to top Pounds 40bn, 100 times the cost of the National Health Service
(NHS) in 1949, its first year. The growth in NHS spending appears
inexorable, with expectations now raised by the Patient's Charter which
promises higher quality service and a more customer-friendly approach.
Rising health costs are nothing new. Beveridge, the architect of the modern
welfare state, estimated that the health service would cost just Pounds
170m. The out-turn in the first year was more than double this figure, and
the NHS has absorbed a rising proportion of the national income ever since.
Beveridge's prediction that the cost would not increase as the benefits of
free health care raised the nation's health now looks to be  - as Enoch
Powell put it when health minister  - a 'miscalculation of sublime
proportions'.
There has been some slackening in growth rates: from annual rates of over 5
per cent in the 1960s and 1970s, growth has come down to 3 per cent a year
in the 1980s. And productivity has greatly increased. The number of patients
treated in NHS hospitals has risen from 3.8m in 1951 to 9.2m in 1990-91.
This has been achieved on a much smaller share of national income than most
other advanced countries spend. UK health expenditure is just 6.5 per cent
of GDP, compared with the average for the OECD of 9 per cent and for the EC
of 7.6 per cent.
UK behind
It is not evident that people in the UK are greatly worse off as a result of
spending a quarter less on health than the OECD average. The infant
mortality rate in the UK, at 7.9 per 1,000 live births, is on the OECD
average and barely above the EC figure. Life expectancy rates for both men
and women are also much the same as the EC average. There are indicators
where the UK lags behind  - the high level of heart disease among men is the
best example. On the other hand, Britain does well by other measures  - such
as the death rate from strokes among women, one of the lowest in western
Europe.
One reason for the apparent efficiency of the UK health service has been the
control which the centralised NHS has historically been able to exert over
costs, particularly pay. However, the downside of the UK's planned economy
in health has been queues, with about 700,000 people on waiting lists for
hospital treatment, some for as long as two years. Those who can afford it
go privately  - 13 per cent are now covered by private medical insurance,
mainly to avoid queues.
Higher quality
The government's health reforms are designed to turn the planned economy
upside down. Patients are being given rights and health service managers
empowered to deliver higher quality and more responsive health care. Large
health authorities are giving way to self-governing NHS trusts, and greater
flexibility in staffing and pay is promised.
These aims are wholly commendable, but vigilance will be essential if this
freeing-up of the health market is not to bring an explosion in costs.
Breaking away from national pay scales often leads to wage drift upwards
rather than lower costs. And there are many parts of the country where there
is only one district general hospital within easy reach, which will enjoy
effective monopoly power in the NHS internal market.
Nonetheless, the potential for lower costs is there. The increased number of
patients treated in hospitals has been achieved despite a fall in the number
of beds from 550,000 in 1961 to 330,000 in 1991. New surgical techniques are
increasing the scope for increasing still further the number of treatments
which can be carried out without an overnight stay in hospital. Family
doctors have been encouraged to carry out much more treatment in local
health centres which have lower overheads than all-purpose hospitals. While
cuts in health spending are almost certainly politically impossible, it
should be possible to squeeze better health care out of the budget without
further quantum leaps upwards.
