FT  27 FEB 92 / Wakeham seeks power price curb
MR JOHN WAKEHAM, secretary of state for energy, has intervened in commercial
negotiations between power companies in an attempt to keep energy prices
down ahead of the general election.
Mr Wakeham has told British Gas and Nuclear Electric, the state-owned
company which operates nuclear power stations in England and Wales, they
must keep prices down as the government tries to demonstrate that its
privatisation effort will benefit consumers.
The move follows the government's repeated insistence that it would not seek
to influence pricing in the recently privatised gas and electricity markets.
Both industries are, however, closely regulated by government appointed
watchdogs.
Mr Wakeham is keen to avoid public rows over high energy prices because they
could damage the Conservative party's standing in the opinion polls. Large
industrial users of electricity, represented by the Major Energy Users
Council, have been lobbying Mr Wakeham over prices they claim are too high
for them to compete in Europe.
Mr Peter Rost, Conservative MP for Erewash and chairman of the users
council, said yesterday that Mr Wakeham had asked Nuclear Electric to offer
industrial consumers cheap power in an attempt to resolve the row. Mr Rost
said the Mr Wakeham had asked Nuclear Electric to re-enter the market in the
hope that this would increase competition in an industry dominated by
National Power and PowerGen.
Mr Rost's remarks offer one explanation for Tuesday's announcement by
Nuclear Electric that it would be selling electricity contracts directly to
customers in a 'new and innovative auction.' Nuclear Electric held its usual
auction late last year.
The nuclear power group said it could not comment on the suggestion that Mr
Wakeham had engineered the auction, which it said was designed to meet fresh
market demand.
Mr Wakeham has also stepped into talks between British Gas and the Office of
Fair Trading over the OGT's insistence that British Gas halve its share of
the industrial gas market by 1995.
British Gas has been threatening price rises for industrial customers and a
change in domestic pricing if it is forced to cut its market share.
It has said that if it goes ahead with reducing market share and hiving off
its pipeline and storage system, as agreed with the OFT, it will have to
vary prices to customers. The company says it will mean eastern consumers
paying less for gas because they are closer to gas terminals.
Mr Wakeham's intervention comes just before British Gas's announcement today
of an expected rise in profits to around Pounds 1.3bn from Pounds 1.2bn last
year.
PowerGen feared Labour ban on coal imports Page 6
