FT  10 APR 92 / International Company News: Digital shares tumble 10% on
Dollars 294m net loss
SHARES in Digital Equipment, the second largest US computer manufacturer,
plunged by nearly 10 per cent yesterday as it reported worse third-quarter
figures than Wall Street was expecting and said it might need to make a
further restructuring charge at the year-end.
The Massachusetts-based company, which has been cutting costs and laying off
staff in the face of a weakening world economy, said it would reinstate its
programme of lay-offs in May. In the past, executives forecast that some
10,000 staff could leave the company during the fiscal year to June, but
yesterday they appeared to hint the cuts might be deeper.
Digital reported a net loss for the quarter of Dollars 294m, or Dollars 2.36
a share, compared with net income of Dollars 116.5m, or 94 cents, in the
same period last year. Operating revenues totalled Dollars 3.25bn, down 8
per cent from the Dollars 3.52bn of a year ago. For the nine months it
reported a net loss of Dollars 403.86m, or Dollars 3.24 a share, compared
with net income of Dollars 253.89m, or Dollars 2.06 a share.
The company blamed the drop in revenues in part on the economic slowdown,
particularly in Europe and Japan, on unfavourable currency movements, which
cut foreign revenues by Dollars 150m to Dollars 200m and on pricing
pressures.
Product margins had declined mainly because of lower than expected volumes.
Additionally, the company's recent push into directly selling personal
computers to end users, and its new, low-cost workstations, had meant a
continued shift in its mix to lower margin products.
Mr John Smith, senior vice-president for operations, said that while the
company was very disappointed with the results it was confident in its
strategy and new products.
But he added it remained cautious about revenues and profits for the
remainder of the fiscal year and the first half of next.
He disclosed that third-quarter revenues fell about 17 per cent in Europe
and about 10 per cent in the US. On the New York Stock Exchange, Digital
shares closed at Dollars 48 1/4 , down Dollars 5 1/4 in a generally rising
market.
