FT  28 JAN 92 / Dublin budget may boost spending by 7.7%
THE Irish government is aiming for an exchequer borrowing requirement of
IPounds 546m (Pounds 509m) or around 2.2 per cent of GNP, in its 1992 budget
due to be announced tomorrow. This would be slightly up on 2.1 per cent of
GNP in 1991.
Pre-budget estimates of receipts and expenditure, published by the Finance
Ministry yesterday show a projected increase of 7.7 per cent in total
government spending to IPounds 10.6bn, with revenues rising by 4.7 per cent
to IPounds 9.9bn.
Public pay and pensions is expected to account for IPounds 3.72bn of the
spending total, taking into account a new pay package agreed with public
sector unions earlier this month.
Under existing tax provisions and estimates, income tax revenue is projected
to rise by 9.6 per cent to IPounds 3.54bn, while corporation tax revenue is
targeted to rise by 13.6 per cent to IPounds 673m. A 7 per cent increase in
VAT revenues to IPounds 2.2bn is anticipated.
The government has come under increasing pressure from trade union and
business sectors to launch sweeping tax reforms in the 1992 budget. Earlier
this month, the Industrial Policy Review Group (IPRG), an advisory body to
the Department of Industry, said tax reform was 'a matter of urgency'.
The report recommended the phased reduction or elimination of a wide range
of tax breaks and incentives, in order to bring down personal taxation rates
among the highest in the EC.
Mr Bertie Ahern, the finance minister, said last month there was little
prospect of any tax cuts in this budget, though his own Fianna Fail party is
recommending a reduction in the lower income tax rate from 29 to 28 per
cent, and a reduction in the top rate from 52 to 50 per cent.
The party is strongly opposed to any reduction in mortage interest relief.
Mr Des O'Malley, the industry minister who set up the IPRG last year, is
strongly in favour of tax reform. As the leader of the Progressive Democrat
party, the junior partner in the coalition government, he last week issued
an ultimatum to Mr Charles Haughey, the prime minister, to resign or lose
his party's support, because of a series of controversies that have
undermined the government. Mr Haughey is expected to announce his intention
to resign this Thursday.
Mr Ahern, who became finance minister last November, is a leading contender
for the succession to Mr Haughey, and the public's reception of his first
budget could have an important influence on his chances of assuming the
leadership.
