FT  19 JUN 92 / The deal that did not fly: Bad timing and nervousness about
the airline industry scuppered GPA's flotation
Despite the decision in the early hours of Thursday morning to abort the
international public offering of shares in GPA Group, Mr Maurice Foley,
deputy chairman and group chief executive of the air leasing concern,
yesterday put a brave face on it all. The company, he says, has sold Dollars
1bn of equity privately over the past five years and does not intend to give
up its quest for more. It will simply change its strategy and opt for
something less complex than a global issue at the earliest possible
opportunity.
Whether it can do so after such a resounding flop seems questionble. This
was not, after all, a large offer for any of the individual country markets
that GPA had been hoping to tap with the help of some of the world's most
impressive investment banks and securities houses. Yet it was dogged, from
the outset, by noisy disagreements between GPA and its advisers over timing
and pricing.
The first setback came in a private telephone conversation between GPA's
founder and chairman, Mr Tony Ryan, and Sir David Scholey, chairman of
merchant banker S G Warburg when Mr Ryan was looking for a global
co-ordinator. Yet Sir David, while happy to form a relationship with GPA,
would not commit himself to a flotation until Warburg knew the company
better.
Mr Ryan was disappointed. GPA's financial adviser, Hambro Magan, the
specialist merchant bank, had already decided that a flotation was in its
best interest. But since Warburg was reluctant to accept that without
looking at GPA for themselves, the two went their separate ways.
Mr Ryan was even more upset when Cazenove, Britain's pre-eminent stockbroker
in corporate finance, decided against a relationship with GPA. But despite
these merchant bankers and brokers competed fiercely to act for the company
when it invited firms to tender for the key jobs in the offer. Those chosen
ultimately included Nomura of Japan as global co-ordinator, Goldman Sachs,
Merrill Lynch and Salomon Brothers in the US, Schroders and BZW in the UK,
and Nomura and Yamaichi in Japan.
By the end of last year these and other advisers were gearing themselves up
for a flotation in the middle of 1992. Yet Maurice Foley yesterday confirmed
that the buoyancy of the US stock market earlier this year prompted one its
advisers to suggest bringing the issue forwards.
Asked whether GPA should have taken this advice, instead of waiting, by
which time the US equity market began to dry up, Mr Foley said: 'This is a
fair point. You can never be sure of hypothetical circumstances. But in the
end we decided to go for a global offering and not one basically limited to
the US.' This meant going later.
Nor was it the only missed opportunity. On the basis of political
intelligence from Nigel (now Lord) Lawson, a non-executive director, who
correctly predicted a mid-April UK election, GPA flirted with the idea of a
flotation in late March or early April to take advantage of a still buoyant
US market. But in the end it decided it was best to wait until the UK
election was out of the way. As one of its advisers yesterday suggested,
this was the wrong judgment and turned out to compound the original error of
not going in January. In the meantime there were acrimonious arguments about
pricing. When the group's advisers decided in February that the new ordinary
shares should be priced at around Dollars 20 to Dollars 25, with the
emphasis on the lower price, GPA executives immediately insisted on flying
the bankers to the group's headquarters in Shannon, Ireland.
Already irritated, Mr Ryan was reported to be even more angry when he
learned that Goldman Sachs was proposing to sell the shares for as little as
Dollars 17 in order to be sure of placing Dollars 500m (Pounds 276m) of the
stock in the US. One adviser to the group said: 'Mr Ryan hit the roof when
he heard that. In retrospect I think we should have realised at that time
that the group's way of dealing with problems is best suited to a private
company.'
There were to be further rows, of which the most dramatic took place in the
early hours of yesterday. A meeting of GPA's most senior executives and
advisers at Nomura's London offices ended in heated argument when Mr John
Howland Jackson, Nomura's director co-ordinating the flotation, told Mr Ryan
it would have to be pulled.
Mr Ryan asked him to reconsider and look at other possible options, such as
lowering the price and the size of the offer. But when the answer came back
as a firm no, there was an angry exchange between Mr Ryan and the advisers.
One of GPA's investment bankers present said: 'The exchange looked as if it
was going to develop into physical confrontation. It was a terrible,
exhausting end to the whole process.' Few of the advisers present had slept
much over the previous four days and nights.
The ostensible reason for pulling the flotation was not that the investment
demand was inadequate. About Dollars 500m-worth of shares were bid for. The
problem was that the bids were hopelessly unbalanced in terms of geography
and type of investor. Out of 50m shares for which bids were received, 23m
were in Japan alone. Of these, nearly all were from retail investors;
institutional interest was minimal. The equivalent number in the UK was
7.5m, while in the US only 6.5m shares were bid for. The rest of the world
put in for 13.3m. The advisers concluded that to float on the basis of such
an unbalanced market would not be in GPA's interest.
The rot had set in on Monday, the day before the deadline for share
applications, when the US equity When it became clear that US investors were
showing little enthusiasm, interest around the world started to evaporate.
This was just 10 days after GPA had been told by its advisers that the
number of shares on offer could be increased.
Part of the problem was that US investors were worried about depressed
conditions in the airline industry. Despite the fact that GPA derives only
10 per cent of its business from the US, 'we didn't', as Maurice Foley put
it, 'uncouple ourselves from that'.
But rumours about the impending collapse of another US airline did nothing
to help. There was talk in the markets about GPA's relationship with America
West, which is under the protection of Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Yet Foley
points out that America West is up to date with all payments due to GPA.
The blow to the morale of GPA and its management is palpable and may bear
particularly heavily on Mr Ryan himself, who has a Dollars 35m loan from a
banking associate of Merrill Lynch secured on shares in GPA. Nobody can now
be sure what those shares are worth. And while Maurice Foley pointed out
yesterday that the company still has a surplus of Dollars 800m over the book
value of its aircraft which has not been written into the balance sheet,
that value is for the moment intangible. The failure of the flotation
deprives GPA of hard cash in the shape of potential offer proceeds of about
Dollars 800m.
The significance is not so much the risk that borrowing covenants will now
be breached - there is still a wide margin in hand - as that GPA will not
have the increased borrowing capacity that it would have enjoyed as the
result of enlarging its equity base. This is overwhelmingly important since
one of the biggest question marks about the company concerns its ability to
finance future purchases of aircraft. Some Dollars 12bn of firm orders have
to be paid for by the end of the present decade.
The company is now busy emphasising that its future financing was never
dependent on any single option. It will still aim to raise money in debt
markets; and if its credit rating is downgraded, the result, says Foley,
will be to raise the cost of finance, but not to limit its volume. Moreover,
GPA has shown considerable skill in packaging its aircraft into the form of
securities which it then sells to investment institutions. A deal of this
kind completed just before the flotation will bring in cash proceeds of
between Dollars 400m and Dollars 450m. Others are being contemplated.
GPA, according to one of the advisers to the issue, is still a good company.
There is no reason, he adds, to deduce anything about its value on the basis
of a poor market response at a single point in time. While few question the
impressiveness of its performance in a dismal period for the air leasing
business, it is nonetheless hard to believe that the pulling of the public
offer will not be bruising. Or that GPA will not be asking questions about
the quality of the advice it received.
Having grown on the back of the great credit boom of the 1980s GPA now
accounts for 10 per cent of all new orders from the world's aircraft
manufacturers. It shoulders a disproportionate amount of the risk in the
industry on a very slender equity base. Against that background it has
worried some institutional investors that its accounting policies are not
uniformly conservative, notably in relation to depreciation. And after it
sells aircraft to investors it is often still at risk because it guarantees
to underwrite a minimum level of proceeds on any future sale.
That means that GPA can ill afford to slow down. If it does, it will be
obliged to renegotiate orders for new aircraft. The company is confident
that it can handle the strain if it comes to that, because the manufacturers
have no more desire to deliver planes which do not go into service than GPA
has to take delivery on an unprof-itable basis. But nor are the
manufacturers charitable institutions. They are entitled to take back part
of the discount granted on GPA's bulk purchases in the event of
cancellation.
GPA has demonstrated its resilience in the past. The question now is whether
it can persuade investors that such a complex, highly individual business is
really suitable for public flotation at any point in the future.
 ---------------------------------------------------
      GPA: THE FLOTATION THAT FLOPPED
 ---------------------------------------------------
                            GPA's agreed facilities
                              at March 31, 1992
 ---------------------------------------------------
Short term loans                 Dollars 0.742bn
 ---------------------------------------------------
Secured facility
from 73 banks                    Dollars 2.075bn
 ---------------------------------------------------
Other secured
indebtedness and
finance leases                   Dollars 1.052bn
 ---------------------------------------------------
Other loans                      Dollars 1.995bn
 ---------------------------------------------------
Total: Dollars 5.86bn
 ---------------------------------------------------
