FT  07 SEP 92 / Ryan returns to helm in GPA shake-up
GPA, the world's largest aircraft leasing group, has announced a
wide-ranging management shake-up following its aborted stock market
flotation in June.
Mr Maurice Foley, the chief executive appointed two months before the
planned flotation, has been replaced by the company's chairman and
co-founder, Dr Tony Ryan.
The company said yesterday: 'The board has decided that it is in the
company's best interests that there should be just one leadership focus.
'Accordingly, Dr Tony Ryan will resume the position of executive chairman
and the role of chief executive with immediate effect.'
The change follows mounting problems for GPA which, denied the proceeds of
the flotation, is seeking other ways to raise money to meet its committments
to buy new aircraft.
Mr Foley will continue as deputy chairman with responsibility for
relationships with institutions and shareholders, and for strategic
planning.
Mr Jim King, former deputy chief executive for leasing, has been promoted to
vice-chairman. His main task will be to try to reschedule some of the
Dollars 12bn (Pounds 6bn) GPA is committed to spend on aircraft orders with
the world's major manufacturers up to the end of the decade. About Dollars
7.1bn of the total will have to be found by the end of 1994.
Mr Colm Barrington is promoted to chief executive responsible for GPA
Leasing and GPA Capital.
The reshuffle was apparently decided at a board meeting a month ago. An
industry source said Mr Foley was seen as 'too cerebral' and a tougher, more
market-driven approach was needed.
In the lead-up to the flotation, a row broke out between the company and its
stockbrokers over the offer price. The company was aiming for Dollars 25 to
Dollars 30 per share but, after a public row, had to settle for Dollars 20
to Dollars 24, which could would have raised up to Dollars 1bn.
Difficult market conditions led to a lack of interest especially by US
investors, forcing the company to abandon the flotation.
Since then the company has looked at ways to raise money, although the
likely value of GPA shares is understood to have fallen considerably.
The company outlined three priorities: a private placing of new shares;
cancelling or rescheduling some aircraft purchase options and firm orders at
a minimum cost in penalties; completing further aircraft securitisation
packages under which groups of aircraft are sold to investors with leases
attached.
The first such package, known as Alps 1, raised Dollars 500m in June. The
company hopes to have a similar package, Alps 2, completed this autumn.
Observer, Page 17
