FT  02 MAY 92 / England's knight of the square table: Leonard Barden and
David Spanier chart the rise of England's king Dominic Lawson was in his
corner
THE appeal of chess is as much physical as cerebral. It is a game of
emotion, face to face, an outlet for aggression, which briefly satisfies
winners but can totally unnerve and exhaust losers. Chess as a kind of
mathematical struggle, a formalised and ritual logic, is an illusion.
Nigel Short sees chess as a violent, often painful battle of egos. Short
used to have a detached technical view of the game but that altered with
exposure to the bruising personality war among top grandmasters.
Anatoly Karpov, who Short beat in Linares, held the title for 10 years from
1975-85, between the abdication of the eccentric American Bobby Fischer and
the crowning of the present champion, Garry Kasparov. He had never lost a
match except for his epics with Kasparov.
Short demolished him, in spite of losing the first game when Karpov
contemptuously refuted the Briton's carefully prepared gambit. Short
attributed his success to keeping calm and not rushing his response. Instead
he adopted the same Fabian tactics which Kasparov had used against Karpov in
the Moscow winter of 1984-5, grinding out a series of marathon endings.
Karpov is 40, his stamina suspect; and it showed in game six when he gave
away his queen, the worst blunder of his career.
Short has already campaigned for the world title for almost a decade. Twice
previously he was eliminated in earlier rounds, but this time he has
survived a qualification tournament in Manila, plus elimination matches in
London and Brussels. He now meets Jan Timman of the Netherlands, the other
finalist to emerge from the candidates matches. Their series, inevitably at
Linares, will determine who becomes the first Westerner since Fischer to
challenge for the title. Garry Kasparov's title defence will be staged in
Los Angeles in August 1993.
The revival of British chess is a phenomenon which in any outdoor sport
would have attracted banner headlines. It began in 1976 when two English
players, Tony Miles and Raymond Keene, achieved the grandmaster title, which
guarantees entry and an appearance fee for top events. The GM title has
since been diminished by inflation, but at the time it implied performing
well against the top Soviets. Miles is still competing around the world,
while Keene is a prolific writer on the game - his latest book,
appropriately, is Nigel Short World Chess Challenger (Batsford Pounds
10.99).
Grandmasters need to be competitive sportsmen who can also absorb a vast
bank of knowledge of opening moves and strategies. The state-supported
Russians had full-time coaches, specialist journals and card indexes on
potential rivals. In the 1970s Batsford and Pergamon began to publish books
with new analysis, while former British champion Bob Wade built a research
library at his Blackheath home which proved a match for the analysts in
Moscow's Central Chess Club on Gogolevsky Boulevard.
The global chess boom after the Fischer-Spassky match, together with
Britain's early successes, inspired a talented generation of teenagers. In
the 1930s the Russians had given their rising stars special coaching, games
against visiting champions, and early opportunities. The British Chess
Federation decided to follow suit, and to start still younger at primary
age. Teams of children competed in weekend congresses and played as an
England junior squad against the Soviets who visited the annual Hastings
congress. The significant year was 1976 when Viktor Korchnoi, then the world
No 2, met a team of 30 boys and girls at a school in Islington. Eight of
them later became GMs or masters, but after a six-hour battle Korchnoi lost
just one game, to his youngest opponent, Nigel Short. The BCF published
world age ratings showing Short as the world's best 10-year-old; the
corresponding list for age 12 had at the top the Soviet junior champion,
Gary Kasparov.
The Russians have always been good at chess. Its popularity goes back 1,000
years in Russian culture, and before the Revolution the great tournament of
St Petersburg 1914 was held under court patronage. Both Marx and Lenin were
enthusiastic though very amateurish players. One of Lenin's aides was
Nikolai Krylenko, who believed chess could be a cheap character-building
influence in the revolutionary struggle.
The result was official encouragement and state funding for chess at all
levels of society. World champions Emanuel Lasker, Jose Capablanca and Max
Euwe visited the USSR, competed in great tournaments at Moscow and
Leningrad, but had to struggle against massed teams of schoolboys.
Capablanca was persuaded to visit Leningrad on his free day at the Moscow
1925 tournament, and lost to the city's star junior Mikhail Botvinnik, 14.
Next day, back in Moscow, the exhausted Capa lost to his Soviet opponent.
Chess gamesmanship is an ancient art.
In 1948, Botvinnik himself became world champion, the leader of what
propagandists called the Soviet school of chess which has dominated
international play ever since with a brief interruption by Bobby Fischer.
The USSR Chess Federation received a generous budget from the sports
authorities and grandmasters were among the elite permitted overseas travel.
Compared with this, the UK chess boom of the 1970s operated on a shoestring.
Yet while better financed sports failed to produce a home-grown champion,
chess discovered an entire generation. There was basic state support for
some overseas travel, but the seed money came from Jim Slater and Lloyds
Bank. Slater, the financier, added Pounds 50,000 to the 1972 world title
prize fund which persuaded Fischer to play Spassky. Then he offered Pounds
15,000 for the first five British grandmasters, a stimulus to Miles, Keene,
and their contemporaries. Finally he provided funds to help juniors. Shown
some photos of rising talents in 1974, Slater pointed to Short's picture and
said 'That's the boy to beat the Russians.'
When Slater had to drop out in the late 1970s, Lloyds Bank took over. By now
the rising talents were in their teens, needing opportunities to qualify for
GM and master titles or official world rankings. The first Lloyds Bank
sponsorship was a clock match where Karpov met the ten best juniors, led by
Short. Four later became GMs. The Lloyds Bank Masters, held annually since
1977, gives up to 50 boys and girls the chance for adult international
honours. By 1980 Britain had more juniors with world rankings than any other
nation.
In 1978 England beat the Russians for the world under-26 championship. Miles
and Keene were followed as GMs into the national team by the Oxbridge
mathematicians John Nunn, Jonathan Mestel and Jon Speelman. This coincided
with sponsorship from private bankers Duncan Lawrie, which provided the
national team with fees, hotel facilities, and Wade's secret files on
rivals. The effect was dramatic. At the 1970 olympics England were outside
the top 20. During the 1980s, with Short an established member, the England
team won the silver medal at the chess Olympics three times in succession,
finishing tantalisingly close to the Soviet team in Dubai in 1986. The
Russians only scraped home when Kasparov won the last game to finish.
The break-up of the Soviet Union means that many strong GMs will represent
Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, Georgia and the Ukraine. The opportunity is
growing for England to emerge as world champions.
Short grew up in the mining town of Atherton, near Bolton, where his father
David was in public relations and his mother a teacher. Both grandfathers
worked down the pit. Nigel learnt the game at six, insisting on being taught
after watching his father teach his older brother. He improved quickly and
his father asked if Nigel could join the local Bolton club. The secretary
replied that there were no facilities for such a young child, who anyway
ought to be in bed by the time the meetings started. David's response was to
advertise in the local paper and start his own chess club in Atherton, which
later defeated its more eminent rival.
Short rose rapidly. At 12, he was the youngest British championship
finalist. At 14, he tied for the title; at 15, he was runner-up to Kasparov
for the world under-20 championship. There was a hiatus in his mid-teens
when he unwillingly completed his formal education at Bolton School. Even so
he became the world's youngest international master while emerging with
indifferent O-levels. By 19, he was the youngest GM; from then on, the
targets were Kasparov and Karpov.
Short is endowed with a resilient temperament, essential for surviving in a
highly competitive sport. Superficially, he takes a light-hearted, slightly
cynical, approach, and likes to give players schoolboy nicknames - Korky,
Noggy and so on. High calibre opponents are 'smart', to win is to 'give a
guy a good tonking'. But he strives to be objective about his games and has
political ambitions (once SLD, now Conservative) for when he eventually
retires from chess. His wife and the recent birth of a baby daughter have
given his life a stability that many professional chess players never find
time for.
As the world title has become more of a realistic ambition and less of a
dream, Short has become harder. He makes no secret of the fact that he not
only wants to win, he wants to crush his opponent,the same attitude and
phraseology which Fischer used in his heyday. He said in a recent interview
with Dominic Lawson: 'I am getting much more pleasure out of humiliating a
guy. It is a warped sense of pleasure . . . you play these people over the
years - the Soviets particularly, and they are warped, twisted and mean.
They won't spare you any pain. So when you get a chance to inflict suffering
on them, I get a kick out of it. So now I like to play positions when I can
torture the guy slowly. Slowly is important.'
Short could become the UK's first chess millionaire. Although there is
little money in chess on the weekend tournament circuit, at the top the
prizes are huge. The purse for the Karpov match was SFr150,000, (Pounds
55,760) divided five-eights and three-eights between winner and loser. In
the final round of the Candidates, he can expect twice as much. The winner
will also collect the Dollars 1m a German computer company is offering for
the first player from outside the old USSR to reach the final. The prize
fund for the final will be Dollars 4m.
Short said: 'It's true players have to scrimp and save in chess these days.
But once you reach the last eight of the world championship, the money
becomes pretty interesting.' Kasparov himself is reputed to charge a Pounds
20,000 fee for anything from a simultaneous exhibition to a computer
endorsement.
Short's success will have a positive impact on chess in Britain but it will
not in itself reverse a trend of diminishing sponsorship and tournament
opportunities.
'I am not sure that chess administrators can do anything fundamentally to
change things,' Short says. 'I don't think the economic climate is to blame.
We had a boom in the '80s and the number of tournaments did not increase.'
What chess in Britain needs is a winning personality at the top: in Nigel
Short it has found one.
