FT  13 FEB 92 / Arts: David Hockney designs 'Turandot'
David Hockney's designs for Turandot are executed in glowing red, green, and
blue, with softer colours for some of the principals and a chorus in black
until it changes into rich blue for the brief finale. They provide a Hockney
show - in three dimensions and moving through time - of the utmost
brilliance and beauty. The designs were commissioned jointly by the Lyric
Opera of Chicago and the San Francisco Opera. While in New York the Met
revived its extravagant Turandot supershow, designed and produced by Franco
Zeffirelli, with Gwyneth Jones in the title role, Chicago played the
'Hockney Turandot' ten times, last month and this. It goes to San Francisco
next year.
Hockney said that he thought most productions of Turandot 'unbelievably
overdesigned.' He wanted 'to take out the dragons, to simplify it, to get
rid of the grotesque chinoiserie . . . no fussiness.' His Peking is built of
a few careful, striking shapes - red walls and green corrugated roofs
against a cobalt-blue sky. Perspective is not realistic, space not literal.
Light plays a major role, and Duane Schuler, Chicago's resident lighting
man, is one of America's best. The reds, greens, and blues gleam and glow
with carefully controlled intensities, the moonrise of the first scene is
magical, and the final musical crescendo is matched by a breathtaking
sunrise crescendo of light.
The approach is enchanted fairytale. Puccini characterised both the princess
and the prince as 'superhuman'; the psychology of the characters is not
subtle; and the pictorial style of the decor suits Turandot better than it
did Tristan. At the same time, the sets are designed to present the actors
with effective acting spaces (as the Met Turandot does not). The important
staircase of the riddle scene is not omitted.
The show has been criticised for being 'designer's opera', and so of course
it is, but the fault is not Hockney's. He has not yet found - not here any
more than in the Los Angeles Tristan he designed - a cast and a producer who
respond to and make the most of his visions. (May he do so in the Covent
Garden Frau ohne Schatten, his next operatic assignment.) This Turandot was
not mutually inspired teamwork such as one finds in the Peter Sellars
presentations. In all but the visual aspect it was pretty well hackwork.
Chicago is a very big house, and Ardis Krainik had engaged a big-voice
international Turandot and Calaf, Eva Marton and Lando Bartolini. They gave
their standard performances. Marton sang and moved through the role without
expression, usually loudly, sometimes rather coarsely. Bartolini has a
ringing tenor, which he used without subtlety, charm, or grace. Lucia
Mazzaria was the Liu; she, on the other hand, sought to give some light and
shade to the music, but her voice sounded worn and uncertain. Dimitri
Kavrakos's Timur was sonorous and wooden. The trio of masks had more merit:
an able young Ping, James Michael McGuire; a veteran Pang, Piero de Palma;
and a nimble Pong, Douglas Perry.
Bruno Bartoletti conducted, and William Farlow produced. As a musical or
dramatic enactment of Puccini's score, the result was without interest. As a
Hockney show, it was unforgettable.
