FT  28 FEB 92 / A-Z of Personal Finance (3): If you want to switch, be
cautious - Banks and building societies
HATE THEM or love them, there is no way most of us can do without banks. Few
people in Britain are without a bank account, and the number with more than
one current account is growing.
The linchpin of any bank-customer relationship is the chequebook current
account. These are no longer exclusively the preserve of banks: since 1987,
when Nationwide launched FlexAccount, a number of building societies have
offered them.
Transferring your account from one bank to another can be troublesome,
particularly if you have a lot of standing orders and direct debits. There
are also some advantages for credit reference purposes in having a
long-standing relationship with a bank.
If you want to shift your current account, it may therefore be a good idea
to open a second one on an experimental basis, and see how it works for a
few months before transferring your salary into it.
If you feel that you are not getting good service in the high street, there
are alternatives: those with a lot of assets can go to a private bank, where
they will have an account executive to manage their account.
Such private banking arms may have a different name from their parent:
Coutts (for NatWest), Child &amp; Co (Royal Bank of Scotland) and Samuel Montagu
(Midland). Some are ancient banks that were bought by the clearers but still
have relative autonomy. One bank, Hoare &amp; Co, in Fleet Street, London, has
remained independent, and preserves the flavour of banking services in
Britain's days of greatness.
Lloyds, one of the main players in the private-banking market, has just
reorganised its UK private banking operation.
The snag is that these banks expect customers to have substantial assets
before they will take them on - say, Pounds 75,000. And it is worth checking
that a private banking service really is what it says it is. One of the
clearers is running what it calls a private banking service for customers
with Pounds 40,000, which is little more than a thinly-disguised bid to sort
out upper-income customers who might be in the market for insurance or other
savings products.
International private banking, from the US to Switzerland and Japan, is a
further step up the banking ladder for the very rich. Account executives may
manage customers' personal affairs, as well as their finances, from theatre
tickets to children's holidays.
If you are not in the right income bracket for private banking, there are
some attractive alternatives: technology buffs may fancy HOBS, the
screen-based bank account offered by Bank of Scotland. FirstDirect, the
telephone bank launched two years ago by Midland Bank, is open for business
24 hours a day and all through the year. It has relatively few customers but
already has a name for good service.
Building societies have traditionally had a much sunnier relationship with
their customers than the high street banks. Unlike banks, building societies
are owned not by shareholders but by their customers - or at least by those
with savings and borrowing accounts.
In the late 1980s, building societies shed much of their Victorian mutualist
ethos and started talking about profits and customers. Now, the pressures of
the recession may finally be putting paid to their 'nice guy' image. Last
month, the Halifax announced that it was introducing charges for
instant-access customers who do not keep at least Pounds 50 in their
accounts. Does this spell the end of free current accounts, one of the most
radical financial services innovations of the 1980s?
Smaller societies are under considerable pressure from the market, and
several societies which lent to the wrong sort of people during the 1980s
housing boom have been hit by bad debts and forced to merge with stronger
societies.
Does this mean that building societies in 1992 are not the safe homes for
personal savings that they once were? Probably not. Since they are so
important as a receptacle for savings, building societies are much more
tightly regulated than banks.
The moment trouble appears on the horizon - for instance, in the form of bad
debts - the industry watchdog, the Building Societies Commission, will step
in. Building society deposits are more protected than those of banks: 90 per
cent of Pounds 20,000 is guaranteed by the deposit protection scheme,
compared with only 75 per cent for bank deposits. (Incidentally, deposit
protection runs at a rate of Pounds 20,000 per individual, and not per
account - a point that should interest married couples).
Despite this, the banks have vamped up their savings products in recent
years and are much more attractive to savers than they once were. During
1992, they may become even more attractive as building societies hold their
mortgage rates down in an effort to revive the UK housing market and so are
forced to lower their savings rates.
Last year, after many months of talks, banks, building societies and
consumers' groups agreed a code of conduct, to establish some basic rights
for their customers. It is frankly a very limited document, and was branded
a triumph of miserliness by the Consumers' Association. But it does
introduce a maximum liability of Pounds 50 for customers when plastic
payment cards go missing. There are stricter rules on confidentiality; basic
account charges are to be published; and some abuses have been ironed out.
The Code of Conduct does little to tackle the chronic problems of staff
inefficiency in branches, about which customers seem to complain most. In
retail financial services, a lot of money is made out of mistakes. If an
investor incurs an unauthorised overdraft, the bank will almost always
charge them heavily for it. But if a bank makes a mistake, it is most
unlikely to offer any compensation.
TSB Bank recently launched a campaign to improve service quality. It
believes that nearly a quarter of branch staff time is taken up in
correcting mistakes, and this is in nobody's interests.
If a customer has a serious complaint about a bank or building society, he
should refer it to the Banking Ombudsman or the Building Societies
Ombudsmen. It may be possible to arrange an agreed settlement between bank
and customer. If it isn't, the ombudsmen will adjudicate.
Building Societies Ombudsmen, 35-37 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1X 7AW; tel
071 931-0044. Banking Ombudsman, Citadel House, 5-11 Fetter Lane, London
EC4A 1BR; tel 071 583-1395.
