FT  18 APR 92 / Man In The News: Cheerleader for the City - Sir Brian
Jenkins
Each autumn, a Lord Mayor of London comes and goes, and few outside the
ornate Mansion House much care - or even notice - unless the tricorn hat,
lace and gold chain catch the corner of the television screen during the
chancellor's or prime minister's annual speeches to the City.
Not so with this year's incumbent. Sir Brian Jenkins, London's 664th Lord
Mayor, is hardly a household name, but he has done more to put the City
Corporation on the map than most of his predecessors. This week he won
plaudits for his calm and efficient direction of operations after the
bombing of the Baltic Exchange; last month he launched a high-profile
campaign to make London home to the proposed European Central Bank - a
delicate mission, given Mr Major's delicate balancing act on European
Monetary Union. And since taking office five months ago he has publicly
lambasted Labour's now-redundant plans to abolish the City Corporation and
create an elected pan-London authority.
'The general response has been marvellous,' Sir Brian says of the efforts of
staff, companies and back-up services after last week's carnage. As for the
Lord Mayor himself, he rushed out of the Blacksmiths' dinner and hardly got
a break for the next three days, trying to get things back to normal. 'It
showed how important it is for the City to have its own authority - and how
much it values it.'
Sir Brian, 56, is a City man par excellence. A senior partner with the
accountancy firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand Deloitte - head of its audit practice
until last year - his professional life has rarely strayed outside the
Square Mile. In 1980, he joined the Corporation as an Alderman, spent the
decade serving on its committees and became Sheriff in 1987. He sits as a
City JP, is a churchwarden at St Mary-le-Bow, and president of the Bow Lane
Association. Even his school - Tonbridge, Kent - has City connections: it is
run by the Skinners' Company.
His career is a snapshot of how to rise through that extraordinary
institution, which claims to be older than parliament itself - the City
Corporation. Few realise that the Corporation is more than the Lord Mayor's
parade: it is a fully-fledged local authority on a par with - though with
far greater powers and resources than - London's 32 borough councils.
Only a country with a hereditary monarchy and a House of Lords could
tolerate the archaic City Corporation in the 1990s. It operates like this.
Some 14,000 voters - most of them non-residents - from 25 wards elect 159
common councilmen and 26 aldermen to run the Corporation. Each year one of
the aldermen is selected as Lord Mayor by his colleagues from two candidates
nominated by the 15,000 liverymen of the City's guilds. Livery companies are
successors of 11th-century religious and social fraternities: there are now
100 of them, ranging from the ancient Apothecaries and Fishmongers companies
to Sir Brian's own Worshipful Company of Information Technologists.
After that, it may not seem odd that the Corporation should have its own
police force, plus responsibility for Epping Forest, Hampstead Heath, the
Old Bailey, and the Quarantine Station at Heathrow Airport.
For all its peculiarities and mediaeval customs, the Corporation works. 'It
is inconceivable that anyone in his right mind would tamper with us unless
there were strong evidence that London would be better off as a result,'
says Sir Brian. 'Rather than dwell on further organisational change, those
responsible for London should find ways of co-operating with each other.
Every businessman knows you re-organise when you can't manage to do things
well as they are - and now the election is over I hope we can put that
debate behind us.'
Promoting London as venue for the Central Bank is top priority for the rest
of his term. Last month the Corporation voted Pounds 1m for the task; Sir
Brian has lobbied the European Commission, and has trips planned to Paris,
Athens, Madrid, Berlin and Luxembourg to further the cause.
The bank may never materialise - in the Maastricht timeframe, at least. But
if it does, the Lord Mayor is adamant that London should be its home - and
by implication that sterling should be subsumed in the European currency.
'The case for London is compelling: it's not a question of doing down the
competition, but of emphasising the vast experience and expertise contained
in this City. By any objective test, London is the best location.'
And what of the Corporation itself, now the electorate has issued a
reprieve? 'The Corporation's primary task is to act for the City,' says Sir
Brian, but he is emphatic that 'we should not see the City in isolation. We
are a great Hoover taking out of the system - and we ought to be putting a
lot back.'
He is keen for the City to support - perhaps even run - the London Promotion
Centre floated by Michael Heseltine and promised in the Tory manifesto.
Somerset House is a likely venue. Appropriately, his sponsored charity for
the year is 'Learning Together' - a project run by Community Service
Volunteers to encourage undergraduates across the country to volunteer to
spend an afternoon a week helping in a local state school.
At the end of the day, though, a local authority serving 5,000 residents and
extending one and five-eighths miles at its longest and seven-eighths of a
mile at its shortest is bound to look faintly ridiculous. It might be
otherwise: the likely demise of the Docklands Development Corporation in the
mid-1990s could offer a golden opportunity for the City Corporation to marry
London's new and old business districts - were Sir Brian and his successors
to impress Michael Howard, the new environment secretary, of the merits.
Will they even try? 'Ah, that's tricky, old boy,' says a Corporation
insider. 'There are lots of residents down there - it would mean party
politics and all that.' The City, of course, has no politics.
