FT  08 JUN 92 / Arts: The False Servant - Theatre
Dr Johnson knew that people reveal confidences in order to show that they
had been trusted in the first place. In 1724 his contemporary, Pierre
Marivaux (1688-1783), wrote a satire based on this fact of human nature and
called it La Fausse Suivante (The False Servant). He made it intellectually
puzzling and morally complex, but kept it light. The new production at the
Gate Theatre, Notting Hill - a British premiere - answers Marivaux with a
delightfully-paced evening of rapid-fire dialogue and shifts of plot.
The action centres on a Chevalier who has disguised herself as a man in
order to probe the protean deceits of Lelio, whom she thinks she loves.
Lelio in turn, randy for gain, has betrothed a rich Countess and is yoked to
her by bonds of forfeit rather than love. Lelio, believing the Chevalier is
a man, enjoins him to woo the Countess into breaking her betrothal and
paying the forfeit. Meanwhile Trivelin, the Chevalier's duplicitous servant
and Arlequin, the lovelorn clown of the house reveal the Chevalier's true
identity, one through venality and the other through stupidity. The
Chevalier disrobed turns out to be a prospect that Lelio has coveted from
afar. Nobody marries.
The result is a serious comedy that feels like Haydn's 'The Joke' in that
one is never quite sure it has ended, and sounds like the best of Alfred de
Musset, in that one never wants it to. Deceit and disguise dominate the
action, which itself appeals to a set of constantly changing unseen rules,
always governed by the final injunction that the rules can change any
minute.
The insights emerge from the meeting of the unshockable with the
undeterrable. The pattern of tests, feints, parries is always motivated by a
saving of face and a saving of money. Negotiations and love songs are often
mistaken for one and the same.
The sharp translation from Jonathan Guy Martin (who directs) and Mary Ann
Vargas keeps the ethos of the original, giving it a modern bite without
resort to modern infelicity. All the characters are obsessed with form and
forms of language. This can be very funny indeed: 'Sir,' says the Countess,
''sensitive to' is going too far. You could have said 'aware of'.' The
interchange between characters at full stretch also finds a moral level: 'Do
you repent the wrong? or your failure to succeed?'
The acting keeps up with the action. Crispin Redman plays Lelio as a mincing
cadaver; his limber interchanges with William Hope's Trivelin and
Christabelle Dilks' Chevalier (not yet his nimble equal) form the centre of
the action. Susannah Morley plays a leaden-footed Countess. Robust music,
bawdy intrusions from a party of wedding guests, and a simple plain set
complete the salon effect. One pedantry: when a character says 'time's
ticking away', he should not twitch at his wrist. It was only 1724.
The Gate Theatre (071 229 0706) until 4 July
