FT  03 MAR 92 / Technology: Bitten by the bug - The computer virus that is
set to attack this week
A computer virus that is set to wipe out data stored on infected personal
computers this Friday is causing widespread concern among US computer users
and manufacturers. The 'Michelangelo' virus may be the most widespread and
potentially destructive computer virus to date, according to computer
security experts.
Estimates of the number of computers that may be affected range up to 5m,
but are impossible to verify. Commentary on the virus attack is ranging from
hysterical to cynical. Some are predicting a worldwide catastrophe as
millions of computer files are destroyed.
Others view the virus scare as a marketing ploy by companies that sell
anti-virus programs and services. Whether Michelangelo turns out to be an
epidemic or isolated problem, however, there is no doubt that computer
viruses are multiplying and threatening to disrupt the free flow of
information among computers that is one of the prime benefits of the desktop
machines.
There are now about 1,000 identified viruses and at least 100 new ones have
cropped up over the past two months. The sources of most viruses are
unknown. However, this week two students at Cornell University in New York
were arrested on charges that they unleashed a computer virus that paralysed
computers in California and Japan.
The virus - known as the MBDFA virus - was launched on February 14 in three
Macintosh computer games. It infected the computers of people who accessed
the university's public computer archive to play the games.
Computers at Stanford University in California and others in Osaka, Japan
were affected. The Michelangelo virus can be contracted only by using
infected floppy disks, unlike many viruses which are spread over networks.
In the past, computer users could be reasonably sure of avoiding viruses so
long as they used only newly purchased copies of programs and did not
'borrow' copies of programs from other users.
Recently, however, viruses have infected computers at some of the largest
software publishing companies in the US and at computer hardware
manufacturers. Unwittingly some of these companies have passed the virus on
to their customers.
Among those that have discovered the scourge in time, stringent security
measures have been put in place. One of the largest suppliers of computer
networking software, for example, has created a 'clean room' environment in
its software development laboratories by requiring employees to scan all
computer disks through a virus detection system before entering.
Michelangelo is only the latest of hundreds of computer viruses to be spread
among desktop computers. According to a recent survey conducted by the US
National Computer Security Association and Dataquest, a market research
firm, 63 per cent of personal computer users have already encountered a
computer virus and 9 per cent have experienced a 'virus disaster'.
The survey covered more than 600,000 personal computers in businesses
throughout the US and Canada. Corporate personal computers are particularly
vulnerable to computer viruses, according to officials at McAfee Associates,
a California computer security firm, because they are often shared among
several users and typically run more programs than a home computer.
Already there have been several reports in the US of Michelangelo victims
who have lost valuable data when the virus activated prematurely. These have
ranged from the US National Institute of Standards and Technology to West
Coast law firms and charity groups.
Michelangelo can cause total loss of data on a personal computer hard disk
by writing over it with random characters. 'It is a digital paper shredder,'
says Martin Tibor of Synapse Data Recovery, a San Rafael, California,
company that specialises in eradicating infections.
This virus is spread on infected floppy disks. It is transferred to the
computer memory and hard disk when an attempt is made to 'boot' the computer
with the infected floppy disk in place in the drive. Once the hard disk is
infected the virus will infect every other floppy that is used in the
computer.
Several software companies offer programs that can eradicate the virus.
Users 'scan' their computers to find out if any rogue programs are lurking
in the machine's memory bank. If an infection is found, the anti-virus
program will wipe it out, but that is not the end of the story.
Typically, an infected machine will have transferred the virus to every
floppy disk that has been used on the computer. Users must, therefore,
systematically scan the machine until every floppy disk has been checked. In
a corporate setting, this can be particularly tiresome.
Tibor, who has worked on several such projects, says that it becomes
essential to search the premises for disks that people have, for example,
stashed in desk drawers. 'I usually tell employees to bring in their home
computers as well.'
They are typically infected by disks that people take home to work on, he
explains. Constant vigilance is the only sure way to avoid viruses. With new
ones cropping up all the time, it becomes necessary to update frequently
anti-virus programs, which only wipe out the viruses known at the time they
are sold. Too many computer users scan their machines once and then forget
about the problem, warns Tibor.
To deal specifically with the Michelangelo virus, several companies are
offering anti-viral software programs. Central Point Software has a
Michelangelo Protection Kit, which it is selling in the US for Dollars 29
(Pounds 16.50). Symantec is also offering a special Michelangelo edition of
its Norton anti-virus program for a nominal fee to cover shipping.
As a precautionary measure, personal computer users may also advance the
'clock' on their machines beyond Friday to try to outwit the virus program.
Past scares about viruses often have proven to be overblown. But the
unusually destructive nature of Michelangelo makes it hard to ignore.
Following the 'better safe than sorry' principle, seems to be a wise
approach.
