FT  28 NOV 92 / Birt plans the endgame: The BBC's next leader talks to
Raymond Snoddy
John Birt, the man who will lead the BBC towards the millennium, is talking
again. For more than 18 months his smile and his politeness have been seen
but little has been heard.
The uncharacteristic silence was partly a result of Birt's involvement in
two enormous pieces of strategic planning: the first, to introduce a
modified form of the market into a corporation once likened to the Indian
Civil Service; the second, to work out the future role of the BBC in an age
of growing commercial competition.
But the real reason for his silence was to avoid undermining Sir Michael
Checkland, the out-going director-general, in the difficult 18-month
hand-over period.
That period came to an end on Thursday in Studio 1 at the BBC Television
Centre. There was a symbolic handing over of the baton. Sir Michael, who
retires as director-general at Christmas, was there to endorse the BBC view
of its hoped-for future. But it was Birt who enunciated the BBC's wish to
remain a single, integrated broadcaster funded by a licence fee, but less
bureaucratic, more responsive, and searching for distinctive and innovative
programmes. The presentation came two days after the government published
its green paper of options  - not recommendations - for a new BBC Royal
Charter.
Yesterday, John Birt was still in his rather spartan deputy
director-general's office on the third floor of Broadcasting House, although
he is in the final straight of the journey to the big office along the
corridor.
Above all, he is talking publicly again.
From 9am, media correspondents from the national broadsheet newspapers were
ushered in for a 45-minute audience - a timetable that was enforced. By
1.15pm and the last of the bunch, glasses of fizzy water already poured,
Birt was still answering, or not answering, questions.
The green paper? 'Plainly a lucid, comprehensive delineation of all the
questions that could be raised about the BBC,' he said, adding that he was
completely unwilling to make any guesses about the outcome.
It was reasonable and open-minded, he said. And the green paper had also
been right to include radical options such as a Public Service Broadcasting
Council which could give licence money to other broadcasting groups as well
as to the BBC.
However, if such a council had control of the money it would mean a body
other than the BBC would determine its strategy and the corporation's
coherence and accountability would be threatened.
'It would be a leap in the dark. Is it worth the risk? Is it plainly and
manifestly a better way? I very much doubt it,' said Birt, who came to the
BBC from London Weekend Television in 1987 because he saw an important
institution in need of modernisation.
Birt correctly anticipated that the government, any government, would be
interested in greater BBC efficiency. But is he winning the internal
argument for producer choice, the main mechanism that is supposed to deliver
it? Under the concept of producer choice, producers will be able to buy
services from outside the corporation, a change Birt believes is the most
fundamental the BBC has faced.
'In the last couple of months opinion is starting to turn,' he said. First,
the resource departments providing film crews or editing facilities are
finding out how enjoyable it is to control their areas. Programme
departments, initially resistant, have been discovering how much things
cost.
'They are very surprised at it,' Birt said. Programme budgets must now
include everything from the cost of accommodation to the cost of
secretaries.
The BBC is aiming to be distinctive as well as efficient. But isn't there a
danger in too much distinctiveness and the move away from programmes that
are derivative, formulaic or imported cheaply? Don't licence fee-payers
watch such programmes in their millions, and appear to like them, at least
sometimes? 'We're not talking about phasing things out,' Birt said. 'We're
talking about steering a new direction and steering it over 10 years.
'We are not going to take away things that are manifestly loved and enjoyed
by the audience. We are looking to the endgame.' That means making sure at
the end of the decade that people are not paying a licence fee for
programmes that can be found elsewhere.
The director-general-in-waiting said yesterday he 'guaranteed' that the BBC
would remain a pioneer in entertainment, producing hits out of unexpected
material, such as Antiques Roadshow or Dad's Army, as it had in the past.
As a result, the BBC would retain its large audiences despite its viewers
declining to a third of the total audience by the end of the decade.
Does the refocusing imply managerial change when Birt takes over? 'I'am
absolutely not going to be drawn on that today,' he replied.
However, now that he has started talking again, he has no intention of
stopping. He said he accepted the challenge that, as director-general, he
would have to carry the arguments for the new BBC strategies of efficiency,
responsive and distinctiveness throughout the organisation - strategies that
entail swingeing job cuts - and systematically to the country as a whole.
What would he like the shape of the BBC to be in 1997, the first year of the
new charter?
'I would aspire within Britain to be seen as the best-managed institution in
the public sector,' he said. Then it was time for some more talking, this
time to a team from Panorama which is taking a searching look at . . . the
future of the BBC, a programme Birt said he had encouraged.
