FT  13 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Lifting market share through co-operation -
How British insurers are running their overseas businesses
BRITAIN'S troubled insurance companies continue to shy away from joining
forces in the domestic market, but overseas they are becoming increasingly
keen on co-operation.
Recently, for example, Sun Alliance and Royal Insurance merged their
Australian subsidiaries, and Prudential sold its Canadian general insurance
side to General Accident.
The deals reflect an increased tendency for the UK's composite insurers to
join forces or co-operate in rationalising their interests in markets,
typically those in the Commonwealth, where individually they lack
significant market share.
And at a time of worldwide capital shortage, they also reflect the
increasing popularity among insurers worldwide of alliances as a means of
expanding abroad.
Mr Richard Gamble, chief executive, described the Australian deal as
'another step in Royal's strategy to operate overseas when appropriate,
through joint ventures in collaboration with partners.'
Royal, which joined forces with Aaachener and Muenchener, of Germany and
Fondiaria of Italy, to form a European joint-venture last year called EPIC,
is particularly keen on the idea, partially because of the weakness of its
own capital base, which has been eroded by heavy losses in recent years.
EPIC, based in Rotterdam, pools together the non-domestic market operations
of all three companies. The decision to sell its Dutch subsidiary, Royal
Nederland, to EPIC, has provided valuable capital to boost its balance sheet
at home. The Australian merger with Sun Alliance released a further Pounds
50m which can be deployed at group level.
Mr Gamble also stresses the potential economies of scale that co-operation
brings. Management resources are often scarce in smaller markets, and
co-operation allows companies to save in areas like information technology.
He says that improved return on capital can be obtained, pointing to the
success of Royal's South African subsidiary, in which it shares ownership
with Old Mutual, one of the Republic's biggest insurers.
Royal also shares - with Commercial Union - ownership of La Republica, one
of Chile's leading companies, and has joint ventures in Kenya, Malaysia and
Zimbabwe.
In the past Sun Alliance, the country's strongest insurer, has been less
enthusiastic about joining forces with rivals. But Mr Roger Neville, the
group's chief executive, last week hinted at a change in approach. 'We've
tended to do it 100 per cent but times have changed,' he said.
In recent years Sun Alliance has signed co-operation agreement with insurers
in Japan, South Korea and China. And in May it reached agreement with
Helvetia of Switzerland to jointly develop international commercial lines
business.
In Australia Sun Alliance already shared with Royal Insurance ownership of a
78 per cent stake in AAMI, a successful direct writing motor insurer, as
well as a marine insurance agency. Sun Alliance initially approached Royal
about a merger of its Australian operations in June, and teams from both
companies worked throughout the summer on the project
Neither company was big enough individually to influence general rating
trends explains Mr Tony Barron, director of Sun Alliance (Overseas). The
combined operation, with a market share of over 6 per cent, is in a much
stronger position. Sun Alliance was particularly influenced by the increased
success it enjoyed in New Zealand after it acquired the local interests
there of Guardian Royal Exchange in January last year.
In a similar example earlier this year GRE chose to merge its operations in
Australia with the Swiss company, Zurich Insurance. GRE owns a 25 per cent
stake in the merged operation, creating Australia's fourth biggest insurer.
In Canada, the Prudential chose to sell its non-life operation to GA, which
has now become the biggest insurer in the Canadian market with a share of 8
per cent.
All the companies involved are keen to stress that the deals are limited to
particular markets and do not foreshadow integration of operations in the
domestic market.
Commenting on the Australian deal, Mr Neville of Sun Alliance emphasised
that 'every territory is different and must be taken on its merits' while
Royal's Mr Gamble is keen to stress the number of companies with which Royal
is prepared to do business.
Even so, as competition in the 1990s gets tougher and the UK faces up to the
continuing threat from Europe, the lessons learned abroad may yet have
application at home.
