FT  07 MAY 92 / International Capital Markets: Italy absent from
international market for last 14 months
FOR A country with a burgeoning public sector borrowing requirement, Italy
has been notable by its absence from the international bond market over the
past year.
The last Eurobond issue by the Republic of Italy was in February 1991, a
Ecu2.5bn 20-year issue lead managed by Paribas Capital Markets.
The deal marked the culmination of an increasingly ambitious borrowing
programme in the Euromarket, which saw Italy's international bond market
borrowings rise from Dollars 1bn - Dollars 2bn a year in the mid-1980s - to
Dollars 5.4bn in just the first two months of last year.
Italy's absence from the international market over the last 14 months is
partly due to a deterioration in it's public finances and credit quality.
Shortly after the Ecu issue last year, Moody's Investors Service, the US
credit rating agency, lowered Italy's top triple-A credit rating.
The deterioration of public sector finances continues to worry credit
analysts. Yesterday, Standard &amp; Poor's, which does not rate with the
co-operation of the authorities, said that the outlook for its AA+ rating of
Italy (the same level as Moody's) was now negative.
The rating agency said 'the continued delay in reducing large fiscal
imbalances and the lack of strong political leadership' meant that Italy's
credit quality was likely to diminish over time.
Analysts estimate that the 1992 deficit is now likely to top L170,000bn,
against a budgeted L128,000bn. Parliamentary elections last month failed to
produce a strong government. President Francesco Cossiga resigned two weeks
later, reducing the likelihood of strong measures to curb government
spending.
The decline of Italy's credit rating has made borrowing in the international
bond market less attractive.
Italy would certainly have to pay a premium over top-rated sovereign
borrowers in the international market. Syndicate officials said yesterday
that a 10-year Eurodollar deal should be priced to yield around 45 basis
points more than US Treasury paper, against a yield spread of perhaps 25
basis points for a borrower such as Austria.
Ironically, Italy's reluctance to tap the international bond market may be a
positive factor, according to the rating agencies. With only Dollars 22bn
foreign currency borrowings, Italy is not reliant on international
investors.
While foreign investors are nervous about the prospects for Italy, the
government has continued to raise funds successfully in the domestic bond
market. Last week, for example, the Italian Treasury successfully auctioned
L18,000bn of fixed and floating rate bonds.
