FT  08 APR 92 / Election 1992: Minority parties define their terms
THE MINORITY parties yesterday joined in the pre-hung parliament
manoeuvring, with both the Ulster Unionists and Plaid Cymru, the Welsh
nationalist party, outlining the price for their support in such
circumstances.
In moves likely to add fuel to Conservative arguments that a government of
any other complexion could foreshadow the end of the union, both placed
devolution for their respective regions high on their shopping lists. But
the Ulster Unionists hinted at emollience with a pledge not to bring down a
minority government 'recklessly'.
Mr James Molyneaux, UUP leader, said: 'We would not recklessly say that,
unless we get our way on all things, we will bring the government down.' He
predicted that another election within a month or six weeks would cause
turmoil in the City.
Mr Molyneaux said Unionists would vote against a Labour government if it
pressed ahead with proposals for Scottish devolution without making the same
provision for Ulster.
He warned that there could be no surrender of sovereignty over the
Maastricht treaty or greater European union, or any attempt to extend the
Anglo-Irish agreement.
'We are not demanding anything - the two (main) parties are very well aware
of our position,' said Mr Molyneaux. 'If they don't want to aggravate us and
entice us into the opposition lobby, they will know to avoid those issues.'
Mr Dafydd Wigley, Plaid president, said his party would seek a guarantee
that Wales would be treated as favourably as Scotland on devolution.
A comprehensive language act and a low-interest-loan fund for small
businesses and farmers were among the commitments it would seek in the
Queen's Speech. Also on its list were measures to help first-time homebuyers
and water-bill rebates for pensioners and low-income families.
The Ulster Unionist parties expect to retain all 13 of their seats in the
election. Plaid Cymru had three MPs in the last parliament, who are all
expected to hold their seats.
