FT  26 FEB 92 / GEC breakthrough improves prospects for superconductors
UK RESEARCHERS have developed a 'high-temperature' superconductor which may
be suitable for large-scale applications such as cables carrying electricity
for hundreds of miles without losing energy.
The discovery at General Electric Company's Hirst Research Centre in
Wembley, north-west London, followed a two-year search using a robot which
made and tested materials with 15,000 different chemical compositions. The
work was part of a collaborative project involving six European companies
under the European Community's Brite-Euram programme.
The original excitement about high-temperature superconductors - ceramic
materials first made in 1986 which lose all electrical resistance at the
temperature of liquid nitrogen ( - 196 deg C) - waned as scientists learnt
more about their disadvantages. Most serious is that they cannot carry the
large currents required for power engineering or to make magnets powerful
enough to lift trains.
They are called 'high temperature' because previously superconductivity was
known only at temperatures close to absolute zero ( - 273 deg C).
GEC says its new material promises to be 'superior to the known
high-temperature superconductors in important respects, especially for
high-current applications'.
Details of the compound, which includes seven chemical elements including
cadmium, lead and copper, will be published later this week in
Superconductor Science and Technology, a specialist journal. The compound
resembles the best superconductors discovered so far, the thallium series,
but without their drawbacks of toxicity and volatility.
Only a few grammes have been made but scientists have established that it is
a stable and reproducible material which becomes superconducting at - 181
deg C.
The next step will be for GEC to transfer the material to the other
participants in the EC project: BICC, ABB, Alcatel Cable, Pirelli Cavi and
Siemens. They will work to develop superconducting cables from it, though
these are unlikely to reach the market for 10 years.
According to an EC estimate, Europe could theoretically save Pounds 2bn a
year on energy losses by replacing its power-transmission system with
superconducting cables cooled by liquid nitrogen.
Another large-scale application is energy storage - electricity can flow
indefinitely around a superconducting coil.
