FT  14 MAR 92 / Minding Your Own Business: It's harder starting over again -
Chris Tighe meets Rob Askew, whose strategy to save the family firm put a
strain on the family
BUILDING a new business is hard work but restructuring a venture which,
after decades of trading, has become vulnerable can be harder still.
The path that led a graduate chemical engineer to start making Alphorn
covers for the German market was never going to be uneventful. But
unforeseen problems, personality clashes and the recession have made for a
bumpy ride since Bob Askew leapt into the unknown and joined Tyneside
Leathercrafts two years ago. The South Shields company was founded in 1937
by Eddie Brumlick, a Viennese Jew who had fled from the Nazis. It was bought
in 1960 following Brumlick's death by a friend, Albert Askew, a foreman in a
company making telephone exchange equipment. Under the management of Askew
and his younger son Rodney, who joined the business in 1971, Tyneside
Leathercrafts expanded into a substantial small company with 60 employees
and turnover approaching Pounds 1m a year. Within its speciality niche -
musical instrument covers and straps, military and marching band belts and
harnesses and upmarket sports bags and accessories - it achieved a strong
national profile. In some product areas, such as PVC musical instrument
covers, it enjoyed a virtual UK monopoly. Two years ago Bob Askew, elder son
of the by-now-retired Albert, agreed to join the business to bring to it the
management skills he had acquired setting up and running a successful
burglar alarm company after leaving chemical engineering. It seemed, he
says, that Tyneside Leathercrafts was simply too big for his brother to
manage alone. Six months later, after bitter clashes over management style
which have left them, to their elderly parents' chagrin, barely on speaking
terms, Rodney walked out. Rob says he realises that he and his brother could
never have worked together. He also admits that before committing himself he
would have appraised the company more keenly had he not been dealing with
family.
Rodney denies his brother's claim that the business was in a mess. But he
admits he had been trying to do too much at once. 'With hindsight the
company grew too quickly and too large,' he says.
The problem, says his brother, was that the business lacked the management
systems to cope with its size and 4,000 product lines. Consequently
overheads and pricing policy were out of control, delivery times awry, stock
control deficient, cash flow hand to mouth and marketing haphazard. And, he
says, some customers, disgruntled at long delays, were going elsewhere just
as the recession began hitting orders.
Compared with this the problems of fledgling companies look modest. 'If you
start up a business you can gradually grow,' says Askew. 'I had to look at
everything at once."
Staff was pruned from 60 to 25, helping to cut overheads by 50 per cent.
Product lines were cut to 1,000 to introduce a degree of standardisation.
The pricing structure was overhauled; a few prices were cut, others had to
rise.
'I put my cards on the table, I said it's a case of us going bust or we have
to charge realistic prices,' says Rob. 'A lot of our customers said they
never knew how we could charge such low prices in the first place.'
Without drastic change the business might well, he says, have succumbed to
the recession as monthly sales nosedived from Pounds 90,000 in 1989 to
Pounds 45,000 in 1991.
The company is now, he believes, on a firm footing and should make a small
profit on turnover of around Pounds 600,000 in the year to May 1992. Now his
aim is to widen the customer base, currently 95 per cent regulars, by
creating new products.
A designer recruited from Burberry has come up with a stylish range of
holdalls which are about to be marketed. Rob, a German speaker, scored an
unexpected bullseye at last year's Frankfurt Music Fair when he offered to
design and make Alphorn covers for a German distributor. Forty have been
sold so far and the US market beckons.
'Had we not had the recession I would have been sailing now; with the
recession all the measures I've taken have meant I was able to stand still,'
he says. At 44, he is working 50 hours a week for Pounds 250. He has
remortgaged his home to raise Pounds 85,000 for the business.
So has it all been worth it?
'Ask me in six months time.'
Tyneside Leathercrafts, Shaftsbury Ave/Amos Place, South Shield, Tyne &amp;
Wear. Tel: 091-455-2756.
