FT  05 NOV 92 / Government Bonds: US long bonds fall as domestic issues fade
AFTER an upbeat opening in the wake of Mr Bill Clinton's victory in
Tuesday's presidential election, US Treasury prices edged lower at the long
end yesterday as many investors and dealers switched their attention away
from domestic politics.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  3/16 at 94
31/32 , yielding 7.675 per cent. The two-year note, however, was slightly
firmer, up  1/16 at 99 21/32 to carry a yield of 4.416 per cent.
Treasury prices were mixed overnight on foreign markets as it became clear
that the Democrats had won the White House easily, but there was some early
buying of longer- dated bonds when New York opened - the result primarily of
short-covering. That buying soon fizzled out, however, and shifted to the
intermediate and short end of the market, where the two-year gained ground.
Although the political situation was still a factor affecting sentiment  -
the new question troubling investors was who President-elect Clinton would
appoint to senior Treasury and economic posts - players began to switch
their attention back to the economy, and tomorrow's employment report for
October. The day's only economic news - a 1.1 per cent rise in September
factory orders, and the Federal Reserve's 'Beige Book' report on the economy
showing a sluggish rate of recovery - was mostly ignored.
UK government bonds lost up to a quarter of a point at the long end ahead of
last night's parliamentary debate on the Maastricht treaty on European
economic and monetary union.
Dealers said the gilt market appeared to be assuming a very narrow majority
for the government in the critical Commons debate.
Long-dated issues shed about a quarter of a point, with the 9 per cent gilt
due 2008 falling  13/32 to 102 1/8 to yield 8.74 per cent. Shorter-dated
gilts held up well and ended little changed on the day.
FRENCH government bonds ended slightly firmer after Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the
prime minister, said Monday's quarter-point cut in key interest rates was
not the last.
Mr Beregovoy said the strength of the French franc provided scope for
interest rate cuts, and his comments raised hopes of lower rates across
Europe. The 10-year OAT yielded 8.12 per cent, against 8.17 per cent the
previous day, and the Matif futures contract closed at 110.72, up 0.12 from
late Tuesday.
Elsewhere in Europe, long-dated German government bonds ended slightly
weaker with the market trading in a narrow range.
On the Deutsche Terminborse, long bunds dropped to 91.37, from 91.46 at
Tuesday's close, after trading in a range of 91.23 to 91.46. Medium-term
December bund futures slipped to 95.83, from 93.84 at Tuesday's close.
JAPANESE government bonds rallied at the opening on the yen's strength
against the US dollar overnight, but early gains were wiped out by
profit-taking and the market closed slightly lower on the day.
The futures contract and benchmark cash bond firmed in the morning following
the yen's rise in New York overnight, but the rally lost ground as the
dollar rebounded in Tokyo.
The yield on the benchmark No 145 issue opened at 4.68 per cent and moved to
4.67 per cent, then ended the day at 4.695 per cent after dealer
profit-taking. The December futures contract ended at 107.59 against its
Monday close of 107.57.
A senior fund manager from Fidelity Investments, the large investment
management group based in Boston, yesterday warned that the slowdown in
Germany was likely to be far worse than anyone in Germany - or the financial
markets - had yet realised, writes David Waller in Frankfurt.
Mr Martin Wooller, Fidelity's UK fixed income director who manages five bond
funds, said 'Germany is about to come under a tidal wave of recession'.
Under this scenario, Mr Wooller argued that the prognosis for bunds was
extremely favourable: he predicted that 10-year bunds would yield 6.25 per
cent by the end of 1993.
See Observer, Page 21
