FT  21 DEC 92 / Higher taxes before end of 1994 predicted
A GROWING crisis in public sector finances will force the government to
raise taxes before the end of 1994, according to the latest Financial Times
survey of economic forecasts.
The most comprehensive survey of forecasts for the UK economy over the next
two years shows that more than half of City, academic and independent
economists believe the government will have to increase taxes to claw back
some of the revenue lost as a result of the recession.
Although the consensus forecast for this year's public sector borrowing
requirement is in line with the Treasury's expectation of Pounds 37bn,
economists see government borrowing spiralling to-wards Pounds 50bn in
1993-94, or about 8 per cent of gross domestic product.
'In order to bring the PSBR down to 3 per cent of GDP over the medium term,
it would re-quire annual increases in taxation - excluding any changes to
expenditure - of anything up to Pounds 10bn a year,' said Mr Neil MacKinnon,
chief economist at Citibank.
Few predict that the government will raise direct taxes. Increases in
indirect taxes are more likely, and a number of economists expect the scope
of value added tax to be widened and excise duties raised. Abolition of the
upper earnings limit on national insurance contributions is also possible.
The outlook for inflation is more pessimistic than official forecasts
suggest. More than half of the 38 economists questioned expect the retail
prices index, excluding mortgage interest payments, to pass the upper limit
of the chancellor's 1-4 per cent target range in the next two years.
Forecasts for average inflation next year range from as little as 2.3 per
cent to 6.2 per cent, although a number of economists forecasting a rise in
inflation next year expect it to drop back again in 1994, once the
devaluation of sterling has made its impact on the index. The average
forecast for 1994 is 4.4 per cent.
Expectations for growth among economists are broadly in line with the
Treasury's latest forecast of 1 per cent next year. The following year,
economists see GDP growth rising to 2.4 per cent, but this will not be
enough to make a significant dent in the unemployment total. This is
forecast to stay at just over 3m both next year and in 1994, with only four
economists expecting the peak before the end of 1993.
Few foresee an early re-entry to the European exchange rate mechanism, if at
all.
'Assuming that economic sanity reigns - a bold assumption given the events
of recent months - the UK will not rejoin the ERM in the forseeable future,'
said Mr Paul Neild at County NatWest.
'Britain will only rejoin when German monetary policy is appropriate for the
UK. With the UK and German cycles out of phase, re-entry is unlikely within
the life of this parliament,' said Mr Keith Wade, chief economist at
Schroders.
Those who do expect re-entry, believe it will happen in 1994 at a rate
between DM2.40 and DM2.60.
An emergency government programme in the new year to create jobs was urged
yesterday by Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor. He argues that the
widespread fear of unemployment is a significant factor in delaying the
recovery.
Page 6
Economists see end to recession but weak growth
