FT  06 JUN 92 / Collecting: Taste of the unexpected - Two London galleries
celebrate special anniversaries this summer
TWO LONDON galleries celebrate anniversaries this summer. To mark its 175th
year, Agnew's shows some 50 works of art chosen to emphasise the perhaps
unexpected range of the gallery's activities (June 9-July 24).
The company offers paintings from Fra Angelico panels to a cool, Cubist
Braque, Old Master drawings, sculpture and a group of prints that extend
from Piranesi capricci to Jasper Johns' flags. British works, from
Gainsborough and Zoffany to John Wonnacott, take in a clutch of Turner
watercolours plus a Venetian oil that, initially valued at Dollars 25m,
(Pounds 14.1m) is thought to be the most expensive picture on sale in the
world.
Those already in possession of the anniversary catalogue will be
disappointed not to find the portraits by Sebastiano and Goya, the
Giaquinto, Tintoretto's Desecent from the Cross and The Sleeping Shepherd by
Samuel Palmer. Agnew's, however, is pleased to count them among eight works
already sold. Any holes on the walls are to be filled by a pair of Guardis
and an Aert van der Neer skating scene that has not been on the market since
the 19th century and has found itself back at Agnew's once more.
As that show closes, The Leger Galleries open with a predominantly loan
exhibition of Samuel Palmer which marks a century of art dealing (until July
24). All 29 works have a Leger provenance. Palmer is an inspired choice for
a centenary show, given Harold Leger's fondness for an artist who has become
one of the nation's most beloved landscape painters. It is also a courageous
choice given that Leger was famously duped in the 1970s by four of Keating's
ingenious Palmer pastiches.
With the glowing exception of the oil and tempera The Shearers which is on
loan from the Tate, the show comprises watercolours and drawings. The
selection is striking too for its emphasis not on the visionary works of the
Shoreham years but on the less familiar late works which, as Raymond Lister
argues in the catalogue, are less intense but rarely less romantic or poetic
idylls of the English countryside. Palmer enthusiasts should not miss the
treat.
Further up Bond Street, The Fine Art Society offers perhaps the most
unexpected show of the season: 'Gibson to Gilbert: British Sculpture
1840-1914' (until July 2). The core of this group of 65 works is the
outstanding collection put together by John Lewis, and previously on
extended loan to the Minneapolis Institute of Arts. Its particular strength
is the New Sculpture that revolutionised British sculpture in the last two
decades of the 19th century, an area of collecting in which the gallery
first became involved in 1902. The New sculptors promoted sculpture for the
home - hence the profusion here of reduced-size casts of domestic scale but
museum quality.
The genius here is Sir Alfred Gilbert of Eros fame. He not only revived the
infinitely subtle 'lost-wax' bronze-casting technique and developed a taste
for combining metals, ivory and semi-precious stones, but invested his
sculpture with a powerful personal symbolism. The exhibition, with its
excellent catalogue by Benedict Read, also includes works by Bayes, Boehm,
Frampton and Hamo Thornycroft, as well as the painter-sculptors Lord
Leighton, GF Watts and Alfred Stevens. Here, too, are Dalou, who taught in
London, and Carpeaux who exhibited here. Prices range from Pounds
2,200-Pounds 110,000.
Italian and German 16th and 17th century bronzes plus Old Master drawings
after Antique and Renaissance sculpture, and preparatory sketches for
sculpture, are among the various works of art in the combined show of
Trinity Fine Art and Katrin Bellinger, at Harari and Johns Ltd (June 24-July
10). We find, say, Girolamo da Carpi drawing from various Roman sources, and
sheets after Michelangelo by Battista Franco, Salviati and Tintoretto. An
unusual Paulus van Vianen is a design for a lost silver plaquette.
WR Harvey's seventh summer exhibition (until June 27) focuses on the
furniture of the period of the four Georges, organised into four room sets.
The show is worth visiting not least to see the loans which include a
spectacular pair of gilt Palladian armchairs made to the designs of William
Kent by Benjamin Goodison in 1730, rich in classical detail and metaphor.
Oriental porcelain dealers S. Marchant &amp; Son is also staging its seventh
summer show (June 7-26). It is, the firm believes, the first commercial show
devoted to Qing mark and period monochrome and two-coloured wares. The 60 or
so exhibits, predominantly 18th century, have been gathered mostly from
private collections over several years. Within the show's self-imposed
parameters (there is understandably no blue and white, say), the quality and
range in terms of ware and form are impressive.
Monochrome porcelains are for the purist, for their success depends entirely
on form and colour - and the glazes are glorious. Such a spectrum of colour
had not been seen before in ceramic art. Here we find pale lavender,
celadon, peachbloom, red, brilliant yellow and lemon, purple, aubergine,
blue, green, turquoise and brown. Prices range from Pounds 1,600-Pounds
70,000. The handsome hardback catalogue (Pounds 30 inc p&amp;p), with an
introduction by John Ayers, should prove a useful reference work.
Spink's present another first: an exhibition of the much derided Satsuma
pottery of 19th century Japan (until June 19). Its 50 choice pieces have
been selected to prove that there is a difference of chalk and cheese
between the mass-produced - and still much in evidence - Satsuma export
wares and the spectacular show pieces - often intended for World Fairs -
produced by specialised workshops and studios in Kyoto and Osaka. The show
presents the work of the greatest Satsuma potters and artists, including
five pieces by the unrivalled Sozan. Prices are Pounds 1,500-Pounds 38,000.
Barling of Mount Street launch the first in a series of annual exhibitions
designed to show a representative example of what the firm normally carries
in stock (June 9-26). On show is a set of three 16th century Japanese fusuma
or sliding door panels now mounted as screens, 17th century Chinese lacquer
trays and boxes, Sui and Yuan dynasty sculpture and a group of 16th and 17th
century Chinese hardwood furniture. The cataloque is prefaced with an
impassioned plea for the sympathetic conservation of such furniture, the
original surfaces of which have been so often destroyed by abrasives and
chemical solvents during careless restoration. Prices, Pounds 2,500-Pounds
75,000.
Linda Wrigglesworth is host of Sue Olleman's exhibition of 19th century gold
and moghul jewellery from the Indian subcontinent (June 18-27). Jehanne de
Biolley shows a service of mostly 19th century apple green Peking glass
(June 9-26).
Surprisingly colourful quilts made in the Amish communities of Ohio, Indiana
and Pennsylvania in 1900-1950 - the forms and colour combinations of which
were to prove so influential to the early American Abstract painters in the
1950s - are to be found at Browse &amp; Darby until June 20. Prices Pounds
3,500-Pounds 7,500.
Wildenstein presents a fascinating exhibition of the Russian artist Marevna
and her friends in Montparnasse 1912-42 (June 17-September 16). The show
marks the centenary of her birth, and is organised in association with the
Musee du Petit Palais, Geneva. First a Cubist, exhibiting at the Salon des
Independents in 1913, she moved on to Pointillism before curiously combining
the two styles.
Inevitably, however, much of the show's interest rests on Marevna as a
chronicler of Bohemian society. Many of her pictures and drawings portrays
her friends, Diego Rivera (the father of her child), Picasso, Chagall,
Leger, Modigliani, Soutine and Gorky among them. On show are some 30
Marevnas plus the work of some 20 friends, including Blanchard, van Dongen,
Foujita, Laurencin and Soutine.
More Russian pictures can be found in the Roy Miles summer show (until July
9). Jonathan Clark's Modern show (until June 27) is particularly strong on
the Scottish Colourists, with works by Cadell, Cursiter and Peploe. Many of
the British artists exhibited there also take a bow at Spink's 20th century
show (until June 26). Here we also find a Vorticist watercolour by Wyndham
Lewis and a recently discovered Duncan Grant portrait of Vanessa Bell.
Prices: Pounds 1,000-Pounds 100,000.
