FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Pensions may be split in divorces -
Scheherazade Daneshkhu on moves to give women a share of their ex-husbands'
pensions
A FURTHER step towards the day when many divorced women will be entitled to
half their husband's pension was taken this week. The National Association
of Pension Funds, the industry's trade association, is proposing a split of
pension rights when divorce occurs.
Brian MacMahon, the chairman, emphasised the inequality in the present
system. 'If it is right for assets to be divided on divorce, it must be
wrong to ignore what is one of the biggest assets, particularly when those
rights are becoming increasingly significant and when one-third of marriages
ends in divorce,' he said.
The NAPF is recommending that courts be given the power to divide pension
rights on divorce, regardless of whether the pension is occupational,
personal or state earnings-related. This has important implications for
married women. Many have little or no pension of their own, relying instead
on their husband's or the basic state pension.
During a divorce, their pension rights are left to the discretion of the
courts or - in cases where pension benefits are ignored - the ex-wife is
left to compete with a new wife for pension payments.
'The present law is impractical,' says James Marcus, a partner at Gordon
Dadds, a legal firm specialising in divorce. 'In many cases, the husband
does not have sufficient other assets to compensate the wife for the loss of
pension rights on divorce.'
The situation is different in Scotland where 'matrimonial property' includes
the proportion of pension and insurance rights that are accumulated during a
marriage.
The NAPF's proposals would confront the problem of women facing poverty in
old age because of divorce. The association says that one in eight women
over 65 will be single because of divorce in 2025. Even women with pensions
are exposed to financial hardship when they retire because of the time taken
off in their working lives to look after children.
In a study of women and personal pensions, the Equal Opportunities
Commission has predicted that 64 per cent of women retiring with pensions in
2023 will be below the poverty line, (assuming state benefits are up-rated
in line with prices, and a real rate of return of 0.5 per cent on personal
pensions).
The main difficulty with pension-splitting on divorce has been assessing the
value of the pension and deciding the most equitable way of allotting it.
The NAPF is recommending that pension rights earned during a marriage should
be based on the present value of a pension calculated in the same way as for
a transfer. It would be revalued to allow for inflation up to retirement.
Half this amount would be paid to the divorced wife, who could use it only
to buy a pension - she could not take cash instead. The husband's pension
would thus be reduced at retirement. The split of rights would not be
delayed until retirement but would take place at the time of divorce.
The NAPF does not, however, believe that pension rights should be split when
a marriage has lasted less than two years or when the difference between the
pension rights of the couple is less than Pounds 5,000.
The recommendations are in response to proposals put forward by a Pensions
Management Institute working group on pension and divorce, which was set up
in February. But the NAPF says it does not expect pension-splitting on
divorce to be made law in this parliament.
