FT  30 JAN 92 / Weakness in Lloyd's solvency seen
LOSSES at Lloyd's of London over the next three years could seriously weaken
its solvency, according to figures published yesterday by Chatset, the
company that analyses the performance of the insurance market's syndicates.
Chatset estimates that losses for 1989, 1990 and last year may exceed Pounds
3.2bn against deposits and reserves of around Pounds 4.4bn at the end of
1990.
'On our projections Lloyd's will have lost, by the time the 1991 figures are
out in 1994, the equivalent of the accumulated deposits of the entire
membership,' Chatset warns.
Names - the individuals whose assets make up the market's capital base  -
deposit an amount equivalent to 30 per cent of their stamp capacity (the
amount of premiums they are allowed to accept under Lloyd's rules) with
Lloyd's.
Chatset suggests that urgent action is needed to bolster the the market's
central fund, out of which claims are paid if Names are unable to meet their
commitments. The fund currently stands at around Pounds 450m.
The group's grim predictions come as Lloyd's leadership grapples with the
implications of implementing wide-ranging reforms of the market's structure
recommended by a task force just over a fortnight ago.
It had been expected that the 1989 year, the results of which Lloyd's will
report in June, would produce losses of more than Pounds 1bn. However, the
scale of Chatset's forecast losses for 1990 and last year - which will be
reported this year and next - has provoked consternation in the market,
where insiders dispute the predictions.
Chatset says losses in 1990 could again exceed Pounds 1bn (against a
forecast Pounds 1.35bn in 1989) and losses for last year could be at least
Pounds 700m, partially because of the continuing impact of claims as a
result of US asbestosis and pollution awards.
According to Chatset an average of between Pounds 400m and Pounds 600m a
year will be needed to top up reserves.
The market was badly hit by a number of substantial losses at the end of
last year. The biggest losses came from Typhoon Mireille which devastated
parts of Japan in September, leaving Lloyd's with claims of more than Pounds
200m.
Chatset expects the results for 1990 and last year for marine syndicates -
specialists in the insurance of ships, cargoes and offshore oil rigs - to be
worse than expected.
The group's preliminary figures indicate that the rate rises introduced last
year by marine underwriters were insufficient to restore profitability.
Mr Paul Archard, chairman of the Lloyd's Underwriting Agencies Association,
yesterday described the predictions for last year as 'completely and grossly
inaccurate'. He added: 'By any stretch of the imagination they are
crystal-ball gazing.'
Solicitors acting for a group of Names involved in litigation with their
agencies confirmed yesterday that they were seeking an out-of-court
settlement. More than 570 Names, members of syndicate 533 managed by the
Warrilow Agency, initiated legal action more than four years ago to recover
insurance losses of more than Pounds 80m. The case was expected to come to
court this year.
