FT  24 DEC 92 / Markets: Hark, the City starts to sing - Serious Money
THE SOUND of Christmas carols can be heard regularly echoing round the City.
But, this year, the choristers have adapted some of the old standards to
reflect this recessionary season. New favourites include the following
ditties, intoned by a bunch of miserable-looking economists:
God make ye merry, Bundesbank,
You cause so much dismay;
Why don't you give us all a break
And cut your rates today?
To save the troubled ERM
And keep the slump away,
All because of Frankfurt and Bonn
Our industry's gone.
All because of Frankfurt and Bonn
and:
In the bleak mid-winter
Norm Lamont did moan,
The headlines scream 'Resign'
Pound drops like a stone;
Gloom is falling, GDP
Refuses to grow,
All the green shoots wilted
Long ago
These haunting melodies are interrupted by the wistful tones of the share
traders, as they sing:
I'm dreaming of a bull market,
Just like the ones I used to know.
When penny stocks glistened
And brokers listened
To bid rumours come and go.
I'm dreaming of a new Hanson.
With every put option I write.
May your earnings forecasts prove right
And may Footsie double overnight.
But they are answered by a rousing chorus from a group of private clients:
Small investors should watch out
On the feast of Stephen.
Rates have fallen all about
Few are breaking even.
Brightly shines the lure of shares
Through the risks are cruel;
Those who buy stocks unawares
Could soon be eating gru-u-el.
The clients also lament the failings of personal equity plans.
The first PEP was sold, so they say,
To a poor young librarian with kids on the way.
The tax break sounded good but the charges were steep
ow the manager's rich but the client can't sleep.
No-yield, no-gain, no-hope, much pain,
The small investor's been fleeced once again
This in turn leads to an angry anthem from a group of clearing bank
accountholders:
Ding dong, bank charges are high
The customers' hands are wringing;
Once your bank account runs dry
The overdraft rates are stinging; Gloria
Hosanna to extortion.
Occasionally, the merry voices of the life insurance companies break
through, extolling the virtues of their with profits policies:
'Tis the season to cut payouts
Fa la la la la la la la la.
All our forecasts have proved way out
Fa la la la la la la la la.
There's no point in shedding tears
Fa la la la la la la la la.
You're locked in for 20 years
Fa la la la la ha ha ha ha.
They follow this with a little number about that favourite subject of
rhythm'n'blues singers, the Financial Services Act:
Hark, the regulators sing
New authorities take wing.
FIMBRA, LAUTRO proved too mild
Salesmen's antics got too wild.
Throw your old rulebooks away
Join the brand new PIA.
Hear the great and good proclaim
Client protection is the aim.
Sadly this bad news we bring,
No-one wants to join the thing.
The building societies perform a routine about their charming habit of
letting depositors' savings languish in obsolete low-rate accounts:
Consider yourself
Ripped off.
Consider that you're
A punter we can exploit.
We've handled your cash
So long,
We feel it's
Been ours all along.
Although we claim to be
Efficient and friendly,
We've no charity for you;
If you're an old lady
Without any salary,
Then there's nothing you can do.
And when you find out
The facts.
The ombudsman won't act.
So after some consideration we can state
Consider that we're cheapskates.
Standing away from all the others is a small band of pinstriped buskers,
with a begging sign which reads saying 'No Ecus accepted.' It is of course,
the Euro-sceptics:
Once in rainy Maastricht city
Ancient enmities were shed;
Where our leaders made a treaty
Which said nation states were dead.
But the snag for Major mild
His backbenchers then got riled.
They came down to vote against him
From the backwoods whence they came.
So he promised opt-out clauses
And a veto for the Danes.
Tory whips were mean and lowly
Still they won by three votes only.
To be sung ad nauseam or until the Maastricht bill becomes law.
