FT  06 JUN 92 / Gardening: It's pot luck for the leaders of the pack /
Finding that the impatient have inherited the earth
THIS year, impatient gardeners have got away with murder. They have broken
the rules, kicked over the calendar and bedded-out plants which are
marginally hardy at a season when wise old gardeners expect a lot to be
killed by frost. In fact, they have flourished. They love the sun, respond
to the rain and, already, they are out of reach of frost. It is all most
irritating. To put it bluntly: Sloane-Wallies swept in at the first sign of
sunshine and acquired most of the summer's decoration before well-trained
gardeners like myself were ready to buy it when the text books recommend.
Admittedly, I would never stuff it in a hanging basket or grow it in
anything which dangled. Most of the plants sold in strips are not my idea of
elegance. I do not want petunias with flowers as broad as the mouth of a
trombone, and I certainly do not want fluffy ageratum. Be wary of strips
unless they contain pure-white tobacco plants, which look lovely anywhere.
Otherwise, remember that soft planting has gained new dimensions in the past
20 years and most of the best things are sold individually in pots among
half-hardy perennials.
The new art of pot-planting is to pack in as much as you possibly can. If
you can afford them, clay pots with a 27-inch diameter allow you the most
scope. I have stuck at 20-24 inches, but only because pots are a small part
of my garden and I am not stuck with nothing more than a roof or balcony.
Weather-beaten Sloanes in the countryside swear by the hand-made articles
from Whichford Pottery, Ascott, Warwickshire, spearheaded by the experienced
Jim Keeling. He has the right combination of clay all over his trousers and
a sharp eye for shape and design. The results are not cheap but they do
withstand British winters. Plainer, less winter-proof pottery is available
much more cheaply from Homebase and other DiY stores.
I have my own top 10 among plants but, like all such lists, they change from
time to time. Part of the art is to use a good silver-leaved companion in
order to soften the stronger colours. My favourite is the familiar
helichrysum petiolatum because it trails, rather than flops, and is a good,
felted grey.
The leaves are cut much more finely on my other favourite, the white senecio
leucostachys, which will climb to a height of 3 ft or so if you train its
main stem up a central cane. For subtlety and season, I still put a
particular verbena called Silver Anne in the number one slot. Again, it will
trail or tumble, and its pink flowers have an unusally soft quality.
Cherry Pie is an essential plant for scent, but most of the forms in seed
catalogues are virtually odourless and the flowers are too showy. The best
varieties have to be bought as pot-grown plants from cuttings - probably
after reference to their name, heliotropium, in The Plant Finder.
Heliotrope is a fine plant from the past, but the future might well lie with
bright forms of evergreen mimulus which are starting to reach us now from
California. The easiest to find is mimulus glutinosus which is evergreen,
sun-loving and orange-flowered without being common.
Other forms have pink or even lemon-yellow flowers; and, although none is
hardy, the entire branch of the family is excellent value at a height and
width of about 2 ft.
Their natural companions are the daisy-flowered osteospermums, which took a
beating in the cold winter but are now back in force in garden centres. The
taller the variety, the less it is hardy; but, in pots, nobody minds a
short-lived visitor and the best is still the tall yellow-flowered
Buttermilk. It looks charming with yellow lilies in a sunny place.
Numbers seven to 10 on the list have no better chance of surviving the frost
but they are coloured wonderfully while they last. The spiky flowers of
diascia rigescens are the prettiest pink in the family and last until late
October if you cut off the dead heads. I like them among the greyish pink
and maroon-centred flowers of a mallow which grows about 2 1/2 ft high:
lavatera maritima bicolor.
Lastly, a pairing of cherry-red and slate blue. Almost all the half-hardy
salvias are excellent for big pots but my favourites are still the very
similar grahamii and the cherry-red neurepia. Again, they are rounded shrubs
which grow freely to a height and width of more than 2 ft in a season. I
like to see them with the silky, slate-blue flowers of convolvulus
mauretanicus, which will trail harmlessly over the edge of any big pot.
After-care is extremly simple. The main problems are watering and feeding,
specially if you pack your plants together. The bother is greatly reduced if
you work a water-retaining compound into the soil before planting.
Enthusiasts tell me the best variety is Broadleaf P4, made by Agricultural
Polymers of Merchants Road, Gloucester (tel. 0452-21733). If its granules
are added to the soil in a pot, they can cut down watering to one day a week
instead of three.
As for feeding, you can then kill both jobs at once. Mix in the prescribed
dose of the admirable Phostrogen into your watering can and feed and water
in one wherever you have packed plants tightly together. Let the
water-absorbent granules do the rest and you can admire your elegant results
while other people's petunias have started to shrivel.
