FT  09 MAY 92 / Anti-Tory alliance to be proposed: Ashdown wants Labour to
join opposition 'forums' - Gould rejects pact but speaks of 'common ground'
MR PADDY ASHDOWN, Liberal Democrat leader, will today propose policy
'forums' - which would include Labour representatives - to develop an
anti-Tory political agenda.
He will try to capitalise on Labour gloom after Thursday's council elections
by arguing that the party's leaders can no longer claim to speak for all
non-Conservatives.
Mr Bryan Gould, shadow environment secretary and a candidate for the Labour
leadership, dismissed a pact with the Liberal Democrats but said he favoured
'building common ground' with other parties to prove the Tories were in a
minority on many issues.
Mr Ashdown said Labour must ask whether its role of challenging the Tories
had been replaced with a new role - 'to lie across the tracks like a
roadblock to any other force that is capable of removing the Conservatives'.
His speech today will stop well short of calling for election pacts, which
would have little support in his party. But he will suggest 'forums' drawing
members from a range of organisations and starting with electoral reform.
He hopes to stimulate debate on the realignment of the opposition parties.
But his proposals are unlikely to receive much attention from Labour
leadership candidates who want to lead any moves towards mechanisms for
building anti-Tory alliances.
Labour moved to quell suggestions that its poor performance in Thursday's
local elections had ushered in a period of one-party politics, as the
Conservatives achieved their best council result for 15 years.
Mr Jack Cunningham, Labour's campaigns co-ordinator, conceded that the loss
of more than 360 seats was disappointing. He said, however, that Labour
remained 'the dominant party of local government' with about 9,100
councillors compared with about 8,400 for the Tories.
In spite of a Conservative party estimate that the turnout was a 'perfectly
respectable' 43 per cent, Mr Cunningham said the lower number of voters in
Labour strongholds meant 'it is misplaced to read any long-term trends or
conclusions' from the results. 'What happened on April 9 was something
altogether on a very different scale,' he said.
Mr Gould said it was 'premature and faintly ridiculous to begin a discussion
on whether we have now entered a one-party state.' Later he set equality of
women and a less 'macho' image for politics as a theme of his leadership
bid.
Mr Chris Patten, Tory party chairman, described the local election results
as 'spectacular'. He said: 'They are the best results for the Conservative
party for 15 years and the best results for any governing party for a
generation.' They again showed only the Conservatives could be trusted to
provide high-quality services at the best price.
His ebullience was recognised by Mr Ashdown, who acknowledged Liberal
Democrats had been wrong to expect guilt-stricken Tory voters at the general
election to switch support in the local elections.
Mr Ashdown said, however, that the Liberal Democrats had been able to make
'steady progress', even in the face of rising Conservative support.
He said the Liberal Democrat share of the vote was about 19 per cent, 3
percentage points higher than in 1988. Labour claimed about 32 per cent
compared with about 45 per cent for the Tories.
