FT  11 MAY 92 / Archbishop's sermon attacks top executives over pay rises
THE BULGING pay packets of Britain's top executives were exposed to the
wrath of the church yesterday when Dr George Carey, the archbishop of
Canterbury, criticised businessmen who awarded themselves big increases
during the recession.
A 700-strong congregation, including Sir John Banham, director-general of
the Confederation of British Industry, was treated to a stinging sermon on
the nature of wealth creation during a service at Derby Cathedral to give
thanks for the achievements of industry.
Turning the service into a penitential occasion, Dr Carey said it was wrong
to 'make money for its own sake'.
He added: 'Within our own society, our collective commitment to industrial
enterprise will remain underpowered if the fruits of success appear to be
concentrated too heavily in the pockets of shareholders and senior
executives.'
'For example, massive individual pay rises during a recession do not
encourage public support for wealth creation.'
The archbishop said the purpose of industry was to serve the public by
creating services to meet their needs. 'It is not to make profits for
shareholders, nor to create salaries and wages for the industrial community.
These are necessary conditions for success but not its purpose.'
He questioned whether industry was fulfilling its purpose when 'prolonged
bursts of private-sector-led economic growth' in advanced countries left
more people than ever in the world 'hungry, thirsty, naked, ill or in
prison'.
But Mr Peter Morgan, director-general of the Institute of Directors, said:
'I prefer Adam Smith to the archbishop on the question of understanding the
purpose of business.' He added that it was naive to suppose there was a link
between directors' payment and booms and slumps.
The British Institute of Management supporting Dr Carey said some top
directors had been 'greedy' in awarding themselves pay rises above the
inflation rate.
Mr Roger Young, director-general of the 75,000-member institute, said that
while directors of small companies had shown restraint, those of some big
companies had been 'insensitive'.
Among recent large pay increases was that paid to Mr Lawrence Urquhart,
chairman and chief executive of Burmah Castrol, whose salary rose 40 per
cent last year to Pounds 385,000 despite annual profits remaining static. Mr
Robert Evans, the chairman of British Gas saw his salary more than double to
Pounds 435,222 since becoming chairman and chief executive in July 1989.
Dr Carey's own stipend rose by 6.3 per cent in April to Pounds 43,550 a
year.
But it is not what it was before Queen Victoria's reign. In 1835, before the
creation of the ecclesiastical commissioners, the archbishop of Canterbury
had a stipend of Pounds 19,000, equal today to an annual salary of Pounds
880,000 that would put him ahead of most captains of industry.
