FT  13 FEB 92 / British Aerospace plans to cut another 2,350 jobs
BRITISH AEROSPACE is to cut 2,350 jobs at five aircraft plants, reflecting
reductions and delays in defence contracts and the impact of the recession
on the airline business.
The latest cuts, due to be carried out this year, mainly affect
administrative and technical staff and follow the loss of 10,000 production
jobs at BAe over the past two years. The group now employs 116,000 people.
BAe said it hoped to achieve the cuts through voluntary means but did not
rule out compulsory redundancies.
Mr Tony Blair, the Labour party's employment spokesman, described the news
as 'a devastating blow'.
Union officials accused the government of inaction in the face of demands to
help defence businesses diversify into other sectors.
In the House of Commons, Labour MPs called for 'action, not words' when Mr
Peter Lilley, the trade and industry secretary, rejected demands for new
policies to counter the rising tide of redundancies in manufacturing
industry.
The BAe announcement came a week after 450 jobs were cut at the group's
guided weapons division. Up to 1,000 more jobs at that division depend on
the group clinching a new air-combat missile project for the RAF.
Worst affected by yesterday's announcement is the civil aircraft site at
Hatfield, Hertfordshire, where 830 of 3,400 jobs will be lost. Seventy jobs
will also be shed at Woodford, Cheshire. The financial problems of small
airlines and fierce competition has damaged BAe's regional aircraft
business.
A further 550 jobs are to go at BAe's main military aircraft plant at
Warton, Lancashire, and a similar number at Brough, Humberside. Work on
Tornado jets at Warton will come to an end this summer unless BAe wins a
fresh contract from Saudi Arabia.
BAe is also shedding 350 employees at Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, whom it
had planned to move to Farnborough, Hampshire, when the Kingston plant
closes later this year. The company said they were no longer needed.
BAe is about half way through a programme of cuts in its military aircraft
division which it announced in 1990. This will reduce the number of
production sites from six to four and cut employment from more than 26,000
to about 21,000. Its Preston plant in Lancashire will close next year.
Preliminary 1991 results are due to be presented next Wednesday. BAe said in
September that these were likely to show pre-tax profits of at least Pounds
150m, excluding exceptional items, but that rationalisation costs alone
would be about Pounds 250m. In 1990 it had pre-tax earnings of Pounds 376m.
Mr Michael Jack, a social security minister, last night apologised after
suggesting in a BBC radio interview that the redundant BAe workers would be
'liberated' by the company's decision. He said that he used an 'inadvertent
and unfortunate phrase'.
Mr Jack Cunningham, Labour's campaign co-ordinator, has written to the prime
minister to complain that Mr Jack's comments would be 'deeply offensive to
every unemployed person in Britain'.
CBI reports poor prospects for manufacturing Page 8
Struggles in sky Page 18
