FT  10 NOV 92 / Survey of Computers in Finance (11): Service still friendly
 -IT helps building societies look after customers
THE UK's building societies are proud of the friendly image they have
managed to hang on to, in spite of embracing much of the selling culture of
modern retail banking.
Nor does this image seem to have been hampered by their enthusiastic
adoption of technology. The building societies have the only nationally
branded ATM network, Link, and their branches have long had counter-top
terminals, whereas most banks have yet to install them.
A cynic might say what keeps the service friendly is time it still takes to
update a passbook on the terminal, leaving plenty of time to chat with the
teller. But the main benefit is that a customer can go into any branch of
his or her building society and make a withdrawal or a status (balance)
enquiry with a passbook. Unlike the banks, the societies have central
customer databases, even if many are still account-based rather than
customer oriented.
'The building societies are the most sophisticated users of branch systems,'
says Mr Nigel Croisdale, director of ICL Financial Services Division, whose
Omnia Branch retail banking system is aimed largely at the building society
market.
But the recession and the collapse in the housing market, bringing a drop in
mortgage lending and a rise in bad debts, has forced the societies to
reassess IT and business strategies. The era of diversification into new
product lines has given way to one of renewed concentration on the core
savings and loans business.
Technology can be used to improve customer service and hence to maintain or
increase market share. And while the building societies' cost/income ratios
are generally better than those of banks, they are now looking to reduce
costs and increase productivity. IT can help achieve this, as long as IT
expenditure itself does not get out of hand.
Mr Paul Finch, associate director with Computer Management Group (CMG), says
the current climate has meant that the 'naturally conservative' building
societies are looking harder at IT spending. Some are 'lean and mean' on the
IT side, he says, but others have fat to be trimmed.
Unlike the banks, building societies have stuck to a 'do-it-yourself'
approach to IT, says Mr Finch. 'They are reluctant to spend money on outside
expertise or to delegate project management.'
IT strategy has to be driven by business strategy, Mr Kevin Southwood,
marketing director at Northern Rock, says, 'but some institutions fail in
their IT strategy because they don't have a well-defined business strategy,
or because they change it every six months,' he says.
The business strategy at Northern Rock is to go for high growth, calling for
speed and flexibility in product development. 'If I want to launch a new
fixed rate mortgage I need to be able to get it out to the branches
tomorrow, not in a fortnight,' says Mr Southwood.
This flexibility has been achieved through core systems re-engineering, he
says, while cost effectiveness has been improved by basic office automation.
People, says Mr Southwood, sometimes re-engineer systems unnecessarily
because they confuse systems problems with office automation problems.
Northern Rock has systems people attached to each business department, such
as mortgages or investments, and this, says Mr Southwood, 'helps enormously
in the understanding and management of systems.' This reorganisation of
staff took place three years ago and has, he says, 'brought spectacular
benefits in terms of getting things right first time - it has dramatically
changed our project times'.
The Woolwich is another believer in in-house systems development, partly as
a result of its bad experience in the 1980s when it had considerable trouble
modifying an integrated accounting package from Hogan Systems.
Mr Ray Scotter, general manager of information services at the Woolwich,
admits that the economic downturn has brought a drive to cut costs, in IT as
elsewhere. There is, he thinks, 'some scope for reining in costs without
significantly impacting the business side'. New development projects will be
more closely questioned, as will costs and resources on the operations side.
But although the scope of development activity may be reduced, IT remains
central to the Woolwich's business priority of improving customer services.
'We have to focus on providing good quality IT support for the staff in the
branches,' says Mr Scotter.
A big project for the next 12-18 months will be a radical overhaul of the
Woolwich's branch systems. Being one of the first societies to have put
online systems in all its branches, much of the equipment is due for
replacement. The present mix of IBM dumb terminals supplemented by
standalone PCs will be replaced by PCs running under local area networks
(LANs).
Keeping up its levels of IT investment is the Leeds Permanent which has
undertaken some big IT projects in the past couple of years. It has
installed a new branch system based on a network of Olivetti PCs at a cost
of Pounds 25m, and a new mortgage system in the form of a Pounds 10m Unisys
UFSS package.
Mr George Scarlett, head of computer systems and services at the Leeds,
describes the developments at branch level as 'a phase of empowerment' -
providing more systems support and allowing staff to perform functions
previously carried out at head office. Conversely, the Leeds is also looking
at taking out of the branch those administrative functions that do not
affect customer service.
Projects in the pipeline at the Leeds include a prototype for a new front
end system with a graphical user interface (GUI) to run on PCs in the
branches, which is due to be rolled out next year.
Business strategy may vary from one society to another, but Mr Croisdale at
ICL thinks one thing links those who are successful in their IT strategies:
'The most successful IT users are those where the top management takes a
hands-on interest in the success of IT projects.'
