FT  02 JAN 92 / Deja vu over role in Europe: Paul Abrahams and Emma Tucker
report on the cabinet papers of 1961
DIVISIONS over Britain's role in Europe are revealed by cabinet papers
released yesterday under the 30-year rule, demonstrating the triumph of
continuity over historical change.
While the cabinet of prime minister Mr Harold Macmillan was agreed in 1961
that Britain should join what was then called the European Economic
Community, it was concerned about the subsequent implications on its own
agricultural industry, the remaining European Free Trade Association
countries and the Commonwealth.
The main obstacle to Macmillan's 'grand design', as the prime minister
called his plan to join the EEC, was France and its president, General de
Gaulle, who, according to Macmillan, was demanding 'unconditional surrender'
for entry.
The stakes, thought Mr Harold Watkinson, defence minister, were high: 'If we
succeed, I imagine we should lead Europe. But if this happens can de Gaulle
still be Charlemagne?'
Macmillan's attempts to win over de Gaulle included schemes to supply France
with nuclear weapons and send British troops to Algeria after an army revolt
in the French colony.
President John Kennedy of the US was asked by Macmillan if the UK could
supply the French, who had only just conducted a fourth small nuclear test,
with nuclear weapons or nuclear technology.
The British ambassador in Washington told Kennedy there was little chance of
the UK entering the EEC 'if there was no change over the question of nuclear
know-how'.
But Kennedy turned down the proposal, arguing that it might weaken France's
commitment to Nato.
Macmillan, like Mr John Major, prime minister 30 years later, also had to
deal with those within his party who were opposed to the EEC.
Mr Edward Heath, then Lord Privy Seal, warned that the 'surrenders of
sovereignty are serious' and might form the basis of attacks by opponents.
One group that the harried Mr Major did not have to contend with last year
in the approach to Maastricht was Britain's former Commonwealth trading
partners.
In the summer of 1961, prior to Britain's application to join the EEC,
Macmillan dispatched a number of senior and reluctant ministers on a tour of
former colonies to persuade them that Britain's enthusiasm for Europe did
not mean they would be abandoned by their former coloniser.
Nearly all countries had expressed 'serious anxieties' over possible changes
in trading relations and, for some, the political implications.
Canada told Mr Peter Thorneycroft, aviation minister, that it would resist
linking up economically with the US which might lead to it 'being swallowed
up politically'.
Mr Jawajarlal Nehru, India's prime minister, was worried that Britain was
joining forces with other rich industrialised countries, leaving the
developing countries to their fate.
Mr Duncan Sandys, secretary of state for Commonwealth relations, described
Mr Keith Holyoake's New Zealand government in a telegram to Macmillan as
'jumpy and defensive'.
From Jamaica Lord Perth of the Colonial Office sent a tetchy telegram
describing three long sessions with the federal and so-called unit
governments made up of '40 delegates weak, ignorant of the subject and
hostile to each other'.
The delegates wanted their interests fully protected.
'The list of their interests (vital?]) range from arrowroot to tonka beans,'
wrote Lord Perth. 'Perhaps for the first time they are beginning to realise
how much we do for them.'
For all their fears, the trading status of the former colonies was to remain
'favoured' for at least a little longer.
A memo to Macmillan from the home affairs committee which had been looking
for cuts in the National Health Service said one would be to remove the
subsidy from welfare foods such as orange juice.
But the committee was cautious. 'Can we be satisfied that this will not
result in reduced consumption of orange juice to an extent sufficient to
worry the West Indies and the Colonial Office?' it asked.
