FT  07 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Learning from BCCI
THE BANK of Credit and Commerce International, dead a year ago, lives on in
the new rules for international banking supervision issued by the central
bankers' Basle Committee.
You would never guess it, however. BCCI is not mentioned at any point. The
text merely murmurs, in a reassuring sort of way, that 'following recent
dev-elopments' the committee has reviewed the way international banking
supervision is co-ordinated.
Would the new rules have prevented those 'recent developments' from taking
place? In other words, if central bankers had been operating to these rules
all along, would BCCI have been allowed to get away with it for so long? At
the heart of the new rules is the requirement that all international banking
groups should be supervised by a home-country authority that is up to the
job. On the face of it, that goes some way towards eliminating the anomaly
that allowed BCCI to be supervised in Luxembourg, a country not equipped to
supervise a big international bank. It also rules out the ad-hoc replacement
supervisory regime for BCCI that was cobbled together when Luxembourg needed
help.
This device, a 'college of supervisors', brought together all bank
regulatory agencies from countries where BCCI had significant operations. It
suffered from a fatal flaw: no one supervisor carried the can. As a result,
with responsibility divided, BCCI was allowed to continue in operation for
too long.
Primary responsibility
Under the new rules, supervisors are free to set up colleges or any other
information-sharing arrangements, but the primary responsibility rests with
a single home-country supervisor, whose permission will be needed before a
banking group can expand abroad. Host-country supervisors will in turn have
to grant permission for entry; and before doing so they must satisfy
themselves about the home-country supervisor.
In theory, that sounds fine. In practice, though, it will pose many
problems. It is easy enough for a host country to turn down the branch of a
bank based in some offshore island only detectable with a microscope; it is
far harder to turn down a bank based in a respectable developed country like
Luxembourg. Indeed, the EC's Second Banking Directive explicitly rules out
such discrimination between member countries of the Community.
Demanding task
There is a passing nod to the EC's single banking passport in the new Basle
rules, but in truth the two sets of principles work a little at
cross-purposes: as Basle is urging banking supervisors to discriminate more
finely between home countries, Brussels is requiring equal treatment for all
EC members. Brussels has a demanding task ahead of it in ensuring that
standards of banking supervision throughout the EC are uniformly high.
BCCI crept up on the world banking community, without anybody really
noticing; and once it was established, nobody wanted to close it down, for
fear of damaging depositors. The same problem underlies the new rules. They
may work well in preventing an unsuitable new entrant to international
banking; but the chances are that the next potential scandal-ridden bank is
already operating. There is no 'grandfather' clause in the new rules, but in
practice each banking supervisor will decide how quickly to apply them
retrospectively. That is unlikely to be a speedy process.
The new rules are a sensible additional protection for depositors. But the
problems they leave unresolved demonstrate that there is no substitute for
caution about where you deposit your money.
