FT  03 JUN 92 / Indonesian banks face pressures
A REPORT criticising Indonesia's banking sector has added to bankers'
expectations that the next year will see a series of mergers as banks try to
reduce costs, rationalise loan portfolios and meet higher capital adequacy
requirements.
The report, by Jardine Fleming Nusantara, the Indonesian subsidiary of Hong
Kong-based Jardine Fleming merchant bank, says it has 'very significant
reservations about the (bad debt) provisions of banks' brought about by
'irregular and imprudent lending policies', the report says.
Officials at Bank Indonesia, the central bank, estimate the banking sector's
level of bad and doubtful debts has increased from 3.9 per cent of total
loan portfolios in 1990 to 5.9 per cent last year.
Economists at donor agencies say that bad debts of the five state-owned
commercial banks, which account for half the sector's total assets, are
between 15-25 per cent of their respective portfolios. 'The banking sector
is a major worry. They (Bank Indonesia) have to rationalise it somehow. It's
not sustainable,' says Dr Mari Pangestu, head of economic affairs at the
Centre for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
The sector experienced explosive growth following a de-regulatory decree in
1988. Outstanding credits of the sector totalled Rupiah 113,608bn (Pounds
30.56bn) last December, up from Rp44,000bn at the end of 1988.
Bankers say, however, that poor credit analysis has plagued many private
banks, while state banks have made loans on political, rather than
financial, grounds. Some banks are also capitalising interest payments on
loans to avoid categorising them as non-performing, they say.
Jardine Fleming estimates that 'banks are at present providing about 1.0-1.5
per cent (of productive assets) for doubtful debt', a figure supported by
bankers in Jakarta. It warns that raising provisions to accommodate actual
bad debt would have 'a devastating impact on profitability'.
Its report looks at seven leading quoted banks and estimates that, if 3 per
cent of performing assets were provided for bad debt, four banks would have
recorded a loss in 1991, while the profits of the other three would have
been more than halved. All seven banks reported net profits last year but
provided just 0.64-1.65 per cent of performing assets for bad debt.
There will be 'many mergers with Bank Indonesia's assistance', Dr Pangestu
predicts, a view shared by bankers in Jakarta who believe that the central
bank will orchestrate a controlled shake-out of the sector. Bankers do not
believe there will be a banking crisis and say confidence in the system
remains strong.
Pressure on the sector will increase, however, with banks having to meet new
capital adequacy requirements of 8 per cent of total assets by December,
1993, up from 5 per cent currently set by the central bank. Most severely
affected will be the five state-owned commercial banks which, bankers say,
will require a capital injection of about Dollars 2bn.
A government decree should help some private banks to raise capital. It will
allow foreigners to purchase up to 49 per cent of listed shares of quoted
banks. Foreigners are at present barred from holding shares in quoted banks.
The Indonesian military has shot dead Mr M L Prawar, the military commander
of the rebel Free Papua Movement (OPM) in Irian Jaya, the state-owned Antara
news agency reported yesterday, writes William Keeling. Mr Prawar was
ambushed by a 13-member special task force in Skouw-Wuting area which
borders Papua New Guinea (PNG). Irian Jaya was transferred to Indonesia from
Dutch rule in 1963 and the OPM was formed in 1977 to seek unification with
PNG.
