FT  14 MAY 92 / Survey of Argentina (4): Coming in from the cold - Foreign
Policy
PRESIDENT Carlos Menem's love of the grand gesture makes him, on occasions,
a diplomat's nightmare.
The examples are legion. Rather than downgrade subtly the quality of the
Argentine delegation to the Non-Aligned Movement, as a diplomat might have
advised, he pulls Argentina out with a grand fanfare. Rather than wait for
an invitation to visit Britain, which would certainly have been forthcoming
in time, he announces, through the medium of the FT, a plan to pay a visit
to the UK in 1992, an election year and the 10th anniversary of the
Falklands war. (The visit seems likely to take place in 1993.)
In contrast to the awkward reaction of most Latin American governments to
the crisis in the Gulf, Mr Menem sends two warships to support the US-led
coalition. He also followed the hard US line on Cuba, breaking ranks with
the rest of Latin America.
Mr Menem is telling the world that Argentina is a changed country; that the
60 years of isolationism which marked Argentina's foreign policy is over. He
is seeking to bury Argentina's reputation as an unreliable player on the
world's diplomatic stage.
Mr Fernando Petrella, deputy foreign minister, argues that 'Argentina's
internal and its international policies are a unity'. In other words, a
democratic, open economy requires a different foreign policy from a closed
economy run by a dictator. The wide-ranging manifestations of this policy
include:
Alignments: Argentina has aligned itself more closely to the west. This was
initially seen as a pro-Washington tilt to policy, an interpretation
disliked in both Washington and Buenos Aires. More recently, there has been
emphasis on relations with Europe, which accounts for nearly 40 per cent of
external trade compared with 15 per cent in the US. Family ties with Europe
are strong - more than 1m Argentines are also citizens of EC countries.
International agreements: Argentina has professed an intention to comply
with a wide range of these that it had previously refused to sign. In April
President Menem signed a decree placing strict controls on the export of
sensitive materials. The government has signed agreements with Brazil on
nuclear inspection, and with Brazil and Chile on banning nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons. The nuclear safeguards laid down by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna have been adopted. The government has made a
commitment to the US to abandon the Condor missile project, expressed a
desire to join the Missile Technology Control Regime and committed itself to
nuclear non-proliferation and the Tlatelolco treaty which banks nuclear
weapons in Latin America. It has also signed treaties on international
investment protection.
Despite all this, many of these commitments have yet to be ratified by the
Argentine Congress. Furthermore, there will remain some doubts about the
ability of the government to force compliance on the military of some of
these agreements.
Nonetheless, the reaction from Washington has been positive. The US has said
that some 20 Skyhawk jets are available to the Argentine air force, the
first indication of US willingness to combat aircraft to Argentina since the
Falklands War.
Relations with neighbouring countries: Argentina has eased historically
tense relations with Brazil and Chile. This has a strong economic motive.
The government is intent on economic integration with Brazil, the key to
which is Mercosur, a customs union of the two economies with Uruguay and
Paraguay. That is scheduled to begin in 1995, though its implementation may
be delayed.
The hope is that Chile will join the group once Brazil's economic problems
abate. But there is little doubt that the excitement in Argentina over
integration with Brazil is not matched in Brazil. There are also some
worries that Mercosur may restrict Argentina's ability to act unilaterally
over trade matters, for example, in discussing a free trade agreement with
the US.
However, given the openness of the Argentine and the Chilean economies, and
the growing outward orientation of Brazil, further economic integration
appears inevitable with or without agreements among governments. Companies
from the three countries are already discussing mergers and joint venture
agreements, and Chilean companies have already been buyers (of two power
stations) in the Argentine privatisation programme.
Relations with the UK: Argentina restored diplomatic relations with Britain
in July 1990. These had been broken with the invasion of the Falkland
Islands 10 years ago. That was also the key to improving relations with the
European Community.
With the issue of sovereignty under a so-called umbrella - meaning both
sides retain their claim to sovereignty - fairly cordial discussions between
London and Buenos Aires have moved ahead on the practical issues of fishing
rights and aviation. There has been less progress on the more difficult
issue of oil exploration rights.
Mr Guido di Tella, the Argentine foreign minister, has also said that the
desires of the islanders will be taken into account in a settlement, a
statement viewed as constructive in London.
While Britain retains a garrison of 2,000 men on the islands that the
Argentines know as the Malvinas, Argentina must be considered now neither to
have the intent nor the military capability to invade. Thus the only risk to
the 2,100 islanders is the small one of an attack by some maverick force.
The Argentines have not given up on their claim to the islands, however, and
the war remains a traumatic experience over which they still agonise. Since
there is little chance of the British parliament cutting a deal over
sovereignty over the heads of the islanders, the Argentine government
appears to have embarked on a longer-term strategy of reducing the
islanders' fear of things Argentine.
If this is so, policy towards the Falklands fits neatly with the rest of
Argentine foreign policy: to convince the world that Argentina is now a
democratic, stable and reliable member of the community of nations.
