FT  04 DEC 92 / Yeltsin seeks to become master of the economy
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin, has proposed a sweeping increase in his powers over
the economy, virtually excluding the Russian parliament from any competence
in the field.
A resolution released yesterday by Mr Yeltsin's office to be put to the
Congress of People's deputies later this week or next, and now the subject
of furious behind the scenes debate and negotiation, would also give Mr
Yeltsin the right to appoint the government and to make the final judgment
on all legislation proposed by the parliament.
The proposal, in effect, would usher in a system of presidential rule in
most important areas of government.
However, the draft resolution is being treated as a bargaining ploy rather
than a fixed intention, and is the subject of discussions not just between
the parliamentary factions but also between the president, the government
and the powerful Civic Union group.
Mr Vassily Lipitsky, leader of the Free Russia party within the Civic Union,
said yesterday that 'everything was open for negotiation' on the president's
powers.
A series of constitutional changes proposed by the deputies will be tabled
today - one of which will give parliament the right to veto not just the
prime minister, but all the deputy prime ministers and the main cabinet
ministers as well. In a fierce argument about whether or not the debate on
these constitutional points should be open or closed, liberal and hardline
deputies resorted to exchanging blows and wrestling at the base of the
podium last night.
This scene involved Mr Vladimir Varov, a liberal deputy, trading ineffectual
punches with Mr Ilya Constantinov, a leading nationalist.
It is now clear that both Mr Yeltsin and Mr Yegor Gaidar, the acting prime
minister, have decided to show a determined face to a Congress which, while
hostile, has so far failed to display a united resolve in moving against
them.
Mr Gaidar, in a brief response to a largely critical debate yesterday on the
progress of the economic reform, repeated that his government would never
back away from its fundamental attachment to private property and a
dismantling of controls.
However, he also went on to say that the Civic Union bloc 'underestimate our
willingness to be flexible'.
According to Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, the first deputy prime minister, Mr
Yeltsin is completely committed to keeping Mr Gaidar in his post as prime
minister - suggesting that he will soon propose him to the Congress.
