FT  19 DEC 92 / Israel resists pressure to take back deportees: Palestinians
left stranded as UN debates resolution
ISRAEL came under strong international pressure yesterday to take back more
than 400 Palestinians whose expulsion threatens to derail the Middle East
peace process.
A strongly worded resolution condemning the Israeli government's action and
firmly opposing deportations was being considered by the United Nations
Security Council last night.
The deportees, all alleged Islamic fundamentalist extremists from the
occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, were stranded yesterday in no-man's land
in south Lebanon after being left by Israeli forces just outside the
Israeli-controlled 'security zone'.
A few miles further north, Lebanese troops prevented them from travelling
deeper into the country on orders from the government in Beirut which said
it would refuse to co-operate with the Israeli move. The deportees trudged
back to Israeli lines but were turned away. Witnesses said warning shots
were fired over their heads.
The Palestinians remained in no-man's land in the rain, sheltering in tents
provided by the International Committee of the Red Cross. An ICRC official
in Lebanon said lamps and cookers would be supplied today but that the site
was unsuitable for a long stay.
Israeli security forces in the occupied territories were on high alert
against an anticipated wave of protests against deportation, one of the
punitive measures most hated by Palestinians.
Leaflets from Islamic and Palestine Liberation Organisation underground
groups called for '10 days of fire and exploding rage'. The West Bank and
Gaza Strip remained sealed off from Israel, with many areas under curfew.
Security Council members hoped that the US would support the draft
resolution being drawn up, which would declare the deportation of civilians
to be a breach of the 1949 Geneva Convention. It would demand the immediate
safe return of all deportees from the occupied territories. The US and
Britain, the latter speaking for the European Community, issued similar
calls.
However, Israel showed no sign of reversing the unprecedented mass
expulsion, ordered in retaliation for a recent spate of violent attacks by
Hamas, the Islamic resistance movement, which left six Israeli soldiers
dead.
The government said it did not expect the move to jeopardise the Middle East
talks which broke up in Washington on Thursday without setting a date for
resumption. The PLO said it would not return to the talks unless the
deportations were reversed.
PLO officials in Tunis said representatives of the organisation, Syria,
Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt would meet soon in Cairo to discuss the issue. PLO
supporters said the Israeli action had strengthened support for Hamas, which
is opposed to the peace process, and undermined their more moderate
position. No charges were brought against the deportees, who will be allowed
to return home within two years.
Mr Taher Shriteh, a prominent journalist in Gaza who was among 1,200 people
rounded up by the security forces this week, was released yesterday
following protests from human rights organisations and foreign
correspondents in Israel. Mr Shriteh, who works occasionally for the
Financial Times, was among those loaded on to buses on Wednesday.
George Graham in Washington writes: Mr Edward Djerejian, assistant secretary
at the State Department in charge of the Middle East, said the Palestinian
delegation to the Mideast talks had reaffirmed its 'serious commitment to
the peace process'.
Lull in battle for peace, Page 6
