FT  19 DEC 92 / A lull in the battle for peace: Middle East talks hang in
the balance after the deportation of alleged Islamic militants from Israel
This has been a miserable week in the Middle East. Against a backdrop of
rainstorms, snow squalls and dense fog, violence and recrimination have
pitched the region into its severest political crisis since peace
negotiations began in Madrid a little over a year ago.
The brutal deportation by Israel on Thursday of more than 400 alleged
Islamic militants, which followed a spate of attacks on Israeli troops in
the occupied territories by the Hamas Moslem fundamentalist movement, has
left the peace talks hanging in the balance.
Instead of inheriting a well-established process moving slowly, but
steadily, towards agreement, President-elect Bill Clinton and his yet-to-be
announced secretary of state must add the Arab-Israeli conflict to the list
of foreign trouble spots that require urgent and skilful attention when they
take over the US administration next month.
For President George Bush and Mr James Baker, his chief of staff, this
week's crisis must have been especially galling. The president had summoned
the Israeli, Palestinian, Syrian, Jordanian and Lebanese delegations to the
Washington talks to the White House on Thursday for what was meant to be a
congratulatory public reminder of his administration's achievement in
putting the peace talks together.
But instead of basking in compliments, Mr Bush was reduced to making appeals
that the negotiations should not now fall apart. Most bitter of all, the
president was confronted with an unexpected act of repression against the
Palestinians by Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister whose election
last June was greeted with gushing enthusiasm by the Bush administration as
a great step forward in the peace process.
Indeed, the advent of Mr Rabin's Labour-left coalition, with its commitment
to advance the peace talks, was widely seen in the Arab world, in Europe and
in the international community generally as a welcome relief from the
uncompromising rule of the right-wing Likud party which went before it.
Now, however, by deporting by far the greatest number of Palestinians from
the West Bank and Gaza Strip to be expelled at once since the occupation
began in 1967, Mr Rabin has outstripped the toughest punitive measures taken
by Likud's former prime ministers, Mr Yitzhak Shamir and Mr Menachem Begin.
Previously, 66 Palestinians had been expelled in the past five years of the
intifada, or uprising, in the occupied territories, an action widely
condemned internationally as a breach of the fourth Geneva Convention
governing the conduct of occupation authorities. But Israel does not
recognise the convention in the West Bank and Gaza.
On Wednesday night, about 410 prisoners were bound, blindfolded, loaded on
buses and driven to the Lebanese border. With the action veiled in military
censorship, civil rights lawyers had to rouse High Court judges from their
beds in a desperate attempt to stop it.
There was a temporary injunction. But eventually the High Court ruled that
the government could carry out the expulsions, which will last up to two
years, without giving the deportees - whose names were not even requested by
the judges - the right to prior appeal.
After about 24 hours confined in their buses, the deportees were given some
money, food and a blanket and dumped into no-man's land in south Lebanon
between the area controlled by Israeli forces and the areas controlled by
the Lebanese army. The Lebanese authorities refused to accept them, but
witnesses claimed Israeli forces had fired shots over their heads to prevent
them walking back into Israeli-controlled territory. Yesterday they remained
in a rain-lashed limbo, hoping the Red Cross would come to their aid.
Why did Mr Rabin, who continues to advocate a peace settlement based on
Israeli withdrawal from occupied land, take such a step? Why, too, did the
ministers of Meretz, Labour's left-liberal coalition partner, defy their
party's longstanding opposition to deportation and support the decision?
Part of the answer lies in the spate of violence in recent weeks in which
Qassam, the military wing of Hamas, stepped up the use of arms against the
security forces with an intensity not seen so far during the intifada.
Qassam has killed six soldiers this month - including a border policeman
kidnapped against a demand that Israel release Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, the
jailed Hamas leader. Previously, fewer than 20 soldiers had died in the
intifada.
The government and the army were anxious quickly to suppress this
development. There was some pressure from the right-wing opposition and the
public to react forcefully, but Mr Rabin seemed to need little prompting. He
has a long record of uncompromising actions against unrest. Since he took
office in July, the number of fatal shootings by soldiers in the territories
has increased markedly.
But both Labour and Meretz leaders admit the action will not eradicate
Hamas-inspired violence. In fact they are braced for an outburst of anger in
the territories. They appear convinced, however, that the deportations will
be understood as a necessary means to undercut the growing influence of
Islamic fundamentalists who oppose the peace talks and, indeed, the
existence of Israel. With an eye on tough anti-fundamentalist policies in
Egypt, Jordan and Algeria, they think Arab leaders, including the Palestine
Liberation Organisation, will privately applaud.
'This is the only way to win the battle for peace,' said a close associate
of Mr Rabin. 'The Palestinian negotiators are afraid of Hamas  - that is why
they are avoiding making progress in the talks. We have to eliminate this
fear to have peace in the region.' The deportations were deliberately timed
to coincide with a likely two-month hiatus in the talks while the new
American administration takes over. Mr Rabin believes the PLO will return to
the negotiations. 'We have no doubts about that,' an aide said.
But pro-PLO leaders in the West Bank are aghast at this argument. 'If that
is how they think, then I am really shocked,' said Mr Sari Nusseibeh, a
senior adviser to the Palestinian delegation. 'What they have done to Hamas
will undoubtedly strengthen its position in the territories. I think there
will be every reason now for those against the peace process to argue
cogently for their position. Public faith in the talks was already wearing
extremely thin. Now I am sure the majority would be against continuing. It
puts a great burden on the (PLO) leadership.'
The circumstances are all the more difficult for the PLO because of Israel's
refusal to allow it to play a direct role in the negotiations. Overt PLO
members and Palestinians from outside the occupied territories are not
allowed to be members of the Palestinian delegation. Nor does the PLO have a
direct dialogue with the US. Without these, the PLO leadership's room to
manoeuvre is limited.
Ministers from the Meretz party have sought to justify their support for the
action against Hamas, by saying it amounted to an explicit acknowledgement
by the Israeli government that it is happy to negotiate with the PLO. To
date, Mr Rabin has turned a blind eye to close co-ordination between Mr
Yasser Arafat, the PLO leader, his top officials and the delegation in
Washington. But he has repeatedly ruled out direct PLO involvement.
Where, then, do things go from here? In a statement from its Tunis
headquarters, the PLO said it would abandon the talks unless the
deportations were reversed. When the eighth round of talks in Washington
ended on Thursday, no date was set for a resumption.
But the process is not necessarily doomed. Significantly, the other Arab
parties to the talks, while bitterly condemning the Israeli action and
cutting short the last day of negotiations, reserved their positions. Mr
Mouwafak al-Allaf, Syria's chief negotiator, said at the White House: 'We
are not boycotting the peace process.'
The events of the past week - and the gloomy prognostications which went
before - have tended to obscure the fact that, for all the slow progress of
the talks, the participants still have a greater interest in pursuing a
negotiated settlement than abandoning it. Neither Israel nor Syria, for
example, can seriously contemplate another war over the disputed Golan
Heights; both need to cement relationships with the US and Europe, which
insist on a continuation of the talks, for strategic and economic reasons.
King Hussein of Jordan makes no secret of his desire to achieve an
agreement. The Palestinians are more inclined to think that no deal is
better than an agreement which falls well short of their aim of an
independent state. But most senior Palestinians still worry that failure to
secure a foothold now may mean their aspirations remain forever in the realm
of dreams.
Some progress has been made in the Israeli-Palestinian talks towards an
agreement on the interim period of self-government in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip which is planned to precede talks on a final settlement of the
territories' status.
Jordan and Israel have virtually agreed the format for a peace agreement
between them. Syria and Israel remain far apart on Syria's demand for a
complete Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights, but they have agreed
formulas on the need for mutual security provisions. Only the
Lebanese-Israeli talks have gone nowhere.
Yesterday in Israel, there was press speculation that Mr Rabin may soon move
to widen his coalition to include two small right-wing parties. But even if
that happens, Labour will stay the dominant partner. Mr Rabin's declared
willingness to undertake significant withdrawal from the Golan, the West
Bank and Gaza is still very different from the outright rejection of
territorial compromise of the Likud.
Nevertheless, in the Middle East reason can all too easily be supplanted by
miscalculation fuelled by decades of hatred and conflict. Much now depends
on the ability of the incoming Clinton administration to persuade,
pressurise and coax the participants into returning to the negotiating
table. Otherwise, the window of opportunity in the region that President
Bush levered open could slam shut before the warming of spring.
