FT  01 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Campaigning whaler trapped on
the Clyde
A NORWEGIAN whaling boat was trapped on the Clyde in Glasgow last night
after activists from the environmental group Greenpeace blocked its exit
down the river.
The 65-foot Elin Toril was prevented from starting its return voyage to the
Lofoten Islands because seven Greenpeace protestors manacled themselves to
the Bell's Bridge, a swing bridge, preventing it from opening to let the
boat through.
Four others had chained themselves to the Elin Toril's whaling harpoon, the
roof of its wheel house and its crow's nest. The whaling boat sailed to
Glasgow on Monday with a party of people from whaling communities in the
Lofoten Islands off northern Norway to underline their support for a
resumption of whaling.
That day the Norwegian government announced to the International Whaling
Commission, which is holding its annual meeting in the city, that it will
resume commercial whaling next year, defying the moratorium which the IWC
agreed in 1985, and irrespective of any decisions the 37-nation body takes
this week.
Yesterday Mr John Gummer, the UK agriculture secretary, urged Norway to
reconsider its decision. Attending a conference in Luxembourg, he attacked
the 'double standards' of countries which failed to live up to international
commitments.
On Monday night the Elin Toril had been the scene of joyous celebrations,
matching those reported from fishing communities along the coast of Norway,
at the decision of the Norweagin government.
'Whaling's part of our way of life,' said Mr Stig Odinsen, skipper of the
boat which, perhaps rashly, he had moored within a harpoon's shot of the
much larger Greenpeace research ship Polo.
There are about 25 whaling boats based around Mortsund in the Lofoten
Islands, with the rest of Norway's 50-odd whaling boats based on the
mainland.
Until 1987 when Norway finally adhered to the moratorium after the US
threatened to ban the import of Norwegian fish, some 60 per cent of Mr
Odinsen's income came from hunting whales, with the remainder coming from
netting cod and other whitefish in the summer and herring in the winter.
Since then he has had to confine himself to normal fishing.
There is a simple reason for the attractions of hunting whales: they are
considerably more valuable than whitefish. Speaking mainly through an
interpreter Mr Odinsen says: 'One kg of whale meat is worth Pounds 3 whereas
one kg of cod is worth Pounds 1. One big whale is worth about Pounds
10,000'.
In the last season before Norway joined the ban on whaling Mr Odinsen caught
20 whales. He reckons he could kill between 50 and 60 minke whales a season
if the Norwegian government granted him a sufficiently large quota.
The minke whale is one of the smallest of the whale family, dwarfed by
leviathans such as the blue whale which has become an endangered species.
'All kinds of hunting are cruel, but whaling is no more cruel than elk
hunting or your own fox-hunting,' says Mr Odinsen. 'With our new harpoons
loaded with a grenade which explodes on impact the whale dies
instantaneously.'
