FT  19 OCT 92 / International Company News: MGN agrees plan over Donohue
stake
MIRROR GROUP Newspapers is close to realising a lot of the value of its
holding in Donohue, the loss-making Canadian forest products group.
MGN reached an agreement with Quebecor, the controlling shareholder in
Donohue, over the weekend for a series of transactions that would tidy up
another small part of the empire of the late Mr Robert Maxwell.
If all goes according to plan it is estimated that MGN will at least clear
the book value of the Donohue stake which in June 1992 was in the newspaper
group's accounts at Pounds 38.5m.
MGN at present has a 49 per cent stake in a private Canadian company,
Mercor, whose sole asset is a 53.8 per cent holding in Donohue, a company
with a market capitalisation of Pounds 225m. The controlling stake in Mercor
is held by Quebecor, the Canadian publishing and printing group. The stake
dates back to 1987 when Mr Maxwell set up a joint venture with Quebecor.
Under the deal Donohue is offering to exchange its existing 20 vote shares
for new Donohue shares with only one vote in return for a 12 per cent
premium of new shares. The aim is to allow Mercor through Quebecor to retain
voting control of Donohue without MGN. The 12 per cent premium will mainly
come from shares now held by MGN.
Following the offer Donohue and Mercor will offer for sale 6m units, each
containing a share and a warrant to buy a share. This would be made up of
new shares issued by Donohue and the existing MGN shares in Mercor.
Mercor will pay MGN the proceeds and if warrants are not exercised MGN will
own directly Donohue shares reserved for the warrants. After the public
issue MGN will hold directly between 1.78m and 2.34m Donohue shares which
can be sold six months after completion.
The MGN board says the transaction should give the company greater
flexibility to dispose of its Donohue stake. If the public issue is
completed it would 'provide for an early disposal of a substantial part of
MGN's interest.'
