FT  14 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Telecoms leaders switched
THE UK'S two telecoms leaders, BT and Cable and Wireless, moved in opposite
directions as institutions switched from BT into the latter in the wake of
last week's widespread downgrading of BT shares and the worries that Oftel,
the telecoms regulator, may insist on larger price cuts than previously
predicted.
The strong performance by C and W was additionally fuelled by revived hints
that AT&amp;T, of the US, may buy a stake in Mercury Communications, C and W's
UK telecoms division.
Specialists also spoke of stories that C and W plans a flotation for
Mercury, or may seek a trading link with Vodafone, which is at present
competing with Cellnet, BT's subsidiary, for leadership in the UK cellular
phone market. C and W touched 603p before ending a net 11 up at 600p.
Both classes of BT shares came under pressure, although quotations were
adjusted to allow for the 7.6p gross interim payment. BT 'old' settled at
318p ex-dividend, down 5, while BT 'new' closed 6 off at 114p ex-dividend.
Dealers reported plenty of switching between the two classes of BT.
Abbey National sold
Abbey National, the building society turned bank, came up against a flurry
of speculative selling pressure and substantially underperformed an
otherwise resilient banks sector. The weakness followed widespread hints in
the stock market that at least one of the UK's big building societies, and
possibly as many as three, was in trouble.
Dealers said the failure of a big building society, while having little
direct financial impact on Abbey, would inevitably have an adverse affect on
sentiment in Abbey shares. 'All the leading financial institutions have
suffered from a deterioration in lending quality,' said one banks
specialist.
Abbey shares lost ground as the session progressed, closing 6 1/2 off at
273p, albeit in relatively thin turnover of 1.9m shares but against the
closing trend of the stock market.
Reuters recovers
Reuters Holdings rose yesterday to the highest level since August 1990 as
buyers continued to pin their hopes on exceptional growth this year. The
shares closed 19 stronger at 1064p after turnover of 1m.
The stock appears to be recovering from the disastrous plunge suffered 18
months ago when it lost 184 points to 1045p after the company warned of a
decline in second-half profits. One analyst said: 'Even the great detractors
have to admit that Reuters is one of the quality stocks in the sector.' The
shares have strongly outperformed the FT-SE All-Share Index over the past
three months and are on a very high rating.
Bears of the stock, such as agency broker James Capel, believe a ceiling for
the shares is being reached, but buyers are confident that heavy investment
by the banks in Reuters' electronic dealing system will provide the company
with the sort of sharp growth that has been seen by Glaxo and Wellcome.
Chemicals active
A downgrade and change of stance from a leading UK securities house affected
the shares in chemicals companies Laporte and BOC.
Kleinwort Benson cut its estimate for Laporte's 1991 profits by Pounds 5m to
Pounds 105m and next year's by Pounds 8m to Pounds 94m. Analyst Mr Jeremy
Chantry said he was quite positive on the company but was advising investors
who were overweight in the stock to reduce their holdings because of the
'ongoing effects of the recession'. Laporte fell 12 to 604p.
Mr Chantry also pointed out the defensive qualities of BOC, which added 12
at 627p. It was one of the most heavily traded stocks in the chemicals
sector with turnover of 1.4m shares.
Lonrho saw the biggest percentage fall of any of the stocks in the FT-SE 100
list as traders reacted to negative weekend press comment. The shares fell
12 to 164p, more than 6.8 per cent, with 5.2m traded. A Sunday newspaper
article said there was disappointment that executive director Mr Terry
Robinson resigned from Lonrho last week and there had been speculation that
Lonrho had cash flow problems and might cut its dividend.
Glaxo was the most actively traded major stock yesterday. It reached a new
high despite a cautionary note from SG Warburg, the UK investment bank, and
a slight easing of interest from US investors. In its regular bulletin on
the pharmaceuticals sector, Warburg highlighted the premium rating of all
but one of the stocks. Glaxo was 3 easier in early trading but London
investors bought into the weakness of the shares which closed 14 ahead on
the day at 930p with 4.9m traded.
Other dollar earners were also firm. SmithKline Beecham rose 9 to 946p,
Wellcome 6 to 1041p and Reckitt &amp; Colman 5 to 692p. Fisons, which Kleinwort
moved from a sell to a hold and highlighted as the only underperformer
against the market, improved 7 to 354p.
BP rose 4 to 286p, stimulated by a strong showing by oil prices, a broker
buy recommendation and news that the oil company is intensifing its
operations in Colombia, a move which specialists said indicated BP's
optimism about the Cusiana discovery announced last year.
Girozentrale Gilbert Eliott, the stockbroker, helped sustain the BP share
price in highlighting the stock's yield attractions. Mr Chris Perry at
Girozentrale adopted a bullish tone on BP's dividend policy after recent
market worries.
'Contrary to popular opinion BP has committed itself to long-term real
dividend growth and refuses to cut the payout,' said Mr Perry. He expects BP
to increase the fourth-quarter payout to 4.5p, making 17.1p for the year. He
added: 'Even if the dividend is not increased, shareholders are guaranteed a
year-on-year dividend growth of 4.7 per cent and a yield of 8.2 per cent
compared with a market average of 5 per cent.'
Burmah Castrol added 10 at 496p, still responding to the recent Smith New
Court buy note, while there was more heavy activity in Lasmo, which gained 6
more at 244p.
The influential retailing team at County reinstated some buy recommendations
after the sector underperformed by 6 per cent since it suspended all its
previous buys. 'With the uncertainties of Christmas behind us and seemingly
not matching worst expectations we believe the sector is due a bounce,' said
County. It reinstated its buys on Argos, Boots, Dixons and WH Smith. Argos
rose 4 to 260p. Jacques Vert slumped 77 to 116p after the losses and halved
interim dividend.
Shares in Rank Organisation suffered a retreat of 11 to 609p as securities
house Hoare Govett highlighted the stock as one of its three key sells in
its weekly market overview. The house said it had changed its stance some
time ago but this was the first time it had published it.
Kleinwort Benson downgraded its 1992 profits estimates for both Sedgwick and
Willis Corroon and recommended a switch from Sedgwick into Willis, up 4 at
235p.
Birse, the building group, came under intense selling pressure and fell to
62p at one point, before stabilising and closing a net 8 off at 66p amid
stories that a statement on trading is imminent.
Tomkins was volatile as the company reported interim figures at the top end
of market expectations. Profits rose 40 per cent to 43.7m and the stock
advanced 5 to 439p.
Charterhouse Tilney, which raised its full-year forecast by Pounds 1m to
Pounds 131m, believes there is little scope for the shares in the short
term, but remains a buyer for the long term.
Favourable press comment on the possible link-up between British Airways and
KLM boosted the shares of the UK airline, which gained 7 to 236p on turnover
of 4.8m.
GW Thornton jumped 53 to 203p after being relisted following an announcement
that Bromsgrove Industries was making a recommended Pounds 14.6m offer for
Thornton.
The recent favourable view of Rolls-Royce was further boosted by news of a
Dollars 67m order for the US Navy. The shares gained a further 5 to 137p on
turnover of 4.9m.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1991/92
NEW HIGHS (51).
AMERICANS (6) Amdahl, Dial Corp., Honeywell, Houston Inds., Pall, Utd.
Tech., CANADIANS (5) Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Brascan, Can.
Pacific, Can. Imperial Bank, BANKS (2) ABN Amro., Deutsche, BUSINESS
SERVICES (2) Security Archives, Sherwood Computer, CHEMICALS (1) Bayer,
ELECTRICALS (3) Chemring, China Light, Ericsson (LM), ELECTRONICS (2) Druck,
Elect. Data Procsg., ENGINEERING GENERAL (3) IWP Intl., SKF, Victaulic, FOOD
MANUFACTURING (4) Cranswick, Golden Vale, Tate &amp; Lyle, Do. 7.25pc Prf.,
HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (6) AAH, Bespak, Crown Eyeglass, Hafslund Nycomed Free A,
Macarthy, Novo Nordisk B, HOTELS &amp; LEISURE (1) Tanjong, INSURANCE LIFE (1)
Torchmark, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (3) Gartmore Amer. Secs. Zero Prf., Scot. Natl.
Stppd. Prf., Scot. Value, MEDIA (2) LWT 3.9375p Cnv. Pfd., Ulster TV, MOTORS
(1) DAF N/V, OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (3) Tomkins, Do. 5.6pc Prf., Do. 6
1/4 pc Prf., PACKAGING, PAPER &amp; PRINTING (1) De La Rue, TEXTILES (2) Campari
Intl., Shiloh, TRANSPORT (2) Brit. Airways Cap. 9 3/4 pc Cnv., Sea
Containers, SOUTH AFRICANS (1) Tongaat-Hulett.
NEW LOWS (72).
AMERICANS (1) Hasbro, BUILDING MATERIALS (4) Freeman, Quiligotti, SWP,
Sheffield Instls., BUSINESS SERVICES (1) Corporate Servs., CONGLOMERATES (3)
Goode Durrant, Melville, Reece, CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (7) AMEC 6.5p
Prf., Birse, Laing (J), Do. A, Prowting, Ward, Wescol, ELECTRICALS (2)
Emess, Do. 6.25p Prf., ELECTRONICS (2) P-E Intl., Sema, ENGINEERING GENERAL
(6) Elliott (B), Hadleigh, Jones &amp; Shipman, Neepsend, Ransomes, Willaire
Prf., FOOD MANUFACTURING (2) Acatos &amp; Hutcheson, Matthews (B), HEALTH &amp;
HOUSEHOLD (1) JS Pathology, HOTELS &amp; LEISURE (3) Kunick, Pickwick, Wembley,
INSURANCE BROKERS (1) Archer (AJ), INVESTMENT TRUSTS (9) County Smaller
Cos., Gartmore Smllr. Cap., Do. Inc., M &amp; G Dual Inc., Merlin Intl. Green,
Morgan Grenfell Equity Inc., River &amp; Merc. Cap., Scot. Natl., Sphere
Wrrnts., MEDIA (1) Shandwick, METAL &amp; METAL FORMING (2) Garton Eng.,
Sycamore, MISCELLANEOUS (2) Porth, RPS, MOTORS (3) Lucas, Mid-States, T &amp; N,
OIL &amp; GAS (5) Cairn Energy, Crossroads Oil, Hardy Oil, Pict Petrlm., Sceptre
Res., OTHER FINANCIAL (2) Natl. Home Loans, Union Discount, PACKAGING, PAPER
&amp; PRINTING (1) Waverley Cameron, PROPERTY (9) Bolton, Chesterfield,
Greycoat, Hammerson A, MEPC, Palmerston, Regalian, Stanhope, Wood (JD),
STORES (2) Dumas, Goldsmiths, TEXTILES (2) Alexandra Workwear, Jacques Vert,
TRANSPORT (1) Bergesen d-y A, MINES (3) Anglovaal, De Beers Linked Units,
Wankie Colliery.
