FT  19 JUN 92 / WEU prepares to strap on some weapons
THE long-dormant Western European Union is today expected to agree to give
itself a genuine military role, including the capacity to send peace-keeping
forces to flashpoints like Yugoslavia and Nagorno-Karabakh.
Foreign and defence ministers of the nine-nation organisation are meeting
outside Bonn to discuss what practical military steps can be taken to
implement their declaration on a common European defence identity, attached
to the Maastricht treaty.
That declaration, which states both that WEU will be developed as 'the
defence component of the European union' and as a means to strengthen the
European pillar of the Atlantic alliance, is diversely interpreted by member
states.
While Britain has put the accent on the organisation's continuing close
relationship with Nato, France, Germany and some other members see its role
as leading gradually, but inexorably, to a common European defence policy
under the political direction of EC governments.
These ideological differences, however, should not prevent ministers from
taking decisions on the forces to be assigned to the WEU for purposes
ranging from peace-keeping and humanitarian operations to military
intervention outside the Nato area of the Gulf War type.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the British defence secretary, has proposed that
European multinational units such as the planned
Dutch-Belgian-German-British Nato division, the UK-Netherlands amphibious
force or the Franco-German corps could be put at the disposal of the WEU.
The ministers are also due to give the green light to a 40-member WEU
military planning cell.
In a declaration to be issued at the end of the meeting, the WEU will offer,
as did the Nato Council earlier this month, to make its forces available for
peace-keeping operations at the request of international organisations such
as the United Nations and the 52-nation Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe. Decisions on whether to take part in such operations
will be taken on a case by case basis by WEU member states.
The ministers are also due to invite Greece, Denmark and Ireland, the only
three EC members not already in the WEU, to join the organisation as full
members or observers. Of these three, only Greece has applied for full
membership.
The WEU will examine ways of enforcing international sanctions against
Serbia, possibly with a naval blockade in the Adriatic, Mr Wim van Eekelen,
its secretary general, predicted yesterday, David Buchan reports from
Brussels.
