FT  22 APR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Diamond hunters' hopes soar in
the frozen north
THE BIGGEST rush to stake mining claims in the history of the North American
industry is going on at Lac de Gras in Canada's Northwest Territories.
Causing all the excitement are 81 small diamonds, each less than 2 mm in
diameter but some of gem quality, found in a kimberlite pipe about 300 km
(185 miles) north-east of the city of Yellowknife.
At least 22,800 sq km (8,900 square miles) has been staked around the first
discovery and hundreds of claims are still outstanding.
Stakers are using helicopters because each claim area is so large - more
than 1,000 hectares (2,500 acres) in most cases. A device fitted to the
helicopter gives a constant reading of longitude and latitude and when a
pre-determined site is found the helicopter lands, allowing a crew member to
jump out and hammer in a claim post.
The Northern Miner, Canada's mining newspaper, reports, however, that so
great is the rush that many of the posts are being dropped from above and
will be secured only after the spring thaw.
The claim rush, said by some observers even to outdo the Yukon gold days at
the end of the 19th century, is being caused by a peculiarity of geology.
Kimberlite pipes usually occur in clusters of ten to 40 spread over an area
of 100 sq km or more. So there is every chance that the main diamond bonanza
could be well outside the area where the first stones were found.
The diamonds were in a 140 m (465 ft) length of core drilled by a joint
venture owned by BHP, Australia's biggest corporation, and a Canadian junior
exploration company called Dia Met Minerals.
Significantly, among those to have rushed to the area is Monopros, the
Canadian exploration arm of De Beers, the South African group which controls
80 per cent of the world's trade in rough (uncut) diamonds.
The Northern Miner reports that the joint venturers have transported 200
tonnes of material from Lac de Gras for testing. Ten trucks carried the
material along the 580 km winter road, built when the ice is thick enough,
between Echo Bay's Lupin gold mine and Yellowknife, capital of the Northwest
Territories. This road runs half a mile from the diamond discovery.
Sampling is being carried out at Dia Met's 80 tonnes a day diamond recovery
plant near Fort Collins in Colorado. The company estimates that, after some
fine tuning, recovery rates will be about 99 per cent.
Analysts suggest that to be economic the kimberlite pipe, estimated to have
a surface area of 16 to 32 hectares, would need a grade of 0.5 to 0.9 carats
a tonne (1 carat equals 200 milligrams) with diamond quality of Dollars 50 a
carat. Sampling will indicate the ratio of industrial to gem quality
diamonds. Industrial diamonds, which also can be made synthetically, fetch
only about Dollars 1.3 a carat.
BHP has decided to double its annual spending on the Lac de Gras property to
CDollars 2m (Pounds 960,000). To earn a 51 per cent interest, the Australian
group has also agreed to finance a feasibility study and arrange production
financing of up to CDollars 500m. Mr Vincent Pisani, analyst at Potter
Warburg, the Sydney stockbroker, points out in the latest SG Warburg
International Mining Outlook, that the Lac de Gras venture is not the only
one providing diamond exploration excitement in North America. In
Saskatchewan, four or five companies are working in the Prince Albert area.
At Fort-La-Corne, Cameco and Uranerz Mining report that 160 microdiamonds
have been recovered from 15 separate kimberlite pipes. But, at an average of
2 carats a tonne, the grade is uneconomic. There is also exploration in
Northern Alberta and Ontario in the Attwapiskat River area.
Ashton Mining, the Australian group that owns 40 per cent of the world's
biggest diamond mine (in weight terms) at Argyle in the Kimberley district
of Western Australia, is committing 30 per cent of its USDollars 5m diamond
exploration budget over the next three years to the Great Lakes project
located south of Lake Superior and west of Lake Michigan in the states of
Michigan and Wisconsin.
Exploration there revealed a cluster of kimberlitic pipes bearing
microdiamonds and these are being tested for commercial potential. Ashton is
earning a 51 per cent interest in the project from a junior company called
Crystal Mining. Early work was carried out by Dow Chemical and it also
retains an interest.
Ashton believes that Great Lakes has the potential to be a world-class
diamond deposit.
However, Northern Miner adds some words of caution. It points out that there
have been several diamond finds in the US but only one, the Crater of
Diamonds State Park in Arkansas, ever reached production.
This is not surprising because, in order for diamonds to remain intact and
not become graphite or carbon dioxide, they must be brought to the surface
from depths of 160 km or more at speeds of 8 to 32 kph as the
kimberlite/lamproite magma reaches the surface.
Consequently, although there are more than 3,000 known kimberlite deposits
in the world, fewer than 1,000 carry any diamonds and only 50 to 60 have
ever proved economic.
