FT  09 JUN 92 / Guerin funds went to prince's equerry
MR James Guerin, the former deputy chairman of Ferranti who will be
sentenced to prison in the US today on fraud, money laundering and illegal
military export charges, used Swiss bank accounts to transfer more than
Dollars 1.2m (Pounds 650m) of stolen corporate funds to Sir David Checketts,
a former private secretary and still-serving equerry to Prince Charles.
Until 1989 Sir David also worked as a London-based executive at Ferranti,
the UK defence electronics group.
The disclosure, contained in a court filing by US prosecutors, also states
that Sir David - who has not been accused of wrongdoing - was interviewed
last year by Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO) in connection with the
fund transfers.
Mr Guerin, who in 1987 sold International Signal and Control (ISC), a
Pennsylvania defence company, to Ferranti, will be sentenced on charges of
defrauding Ferranti of Dollars 1.1bn, engaging in Dollars 950m of money
laundering and illegally exporting military technologies to South Africa and
Iraq.
Sir David, who last night was advised by his solicitor not to comment on the
matter, resigned in 1989 as the managing director of ISC Technologies Ltd, a
UK affiliate of the ISC-Ferranti group. He first joined ISC in 1979 and
served as an international marketeer of defence electronics, aerospace
products, missile systems and educational equipment. Sir David, aged 62, who
served as private secretary to Prince Charles between 1970 and 1979, remains
an extra equerry to the prince. This post was described by Buckingham Palace
last night as 'a very part-time position'.
In 1989 Sir David denied any knowledge of the ISC fraud and said his
resignation from the Ferranti group was 'not directly' related to the ISC
affair.
According to the US court documents Mr Guerin 'invested substantial sums
with another business associate and executive of ISC, Sir David Checketts.
During the period 1986 through 1988, Guerin disbursed Dollars 1,258,510 to
Penselworth Ltd. . . a company formed by Checketts to invest in a shuttle
air service and a printing company'.
A US official said the Dollars 1.2m transferred by Mr Guerin to Sir David's
company in the UK was part of the stolen corporate funds included as part of
the conspiracy section of the indictment of Mr Guerin. The indictment says
these included funds diverted from ISC for Mr Guerin's 'personal benefit and
the benefit of others, including payments to relatives, friends and business
associates'.
The documents further show that Sir David received the funds in six
transfers to accounts at Barclays Bank in the UK from Swiss bank accounts
opened by Mr Guerin in the name of fictitious entities with names such as
Severn, Loreo, Held and Rovigo.
The SFO last night confirmed it had questioned Sir David last year and said:
'Even though our investigation is still technically open, we are satisfied
that those indicted in the US are the primary defendants to the allegations
of fraud with which this office is concerned.'
In London, Ferranti declined to comment on the matter.
