FT  18 JAN 92 / International Company News: Packer to float 55% of ACP for
ADollars 475m
CONSOLIDATED Press Holdings (Conspress), Mr Kerry Packer's privately-owned
master company, is expected to announce plans soon to raise ADollars 475m
(USDollars 353m) through the flotation of 55 per cent of its magazine arm,
Australian Consolidated Press (ACP).
A draft prospectus circulated to financial institutions yesterday said ACP
would remain the cornerstone of Mr Packer's family interests, but would be
independently managed.
The prospectus said Mr Packer would remain chairman of ACP, with Mr Al
Dunlap, chief executive of Conspress, as his deputy. ACP publishes several
leading titles, including Woman's Day, Cosmopolitan, New Idea, The Bulletin
and Australian Business Monthly.
The flotation values ACP at ADollars 865m, equivalent to 7.6 times forecast
earnings of ADollars 112.4m before interest and tax for the 12 months to the
end of June. Profits are forecast to increase to ADollars 132.2m in the
following year.
The issue price is 13.4 times forecast net earnings of about ADollars 65m
for 1991-1992, which puts the company in the top range of Australian media
stocks.
Analysts said the high valuation was justified by the quality of the group's
management, and its titles, which include nine of the top 20 magazines by
circulation. However, some said the price might be too high for the shares
to trade at a premium when the stock is listed on the Australian Stock
Exchange, probably in March.
The prospectus says ACP plans to distribute 80 per cent of the company's
forecast profits as dividends. Analysts said this was intended to increase
the flotation's attractiveness to investors worried about the high p/e
earnings multiple.
The issue is to be fully underwritten by Ord Minnett, the stockbroking firm
which recently underwrote fundraising by Tourang, the consortium led by Mr
Conrad Black.
The part flotation of ACP will raise eyebrows in Australia, since Mr Packer
has previously resisted shareholder involvement in his operations, with the
exception of the Channel Nine network.
Mr Packer bought out non-family shareholders in Conspress in 1983, and his
agreement to a flotation of a major part of the group has been interpreted
by some observers as an indication that Conspress is in need of cash flow to
meet interest payments.
