FT  06 JAN 92 / Economics Notebook: News from the north lightens British
gloom
AFTER the celebrations, the hangover. As far as the British economy is
concerned this seasonal observation holds truer at the start of this year
than most.
Economic forecasters have been revising down their projections of growth in
1992 as fast as their computers will let them. The number of company
failures looks poised to rise further from last year's record total.
Employment prospects are bleak, especially in the service industries.
But look north, away from the recession-battered south east, and there are
signs of hope amid the gloom. The latest Institute of Directors' bi-monthly
poll of 300 business leaders found that company bosses in the north were
more optimistic about the economy than elsewhere in the UK. Directors in the
north and midlands were significantly more inclined to increase investment
and employment than those in the south.
A survey of 500 chief executives and finance directors of owner-managed
businesses conducted by MORI for business and financial advisers Ernst &amp;
Young found a similar trend. Only 54 per cent of respondents in London and
the south east were confident of an economic recovery this year, while in
other regions between 66 per cent and 70 per cent were optimistic.
A Huddersfield-based stock broker - BWD Rensburg - said last week that part
of the north stretching from the Lake District to North Yorkshire was
becoming one of England's most prosperous areas. Disposable incomes were
often as high as in the south while lower outgoings made people better off.
Such a claim would come as no surprise to the Reward Group, which compiles a
quality-of-life index for middle managers on a regional basis. This index,
based on the cost of living and average salaries, puts Scotland first among
the British regions last year, followed by the north and Yorkshire and
Humberside. The south east and greater London were at the bottom of the
table.
Economists increasingly believe the more distant regions of Britain will
fare better than the south east this year. Mr Simon Briscoe of Midland
Montagu sees a 'multi-track Britain' in 1992 with recovery beginning in
Scotland and the north of England only to reach the south east sometime
later.
Mr David Kern, National Westminster Bank's chief economist, expects the
south east's economic performance will lag behind the UK for the third year
running and fail to catch up with the national average in the five years to
1996.
Mr Kern believes gross domestic product in the south east (including
London), the south west and East Anglia declined between 2.8 per cent and
3.2 per cent in 1991 compared with his forecast of a 2.3 per cent fall in
economic output for the UK. The numbers out of work in the south have risen
so rapidly in the past 18 months the three southern regions now have more
jobless people than the north, north west, Yorkshire and Humberside and
Scotland combined, he points out.
Does this mean Britain's north-south divide will disappear?
Figures for 1990 issued last week by the Central Statistical Office suggest
it is too early to write off the south. GDP per head of Pounds 10,400 in
London was 27 per cent higher than the national average and still further
ahead of the north of England's Pounds 7,230, Wales's Pounds 6,960 and
per-capita GDP of Pounds 6,200 in Northern Ireland, the poorest UK region.
One problem is the sheer weight of Greater London and the south east in the
UK's centralised economy. Together, these areas accounted for 36 per cent of
GDP in 1990. So long as the economy in the south remains depressed, the
whole UK economy is likely to experience subdued growth.
However, Mr Simon Briscoe of Midland Montagu argues that the north and
Scotland should reap the benefits of often painful economic restructuring in
the 1980s. While the south east is experiencing post-boom retrenchment in
the financial services sector, with adverse effects for the housing market
and construction, more distant parts of Britain frequently have a varied
manufacturing base and growing service industries.
Regions outside the south east have been the greatest beneficiaries of
inward investment from Japan, the US and Germany. Public sector employment
contributes more to GDP in the regions and so acts as a cushion against
recession.
On the other hand, NatWest's Mr David Kern sees some element of the
traditional north-south divide remaining a feature of the UK economy over
the next five years in spite of a reduced gap in regional growth rates
compared with the 1980s.
He believes the northern regions should sustain an improvement in confidence
apparent in recent years and so attract successful businesses. However, he
expects East Anglia, the south west and the central regions of the east and
west Midlands and Wales will be the areas of strongest growth in the next
few years as businesses relocate from the congested south east.
In spite of the generally improved outlook for Britain's regions, a new
discussion paper* from the Department of Land Economy at Cambridge
University argues that there is 'a pressing need for a coherent and
well-resourced regional policy' in the UK.
Its authors, Mr Ron Martin and Mr Peter Tyler, say government policies since
1979 towards the UK's depressed regions have not cured their fundamental
problem of a weak industrial structure.
'There is little evidence that Thatcherism unleashed and fostered an
enterprise revolution in the depressed regions,' they say. Instead, new and
growing sectors continued to concentrate in the south east throughout the
1980s.
Messrs Martin and Tyler say the government should spend more on Britain's
regions because they are likely to face increased competitive pressures as
Europe integrates.
It is unlikely theirs will be the last such call. By agreeing at Maastricht
that 'the Community shall aim at reducing disparities between the levels of
development of the various regions and the backwardness of the
least-favoured regions', EC leaders have ensured that pressures will grow
for more active regional policies throughout the community.
*The Regional Legacy of the Thatcher Years, Discussion Paper 36, Department
of Land Economy, University of Cambridge, 19 Silver Street, Cambridge CB3
9EP.
