FT  05 FEB 92 / Parliament and Politics: Major underlines resistance to
self-rule - Scotland and Wales
MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, yesterday underlined his determination to
resist the political pressures for Scotland to leave the UK.
In his first public comment since an opinion poll showed that more than 50
per cent of Scots favour independence, he maintained that both Scotland and
England had benefited from the union and emphasised: 'I do not wish to see
it undermined'.
The prime minister also rejected a call for a Welsh parliament by Mr Ieuan
Jones, the Plaid Cymru MP for Ynys Mon.
Buoyant Scottish Nationalist MPs cheered Mr Andrew Welsh, (Angus East) when
he envisaged a surge in support for his party in the general election.
He asked the prime minister: 'Since this government has supported
independence in Russia, Lithuania and other parts of the world, when the
people of Scotland democratically and peacefully vote for independence, what
will this government say to them?'
Mr Major emphasised that the policies of the Scottish nationalists - and
those of Labour and the Liberal Democrats - would undermine the relationship
'that has served us so well in the union'.
He insisted: 'Devolution is not just a matter for Scotland. It is a matter
for the whole of the United Kingdom.'
A government spokesman made clear later that the prime minister had not
intended to imply that he favoured a referendum on the issue.
Mr Major also called on his critics on the opposition benches to explain how
Scotland's prosperity would be assisted by having additional taxes imposed
by a Scottish parliament.
He told Scottish nationalists: 'You ought to put a fair proposal before the
Scottish people, not the half-baked proposal you do put forward.'
The prime minister reminded Welsh nationalist MPs that on an earlier
occasion when there appeared to be a majority in favour of devolution a
referendum had produced a contrary result.
He emphasised: 'The people of Wales realised that the best interest of their
country and of the United Kingdom was to sustain the present arrangements.'
