FT  03 OCT 92 / Ugly noises mar quiet alliance: The reasons behind the
recent bout of Anglo-German acrimony
A junior British minister, speaking in spring last year at the annual
Anglo-German Konigswinter conference, delivered an eloquent illustration of
the unevenness of ties between Britain and Germany. Emphasising how reunited
Germany should play a more active role in world affairs, he declared: 'We
would like the Germans to be more assertive - as long as they agree with
us.'
His remark provides an insight into the past few weeks' hubub between the
two countries over the decline of sterling and the future of European
integration. During the post-war period, Britain has always wanted a strong
relationship with Germany. But, as one of the two European countries (along
with France) with any pretensions to being a world power, Britain wanted to
define these links, as far as possible, on its own terms.
Now, as a result of Germany's development into Europe's pivotal economic and
political power, the favourable terms of the 1950s and 1960s - or even of
the 1970s and 1980s - are no longer on offer. Against a background of
evident British economic weakness, the relationship needs to be reshaped -
amid an atmosphere of bickering and mistrust which is hardly conducive to
mutual co-operation.
The criticisms by the British government, backed by the media, of alleged
German complicity in the pound's collapse have been only the latest example
of irritation. German ministers and officials - including some in the
Bundesbank - were severely irked by the lack of support for reunification
shown in 1989 and 1990 by the government of Mrs Margaret (now Lady)
Thatcher.
Both sides have done their best to forget the episode, along with the less
serious affair in 1990 over anti-German remarks by Mr Nicolas Ridley, then
industry secretary, who was forced to resign. But bruised feelings are still
there - manifest in barbed comments by Bonn officials as well as,
occasionally, by the German chancellor himself.
Not least because of the residue of ill-feeling, Mr John Major has made
repairing ties with Bonn one of his priorities since he took over the
premiership nearly two years ago. He has succeeded in building a good
working relationship with Mr Kohl - one which enabled him to achieve
Britain's 'opt-out' accords on economic and monetary union (Emu) and on the
social chapter at last December's Maastricht summit.
None the less, the skirmishing has flared up again during the past year.
Discontent has been sown by differences on matters ranging from policies
towards the former Yugoslavia to the European Fighter Aircraft. Germany's
quest for a permanent seat on the UN security council has also set some
alarm bells ringing in Britain. Last week, the Bonn government's (promptly
abandoned) plans to support officially a ceremony to commemorate the first
flight of Hitler's V2 rocket spurred strong rebukes from British newspapers
and politicians.
If the Anglo-German partnership - dubbed only a few years ago the 'quiet
alliance' - has grown cacaphonous, this is partly a reflection of the
growing problems both countries face at home. Germany is united. Yet,
preoccupied by the exacting (and seriously underestimated) economic and
social challenge it faces, it has yet to demonstrate that unification will
prove a success. Britain is not only debilitated by recession. It is also
caught between opposing fears of being ensnared in a German-dominated
federal Europe, and of being excluded from a 'core' of richer countries, led
by France and Germany, which could forge ahead with integration in a
'two-speed' Europe.
On both sides, there is edginess and oversensitivity, combined with
insufficient understanding for the other country's predicament. Just as
Britain sometimes fails to comprehend the strains on Germany caused by an
unprecedented influx of 400,000 asylum-seekers this year, the Bonn
government admits it was late in spotting the full political importance of
the pressures forcing sterling's exit from the ERM last month.
One German diplomat, upset at the readiness with which Nazi caricatures
surface in the British media, compares the climate - perhaps somewhat
drastically - to the sabre-rattling between the two countries before the
First World War. Certainly, the ramifications of comments on the recent
exchange market upheavals by Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank
president, bear a resemblance to the celebrated Daily Telegraph affair in
1908. Then, indiscreet interview remarks by Emperor Wilhelm sparked off a
crisis with Britain.
Mr Josef Joffe, foreign policy commentator of the Suddeutsche Zeitung, the
Munich-based newspaper, says he has been surprised by the anger towards
Germany in Whitehall in recent weeks. 'I never thought you could build good
cars, but I always thought you had a talent for keeping cool,' he says.
Lord Roll, a veteran diplomat and now president of S G Warburg, points to
the ease with which anti-German resentment can 'bubble up' in Britain.
'Ignorance and disdain, mixed up with envy and jealousy, tend to rise up and
poison the atmosphere.' He adds: 'This is dangerous, and it should be
stopped.'
Mr Major now says the same, with his appeal on Thursday for an end to the
'war of words' between the two countries - announced at the same time as his
decision to resubmit the Maastricht treaty to parliament. Mr Major's
strategy of attaining D-Mark-like currency stability has disastrously
misfired. But he appears to have been firmly told by Mr Kohl, during their
one-hour telephone conversation on Wednesday, that Britain's credibility
will take a further dive unless it goes ahead with ratifying the treaty.
In the light of the sterling debacle, the British government has been
jealous of France's success in the last fortnight in maintaining the franc's
parity against the D-Mark. Mr Major has, however, probably realised that too
evident a show of Euro-scepticism in Britain would end up strengthening the
Franco-German alliance - the opposite of what he intends.
In its European policies, Britain has one trump card to play with Germany.
Mr Kohl has his own domestic reasons - above all, growing opposition to the
abandonment of the D-Mark - for not proceeding too quickly to Emu. In view
of Britain's own scepticism about monetary union, Mr Major is thus a useful
ally to have on board.
In the end, though, the future of European integration depends not on
Britain, but on whether Germany overcomes its own economic difficulties in
the next few years. If it fails, Mr Kohl and Mr Major may face the prospect
not of a Europe of two speeds - but of a Europe proceeding at no speed at
all.
