FT  19 MAR 92 / Election 1992 (The Manifestos): Economic differences centre
on tax policies
BRITAIN'S three main parties are heading for the election with similar
macro-economic and monetary policies but differ fundamentally over how to
share the nation's wealth and foster its creation.
The Conservatives, Labour and Liberal Democrats accept a large public sector
borrowing requirement in 1992-93 and the monetary discipline of the
Bundesbank through the EMS exchange rate mechanism.
However, their manifestos highlight very different priorities on taxation
policy and the role of the state in encouraging investment and growth.
Both Labour and the Liberal Democrats promise immediate action to combat the
recession. Labour believes 'Britain faces a huge task of national
reconstruction' and makes investment, jobs and training priority areas in
its 'National Recovery Programme'. The Liberal Democrats want a 'new
impetus' and emergency investment 'to end the slump' and cut unemployment by
600,000 in two years.
The Conservatives, by contrast, argue that the foundations of recovery have
been laid. 'What is needed to trigger confidence and growth is a
Conservative victory with a decisive majority.'
All three manifestos are carefully designed not to frighten voters. But deep
underlying differences in philosophy are apparent between the Conservatives
on the one hand and the Labour and, to a lesser extent, the Liberal
Democrats on the other.
Taxation is one obvious area. The Conservatives promise to continue cutting
personal taxes, reduce the threat of inheritance tax for home owners and
also 'lighten the burden of capital taxes and reform the taxation of
savings'. Labour is for 'fair taxes', which as this week's shadow Budget
showed, means lower taxes for about 80 per cent of taxpayers and a sharply
rising tax burden for those earning more than Pounds 22,000 a year.
The Liberal Democrats would reverse the government's plans for a 20p tax
band and add 1p to the basic income tax rate to finance education spending.
Looking further ahead, their manifesto aims to shift 'the burden of taxation
from the things the country needs more of  - income, savings and value added
 - and on to the things we want less of, such as pollution and resource
depletion'.
What differentiates the parties is their attitude to market forces. The
Conservatives work from the presumption that market mechanisms and
incentives should be allowed whenever possible to do their job. The Liberal
Democrats 'know that the free market is the best guarantee of responsiveness
to choice and change', but add that 'the market should be our servant, not
our master'. Labour says: 'Modern government has a strategic role, not to
replace the market but to ensure that the market works properly.'
Labour reserves the right to interfere in broad sectors of the economy in
pursuit of this. It plans, for example, to restore the National Grid to
public control and secure the long-term future of the coal industry by
reducing imports and other measures.
As part of its counter-inflation policy, Labour would 'manage credit
sensibly' and 'stop excessive price rises in water, electricity, telephones,
transport and NHS prescriptions'. To strengthen the regions, the party would
'establish new regional development agencies in England, strengthen Scottish
Enterprise and the Welsh Development Agency and modernise regional
incentives'.
By contrast, the Conservatives promise more privatisation, competition and
deregulation. They place a heavy emphasis on private ownership. Council
house tenants will continue to enjoy 'right to buy' discounts and a
nationwide 'rents to mortgages' scheme is planned. 'Sustaining not just a
home-owning but a capital-owning democracy is crucial to our vision for the
1990s', their manifesto says.
The Liberal Democrats plot a middle course, promising support for
infrastructure investment, training and science and action to stimulate
competition, break up monopolies, promote consumer rights and encourage
decentralised wage bargaining. The Liberal Democrats are also unique in
promising to make the Bank of England operationally independent and planning
a 'savings target' for the nation.
