FT  04 APR 92 / Long day's journey to the right: Neil Kinnock, the Labour
leader, has come of age
It was not quite JFK's Camelot. But the 250-odd guests who gathered for Neil
and Glenys Kinnock's 25th wedding anniversary in the Inner Temple's
Parliament Chamber 10 days ago owed something to a mediaeval court.
Dotted among the Parrys and Howells from Wales were a smattering of shadow
Cabinet members, courtiers from the leader's Commons bunker, Mr Gavyn
Davies, the City economist, the discreet presence of favoured trade
unionists and, of course, familiar friends from showbiz - John Mortimer,
Anthony Sher and Stephen Fry among them.
At the centre of this babbling throng, the happy couple presided with
magisterial self-assurance: Neil, foot-tapping to a live performance by Cleo
Laine, as Glenys chatted nearby with a relative.
With election day just three weeks away, the party's aim - anniversary
celebrations aside - was to show the world that, mid-campaign, the Labour
leader was in command, relaxed and confident.
'It don't mean a thing, if it ain't got that swing,' trilled Cleo. And, sure
enough, less than a week later, the polls swung accordingly.
If Labour loses the election, the Kinnocks' party will probably rank among
the highest points of their lives. After 25 years of hard politics, it was a
triumphant confirmation of Labour's return to its rightful place as
Britain's alternative establishment and a public acknowledgement of the
Kinnocks' central part in the process.
No wonder then that the host's ebullient self-confidence was the overriding
impression of the evening. Yet with only days to the election to go, Mr
Kinnock's personality remains at the very centre of the British political
plot.
Is he a Moses, destined to lead the party to the promised land, but doomed
never to enter it? Or might he be a bluff Prince Hal, a boisterous
rabble-rouser set to be transformed, like a political Henry V, into a safe
pair of hands?
If there is any single quality that is repeated time and again in the
reminiscences of friends and acquaintances of the man now on the doorstep of
Downing Street, it is his extraordinary lack of self-doubt.
Even though, on occasions, Mr Kinnock's private insecurities show through,
for some onlookers it is this conviction in his own capability that is
indigestibly strong meat.
One Scots MP, a self-proclaimed Kinnockite, commented recently that while he
applauded all his leader's achievements, he would never be able to empathise
with the man himself. 'It is the 'boyo' side of him I just can't stand. He
is just not my kind of person,' he commented.
Much of the Conservatives' campaign has been based on the premise that the
public share the same feeling. When Mr Kinnock's virtues are discussed - his
persistence, his courage in tackling Militant, his achievement in bringing
Labour so close to power - his Tory critics counter that swallowed
principles, inverted policies and an opportunism, forged by ambition alone,
render him unfit to be prime minister.
Such charges, enraged Kinnock loyalists insist, are merely a distorted
fiction of the tabloid press and a wilful misrepresentation of a courageous
and talented man.
The truth, perhaps, is more simple than both cartoon images. So entwined is
the Labour leader's political journey with the party's own decade-long
metamorphosis that it is hard to disentangle the two. For The Sunday Times
the Kinnock story is headlined The Flight from Conviction, but it could be
called The Road Back to Reality.
Even before he won the leadership election almost nine years ago, Mr Kinnock
is said to have confessed privately that he had some reluctance in taking up
the challenge. With his ideas still half-formed, his natural rebelliousness
unprepared for the straightjacket of responsibility, his immaturity often
showed.
'It has always been Neil's misfortune,' as one sympathiser put it recently,
'that he has had to do his growing up in public'. So it has been with
Labour.
Almost from his infancy, the young Neil Kinnock's natural effervescence drew
attention. Born 50 years ago into a mining family in Tredegar - the
constituency of the Labour hero, Aneurin Bevan - he was the only child of a
happy marriage between Gordon Kinnock, a gently-mannered miner, and Mary
Parry, a formidable and intelligent district nurse.
Nurtured by devoted parents in the extended family of a Welsh mining
community - the Coldstream Guards of the Labour movement - the young Neil
was swaddled in security, a cheerful boy, with a cheeky talent for mimicry.
Though the family was not well off, Nurse Kinnock's maternal ambitions and
critical tongue saw her son hurdle the greatest obstacle to working-class
success, the 11-plus exam. In consequence, and much to his irritation, he
was sent to Lewis School, Pengam - a single-sex establishment considered the
Eton of the Valleys.
In his campaign plane last week, Mr Kinnock recalled his and his friends'
loathing for the place. 'We didn't do a stroke,' he said, with mild
amusement. 'But because we had got through the 11-plus we were all convinced
we had made it.'
Already politics, thick in the Welsh air, had permeated his life. He first
saw Bevan speak aged 10, read his treatise, In Place of Fear, at 14 and
joined the Labour party a year later. Unhappiness at school and three 'O'
levels persuaded him to seek work in the pits, but his mother would not have
it. He went on to pass well in three 'A' Levels to become the first in 'a
thousand generations of Kinnocks' to take a place at university.
Much scorn has been poured on Mr Kinnock's pass degree at Cardiff but his
lack of academic distinction owed mostly to the heady atmosphere of
university life - an exuberant combination of rugby, politics and
socialising.
It was here that he first met his wife-to-be while handing out leaflets in a
cafeteria queue. It was to impress 'Glen' that the young tyro first took to
the rostrum in speeches to up to 700 fellow students. Lord Callaghan, then a
Cardiff MP, was just one of many listeners astonished by the impact of the
young debater.
Other Kinnockian qualities also emerged at this time, not least a certain
vanity and priggishness. He was fiercely conservative in his clothes - white
shirts and highly polished shoes - and curiously illiberal for the
permissive 1960s. His friend Mr Rhodri Morgan, now MP for Callaghan's seat,
remembers how Neil pressed the landlord of The Old Arcade pub to eject the
local hippies, suspecting they were selling dope.
Although a left-winger, Mr Kinnock also kept within reach of the mainstream.
One of his first political collaborations with Glenys was to organise the
ousting of an extreme left clique from the leadership of the Labour club.
From the presidency of the Cardiff students' union on, the young Kinnock
maximised his contacts in the unions and industry by lecturing for the
Workers' Educational Association. A fierce opponent of Barbara Castle's In
Place of Strife union reform proposals, he entered parliament in 1970 as the
Heath government began its own wrestling match with organised labour.
Aged just 28, the MP for Bedwellty's politics fused the lessons of his
half-digested industrial relations course and the more fashionable verities
of the National Union of Students. But his passion was rooted in the class
solidarity that permeated the mines and factories of the Valleys.
Rapidly establishing a reputation as a powerful, fluent (if verbose)
speaker, the young firebrand was soon making frequent visits to constituency
parties across the country.
On most issues, he sat comfortably with left-wing orthodoxy, though, even
then, his arguments were often based not on ideology but in practical or
party political terms. On the European Community, for example, Mr Kinnock's
opposition to British membership was less that the EC was a 'capitalist
club' and more that the hated Tories' favoured it.
On devolution for Scotland and Wales, however, he took a more marxist
stance, arguing at the risk of hostility from his constituents that the
working-class gained nothing from a Welsh assembly. 'We have not,' he
ironically told the 1976 party conference, 'had one riot in Ebbw Vale for
lack of direct elections to the Welsh Tourist Board.'
A year earlier during the sterling crisis of 1975, Mr Kinnock had sided
dogmatically with the left, joining 37 Labour rebels to vote down the Wilson
government's package of public expenditure cuts. The minutes of Bedwellty
party record that their MP argued 'it was not the task of Labour to salvage
and re-establish capitalism'.
When a year later his early mentor, Mr Callaghan, complimented his powerful
speaking abilities by offering him a junior ministerial post, he turned it
down, calculating that the price of silence, under the convention of
collective responsibility, was not worth paying.
So far, so radical. But in the wake of the 1979 election defeat, amid the
devastation of the Winter of Discontent, Mr Kinnock's change began.
Well before Labour's civil war began in earnest, the young MP had naturally
sided with the grassroots activists. As early as 1973 he had helped found
the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy, later to become the banner of the
Bennite opposition against the parliamentary establishment.
Furthermore, he had publicly opposed the 5 per cent pay norm that had
triggered the conflict with the unions. Yet when parliament returned, the
rebel decided to use the period in opposition to climb. Just as Mr Tony Benn
decided not to stand in the shadow cabinet elections in order to fight for
internal changes in the party, Mr Kinnock opted to try, arguing instead: 'It
was put up or shut up time.'
In interviews since he has suggested that his motive was intended to push
for a left-wing programme from the vanguard not to carp from backbenches.
'It was no good wingeing on . . . it was time to influence affairs.'
That appears to be borne out by his statement at the time that priva tised
industries should be renationalised without compensation to shareholders.
But to his allies on the hard left, Mr Kinnock's decision to accept an
appointed frontbench post as education spokesman had, as Mr Benn records in
his diaries, 'totally' undermined the left's argument for democratic change.
But the key break did not come until the following year when Mr Benn
launched his 1980 challenge to Mr Denis Healey for the deputy leadership. In
an outspoken article for the Tribune newspaper, Mr Kinnock went on the
offensive. Accusing the Benn manifesto's pledge of full employment within a
lifetime of a parliament as 'a reckless simplicity', he said the darling of
the radicals has 'significantly harmed the current standing and electoral
opportunities of the Labour party'.
It was the first important act of genuine political courage of his career.
It signalled the end of Mr Kinnock's period of posturing and a new
seriousness that was to put electoral considerations repeatedly ahead of
ideology on his list of political priorities.
Even before his election to the party leadership Kinnock had recognised that
the growth of the Social Democratic party, demanded urgent action. He was
shifting ground on Europe, believing withdrawal from the community was now
no more than a fantasy. And a mounting suspicion of middle-class elitism
within the Bennite-left began to colour his criticism.
'They are willing to condemn millions of people to unemployment, bad
housing, deficiencies in education, bad health provision,' he wrote in a
vituperative article in the Morning Star, 'they surrender the right to call
themselves socialists since they are ready to fight to the last drop of
someone else's blood.'
Such sentiments added both to Mr Kinnock's enemies and his growing authority
as a left-wing voice of reason. Furthermore, the shift in tone was as
perfectly timed as the delivery of his speeches. When the Foot leadership
collapsed in the ashes of the 1983 election defeat, the party judged that it
was only the 41-year-old Mr Kinnock who could heal the left-right schism.
In his acceptance speech, the young leader quoted extensively from Bevan's
admonition against politicians speaking in 'old false categories . . . that
echo the past', urging them instead to 'speak with the authentic accents of
those who elected them'.
Mr Kinnock added: 'We have to commend the common sense of socialism, the
realism of socialism . . . the most rational, reasonable, emancipating creed
ever put on the agenda of mankind.'
Armed with those words, his leadership has marched steadily down the
revisionist path. But while the red rose revamp of the party's image
proceeded, progress was at first little more than decorative. It was his
attack on the Militant tendency at the 1985 Bournemouth conference that
finally underlined the deadly seriousness of Mr Kinnock's determination to
see Labour back in office.
But it was only in the wake of the 1987 election defeat, that his zeal
spread across the party clearing the path for the root and branch policy
review that eventually jettisoned unilateralism, embraced Europe
wholeheartedly and reclothed Labour in social democratic colours.
For Mr Kinnock himself the process of change has often been painful. Friends
have noted that his natural cheerfulness has diminished. Colleagues remark
sympathetically on the loneliness of a job which has seen him transformed
from a darling of the media to its prime target.
Ms Clare Short, a member of labour's National Executive Committee who has
twice resigned from his front-bench team, still expresses a motherly
affection for him.
Yet the more rabid Tory tabloids aside, how unfair has the press really
been? Has Mr Kinnock not taken U-turns on almost all the key issues of the
day - Europe, nuclear weapons, devolution - to name but three?
The truth is that in reforming the party Mr Kinnock reformed his own ideas
too, turning cautious pragmatism into his new ideology. As policy-changes
have seen Labour rise in the opinion polls from the 27 points of 1983 to the
potentially election-winning 40s, the leader feels vindicated in his belief
that the party's policies are ideologically sound - socialist even - if they
fairly reflect ordinary people's beliefs and ideas.
On that ground alone, unilateralism could be jettisoned - a decision that is
said by intimates to have caused neither Neil nor Glenys any profound pain.
The same argument underpins his lack of interest in electoral and
constitutional reform.
Privately, Mr Kinnock retains a deep scepticism about devolution, though he
will go along with it in order to halt a Scots rebellion. On such issues as
devaluation and budgetary prudence, he is dogmatically austere - convinced
that quick fixes for the economy are no substitute for old-fashioned hard
graft.
Indeed, he is now a genuinely enthusiastic European, admiring its commitment
to industry and training. The Exchange Rate Mechanism and the Maastricht
convergence terms for a single currency, he believes, will prove useful
shields against an explosion of unrealistic pay claims from the unions.
When attacked for these policy shifts, Mr Kinnock says that his changes
reflect a changed world, but retain in their ideals of redistribution and
social welfare a clear continuity with Bevanite ideas.
His goals, set out in his 1991 Brighton conference speech, were to enable
people to get the best out of life and control their own destinies. By
contrast, 'British Toryism is above all about letting the future look after
itself, about letting people fend for themselves whether they are able or
not.'
Where then does all this leave his fitness to govern? To this, Mr Kinnock's
understandable response is to point to his success in remodelling Labour
into the most unified and disciplined shape ever achieved in its long
history.
His campaign has shown him better able than ever before at handling the
rigours of the television interview and publicly sifting the minutiae of
policy. Yet it is Mr Kinnock's personality that continues to provoke unease.
His Tuscan holidays, his obvious delight in theatre and music, his fondness
for the well-chosen word show an unashamed pride in middle-class tastes. But
now and then there comes a shock. It may be the flash of temper that
recently ruined a Commons' speech when he called a respected backbencher 'a
jerk'.
Perhaps, most of all, it is that demagogic platform style - all sweeping
hand gestures and grandiose oratory - which this week dismissed Toryism, in
the language of a fiery chapel preacher, as 'a sin, a sin, a sin'.
The Kinnock toughness - the bullheaded stubbornness - has got him where he
wants. It may well prove an asset if he is forced to bang heads round
Downing Street's cabinet room table.
But far from being dangerous, Mr Kinnock's politics in their mature
middle-age are a reflection of the man: sturdily respectable, sentimentally
embedded in community and family, romantic even, and, perhaps, a little
dull.
Yet, every now and then, one has the sensation that - beneath the laughter
and the bonhommie - a deep hurt lingers. The champion of compassion has had
to learn the ways of the streetfighter: the fare for a journey from
jack-the-lad to national leader has been paid in full.
Additional reporting by Emma Tucker and Catherine Milton
