FT  24 APR 92 / Observer: BAe lands its man
If the British Aerospace chairmanship is such an attractive job, why has it
taken seven months to fill? With a workforce of over 100,000, BAe is
Britain's biggest manufacturing exporter but it also poses one of the
country's biggest management challenges.
Its main strength - defence - is a declining industry, and it is weak in
most other areas. Perhaps its status as a national industrial asset with a
questionable long-term future is the reason the best and brightest of
British business (foreigners were excluded) have not rushed to take up this
public duty. Maybe the risks of failure outweigh even the almost certain
knighthood.
In the past the job has been done by an oilman (Sir Austin Pearce), and a
management professor (Sir Roland Smith), with mixed results. Sir Graham Day,
who has been doing the job on a temporary basis, was a favoured candidate.
But he has his own reasons for not wanting the post.
Against such a background, BTR stalwart John Cahill is as good a choice as
any. Admittedly, he is in his early 60s, has never chaired a plc company
before, and has not even sat as a non-executive on other boards. However, as
chief executive of BTR - one of Britain's industrial success stories - he
headed a workforce considerably bigger than BAe's.
As an operational man, Cahill is hard to better. A sprawling business like
BAe is bound to benefit from his attention to costs and margins.
Even so, whether he has the right skills to be chairman, as opposed to chief
executive of BAe, is uncertain. He does not have any feel for dealing with
the world's defence/military establishments, and it is far from clear that
he has the vision needed to establish BAe as a force to be reckoned with in
the next century.
Given this weakness, one of his first jobs should be to strengthen his board
of directors which lacks the sort of depth one would expect in a company of
BAe's size. Provided he does so, and in particular appoints an effective
finance director, BAe might well have chosen the right man.
