FT  04 DEC 92 / Calls grow for tough action against Serbs
THE worsening plight of Bosnia's Moslem population is putting increasing
pressure on the international community for firmer action, including
military measures, against the Bosnian Serbs.
The Islamic countries, in particular, have stepped up their campaign for the
use of force against the Bosnian Serbs, whose 'ethnic cleansing' campaign
has been responsible for the deaths or expulsion from their homes of tens of
thousands of Moslems. Their outrage was expressed at a meeting of the
50-member Organisation of the Islamic Conference in Jeddah, which ended in
the early hours of yesterday morning with a call to the United Nations
Security Council to review the situation in Bosnia-Hercegovina and the
implementation of relevant UN resolutions before January 15.
The more militant of the Islamic countries, such as Iran, are urging the UN
to lift its embargo on arms deliveries to Bosnian Moslems and have even said
they are ready to send troops to Bosnia, albeit 'within the framework of
international law'.
Such concern is being treated very seriously by western governments, who
fear a spread of the Bosnian conflict to Kosovo and Macedoniaif the Serbs
are not kept in check.
If that happened, a general Balkan conflagration, with the participation of
neighbouring countries such as Greece and Turkey, to say nothing of Moslem
countries from outside the region, would be difficult to avoid. Even so,
most western governments continue to be opposed to full-scale military
intervention in Bosnia.
The reasons for this reluctance were summed up by the British foreign and
defence secretaries, Mr Douglas Hurd and Mr Malcolm Rifkind, yesterday. Mr
Hurd stressed a political solution could not be imposed by the use of
outside military force.
Mr Rifkind said he believed that 'tens of thousands, probably over 100,000,
would almost certainly be exposed to very heavy casualty and would be
unlikely to bring peace,' Mr Rifkind said.
If that is also the opinion of the other western powers - what are the
alternatives to be discussed at the emergency conference on Bosnia in Geneva
on December 16?
International sanctions imposed by the UN can still be tightened further,
but no one believes that this alone will change Serbia's policies.
The one military measure that appears to be acceptable to all the western
countries, is the enforcement of the 'no-fly' zone over Serbia, imposed by
the UN last October.
Although no violations of the flying ban by Serb fixed-wing aircraft have
been reported, the UN has become increasingly concerned that the Serbs are
using helicopters to transport their senior military officers throughout
Bosnia.
Any decision to shoot down Serb planes violating the ban would have to be
authorised by another UN resolution. The original reservations of several
members of the Security Council, including Britain and France, have been
swept away by the growing realisation that tougher action is necessary.
Other more imaginative steps, including perhaps the creation of safe havens
for Moslems on the northern Iraq model, will have to complement such a
limited military measure as the enforcement of the 'no-fly' zone, if Islamic
countries are to be satisfied.
UN peace-keepers halted all flights for 48 hours yesterday after a plane
carrying their commander in Bosnia was hit by gunfire, Reuter reports from
Sarajevo.
The UN said nobody was hurt and the plane carrying Major General Philippe
Morillon landed safely. British troops also came under mortar fire in the
town of Turbe but no-one was hurt. Heavy fighting raged throughout Bosnia
yesterday. The Sarajevo crisis centre reported 41 killed and 118 wounded in
the past 24 hours.
Editorial comment, Page 20
