FT  05 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Brook Hunt predicts sharp fall
in Japanese metal demand
JAPAN'S SHARP fall in industrial output will lead to a substantial drop in
metals demand from that country, Brook Hunt &amp; Associates, the independent
research group, points out in its latest monthly Metals Service reports.
It estimates that, compared with 1991, Japan this year will use 15 per cent
less nickel (148,000 instead of 174,000 tonnes), 9 per cent less copper
(down from 1.634m tonnes to 1.484m) and 5 per cent less aluminium (down from
2.4m tonnes to 2.272m).
The German economy is also slowing and 'while the forecast for Germany is
not nearly as bleak, the recession there is causing a Europe-wide slowdown.'
Metal exports from the former Soviet Union are also forecast to remain at
historically high levels. Brook Hunt estimates that they will total about
850,000 tonnes of aluminium, 350,000 tonnes of copper and 100,000 tonnes of
nickel this year.
The reports says that, despite the gloomy outlook, metals prices this year
have been buoyed by large-scale buying by commodity funds. These are now
benefiting from the cash flooding out of money funds in the US.
Ironically, relatively high prices are delaying necessary production cuts
and plant closures, Brook Hunt warns.
It says metals prices are unlikely to sustain high levels for long.
Consumption of aluminium, copper and nickel will be weaker in 1992 than in
1991 with little prospect of meaningful world economic recovery before the
end of this year.
'Even with sharply rising consumption in 1993, the market for all three
metals will remain in heavy surplus unless production plants are closed and
plans for future expansion delayed. Such measures will be initiated only if
prices fall significantly below current levels,' Brook Hunt concludes.
It says average cash production costs are still comfortably below market
prices for copper and nickel producers. Aluminium smelters, however, are
already in trouble because of the stockpile in London Metal Exchange
warehouses.
