FT  25 MAR 92 / International Company News: Sekisui House under pressure
despite rise
SEKISUI HOUSE, Japan's largest builder of houses, reported a 1.6 per cent
increase in pre-tax profit to Y89.5bn (Dollars 640m) for the year to the end
of January, but admitted that the property market slump has put the company
under extreme pressure.
Sales rose by only 4.4 per cent to Y1,077.4bn after a 22.7 per cent increase
in the year-earlier period, while cash deposits plunged by 43.6 per cent and
payments receivable jumped by 55 per cent, reflecting clients' payments
difficulties.
Prices for apartments on the fringe of Tokyo have fallen by as much as 30
per cent, and the fall has been even larger in some parts of Osaka. The
average decline in land prices nationally is generally reckoned at 30 per
cent over the past two years.
The housing industry is suffering from a build-up of inventory, and
complains that uncertainty over the next cut in official interest rates is
prompting buyers to delay planned investment.
Sekisui said that its stock of saleable land rose from Y227bn a year ago to
Y353bn at the end of January, following a 22 per cent fall in real estate
sales. Home construction revenue rose by 12.8 per cent, though the company
expects difficulty in moving unsold properties during the current period,
for which total sales are forecast to rise only marginally to Y1,120bn.
Property companies were bruised last year by a Ministry of Finance order to
Japanese banks to limit their property-related lending. That order, intended
to reduce banks' exposure to the market and to clamp down on speculators,
was lifted at the end of last year, and some pressure on builders will be
eased.
Sekisui said the property market was hurt by high interest rates, the
weakness in the Tokyo stock market, and reductions in capital investment.
One result was a 330,000 fall to 1.37m in new housing starts reported last
year by all Japanese builders.
The company said the 'overall environment has become particularly
difficult', and cited a fall in second-hand prices as a cause for concern
for new home builders. For the current year, Sekisui is forecasting a 10.6
per cent fall in pre-tax profits to Y80bn.
Marubeni, one of the leading Japanese trading companies, is negotiating the
acquisition of around 10 per cent of California-based EO, a company
affiliated to AT&amp;T, the US telecommunications concern, for an undisclosed
sum, Reuter reports from Tokyo.
Meanwhile, Matsushita Electric Industrial, of Japan and the world's largest
consumer electronics group, is considering acquiring capital in EO.
