FT  11 JUN 92 / Blacks feel squeeze at work / A look at how ethnic
minorities have slipped back in the jobs market during recession
A SURVEY of leading companies shows that only five of Ford Motor's 407
senior British managers are from ethnic minorities. At J. Sainsbury, with
97,000 employees, ethnic minorities account for 2 per cent of the
management.
Those figures may look unimpressive, but records of many other companies are
worse. At least Ford and Sainsbury answered the question - many
organisations taking part in the survey declined to break down their
employees and managers by ethnic origin.
'Even the largest employers do not take the steps necessary to ensure
equality of opportunity in their employment practices,' writes Dr Wilfred
Wood, bishop of Croydon, in a foreword to the survey report by the
Ecumenical Committee for Corporate Responsibility.
He should know. As a black bishop, Dr Wood is as unusual in the church
hierarchy as black people are among senior managers, high court judges,
vice-chancellors and the upper ranks of almost every walk of British public
life.
Britain's young blacks have depressingly few high-level role models to
aspire to. Not that they spend much time discussing the lack of black
bankers and bishops: they are more likely to be concerned with immediate job
prospects.
The Commission for Racial Equality's annual report yesterday drew attention
to the damage the recession is doing to attempts to increase ethnic minority
recruitment and promotion rates.
The commission had begun to hope that the combination of an expanding
economy and a declining number of young people in the population would
reduce the employment imbalance suffered by ethnic minorities. Unemployment
rates - double those of the white rate until the mid 1980s - declined to
about 60 per cent by the late 1980s. The gap is now widening again.
Research for the commission shows that 8 per cent of university students
come from ethnic minorities - broadly their proportion among young people as
a whole - while 16 per cent of the 1990 intake to polytechnics and colleges
was from ethnic minorities. But as the recession hits graduate recruitment,
there is a danger of black graduates' becoming another disillusioned group.
The commission's report on its work over the past year shows that Britain's
ethnic minorities face continuing difficulties in finding jobs and gaining
promotion.
An investigation into the hotel industry showed people from ethnic
minorities over-represented in unskilled jobs such as cleaning and portering
and under-represented in managerial and supervisory posts.
A study of lecturer appointments in Leicestershire further education
colleges found that only 1.2 per cent of lecturers came from Asian and
Afro-Caribbean backgrounds, although ethnic minorities constitute 11 per
cent of the county's population.
The commission is seeking talks with the government on promoting equal
opportunities policies through awarding of public contracts. Limited
opportunities for doing that already exist - local authorities can, under
the 1988 Local Government Act, question contractors, but many fail to do so.
The commission hopes that the government may eventually extend the positive
promotion of equal opportunity - the principle behind Northern Ireland's
Fair Employment Act - to race relations.
'We need to concentrate on outcomes and focus on the positive steps people
and organisations can take to improve equal opportunities,' says Ms Mary
Coussey, director of the commission's employment division.
Aside from the recession, some investigations suggest that straightforward
racism often remains a barrier to finding a job.
A study of young people in Liverpool, published by Liverpool University's
sociology and social policy department earlier this year, concluded that
young blacks were not obtaining equal rewards in the labour market when they
had the same qualifications as whites.
'There can be no doubt whatsoever that racism reduces blacks' chances in
Britain's labour markets,' the report concluded. The labour market, it
argued, was at the root of the black community's disadvantage, with those
young black people who had achieved in education 'mostly being pushed back'.
That, the report said, was taking place against a background where many
leading employers proclaimed the cause of equal opportunities but in reality
treated it as little more than a public-relations exercise.
