FT  03 MAR 92 / Arts: Ten years old today - A look at the Barbican on its
anniversary
The Barbican arts centre celebrates its tenth anniversary today. Only ten
years] The grey monolith, looming unexpectedly on the City landscape like
some sinister battle cruiser, seems to have existed for ever. And, like a
battle cruiser, it is taking ages for it to change direction, moving from
loss to profit, from an object of derision to an old friend, from an
artistic problem to an artistic joy.
It was the last manifestation of brutalist architecture, a decade or more
behind the times when it opened. Its captains, Henry Wrong, who spent most
of his working life on a building site, and, since 1990, Baroness O'Cathain,
have struggled manfully to make it more loveable. Never can an arts centre
have lived and died so much by its appearance rather than by the activities
taking place inside. For once you have penetrated one of the 100 or more
access points that the architects devised instead of a recognisable main
entrance, the Barbican as a performance place - apart from a (much improved)
dodgy acoustic in the concert hall - has mainly been a delight.
Of course the artists have played up. First the resident orchestra, the
London Symphony, went on a wallet breaking learning curve to discover that
its challenging seasons of Tippett and Webern and its repeated concerts in
blocks of intense monthly playing, were not what the audience wanted. There
was a nasty cash crisis seven years ago. Now the corner has been turned and
the LSO is on a high, with record attendances of 85 per cent this season and
with the Arts Council and the City happily throwing extra money at it to
expand its size and widen its repertoire with new commissions.
Then the RSC went sulky, despite the fact that the main theatre and the
experimental dungeon space, the Pit, were designed to the scenarios of its
successive directors Peter Hall and Trevor Nunn. Once again poor programming
produced a crippling deficit. Now the RSC has been placated, with more money
and more affection. Its new management team gets on much better with Detta
O'Cathain; the moans over backstage facilities have resulted in the current
refit; and director Adrian Noble is so positive about the Barbican that he
is for the first time premiering the big production of his 1992 season -
Kenneth Branagh's Hamlet - at the Barbican rather than at Stratford.
Hamlet provides one of the first examples of what the Barbican was designed
to promote but singularly failed to deliver - a comprehensive artistic
experience - musical, dramatic, and, in the gallery, artistic, to
demonstrate the universal interweaving of the arts. The three residents have
rarely co-operated on joint ventures. There are genuine problems - two or
three year lead times in planning the music programme as against a year for
the theatre, for example - but with a will more could have been achieved.
But this autumn a Scandinavian Festival will put Sibelius alongside Hamlet,
with the gallery exhibiting north European romantic paintings.
Perhaps the biggest change in the fortunes of the Barbican has been the
rallying round of the City. At first it was critical (with some reason since
its expenditure on the project had spiralled from Pounds 8m to Pounds 190m),
but now it is proud to be the third largest benefactor of the arts in the UK
after the Arts Council and the BBC. The City gives the Barbican Pounds 30m a
year to cover its capital and maintenance costs and it is currently prepared
to put in a little extra to help eliminate the Pounds 2m shortfall. This
shortfall has proved stubbornly unmovable, thanks to the recession which has
wiped Pounds 300,000 from the sponsorship target, cut bookings of
conferences and exhibitions, created more dark nights, and reduced
audiences, mainly for run-of-the-mill events although even the Messiah
failed to sell out last Christmas.
How to fill the concert hall when the LSO, which promotes 85 performances
there a year, is absent, remains the key problem for Detta O'Cathain. Her
revenue comes mainly from catering, bars, and parking and her aim is to
boost attendances from the current 73 per cent to 85 per cent, and no dark
nights. To a great extent she relies on outside producers, like Raymond
Gubbay, who on Wednesday puts on his 1000th show at the Barbican, to
populate the place. But many of his competitors have withdrawn and the
Barbican has been forced to increase its own promotions from under 20 to
approaching 70 a year.
Like its rival on the South Bank it is trying to give form to its activities
by creating themes and seasons. So a series by the Academy of St Martins, a
light entertainment festival, and one devoted to operatic classics, are
pencilled in. The City is investing more in such promotions, both to raise
quality and to avoid nights when the Barbican feels forced to accept a
bizarre booking from some egotistic eccentric. On the other hand Detta
O'Cathain is 'quite prepared to listen to our customers' and if a company
wants a concert to entertain its staff or customers the Barbican will tailor
one for you.
With the artistic programme at last coming together Detta O'Cathain can
concentrate on the building. Soon a design company delivers its solution to
the crucial problem of signposting, both to, and inside, the Barbican. The
catering has already been improved. The retail spaces are to be franchised
out and the car parks rationalised.
But the big event, scheduled for 1993, is the creation of an entrance to the
Barbican. The architects expected everyone to arrive by car down a ramp
underground. Lack of a natural focus has probably caused more people to
arrive disgruntled than any other factor. Once again the City is digging
into its pockets for Pounds 2m to pay for the entrance.
Even before the building is finally made habitable Detta O'Cathain is
asserting her will. She is like a landlady trying to smarten up a property
occupied by controlled tenants. She might warn the RSC that Dr Jekyll and Mr
Hyde was an unseasonal Christmas show but she could not dissuade it from
making the mistake. She has had better luck convincing Adrian Noble that Two
Gentlemen of Verona should transfer to the main stage rather than descend to
the Pit. Where she has power she wields it  - the cinema has moved into the
exhibition business, acquiring the British rights to Pavarotti's film of
Rigoletto: it covered its cost at the Barbican and can now make a profit for
five years. She hopes to take the Barbican art gallery, another tenant,
under direct control. It is all proving slow progress but in another ten
years the Barbican could be loved, rather than , as now, just accepted.
