FT  17 FEB 92 / Letter: Towards a 'level playing field' in trade and the
environment
Sir, I was pleasantly surprised to see your extensive coverage of trade and
the environment (February 12). It seems at last that there is a recognition
that trade and environment issues are inextricably linked.
However, I felt that the discussion, both in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade report and the article, did not adequately address the
central issue - that trade rules should treat producers fairly, and create
the much sought after 'level playing field'. An important element in fair
trade is that producers should not be able to 'dump' their products at
prices that are below cost.
Those costs must include the use of environmental services - for example,
using nature as a source (as in timber) or as a sink (as in waste disposal).
If companies do not pay for those services, they are trading unfairly. This
is the crucial point that the Gatt report does not address. Under current
rules of trade, Gatt allows nations to impose countervailing duties for
dumping covering most costs, but does not extend this to environmental
dumping. In fact, the rules explicitly do not allow differential treatment
of traded products on the basis of their production method.
This leads to environmentally destructive competition and low commodity
prices. For example, timber producers have no incentive to spend money on
long-term forest management when their competitors are not required to do
so. The result is forest damage, and, in the long run, possible
deforestation. National action alone is not sufficient; a change in
international trade rules is required.
I agree with Gatt that national policies should be the main mechanism to
establish environmental policies, but it must be recognised that Gatt needs
to play a role in setting up the framework for fair trade between nations.
Otherwise, there will be a transfer of polluting industries to developing
countries, as suggested in a recent memorandum from the World Bank's chief
economist.
This is not a rabidly protectionist view. Most environmentalists favour the
reform of trade rules in the area of agriculture, for example, but, unlike
Gatt, we regard sustainable development as the objective, rather than trade
liberalisation itself. It is to be hoped that the nations that determine
Gatt's rules, including the UK, are also working towards those objectives.
We look forward to their support for the long-awaited reform of our
international trading system at the Earth Summit discussions in June.
Barry Coates,
head of development policy,
World Wide Fund for Nature
Godalming, Surrey
