FT  30 JAN 92 / Leaders under arrest but Algeria's opposition battles on:
'There are plenty more people to take over'
A SET of cramped rooms on the first floor of a downtown office has become
the last remaining formal presence in Algiers of the Islamic Salvation Front
(FIS).
Here, amid a constant flow of bearded supporters, party officials defiantly
await the next move from the authorities. Last Wednesday Mr Abdelkader
Hachani, the party's acting head, was arrested, joining more than 500
supporters arrested since the military coup on January 11. Mr Abassi Madani
and Mr Ali Ben Hadj, the two main leaders, have been held in detention since
last June.
Since the party won a majority 48 per cent vote in the initial round of the
country's first multi-party elections a month ago, and the annulment of the
second round on January 16, the military-backed government has sought to
neutralise the leadership. By enforcing exclusive religious use of the
mosques, the authorities are also hoping to deny the FIS its most potent
propaganda vehicle.
'There are plenty more people to take over,' declare party officials, who
angrily blame the authorities for moving the political goal-posts by
annulling the elections and defrauding them of victory. 'A movement backed
by the people like ours will not just disappear.'
The authorities calculate that their measures will play on existing
divisions within the FIS, isolate hardliners and give the electorate a pause
to ponder whether they wish to see the party realise its declared aim of
Islamic rule. Such tactics risk a radicalisation of the FIS and a
marginalising of the moderates who have dominated the leadership.
Mr Hachani, represented the movement's moderate face, was willing to work
out a deal with the military-dominated establishment, including Mr Chadli
Bendjedid, the president who was forced to step down on January 11. Indeed,
Mr Chadli's downfall was largely a result of the military's perception he
would make a deal but then be too weak to combat creeping annexation of the
state by Islamic power.
Party elements had also initiated discreet contacts with western governments
and multinational companies, the latter of which were assured their
investments would be respected. Mr Hachani carefully offered a tolerant
version of Islam, rejecting comparisons between religiously mainstream
Algeria and radical Iran.
But events now favour the radicals who have long argued that the imposition
of a western-style democracy was inimical to Islamic rule. This has been the
message coming from those mosques, where the party has its most articulate
imams.
Attempts by police yesterday to arrest an immam at a mosque in eastern
Algiers led to clashes with young militants in which one person was killed
and seven wounded.
According to Mr M'mida Ayachi, author of the first Algerian study of the
Islamic movement in Algeria, the radical side of the party has been in a
minority in Algerian society, which is divided above all else by regional
loyalties and the allegiancies forged during the bitter struggle for
independence from France.
Operating in semi-clandestinity since the early 1980s as an Islamic
movement, the FIS was one the first to take advantage of the February 1989
legislation that permitted a multi-party system. Its main external
inspiration has been the Moslem Brothers in Egypt, says Mr Ayachi.
However, the FIS has exploited Algerians' confused cultural identity, caught
between the French-speaking, western-orientated intellectual tradition
(particularly espoused by the left) and the new nation's declared aim of
being Arab and Islamic. The late President Houari Boumedienne, himself the
product of an Islamic education, encouraged Algeria's Islamic identity and
ensured the state took control of religion to counter the weight of the left
in the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN).
He established an Islamic university in Constantine, changed the weekend to
Thursday and Friday, promoted an extensive mosque building programme and
accelerated Arabisation in schools through the import of Egyptian teachers,
many of whom were Moslem Brothers.
Mr Chadli continued this process by establishing a national network of
Islamic cultural centres, although state-sponsored Islamicisation was
abruptly halted in the mid-1980s when he realised the movement was
undermining the hegemony of the ruling party and conflicted with modern
economic development.
The subsequent confusion over how to deal with this hydra the authorities
had in part created allowed the FIS to emerge as the authentic exponent of
an Islamic society. This was made easier by its infiltration of the mosques.
The movement possesses no recogniseable ideologist and its vaguely worded,
Koran-inspired platform is almost three years old, but the party is
well-organised and well-funded, often with private Saudi money.
Neighbourhood committees provided social services and food for the poor,
and, when legalised, the party offered street-level promises of jobs and
housing to a population suffering from chronic housing problems and youth
unemployment of more than 30 per cent. And it constantly presents itself as
the populist champion of clean government.
The FIS has thus filled a vacuum created by the combination of an
inefficient corrupt bureaucuracy, a one-party system which has failed to
represent the interests of the urban under-privileged and an economic
development programme whose jobs favoured the western educated.
The party's appeal to the urban poor and disgruntled lower echelons of
government administration seems to go beyond Islam. This is borne out by a
study of the Algerian national research centre which found that only 50 per
cent of FIS voters wanted Islamic rule. But in a 25m population of whom 60
per cent are below age 30, 41 per cent of the voting youth supported the
FIS. Such support will remain as long as the grievances are unremedied.
