FT  16 MAY 92 / Scandal forces Indian markets to close
INDIA'S stock markets were closed yesterday to prevent a further collapse in
prices after police seized assets belonging to Mr Harshad Mehta, the Bombay
broker under investigation for alleged fraud in the securities market.
Share prices , have swung wildly since the country's worst financial scandal
broke three weeks ago. Yesterday the Bombay Stock Exchange suspended Mr
Mehta, and the Central Bureau of Investigation froze his bank accounts and
impounded his share certificates.
Mr Mehta, the main architect of the bull run that more than tripled prices
over the last year, is under investigation for allegedly buying shares out
of funds illegally raised from the interbank market in government and public
sector debt.
His suspension was announced after a meeting he had last night with the
stock exchange authorities. Also suspended were his brother, Mr Ashwin
Mehta, and Mrs Jyoti Mehta, his wife.
Mr Mehta said yesterday that he would honour all his commitments and called
for a meeting with creditors to agree on a way to settle his debts. He said
creditors had 'no real reason to panic'.
He expressed his concern for investors who faced 'the melting of their
wealth.' He assured them 'the long term outlook of the country and the
market is very bright'.
The closing of the market came after a week in which the Bombay 30 share
index recovered some ground because of massive buying by the state owned
financial institutions after plunging violently with the uncovering of the
scandal.
The index, at 3,394, is 24 per cent down on its April 22 peak - but still
trading at historically unrealistic price/earnings ratios.
Dr Manmohan Singh, the finance minister, is to review financial sector
reform at a meeting today with Mr S Venkitaramanan, the Reserve Bank
governor, and the heads of other financial institutions.
Bankers and government officials fear the disclosure of stock market abuses
could damage Indian hopes of tapping direct portfolio investment from
abroad.
The scandal could also make it more difficult for Indian companies to raise
funds on the Euromarkets. Reliance, the petrochemicals group controlled by
the Ambani family,is expected to be the first Indian company to
seekEuromarkets funds with a Dollars 100m issue in June.
