FT  09 OCT 92 / Maxwell insurers near deal: Out-of-court settlement over
Pounds 20m life policy under discussion
LONDON insurers are close to a settlement over a Pounds 20m policy on the
life of the late Robert Maxwell in a move to avoid a long and costly legal
battle.
An out-of-court settlement is under discussion involving the insurers,
Maxwell companies, and administrators who have failed to agree on the cause
of Mr Maxwell's death off the Canaries on November 5 last year. The
insurers, which include Lloyd's syndicates and London market companies,
would pay a figure believed to be in the region of Pounds 6m without
accepting liability.
Detailed discussions were under way yesterday to discuss how the money would
be divided, but it is likely that it will be shared equally between the four
principal beneficiaries.
The policy was taken out on behalf of two companies in the private Maxwell
business empire - Robert Maxwell Group and Headington Investments - and the
public companies Mirror Group Newspapers and Maxwell Communication
Corporation.
Some associated companies may claim a share of any eventual payout.
Under the terms of the policy, broked by Willis Wrightson, the UK subsidiary
of Willis Corroon, the full claim would be payable only if Mr Maxwell died
from accidental causes or murder. The policy is rendered invalid if he
committed suicide, or lied about his state of health when applying for the
policy. In his application, Mr Maxwell is believed to have stated that he
had no health problems.
Mr Roger Rich, of Rich Wheeler &amp; Company, loss adjusters, acting for the
insurers, remains convinced that the most likely cause of death was suicide.
Investigators acting for the beneficiaries have ruled out murder and a heart
attack. They have concluded that Mr Maxwell died from drowning after falling
into the sea. Both sides appear to have accepted that neither suicide nor an
accident can be conclusively ruled out on the basis of the forensic evidence
after autopsies carried out by Spanish, and separately by English and
Israeli pathologists.
Reaching a firm conclusion has been complicated by the less than thorough
nature of a Spanish police report; the absence of witnesses; and different
interpretations by the two sides of Mr Maxwell's behaviour prior to his
death.
There has also been disagreement over the significance of a sudden change of
course by Mr Maxwell's yacht the Lady Ghislaine on the morning of his death,
and by the apparent absence of references to heart ailments or surgery in
the insurance proposal form.
According to Mr Maxwell's personal doctors, he was healthy before starting
his final cruise. But he is known to have had part of one lung removed, and
had been suffering for years from fluid and respiratory ailments. Spanish
pathologists concluded Mr Maxwell could have died from a heart attack in the
water.
BARCLAYS Bank announced yesterday that it had failed in the Court of Appeal
to reverse a High Court ruling that it must face proceedings in the New York
Bankruptcy Court over a disputed Dollars 30m it received from Maxwell
Communication Corporation.
The bank obtained the money just before MCC went into administration.
In July, Mr Justice Hoffmann struck out an application by Barclays Bank for
injunctions to prevent Price Waterhouse, MCC's administrators, from bringing
proceedings in the US courts for the return of the money.
Yesterday, Lords Justices Glidewell, Mann and Leggatt dismissed Barclays'
appeal against Mr Justice Hoffmann's decision and refused leave to appeal to
the House of Lords.
Barclays, a creditor of MCC, received the Dollars 30m repayment on MCC's
overdraft at its branch in Holborn, London, in November last year. A short
time later, the company went into UK administration and applied for
equivalent Chapter 11 protection in New York.
Barclays argued that England was the correct forum for the dispute and
sought to bar the administrators from invoking US jurisdiction.
