FT  20 MAR 92 / Falklands struggle for a new identity: Jimmy Burns surveys
the windswept island colony for which Britain fought a war
A British soldier recently discovered he had been in Port Stanley, capital
of the Falkland Islands, only after he had driven through it. Turning to his
passenger, who was also his commanding officer, he commented on the
'village' they had just passed and, as they motored on into the countryside,
wondered when they would see Stanley.
Indeed, at a glance, it is difficult to understand what all the fuss was
about.
The islands - that saw an Argentine invasion and subsequent death of more
than 1,000 soldiers ten years ago - still look not much different from a
scattering of Scottish isles.
Stark and windswept, they loom out of the south Atlantic like a geological
afterthought.
Stanley, where most of the Falklands population of 2,100 is concentrated,
has fewer facilities than many smallish European villages: primitively built
houses, a single bank and the Upland Goose, which represents the capital's
claim to an international hotel but in reality is little more than a
glamorised pub. It keeps its clients entertained with nightly videos and a
one-page summary of world news. Newspapers arrive several days late.
It says much for the abandoned condition of the British colony before the
war that the present-day Falklands boasts of economic progress: a new fully
equipped hospital and school, a new telephone and road system linking some
previously isolated areas, and a new military airport that can be used by
wide-bodied jets.
No British government, having lost lives to retain the islands, could afford
to let them sink into oblivion.
Between 1982 and 1987, the kelpers, as the islanders call themselves, found
it easy to get subsidies for their business projects: Pounds 30m was
channelled from London into the civilian sector and Pounds 3bn was earmarked
in defence spending.
The programme proved controversial because of some ill-judged investments in
projects which in different political circumstances might have been
subjected to more careful scrutiny.
The Falklands programme has since been streamlined and subjected to more
control. As the governor of the islands, Mr William Fullerton, says, the
economy has entered a 'consolidation phase.'
The real change in the Falklands' economic fortunes has come about thanks to
the discovery of squid in the South Atlantic and the granting of fishing
licences by the local government to foreign companies.
The licences now account for 65 per cent of the islands' operating revenue,
even though this is still only a third of what the British Ministry of
Defence pays out to maintain its troops on the islands.
Thanks to squid, the islands are more self-sufficient than they used to be
and less dependent on their traditional wool industry, which over the years
suffered because of weak world demand.
The new sense of confidence is personified by Mr Terry Betts. In 1982 he was
an employee of the Falkland Islands Company, which virtually controlled the
local economy but whose substantial landholdings have been broken up and
distributed with government assistance to Falklands residents. Its Stanley
holdings, including the Upland Goose, are up for sale.
Today, Mr Betts and his wife run their own businesses, including several
smaller retailing outlets, and have taken shareholdings in some of the
foreign companies which have obtained licences.
'We've moved from living within a colonial glove,' he said, 'to having a
sense of our own identity. What matters to me is success and economic
growth.'
The problem for the Falklands is where to go next. Officials believe the
islands' licensing regime has reached its maximum potential, balancing the
need to increase revenue and the need to conserve stocks on which future
revenue depends.
In fact, licensing revenue has fallen to Pounds 25m from its peak of Pounds
28m in the 1988-89 season because of more stringent conservation and
competition from other fishing areas.
One option being considered by the government is broadening the scope of the
islands' economic involvement in the fishing industry through development of
onshore facilities and a more carefully scrutinised programme of joint
ventures.
Few kelpers have any direct stake in what is actually fished in their
waters, while support facilities are based in the Chilean port of Punta
Arenas.
There is also growing local interest in the prospect of developing oil
resources.
London has authorised the local Falkland Islands government to issue seismic
exploration licences.
At the same time it has embarked on talks with Argentina - at which island
officials have been present - with a view eventually to discussing issues
such as harmonisation of legislation, enviromental policies and demarcation
of zones.
No conclusive survey has ever been done in and around the islands, although
the offshore seabed has long been rumoured to hold large oil reserves.
However, any serious oil development in the islands could well provoke
considerable environmental and political problems and thereby revive the
issue of sovereignty.
