FT  25 JUL 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Jugglers who balance the books,
too - How to profit from digital dexterity
THE company chairman was showing off. He strode into the workshop, picked up
three of his best-selling products and started juggling.
Charlie Fairbairn, the 28-year-old co-founder of More Balls Than Most -
Britain's leading supplier of juggling equipment - has a right to clown
around. From start-up two years ago, his company has grown rapidly and now
commands 55 per cent of the UK market in circus-related products.
It is difficult to imagine a successful enterprise operating from the
company's cluttered headquarters. Housed in London's old Leather Exchange,
the premises look as though a three-ring circus has just decamped, leaving
its equipment behind.
Every surface is littered with brightly-coloured juggling balls; rows of
unicycles hang from overhead racks; there are spinning plates, devil sticks,
clubs and flaming torches by the caseload. A large sign suspended from the
ceiling reads simply: 'Are you ready?'
Fairbairn and his partner, Adam Gardner, think they are ready to expand and
recently have signed distribution rights in Sweden, Norway, the US and
Belgium. They decided to move into overseas markets following record sales
in their 10 UK outlets and through franchised retailers including Harrods,
where the juggling balls were the best-selling 'adult game' last year.
The two jugglers, who set up the company in 1990 using a Pounds 15,000
NatWest overdraft and a loan from the London Enterprise Agency, claim the
secret of their success lies in the feel-good factor. 'We make the world's
sexiest juggling ball - made from polymeric casing and filled with millet to
create a softer, more tactile ball,' says Gardner.
'It has an oooh factor which people find appealing,' his partner adds.
Since its launch, More Balls Than Most has grown from a four-person outfit
into an enterprise capable of producing 30,000 balls a week with 35
full-time staff and a further 30 casual workers who hand-sew the final
stitching on every ball. Turnover this year is expected to exceed Pounds
1.5m and Fairbairn hopes to see a profit of Pounds 250,000 on sales of more
than 750,000 balls.
From its humble beginnings on a market stall in London's trendy Covent
Garden, the company is now looking at ways of using new technology to
increase production. Already, engineering graduates at the South Bank
Polytechnic have helped to boost output by designing a unique 'ball-filling'
machine - one of those hypnotic pieces of equipment which you can watch for
hours. It uses suction to hold the balls in place while the correct amount
of bird seed is pumped in.
Although most of the company's sales are to individuals who want to learn a
new skill, Fairbairn sees corporate demand as the biggest growth market. A
number of groups such as Virgin and Paramount International have ordered
tailor-made juggling balls embossed with their logos. As an alternative
corporate gift, they are said to be more popular than diaries or umbrellas.
The juggling theme also is used as a promotional gadget. One computer group,
Peterborough Software, has balls carrying the slogan: 'You're safe in our
hands.'
They come packaged in a box extolling Peterborough's virtues. The motto on
the outside says: 'A company that knows what the left hand and right hand
are doing.'
The men behind More Balls than Most, both former computer salesmen, say
juggling should not be dismissed as a pastime but recognised as an important
antidote to executive stress.
Gardner and Fairbairn offer stress relief seminars to their corporate
clients, involving a crash course in circus skills. Juggling transcends age
and sex barriers and can ease desk-bound ailments such as repetitive strain
injury, says Fairbairn, who adds that it is prescribed by some US doctors as
an exercise to relieve arthritis.
The company hopes such uses will boost demand overseas. Exports represent
only a small part of their business at present, but the imminent launch of a
US mail order catalogue - to be delivered to 36m households - is expected to
attract more orders.
The optimism, however, is tinged with concern at the tough attitude of
lenders to small businesses. Export sales are desirable in order to ease the
company's cash flow problems.
'The fact we're turning over large sums of money sometimes sounds alarm
bells to banks,' says Fairbairn. 'If you are a company which is vulnerable
and trying to grow, then the banks can be very difficult.'
Like many other young companies with innovative products, the initial
success has to be measured against its borrowing. More Balls Than Most pays
3 per cent over base for its overdraft of Pounds 40,000 and has a factoring
of 2.75 per cent through Lombard NatWest.
Fairbairn refuses, however, to put finance at the top of his list of
priorities. He talks of 'a vision' rather than a business plan, and the
balls come with a booklet entitled A Short Course In Life Enhancement rather
than a guarantee.
'We're not just salesmen,' he says. 'We're teachers. Since we've been in
business, more than 150,000 people have learned to juggle. That's success.'
More Balls Than Most, 14-15 The Leather Market, Weston Street, London SE1
3ER. Tel: 071-357-7707.
