FT  21 SEP 92 / World Economy and Business Review (16): Human face of world
finance - Profile of Michel Camdessus, chief of the International Monetary
Fund
MICHEL CAMDESSUS, the managing director of the IMF, is rapidly establishing
himself as the 'human face' of global finance. In recent speeches he has
called on all international agencies (including the IMF) to place a greater
emphasis on the social components of adjustment policies.
He believes 'social policy' is an essential 'fourth pillar' of a system of
international co-operation. The reforms he advocates include a big increase
in aid for developing countries and more generous social safety nets to ease
the human suffering involved in the transition to market capitalism.
Mr Camdessus has long argued that the IMF must adapt its traditional
approach. He favours less emphasis on short-term 'stabilisation' policies
and more emphasis on policies likely to promote long-run growth. At the Rio
Earth Summit in June, he refined his thinking further. The IMF's ultimate
goal was no longer growth but 'high quality' growth, he said.
In an interview just before the IMF/World Bank meeting, he set out the
requirements for high quality growth. It meant an expansion that was
sustainable (for example not based on excessive borrowing), that raised the
living standards of the poorest groups, and that met high environmental
standards.
Sceptics will note that the actual programmes negotiated by the fund's staff
rarely seem to embody Mr Camdessus's higher aspirations. However, the fact
that the IMF managing director makes radical speeches is significant in
itself. Policies will change only if attitudes change, and Mr Camdessus is
at least pushing in the right direction.
The supervision of the transition to capitalism in Russia and other formerly
centrally planned economies will doubtless occupy much of Mr Camdessus's
time in coming years. Indeed, in all probability Mr Camdessus's record will
be judged mainly by his success or failure in this historic task.
However, in the interview, Mr Camdessus stressed that he was also seeking to
place greater emphasis on the co-ordination of policies among industrial
countries. He regards this as a precondition for a robust world economic
recovery. If consumer and business confidence are to revive, he said, the
leading countries 'have to be seen to be acting together effectively'.
His remarks were prompted in part by the recent turmoil in foreign exchange
markets. In the mid-1980s the strains caused by the dollar's severe
overvaluation spurred a short-lived revival of interest in global
co-operation. This led to formal currency pacts - such as the Plaza and
Louvre accords of 1985 and 1987 - and to new mechanisms for monitoring
macroeconomic policies. But the commitment to co-operation proved
half-hearted.
Mr Camdessus's task is to try to build a more durable foundation for the
global co-ordination of policies. As a former governor of the French central
bank and director of the French treasury, he at least has the right
background: the French have always been among the most enthusiastic
supporters of government interventions to harmonise policies and stabilise
currencies.
If he succeeds, he will be fulfilling one of the IMF's historic tasks. As Mr
Camdessus has often stressed, the IMF was founded precisely on the
assumption that co-operative solutions to economic problems are preferable
to confrontational 'go-it-alone' approaches.
