FT  03 MAR 92 / Parliament and Politics: When an MP's past does the talking
EVEN the most cautiously spoken politicians carry a past which might make
them blush now.
'Prices, of course, can only be controlled in two ways: either by government
subsidy or by government dictate,' Mr John Major wrote in the Hampstead and
Highgate Express during the February 1974 election when he was the Tory
candidate in the Labour seat of St Pancras North.
'I believe it is right to retain every method - including statutory powers -
to prevent inflation soaring still higher,' he told the paper in the October
campaign that year.
Though the problems and context may have changed, a politician's defence of
his party's record in power is reassuringly familiar from the current
economic debate.
'The Labour party are intent on blaming the Conservatives for each and every
price rise, despite the fact that they are well aware that most of the price
rises are the direct result of increasing prices overseas,' Mr Major argued
for the Heath government.
Reading the 'Ham and High' for 1974 also offers some signs of the Major
campaigning technique being honed. During his February campaign there was a
report that a Conservative typing error mistakenly attributed to the
Communist candidate Mr Major's own comment that 'Strife not conciliation is
the Communist policy'.
By the second time he fought the seat such problems seemed to have been
ironed out and the value of the photo-opportunity learnt. He arrived at
Camden Town Hall to pay his deposit, clutching a wad of Monopoly money 'to
emphasise to people that if Labour win an overall majority and implement
their policies then sterling will be as valueless as toy money'.
While his February election article was largely devoted to trade unions and
inflation, the one for October covered a doorstep issue. 'I have lost count
of the number of people who have said to me: 'Oh, yes, I know about
inflation, but I don't think any of you can do much about that. What really
worries me is the appalling 214 bus service . . .',' he wrote.
The politician's traditional lament about media bias, on the other hand,
seemed to come almost instinctively.
'I have found, since I became a prospective Conservative candidate in 1971,
that if I make an extreme comment it is far more likely to be printed than a
moderate statement,' he complained in February.
Describing himself as 'wary of being hyper-sensitive on this issue', he
still commented of the 'Ham and High' that 'no one who reads the editorials
could possibly doubt the political persuasions of the editor'.
Much of the 'Reds on the mantelpiece' rhetoric seems a world away from
politics now, but at least one of Mr Major's remarks may strike a chord with
voters looking ahead to this general election.
Musing on his defeat in the February poll, he said: 'There was a real
absence of feeling on the doorstep - no hostility, but also no enthusiasm.'
