FT  21 AUG 92 / International Company News: BHP stock falls sharply on
Foster's stake offer
SHARES in Broken Hill Proprietary (BHP) fell 16 cents to ADollars 13
(USDollars 9) on the Australian Stock Exchange yesterday as the market
reacted to the group's offer to pay more than ADollars 1.5bn (USDollars
1.15bn) for a 32 per cent stake in Foster's Brewing Group.
Analysts said the decline reflected concern that BHP may have to hold the
shares for several years before being able to sell without making a loss.
Foster's shares closed 7 cents higher at ADollars 1.80, suggesting BHP may
have succeeded in removing the uncertainty which has surrounded the group
for two years.
However, Foster's shares could come under pressure because of speculation
that the group will announce a ADollars 1bn rights issue to cover forecast
write-downs in the value of non-brewing assets.
Foster's is expected to reveal substantial write-downs next month when it
announces results for the year to the end of June. Most of the write-downs
are expected to relate to revisions to the loan book of the group's Elders
Finance subsidiary.
Analysts said it was unlikely another bidder would emerge to top BHP's
ADollars 2.39 offer for the shares, which are controlled by the receiver to
International Brewing Holdings (IBH), a private company chaired by Mr John
Elliott. Several international brewers are believed to have considered
taking a stake in Foster's, including Guinness, Anheuser Busch, Heineken and
Miller. But none have indicated an intention to bid.
Foster's is the world's fourth largest brewer. It owns the Carlton and
United brewery in Australia, Courage in the UK and a half share in Molson
Breweries in Canada.
BHP is offering ADollars 1.5bn in cash, plus the cancellation of 27 per cent
of its preference share holding in IBH, equivalent to ADollars 220m. The
deal includes two sets of share options which would increase BHP's Foster's
stake to nearly 50 per cent. BHP has said it acted only to protect its
investment in IBH, which was secured against Foster's shares. BHP said it
plans to sell the shares when the market price reaches ADollars 2.39,
allowing the group to break even on the investment.
