FT  08 JUN 92 / Civil servants resist going to the Dogs: Why howls of
protest against moving to Docklands may be in vain
WHEN Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary, told the Commons last
week of his plan to move 2,000 of his department's civil servants from
Westminster to London's Docklands, it was attacked by the opposition as 'a
back-door deal to save Canary Wharf'.
The civil servants involved have been even more vociferous. At an angry
meeting of 1,000 staff on Friday there were threats of industrial action,
and one speaker described it as 'shoring up a failed private-sector
experiment'.
Mr Howard said three sites were under study: Canary Wharf; Harbour Exchange;
and East India Dock. The move may be less of a bailing-out operation than at
first appears. There are likely to be significant savings if the government
takes advantage of the depressed property market to snap up high-quality
offices in Docklands at Pounds 15 a sq ft or below, less than half central
London levels.
Although it is possible to relocate to areas well away from London where
rents may be even lower, a move to Docklands is more cost-effective,
according to Ms Honor Chapman of Jones Lang Wootton, the property agents.
'Docklands becomes very competitive if account is taken of the costs of
relocating outside London,' she says. 'These include the cost of making
redundant those who do not wish to move, of relocating staff who are
prepared to move, and of recruiting and training new staff.'
Jones Lang Wootton calculates that a typical relocation from central London
to Docklands could recoup the costs in as little as two or three months. For
Sheffield, the pay-back time would be five to seven years. But Ms Chapman
points out that the key to realising the benefits is how easy it is to
dispose of the offices that are vacated.
The experience of the Export Credits Guarantee Department is salutary. That
government body moved in 1991 from central London to Docklands, but its
original offices in Ludgate Hill remain unlet and the ECGD is now paying
rent on both buildings.
Civil Service moves to Docklands will be cost-effective only if they are
from buildings nearing the end of their leases or due to be vacated.
That is why the 2,700 environment staff working in and around the
department's headquarters in Marsham Street are likely to be the first to
make the move. The department last year decided to demolish those offices
after advice that their crumbling tower blocks would cost Pounds 50m to
repair.
In the same boat is the transport department, which shares the Marsham
Street building. Its plans are less advanced, but about 1,200 staff are
expected to move to Docklands.
The 300 staff who work for the Radiocommunications Agency of the Department
of Trade and Industry will also be moving to Docklands - the lease of their
present offices at Waterloo Bridge House is about to end. The same applies
to the 700 Health and Safety Executive staff in two London offices with
leases that both end in 1994.
Other Whitehall departments likely to join the exodus include the
Agriculture Department and the Lord Chancellor's Department. Parts of Mr
Michael Heseltine's DTI, homeless at present while its Victoria Street
headquarters is stripped of asbestos, may also gravitate to the Isle of
Dogs.
None of that has gone down well with the civil servants in the firing line.
A survey of Marsham Street staff last year found that 90 per cent opposed
moving to Docklands.
The relocation pill was sugared for ECGD staff by a Pounds 500-a-year bonus
for additional travelling time. No such inducements appear to be on offer
this time and, according to Ms Elizabeth Symons of the First Division
Association, the union representing top civil servants, undertakings
apparently given to compensate all staff for additional travelling time have
now been withdrawn.
The unions plan a sustained campaign to stop the moves. Aware that there may
be little public sympathy for civil servants, they plan to focus on the
economics of the move, challenging ministers' assertions that relocation to
Docklands is good value for the taxpayer.
The truth is that relocating civil servants to Docklands might well be an
astute financial move. It is unlikely, however, that those who must journey
to work on the Isle of Dogs rather than Whitehall will see that as a
convincing argument.
LONDON'S Docklands are expected to become a regional office centre like
Croydon, according to a poll of the property industry by Gallup, the
research company, Vanessa Houlder writes.
In a survey commissioned by Chartered Surveyors Weekly and Building Magazine
of 80 fund managers and property directors, 78 per cent said Docklands would
be regarded as a regional office centre of immediate importance within 10
years. Nearly one in six expected that it would eventually rank alongside
the West End and the City.
Five per cent thought it would not be regarded as an option for any form of
office accommodation.
A quarter thought the collapse of the Canary Wharf project would slow
economic recovery in the country as a whole. More than a third of the
investment and development companies (35 per cent) thought Canary Wharf's
being in administration would adversely affect their own lines of credit.
Canary Wharf's difficulties would have quite a depressing effect on the
property market, according to 36 per cent, while 48 per cent though it would
be 'not very depressive'. It is expected to be let at a rent of Pounds 14 a
sq ft on average.
Canary Wharf Survey, Chartered Surveyor Weekly, 1 Millharbour, London E14
9RA.
O&amp;Y creditors, Page 19
