FT  27 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Copier protection
THE RECENT news that the European Commission is thinking of prolonging
anti-dumping duties on Japanese photocopiers is a sad illustration of the
perverse effects of protectionism. For five years, Japanese manufacturers
have been subject to a levy of 20 per cent on copiers exported to the EC. In
those five years, four things have happened. Japanese producers have
switched production to the EC; their share of the EC copier market has
risen; the number of independent EC suppliers has fallen from five to three;
and copier prices in the EC are lower than they were before.
This raises two questions. First, it is not obvious why the three surviving
European manufacturers should seek the continuance of a policy which seems
to have served them so badly in the past. Second, given that the object of
the anti-dumping duties is to make EC consumers pay more for their copiers,
why should they tolerate the reimposition of duties, successful or not?
The policy may prove damaging to the European companies over the longer term
as well. It could be argued that in several markets, not just in the EC,
anti-dumping duties have not only dulled the competitive edge of domestic
suppliers. They have also helped Japanese companies by bringing forward
global strategies which they would eventually have pursued anyway.
A Japanese manufacturer such as Canon - the EC market leader in copiers -
talks openly of how its eventual aim in copiers, typewriters, word
processors and cameras is to establish manufacturing sites in developing
countries to serve developed markets. Thus, the Japanese market will be
supplied from south-east Asia or mainland China. The US market will be
supplied from Mexico or South America. The EC will eventually be supplied
from the former communist bloc or from Turkey. The necessary first stage is
to establish manufacturing in the developed country itself. In several
cases, such manufacture has specifically been brought forward by the threat
of anti-dumping penalties. If EC producers cannot cope with this first stage
of the strategy, it is unclear how they will deal with the second.
Nor is it quite clear why the rest of the EC population should care. The use
of cashflow from domestic business to attack foreign markets has been
standard practice for European companies for the best part of a century. Now
that EC manufacturers find the tables turned, they seek protection on the
grounds of lack of reciprocal access to the Japanese market. But for the
most part, that is no longer the issue. Japanese manufacturers are exporting
technology to the EC. In such cases as UK car manufacturing, they are also
making a material contribution to the balance of trade. If EC producers
cannot meet the challenge, there comes a point where it is no longer the
business of EC consumers to bail them out by paying over the odds for their
products.
