FT  16 APR 92 / Survey of Swindon (11): Down to earth study - Natural
Environmental Research Council
LAST week's announcement that the ozone layer above northern Europe shrank
by 20 per cent in the first two months of the year was a tribute to the
international co-operation of 300 scientists working in 17 different
counties.
The scientists, members of European Arctic Stratospheric Ozone Experiment
(Easoe), established that conditions over the north Atlantic, Europe and New
England were so bad in early February, ozone was possibly being lost at the
rate of 1 per cent a day. One calculation suggests that for every 1 per cent
drop in the ozone screen, there could be a 2 per cent increase in
non-melanoma skins cancers, adding an extra Pounds 7m in treatment costs to
the NHS in Britain.
The experiment was also a tribute to the research policy of the
Swindon-based Natural Environmental Research Council (NERC), whose research
institute, the British Antarctic Survey, co-ordinated the investigation in
conjunction with the US space agency NASA. The discovery by NERC's
scientists of the ozone hole above the Antarctic in 1985 led to the Montreal
Protocol of 1989 on phasing out CFCs.
NERC is one of five research councils funded by the Department of Education
and Science. With a budget this year of Pounds 170m and a staff of 2,600
employed in 16 institutes and research units across the UK, it is charged
with the basic task of discovering how the earth's environment, which is now
known to be a network of interlocking natural systems, works.
Other projects include the construction of a new Pounds 40 Oceanographic
Centre at Southampton, and a new Geosciences Centre at Keyworth, near
Nottingham.
Its marine scientists have just completed an ambitious survey of the North
Sea, with a view to constructing a model of how its water quality changes
with the seasons. This has important political and economic implications.
The EC is planning to ban this dumping before the end of the decade. The
government believes it may be possible to dump sewage sludge in the right
place and the right time without doing environmental damage.
It is also investigating changing land use in Britain using satellite
sensing, land classification and on-the-ground sampling. This has already
established for example that some 25,000 miles of hedgerow disappeared
between 1978 and 1984. By comparing these figures with changes in flora and
fauna population changes, it is hoped to obtain a total picture of the
ecosystem.
NERC's work on analysing the biological rather than the chemical
constituents of water has already yielded a very valuable method of
monitoring water quality. A diagnostic computer programme, Rivpacs, designed
for use by water authorities, analyses the biological community which lives
in the water from which it is able to measure the levels of nitrates and
cocktail effects of impurities.
Rivpacs is just one example of NERC's increasing involvement in finding
practical answers to environmental problems. A quarter of NERC's income now
comes from research commissioned by a variety of public bodies and
industrial sectors in the UK and abroad. In the years ahead, it is clearly
set to grow.
