FT  05 NOV 92 / Gulf between the old and the new: The emerging split between
drug companies
When president-elect Mr Bill Clinton repeated his 'challenge' to drugs
companies 'to give us a new healthcare system', in his victory speech late
on Tuesday night, he might have been expected to send a shudder through the
pharmaceuticals industry.
However, a restructuring of the industry was inevitable regardless of the
election's outcome. The industry is already splitting into two groups, as
shown by the job cuts announced last week by Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly
and Syntex.
In the past five years, when most industries have seen earnings constrained
by weak US and European economies, the more successful drugs companies have
turned in steady annual profits growth of 15 to 20 per cent.
For the past decade, pharmaceutical companies without innovative products
that can command a premium have relied on price rises in the US, the world's
largest market, to bolster earnings. Price increases have outpaced inflation
since the late 1970s, leaving the US with some of the highest drugs prices
in the world. According to Mr Viren Mehta, partner at Mehta &amp; Isaly, the New
York analysts, the high prices have helped many companies receive more than
half their profits from the US although only about one-third of total
pharmaceutical sales are made in the US.
However, recession and spiralling healthcare costs have changed the
political climate, making further price increases unacceptable. Mr Clinton's
victory this week shattered any remaining hope of price increases.
Senator David Pryor, the Arkansas Democrat who has led the congressional
campaign against excessive drugs prices, has called for strong and effective
cost containment against the pharmaceuticals industry, which he claimed, was
making 'record-breaking profits on the backs of the American public'.
Over the last 12 months most companies have felt obliged to announce they
would not make further increases or that they would limit them to the rate
of inflation. The effects were seen in the third-quarter results announced
last week, with a growing divergence in the industry between the 'haves' and
'have-nots'.
Companies such as Merck and Pfizer, which have new and innovative products,
have continued to drive double-digit earnings growth. Companies reliant on
older products, such as Syntex and Upjohn, have stumbled.
Merck led the field with net income growth of 17 per cent. Pfizer saw net
earnings rise 8 per cent.
Meanwhile, Bristol-Myers, the world's third largest drugs group, saw
earnings rise only 5 per cent. Last week it announced a 6 per cent cut in
its workforce.
The move came only days after Syntex announced its first job cuts in 10
years. Mr Hemant Shah, a pharmaceutical analyst at HKS in New Jersey, says
that because of the difficulties facing the industry, many more
pharmaceuticals companies are likely to be forced into similar actions.
Upjohn has also suffered problems. Its earnings for the third quarter were
flat. A number of Upjohn's important drugs will lose their patents by the
end of 1994, and analysts do not expect its new drugs to be big enough to
compensate.
Eli Lilly delivered the biggest surprise of the earnings season, turning in
its first-ever loss, of Dollars 268.5m (Pounds 172m). The deficit mainly
reflected restructuring and other charges of Dollars 519.6m. Lilly's
third-quarter charge also included Dollars 245m for manufacturing
streamlining.
Analysts expect other companies to start targeting manufacturing, an area in
which there is massive over-capacity.
'You are going to see a consolidation in the number of manufacturing
facilities,' said Mr Paul Freiman, chairman of the US Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers Association and chief executive of Syntex.
As drugs groups look for further savings, the area most likely to be spared
is research and development. R&amp;D is considered the life-blood of the
industry, as it provides the drugs to drive earnings in the future.
Nevertheless, the present rate of R&amp;D investment - which increased from
Dollars 4.5bn in 1987 to Dollars 11bn last year - is unsustainable.
Most companies are now focusing their R&amp;D resources. They are no longer
researching as many therapeutic areas and have reduced the number of drugs
they develop. SmithKline Beecham, for example, made 150 redundancies among
research staff in September and realigned its R&amp;D focus.
Marketing is another area likely to be cut as drug companies adjust to a
changing world. Mr James Sasser, Democratic senator for Tennessee, estimates
US pharmaceuticals companies spend Dollars 5,000 per doctor a year trying to
encourage doctors to prescribe their particular drugs.
In spite of such measures, the industry's position may worsen. Senator
Pryor, the oldest and closest political associate of Governor Clinton, has
promised action to rein in price rises during the first 100 days of a
Democratic administration.
Such action would only add to the pressure already being felt by the
industry. Mr Mehta believes that there will be 'successful consolidation,
where investors can expect to get some value in the short-term, among
successful companies helping each other get more successful. Companies not
in that league will have to continue on their own in a lonely setting until
their valuation has become more realistic.
'We have not really seen the final reverberations of what is unfolding,'
added Mr Mehta.
On Wall Street, drug stocks fell further than the overall market yesterday
morning, reflecting uneasiness about the implications of a Clinton
administration for the industry.
