FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Mixed news for owners of farms and
businesses - Caroline Garnham unravels a complex set of IHT rules
INVESTMENTS in agricultural land and business property have been eligible
for inheritance tax (IHT) relief at 100 per cent since March. This means
that these investments can be passed on to the next generation on death, or
put into discretionary trusts during your life, completely free of IHT.
This is good news - or is it? There would appear to be a lot of people who
are not at all pleased.
For a start, not all agricultural land or business property qualifies for
the full 100 per cent relief, only:
Interests in unincorporated businesses.
Holdings above 25 per cent in unquoted companies and 25 per cent in USM
companies.
Owner-occupied farmland, which includes farmland where the farmer can obtain
vacant possession in 12 months.
Farm tenancies.
If, therefore, you have a controlling holding in a fully-quoted company or
an interest in permanently-let farmland, you will not get the full 100 per
cent relief although you might be entitled to a reduced relief of 50 per
cent.
Even if you have, or are able to buy, the right type of investment, the
relief still will be refused if you have not owned it for two years (or
seven years if it is agricultural land). But it is not the restrictions on
the reliefs which make them so unpopular, but the lack of them.
Under long-standing rules, you can make a gift to your children free of IHT
provided you do not die within the next seven years. This gift also attracts
a deferral of capital gains tax (CGT) if it is an interest in a business,
shares in an unquoted company, or shares in your family company.
These rules created an incentive for an entrepreneur to pass on his business
to his children during his lifetime, before he was too old to spoil it for
them. But this incentive has been superseded. With the introduction of the
new relief, more are inclined to hang on to their businesses until death.
Exemption can then be guaranteed, not only for CGT but also from IHT.
It is, however, possible to pass on your business, or the shares in your
family trading company, during your lifetime and be guaranteed the
exemptions. You can settle your business interests in a trust, appointing
your children as trustees and yourself as life tenant. In this way, they
will have control of the business but, for IHT and CGT purposes, it stays
with you. When you die, your estate can take advantage of both the CGT
exemption and the new IHT provisions.
As life tenant, you will be entitled to the company share income; but this
does not mean you need to deprive your children. You could create a class of
preferred shares with dividend rights but few, if any, rights on a
winding-up of the company. The value of the company would then remain in the
settled shares.
A similar, if not more vociferous, criticism is focused on the increase of
relief for agricultural land. But, in this case, it is not just limited to
the impatient children of landowners.
The Tenant Farmers' Association fears for the future of its members. To get
the full 100 per cent relief for themselves, landowners are more likely in
the future to want a share farming arrangement than an agricultural tenancy.
This arrangement would not only deprive farm managers of their relief but,
more importantly, of their security of tenure.
The criticism does not stop with the tenant farmers. The Ramblers'
Association, English Nature and the Countryside Commission also are up in
arms, although for a different reason.
Land of outstanding scenic, historic or scientific interest, and buildings
of outstanding historic or architectural interest, can be passed on to the
next generation (or into a discretionary trust free of IHT) if the Treasury
designates the land as such and undertakings are given over public access
and proper maintainance.
Under the new provisions, though, a 'designated building' probably will
qualify for total exemption if it is run as a business; and land of
outstanding scenic, historic or scientific interest will qualify if it is
agricultural.
The result is that IHT relief will be available without any undertakings on
public access or proper maintenance. This is a retrograde step and will
disappoint all those concerned about the English heritage.
Caroline Garnham is a tax and trusts lawyer for the City firm of Simmons &amp;
Simmons.
