FT  22 JUN 92 / Reichmanns moved assets from O&amp;Y
THE REICHMANN family of Canada has moved assets worth several hundred
million dollars from Olympia &amp; York Developments, the holding company under
court protection, into other private family companies during the past 18
months.
The family companies which bought the assets from O&amp;Y lie outside the court
protection which the Reichmanns sought last month for O&amp;Y, its 28
subsidiaries in Canada, and the Canary Wharf project in London's Docklands.
There is no question about the legality of the transfers. The assets are
understood to have been independently valued.
However, the transactions have contributed to growing friction between O&amp;Y
and holders of its CDollars 13.5bn (USDollars 11.2bn) debt.
A lawyer representing one of the lenders said the family 'have managed to
take away some valuable pieces of property from the process.'
The assets transferred from O&amp;Y since January 1991 include:
Olympia Tile, which is one of North America's biggest distributors of
floor-coverings, and was one of the Reichmanns' first businesses after they
arrived in Canada from Tangier in the late 1950s;
The family's 65 per cent stake in Camdev, the property developer previously
controlled by Canadian entrepreneur Robert Campeau;
Several smaller office buildings.
Some key creditors are also complaining that O&amp;Y, renowned for secrecy until
its liquidity crisis broke earlier this year, is still being less than fully
co-operative in making available financial information.
The concerns centre on unencumbered assets, ranging from parcels of
undeveloped land to the Reichmanns' Gulfstream jet, which could be sold to
help service O&amp;Y's debts.
An Ontario court order issued late last week requires O&amp;Y to provide by this
afternoon a more comprehensive list of its assets than has been available so
far.
New procedures have also been put in place to speed up the flow of
information.
The lenders say they were taken aback last week to learn that O&amp;Y was
selling 50 per cent of a 12-storey office development in the centre of
Budapest.
This project was not listed in O&amp;Y's application for bankruptcy protection.
O&amp;Y officials acknowledge privately that the company has delayed providing
some information.
However, they also blame lenders for making unreasonable requests, including
for data which, if publicly known, could complicate the disposal of assets.
They say the Budapest property, which is still under construction, was not
significant enough to be listed separately.
In other developments, a company spokesman declined to confirm or deny
reports that O&amp;Y's US subsidiary had raised USDollars 32m from the sale of a
12 per cent stake in Hyperion Capital Management, a New York portfolio
management firm.
Much of O&amp;Y's energy at present is directed towards keeping the US
operation, comprising more than 20 buildings, out of the bankruptcy courts.
O&amp;Y has disclosed that the three investment banks acting as its financial
advisers will receive CDollars 5.8m in fees over the five months to October.
More than half will be paid to JP Morgan of New York, with the rest split
between James D Wolfensohn - one of whose partners, Mr Steve Miller, is
leading O&amp;Y's debt restructuring effort - and Burns Fry of Toronto.
