FT  24 AUG 92 / BAe shrugs off Riyadh's deferral of Pounds 8bn air base
project
BRITISH AEROSPACE, the troubled defence contractor, yesterday played down
the likely impact of a decision by Saudi Arabia to shelve the Pounds
8bn-10bn Sulayil air base project.
The base was to have been part of BAe's largest overseas contract,
al-Yamamah, which is understood to be worth Pounds 30bn over the next
decade.
Riyadh is paying BAe, as lead contractor on al-Yamamah, about Pounds 3bn a
year for the rest of the decade for defence equipment, construction and
services such as training. BAe has never disclosed what proportion of the
total it will be retaining, and how much of it is being paid to the other
companies involved in the contract.
A total of Pounds 10bn has been paid by the Saudis so far, most of this for
72 Tornado air-to-air combat aircraft and a number of trainers. In April,
BAe received an instalment worth about Pounds 1.5bn.
News of the postponement comes at a sensitive time for BAe, which is being
restructured in an effort to restore its financial health. Mr John Cahill,
the company's new chairman, is expected to reveal progress on the
restructuring in BAe's interim results due late next month.
BAe confirmed the Saudi decision to shelve the project yesterday. But within
the company it was being argued that the move was 'not significant'.
Equipment, training and support were a far larger part of the al-Yamamah
project than construction, it was said.
Postponement reflected a change in priorities for Riyadh and suggested that
funds would be moved from the construction project to the procurement of
fighter aircraft, the company argued.
This could lead to Saudi Arabia increasing its order for BAe's Tornado IDS,
the version of the aircraft designed for air-to-air combat.
Officially, BAe would say only that: 'We remain satisfied on the progress of
negotiations over the procurement of further equipment for the al-Yamamah
programme.'
The Saudi decision will mean the transfer to other projects of 100 staff at
Ballast Nedam, BAe's construction arm.
They have been working on designs for the Sulayil base, intended to be a 900
sq km complex, about 480km south of Riyadh in a desert region known as the
Empty Quarter.
