FT  07 MAR 92 / Gardening: Anyone can start a colony - Some of the prettiest
perennials for spring planting
THE COMMON montbretia is usually regarded as rather a weed; a plant very
easy to get into the garden, but much more difficult to get out.
It makes a mass of running roots with little bulbs - more accurately, corms
 -along their length. Some are almost certain to get detached if one tries
to dig a plant out, so any one is capable of starting a new colony. The
flowers, widely-flared yellow and bronzey-red tubes on slender branched
stems, are pretty enough in late summer and early autumn, but the plants are
so dense and invasive that they often overrun more valuable things. There
comes a time when one regrets having ever planted this particular
montbretia.
But while the common type may not be very attractive, it is not
characteristic of the family as a whole. Botanically these plants are no
longer called Montbretia, but crocosmia; they include several valuable
late-flowering herbaceous perennials which are all suitable for planting in
spring.
Indeed, they are often included in spring bulb lists, although the most
satisfactory way of obtaining them is not as dry corms but as growing tufts,
ready to start away directly they are put into the soil. None of these
montbretia relatives is anything like such an overwhelming plant as the
common kind. Some are even a little tender, and need to be treated with
respect.
This is certainly true of what I regard as the most beautiful of all,
Crocosmia masonorum. This has erect, sword-shaped, prominently ribbed leaves
which are attractive in themselves, and the slender yet rigid flower stems
curl over at the top to display, almost upside down, a short spike of
closely packed reddish-orange flowers. There is also a new all-yellow
variety named Rowallane Yellow, which is being released this spring by
Bressingham Gardens, Bressingham, Diss, Norfolk.
In its habit, Crocosmia masonorum is immediately recognisable from the rest
of this family, and it has passed on some of its character to a series of
fine hybrids made by Alan Bloom of Bressingham Nurseries, who used this
plant and another species named Crocosmia paniculata. Just to get things
really tangled up, Alan Bloom uses the old name for this plant, Antholyza
paniculata, so do not be surprised to find this name in the Bressingham
Gardens catalogue.
It is another fine plant, taller and stronger growing than C masonorum,
making big clumps but without the tendency to ramble all over the place like
the common montbretia. I like it very much, both as a foliage plant and when
bearing its small spikes of deep scarlet flowers in summer. The flower stems
bend over at the top - but not quite so far as those of C masonorum - so
that the flowers actually face upwards. It has passed on this habit to some
of the Bressingham hybrids which tend to have larger individual flowers but
not be quite so tall.
Probably the best of the lot is Lucifer, also a slightly lighter shade of
red. This is a first class border plant and also a very good cut flower and,
with me, it has always proved to be completely hardy. So, I must add, has
Crocosmia paniculata, though years ago it used to be treated as if it were a
little tender and given sunny sheltered places.
Other members of these Bloom hybrid Crocosmias include Emberglow, which is
shorter in growth and has duskier flowers which Alan Bloom describes as
burnt orange-red; Bressingham Beacon, which has orange and yellow flowers;
and Jennie Bloom, with smaller but very numerous, deep yellow flowers with
more of the typical montbretia character.
Yet another hybrid, but from a different source, is Severn Sunrise. This was
raised by Vera Cattermole and Paul Durrant, who used to work for Bloom's
Nurseries. This crocosmia appeared as a chance seedling in their nursery in
Wales so little is known about its parentage, but its appearance suggests
that the seed came from one of the Bloom hybrids. I have not seen it but
Bloom's Nurseries, which sells it, describe it as 'glowing orange subtly
tinged with pink as the flowers fade, compact and ideal for the smaller
garden.'
Which brings me back to what gardeners still call montbretias. There are
still some very superior varieties that, far from taking charge of the
garden, tend to disappear in winter unless they are dug up in the autumn and
over-wintered in a frame. This I have found true of varieties such as His
Majesty, Queen of Spain and Star of the East, which all have widely-flared
flowers of very good size and quality.
It has also been partly true in my garden of Emily McKenzie, a fine variety
that is widely available and seems to grow well in many places, but which
with me lives for a year or so and then fades away. I do not know why. But
there are some good varieties that do seem more reliable, two of the best
being Citronella and Solfaterre. The former has small but numerous yellow
flowers and makes a good clump of narrow, typically montbretia leaves, the
whole plant 2 ft or little more in height. Solfaterre is remarkable for
having bronze leaves and pale apricot yellow flowers. Neither seems to have
any inclination to behave aggressively.
Some of the failures with these plants may be due to drought. Certainly, in
dry places leaves do tend to wither in summer but I have never been sure
that this is not due to disease. Certainly, it is possible to see crocosmias
of all kinds growing surprisingly well near water.
