FT  18 JUL 92 / International Company News: German groups to develop
hovertrain
THREE OF Germany's leading engineering groups, Thyssen, AEG and Siemens, are
to join forces to develop and build the 'whispering arrow' magnetic
hovertrain.
The companies said they would hold equal shares in a new company,
Magnetschnellbahn, which intended to present a private or part-private
financing plan to the government in the autumn.
The pact follows a cabinet decision earlier this week to press on with a
DM493bn (Dollars 324.3bn) programme to restructure the national road and
rail network, which included approval for an initial stretch of elevated
track for the 400kmph magnet train between Hamburg and Berlin.
However, the government, which has invested DM1.6bn in research and
development work over the past 24 years, said it would not provide further
funds. The initial stretch of track plus locomotives and rolling stock would
cost more than DM8bn, according to transport ministry estimates.
The project, officially called Transrapid, received the technical all-clear
in January following exhaustive running trials on a test track in north
Germany. Mr Gunther Krause, transport minister, proposed then that the first
line could be built by a consortium including industrial groups, banks and
Lufthansa, the state-owned airline.
The new company, which must be approved by the supervisory boards of the
three groups and the federal cartel office before incorporation, will be led
by Thyssen, which has been most closely involved in development.
Mr Heinz Riesenhuber, research minister, and a firm champion of the new
system, said in the longer term the Transrapid service could be extended to
link Bremen and Bonn with Hamburg.
While industry prepares its plans for the commercial launch, the government
is committed to pressing on with legal amendments and changes to the
constitution needed before private participation in the rail network can be
allowed.
Although the transport ministry believes the first stretch could be in
service by the end of the century, delays are almost certain.
The project has raised protests from environmentalists, and strong local
opposition is expected from communities along the proposed route.
