FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of Investment in Quebec (4): Cornerstone of economic
development in the 1990s - Pharmaceuticals thrives in Montreal
THE WESTERN suburbs of Montreal illustrate the turnround in the Quebec
pharmaceuticals industry - from decline in the early 1980s to a cornerstone
of economic development in the 1990s.
Hoffman-La Roche, Canadian arm of the Swiss multinational, built extensive
new research and manufacturing space in pastoral Vaudreuil. The multi-storey
tower and five-storey building alongside were designed for the 21st century.
But in 1969, the federal government introduced compulsory licensing for
imported products and reduced basic patent protection for brand-name
medicines to four years.
The company never moved into its space-age facilities. Nor did an
American-based concern which had built a new research lab in the same area.
Hoffman-La Roche moved its Canadian head office to Ontario and its Canadian
research facilities to the US. It waited several years to sell its Vaudreuil
venture.
The brand-name companies maintained that patent protection had been reduced
to the clear advantage of generic producers in the name of lower drug
prices. They warned that the compulsory licensing system would not work for
Canada or Quebec. The exodus continued. By the early 1980s, Ayerst, McKenna
&amp; Harrison closed its Montreal laboratory, merging it into the parent's US
research operations. A few enterprising researchers stayed put, however.
With Canadian financial backing, one group founded a new company
specialising in products for treating diseases of the immune system and
cancer and viral diseases.
Six-year-old BioChem Pharma has yet to show an operating profit but it
boasts a market valuation of CDollars 1bn. It is Glaxo's Canadian partner in
developing anti-Aids drugs. A big change came in 1987 when Ottawa bowed to
pressure from the multinationals and agreed to extend patent protection to
seven years, in return for promises of sizeable investment in Canada.
The same western suburbs of Montreal now display the results of the
investment spree that followed. Nearly Dollars 500m has been invested by
brand-name international and domestic companies in new research,
laboratories and production plants in Quebec since then.
Montreal has become the undisputed centre of Canada's pharmaceutical
industry. Merck Frosst Canada, Burroughs Wellcome, Bristol-Myers Squibb
Pharmaceutical Group and BioChem Pharma are among those which led the way.
Now the Federal Government plans to extend patent protection further in line
with international practice and end compulsory licensing.
'We want the government to adopt legislation placing Canada on a level
playing field with the major industrial nations for protection of
pharmaceutical products,' says Mr Michael Carnow, president of Merck Frosst
Canada. 'This will enable Canada and Quebec to compete for investment.'
He said Gatt deadlines for agreement on patent protection have slipped and
Canada should move unilaterally to ensure Canadian-based companies can
compete. 'This will lead to more research and capital investment.' Merck
Frosst has begun engineering work on a big manufacturing expansion in
Montreal. The new plant will be geared to specific products for
international markets.
The company's Canadian research budget is CDollars 270m for 1991-95,
including a new Dollars 70m research centre opened last September. Colin
Mallet, president of Sandoz Canada, says the investment spree should
continue. He predicts that hundreds of new research and production jobs will
be created in Quebec and Canada this decade if conditions are favourable.
The Quebec government is likely to work hard to ensure that the bulk of the
new investment comes to the province. Pharmaceuticals represent one of
Quebec's three most important competitive industrial clusters, employing
more than 2,000 researchers and planning investment of up to Dollars 1.5b
this decade.
Almost half the total Canadian pharmaceutical industry and more than half
its annual Dollars 300m research effort are now located in Quebec.
The province has four university faculties of medicine, two pharmacology
faculties, an array of specialised bodies such as the Montreal Clinical
Research, Biotechnology Research and the Heart and Cancer Institutes.
Research is also carried out at Laval University in Quebec City.
The Quebec industry's activities range from basic, applied and clinical
research to biotech engineering. Production includes fine chemicals,
pharmaceutic and therapeutic products, vaccines, biological and diagnostic
products. In 1990, the Quebec industry invested Dollars 126m in research, up
28 per cent from 1989, and the 1991 total was higher. It also includes some
generic producers, though these have congregated mainly in Ontario.
The federal government is now considering extending the patent protection
period to 20 years after application or equivalent to about 10 years in the
market place. 'With the population ageing, the industry will play a more
crucial role in the economy,' says Mr Mallet. 'We're all moving towards
longer protection, partly because testing lasts longer and is more complex.
We must provide an environment fostering competition with other industrial
countries in scientific expertise and patent protection.
'The dice are still loaded against Canada now because its local market is
lost to generic manufacturers after only seven years. Canadian firms and
researchers must be given a fighting chance.'
Generic producers have reacted strongly to suggestions that patent
protection will be extended significantly. Mr Barry Sherman, president of
Apotex, Toronto, one of Canada's two biggest generic drug makers, said the
government has capitulated to US pressure. Apotex is not going ahead with
plans for a Dollars 50m extension to its Winnipeg plant.
