FT  23 NOV 92 / The European Market: Squeezing the new European single
market for all its worth - How an Italian company with fruit juice
operations based in Verona expanded by developing a plant near Berlin
WITH a father called Karl and a daughter by the name of Andrea, Mr Oswald
Zuegg - until 1918 Austrian by nationality - hardly fits the bill as Italy's
biggest maker of jams and fruit juices. The family business has been
involved in fruit-growing since 1895.
But in the fruit-growing valleys of Merano, in the region Italians call the
Alto Adige but Austrians still refer to as the Sudtirol, the name raises few
eyebrows. With German the mother tongue of most locals, family names and
traditions from the era of Austrian rule stick deep.
This year, Mr Zuegg has turned into a, somewhat unwilling, champion of
cross-cultural opportunities and the need for change if Italy is not to be
left behind in a two, or even three, speed European Community moving towards
an increasingly liberalised market.
Though familiar to millions of Italian shoppers, Zuegg was hardly a name
that tripped off journalists' tongues until its travails with a local
council near Verona, one of its three production sites, came to light.
The Verona plant, which houses Zuegg's fruit juice operations, had long
outgrown its boundaries. In a situation familiar to many in Italy, plans to
expand had been thwarted by the country's notoriously slow planning
bureaucracy. Worse still, an election defeat for the local council meant
previously accepted proposals were overturned by its successor.
After years of struggling, Mr Zuegg decided to throw in the towel. 'It's a
labyrinth from which we failed to emerge for six years,' he says. 'Even in a
zone earmarked for industry, the attitude seemed to be that industry didn't
matter.'
The decision coincided with the start of production at Zuegg's new plant
near Berlin, in what used to be East Germany. Talks with the agriculture
ministry of the German Democratic Republic about VEB Fruchtsaft, a small
maker of fruit juices with around 150 employees, had started in the closing
days of the communist era. Assisting the negotiations was none other than Mr
Gregor Gysi, the lawyer turned politician who subsequently became the GDR's
last premier and now heads a small all-German opposition party.
Discussions dragged on as the East German regime fell and the
still-inexperienced Treuhand privatisation agency took over. Finally, in
June 1991 the deal was signed. Zuegg bought the plant for around DM5m
(Pounds 2m), slashed the workforce to 35 and spent DM16m on new machinery.
The timing could hardly have been better for Italians eager to point out
their country's deficiencies. Here was an 'Italian' company turning its back
on the motherland for the efficient and reliable north. Zuegg's Teutonic
traditions just added to the piquancy. The message for Italian industry was
clear: a unified Germany was bound to suck up investment previously destined
for southern Europe, and Italy was in danger of being marginalised in a
unification-dominated EC unless it could put its house in order.
Mr Zuegg sees things differently. He says the company planned to expand
abroad before matters in Verona came to a head. And the new Berlin plant -
now the group's most modern - still has to overcome the suspicions of West
German customers. Many potential western clients remain wary of the plant's
semi-finished fruit concentrates, sold to dairy companies for fruit
yoghurts. 'The problem is that West German customers are still suspicious
about things from the east.'
'We knew from the start we couldn't allow ourselves even one mistake.'
Although production started last November, early output was used internally.
In spite of having ultra-modern machinery in a plant which is 'like new,'
output built up at snail's pace. However, the local staff are dedicated.
'You mustn't underestimate these people. They have a sense of pride in
wanting to show they can produce well.' He wants to develop the plant in
east Berlin as a foothold for northern Europe with a whole range of
products.
For a company with fewer than 500 employees and sales of just L250bn (Pounds
122m) a year, Zuegg is remarkably Community-minded. Its promotional material
comes in five languages, while its message is decidedly pan-European.
Its next aim is to introduce juice from Sicily's famous blood oranges to
consumers in northern Europe, starting with Austria and Germany. The
succulent fruit, only available for a limited period and barely known
outside Italy, will be lightly frozen, concentrated, and then sold chilled
to north European customers.
Mr Zuegg is enthusiastic about the prospects. For, straddling the divide
between Teutonic and Latin cultures, the company is mindful of the potential
for Italian products abroad. 'We know we have no chance with just ordinary
fruit juices in Austria and Germany. Imitating what others have done very
well for 20 years is pointless,' he says.
'But the common European market will give us the chance to promote our
specialities. Over the years, we've seen that when we stick to what we know,
we've done well.'
Taking Sicily's deep red oranges to northern Europe's shoppers could be just
the tonic to liven up tired supermarket shelves. After all, the free market
is supposed to increase choice, not just corporate earnings.
