FT  02 APR 92 / International Company News: Olivetti head given top Xerox
post
MR VITTORIO CASSONI, the managing director of Olivetti, the Italian computer
and office automation group, has been named to a senior post at Xerox, the
US document processing company.
The 49-year-old Mr Cassoni - who in 1988 went back to Italy to run Olivetti
after a stint as president of American Telephone &amp; Telegraph's data systems
division - will become one of three executive vice-presidents at Xerox,
reporting directly to Mr Paul Allaire, Xerox chairman and chief executive.
At Xerox, based in Stamford, Connecticut, Mr Cassoni will become one of the
members of the newly-formed Xerox corporate office, responsible for the
operations of the company.
Xerox reorganised its top management structure in February, creating three
operational executive vice-presidents, plus heads of research and technology
and strategy in place of a single president under Mr Allaire.
Mr Cassoni's responsibilities will include running four of Xerox's nine
document processing equipment divisions. Document processing last year
accounted for Dollars 13.8bn of the company's total revenues of Dollars
17.8bn. 'He will be one of three people who are all ranked as
second-in-command to the chairman,' Xerox said.
Although Olivetti denied it at the time, Mr Cassoni was perceived by
industry watchers to have been effectively demoted last November, when Mr
Carlo De Benedetti, whose CIR holding company controls Olivetti, returned to
the company to take full-time management responsibility.
Great pains were taken by Olivetti to describe Mr Cassoni's new role as an
'ambassador' who would forge international alliances for the company.
However, it was clear to insiders that Mr Cassoni would eventually seek new
employment.
Mr De Benedetti took Mr Cassoni back to Italy in the spring of 1988, just as
Olivetti's 'global alliance' with AT&amp;T was beginning to sour. The energetic
Mr Cassoni, who is fluent in English and French as well as Italian, quickly
launched a huge restructuring at Olivetti, involving the creation of three
autonomous divisions.
However, Olivetti's fortunes have flagged in recent years and Mr Cassoni,
while respected in the computer industry, increasingly became a victim of
the sector's crisis. He faced declining growth, rapid innovation and
plunging product prices.
Olivetti, which suffered a L73.7bn (Dollars 59.48m) loss in the first six
months of last year - compared with a L60.9bn profit in the same period of
1990 - is expected to report a heavy full-year 1991 loss later this month.
