FT  13 JUL 92 / Bonn to sell Airbus holding to Daimler ahead of schedule
THE GERMAN government has agreed to sell its remaining 20 per cent stake in
Deutsche Airbus, the German partner in the European Airbus consortium, to
Daimler-Benz, four years ahead of the agreed date.
In exchange, Daimler-Benz has accepted the cancellation of its lucrative
currency insurance deal with the government, which protected Deutsche Airbus
from excessive currency fluctuations.
The agreement means Daimler-Benz, the largest industrial group in Germany,
will own 100 per cent of Deutsche Airbus through its Deutsche Aerospace
subsidiary. The company is planning a further reorganisation of all its
aerospace interests by October and Deutsche Airbus will now be fully
incorporated into financial results.
Cancellation of the currency insurance deal, which cost the German
government DM580m (Pounds 200m) in 1990, will remove the grounds for the US
complaint of unfair subsidy to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,
upheld by a Gatt disputes panel in January. A further DM640m had been
allowed for in the state budgets up to 1996, when Daimler was originally
expected to take 100 per cent control.
The currency deal meant that the German government covered potential
exchange rate losses on Airbus sales, if the dollar fell below DM1.60,
without charging any premium for the insurance. The US government alleged
that the payments amounted to a subsidy of Dollars 2.5m per Airbus delivered
in 1990.
The German government agreed in January this year to change the agreement,
and the latest announcement says it has been suspended with effect from
January 1.
The agreement with Daimler was disclosed by Mr Erich Riedl, state secretary
responsible for the aerospace industry in the Bonn economics ministry. He
said it should be signed by the end of September, thus completing the
privatisation of the German aerospace industry.
Meanwhile, the European Community is today expected to ratify the
long-awaited EC-US deal to limit direct and indirect government support for
new commercial airliner projects.
Finance ministers, meeting in Brussels, should rubber-stamp the agreement,
which was reached on April 1 after some six years of on-off talks between
the two sides. In spite of early rumblings of discontent in Washington,
Brussels officials now believe the accord is safe from political tampering.
The EC's ratification will come less than a week after United Airlines, the
second-largest US carrier, placed a Dollars 5bn order with Airbus Industrie,
for up to 100 A320 jets. There were fears the deal might revive controversy
over government subsidies to the Airbus Industrie consortium.
Disputes between the US and EC have centred on accusations that Airbus
receives direct development aid from EC governments, and that US
manufacturers benefit from support disguised as military or space research
grants.
Details of the trade accord, which have not yet been officially released,
should emerge today.
