FT  01 OCT 92 / Survey of The New Towns of Britain (6): Slow-moving assets -
The Midlands
TELFORD and Milton Keynes provide the most strenuous challenges for the
Commission of New Towns in its efforts to dispose of public assets in the
new towns of the Midlands. The two are the latest and last of the CNT's
responsibilities in the region.
CNT took over the activities of the respective development corporations at
Telford last October and at Milton Keynes last April. The timing was
difficult. The pace of asset disposals has slackened with the recession and
although activity continues it is slower than two years ago.
'The slowdown in the last year of the development corporation has carried
through into the CNT's first six months,' said Mr John Napleton, the CNT
executive officer in Milton Keynes. 'The world economy is not helping us.
Having said that, we've been some years with the present recession and 9.5
per cent unemployment is beneath the regional average,' said Mr Chris
Mackrell, CNT's officer in Telford.
The two towns have much in common, despite their geographical differences
and despite the fact that Milton Keynes is a brand new town while Telford
new town is welded to old Telford. Indeed, they compete in the same market
for relocating companies.
Both seek to attract companies which are looking for greenfield development
sites, outside the major conurbations. As such they play on a continental
rather than a local scale.
'One of the characteristics is the number of companies which have said 'it's
between you and Spain, you and Luxembourg; I can't recall anyone saying its
between you and Birmingham, you and Wednesbury',' observed Mr Mackrell.
Just as Milton Keynes is particularly keen to attract what Mr Napleton
called 'light clean industry with a high number of employees,' or more of
what has arrived already, so Telford is in the same position. In fact, the
arrival of companies in the plastics and electronics sectors has widened the
economic base of the town.
Telford's position on the western side of the West Midlands means inevitably
that its land prices at around Pounds 130,000 an acre are less than those of
Milton Keynes, which is more susceptible to London influences. Here the rate
is more like Pounds 250,000 an acre, but that itself is some Pounds 50,000
less than it was two years ago and is lower again than the current price
level in Northampton, where the CNT also has asset disposal
responsibilities.
It is the size of the CNT land banks in Milton Keynes and Telford - about
2,000 acres in each - that sets them off from other CNT operations in the
Midlands.
This is not to suggest that Milton Keynes and Telford have no buildings for
sale. They do, and in that respect they are in the same position as Corby,
Northampton and Redditch.
But the work of the CNT in Corby, Northampton and Redditch is not now so
significant in scale as it is in Milton Keynes and Telford. In Redditch, for
example, the CNT has a Pounds 50m portfolio of assets, but it has already
realised more than Pounds 70m from sales. In Corby there are isolated
premises for sale and some 90 acres of sites for industrial development.
Likewise in Northampton there are isolated premises, but the focal point of
the CNT portfolio in the town remains about 600 acres of land, a significant
amount but small in comparison with the quantity available in Milton Keynes
and Telford.
The focus of the CNT activity is now almost wholly commercial property.
Ballots among the tenants of rented housing established by the Milton Keynes
Development Corporation expressed a preference for the transfer of property
control to the Milton Keynes Borough Council. This allowed CNT to disengage
from the public housing sector.
But it remains a responsibility of the CNT to promote the towns, where it
has interests, as developing commercial centres. In both Milton Keynes and
Telford it has sought to involve local organisations in the practical work
of marketing. To that extent it plays a more subdued role than the former
development corporations.
In the case of Telford, it has combined with bodies such as Wrekin District
Council and Shropshire County Council to form the Telford Development
Agency. In the case of Milton Keynes, it has adopted a similar partnership
with local authorities.
These respective bodies will have a difficult time until the international
economy shows stronger signs of sustained growth. But they work against the
background of a stable local infrastructure.
