FT  29 SEP 92 / Honduras and El Salvador plan talks to defuse tension
THE presidents of Honduras and El Salvador were set yesterday to begin two
days of talks in San Salvador, amid continuing tension in border areas
following a judgment on their common frontier this month by the
International Court in the Hague.
Mr Rafael Callejas of Honduras and Mr Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador are
expected to establish a commission to deal with the fall-out from the
decision.
Although the judgment has been received peacefully - even with enthusiasm in
both capitals - people in some of the border areas awarded to Honduras are
reluctant to take Honduran nationality.
The feelings run highest in Nahuaterique, a stronghold of the left-wing
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front during El Salvador's 12-year civil
war. The FMLN has accepted the Hague judgment but proposed that Honduras
allow the residents dual nationality.
However, Honduran law will not allow foreigners to live within 40km of the
border.
Although Mr Manuel Pacas Castro, El Salvador's foreign minister, had
suggested that, because of the tensions, the Hondurans wait three months
before taking possession, the Honduran army has entered the recovered zones.
The judgment awarded 70 per cent of the previously disputed mainland area to
Honduras and 30 per cent to El Salvador. El Salvador was awarded the Island
of Meanguera in the Gulf of Fonseca, which it has occupied for many years,
but Honduras won a guaranteed exit to the sea and maritime rights over a
strip of the Pacific Ocean.
The ruling ended a dispute which began in 1969 when a World Cup soccer
qualifying game between the two countries triggered an uprising of the
Honduran population. In a few days about 300,000 Salvadoreans who had
spilled over into Honduras had been expelled.
The forced expulsion, tolerated by the Honduran military, prompted the
Salvadorean army to invade Honduras and inflict a humiliating defeat on the
Honduran army.
The four-day 'football war' cost 5,000 lives, bolstered the Salvadorean
military and set back the cause of central American integration for more
than 20 years.
The settlement is expected to support those on both sides arguing for a
reduction in military spending. It should also reinforce the normalisation
of Central American diplomatic and political relations.
