FT  19 SEP 92 / Hi-tech sleuths who take art off the fence: Harriet Crawley
visits the Belgravia bunker from which Brigadier Emson traces stolen art
BRIGADIER James Emson has been a trouble shooter all his life. When London's
firemen went on strike he was appointed Chief of Staff for Military
Firefighters. Today he is leading another fight, against art theft.
The weapons are not hosepipes or guns but computers, and some slick software
produced in the US and installed in the basement of 13 Grosvenor Place, a
stone's throw from Buckingham Palace.
From his high tech bunker, surrounded by five university graduates with
degrees in history of art, the ex-Brigadier directs his fast-growing
operation.
The International Art Loss Register is a computerised database of stolen art
with over 40,000 items in its memory bank ranging from snuff bottles to
marble Venuses. Items (they must be over Pounds 1,000 in value) are logged
by description and by photograph on the state-of-the-art optical computer.
The fees vary. Insurance companies take out a corporate subscription for
Pounds 8,000-odd pounds, which means that whenever one of their clients is
robbed the theft is automatically logged with the ALR; otherwise you and I
pay Pounds 20 to register a theft, or Pounds 10 to conduct a 'search,' which
says Emson, has no cut off point.
The ALR was founded in 1990 by a consortium of leading auction houses
(Sotheby's, Christie's, Phillips) and insurance companies (Hogg Group,
Lloyd's, Nordstern). It has confounded its critics and is proving
extraordinarily successful in tracking down stolen art.
Recently, a man in a double breasted suit appeared at the counter of
Sotheby's with a view of Westminster Abbey by John Inigo Richards, claiming
he had bought it in a car boot sale for Pounds 40 and had cleaned it with
Fairy Liquid. Sotheby's found the story far-fetched and rang the Register.
There, Caroline Wakeford fed details into the Register, to instigate a
'fuzzy' search, hoping for a 'match.' Up came an identical picture logged as
stolen a month earlier. A cry of jubilation went up in the bunker.
The police are making increasing use of the Register. The police have free
access to the ALR, and many of the 'dedicated' officers spend hours in the
bunker 'fuzzy searching'. Recently the Regional Crime squad paid a visit
with photographs of two stolen pictures, Charles I and Henrietta Maria,
copies of Van Dyke, which had been registered in 1991 by a loss adjustor.
This led to the recovery not only of the paintings but of nine other items,
all stolen from the same Somerset house.
'Liaison between the 52 different forces in Britain is poor,' said Sarah
Jackson, another articulate ALR sleuth. 'Increasingly we act as go-between.'
The Metropolitan Police logged the theft of several pictures from a private
London house with the ALR; six weeks later the City of London police found a
hoard of paintings in Jewry Street and, suspecting they must be stolen, came
to the register offices with photographs. After feverish 'fuzzy searching'
the paintings were identified as the same sea scapes by James Cleveley the
Elder and works by Thomas Luny, worth Pounds 60,000, which had been stolen
from a private house in Westminster and registered by the Met.
At the end of July, the Register identified a stolen item of furniture when
it was sold at an auction. This gave police the breakthrough which led them
to a series of 'fences' in London. They recovered 3,800 items stolen in
burglaries in the the southern half of England. The Register identified 198
of the items, 80 of which were insured with Lloyd's.
The new head of the Metropolitan Art and Antiques Squad, Detective Chief
Inspector John Butler, is so impressed with the Register that he is
installing a modem in Scotland Yard to give the police instant access to the
files. Emson is delighted: 'The police don't have a comparable stolen art
register which includes images, so we are filling a vacuum. We are the art
equivalent of the Lloyd's register for shipping.'
Sotheby's and Christie's, leading shareholders of the ALR, use it to have
their catalogues searched at a cost of over Pounds 20.000 a year. 'If we can
show a painting has been stolen they will withdraw it at once . . . both
Sotheby's and Christie's are determined to see a reduction in the traffic in
stolen art.'
Insurance companies have a vested interest in subscribing to the ALR
(corporate subscriptions run at Pounds 8,500 a year.) They want to get the
stolen art back so that they do not have to pay out.
'At last we're getting through to the loss adjustors,' says Emson. 'They are
beginning to see that it is worthwhile registering thefts with us.' The
figures speak for themselves: 134 Lloyd's syndicates subscribe and over
Pounds 400,000 of stolen art has been recovered. Syndicate 33 paid the ALR a
fee of Pounds 2,179.60 and recovered Pounds 67,350 of art.
'Value for money,' the ex-Brigadier purred.
But the art trade is showing little interest in the Register, even though
the Society of London Art Dealers and the British Association of Art Dealers
are both shareholders. Phillip Broadbridge of the London and Provincial Art
Dealers Association says his members are sceptical of a commercial body
which is doing the police's job for them.
Emson counters: 'The police are unlikely to get a national database of
stolen art . . . anyway even if they do it won't be available to the public.
A dealer can subscribe for only Pounds 36 a year . . . it must be in
everyone's interest to stop the circulation of stolen goods.'
And yet dealers are not coming forward. 'It's the hassle . . . police,
perhaps a court appearance, a lot of wasted time . . .' says Phillip
Saunders of Trace magazine, which circulates photographs of stolen art. 'In
my view dealers will never subscribe in any numbers . . . they should but
they won't'
In France dealers are obliged by law to register all purchases except those
bought at public auction.
'This draconian measure has been an effective deterrent against dealers who
may otherwise have been tempted to buy stolen art,' said Saunders. 'It's
only a matter of time before the same legislation comes to Britain.'
Meanwhile, the ALR is spreading its international net: the European dealers'
associations have subscribed, so have leading French, Swiss, German and US
insurance companies. A few weeks ago the head of the Italian national art
squad, Colonel Conforte, visited the Belgravia bunker.
Soon the ALR will be working round the clock. It is linking its computer
with Centrox, a US company which digests the catalogues from 178 auction
houses round the world. The ALR will be able to search for your Georgian tea
pot, Constable sketch or Chippendale chair, world wide. Unless the art
thieves think up a computer virus to stop it.
