FT  02 MAY 92 / Travel: Tricky thoughts aloft - Kevin Rafferty wonders about
airline safety procedures
AIRCRAFT crashes in which passengers survived, plus news that last year
passenger deaths in air crashes rose, ought to have promoted new
consciousness about air safety. But they do not seem to have done.
The annual 'beauty contests' which ask newspaper and magazine readers or
experts to rank airlines all relate to frills and fripperies - what sort of
champagne the airline serves, how plastic the food is, whether luggage
arrives safely, how wide the seats are. No-one seems to rank airlines by
their safety procedures. Why?
Is it fear of libel - fear that if you accuse an airline of neglecting
proper safety procedures you might be sued, whereas if you accuse it of
serving only IATA regulation cucumber sandwiches no-one bothers? Or is it
fear of tempting fate - that if you point out that Qantas, for example, has
never had a passenger fatality in all its years of flying, even that
exemplary airline will not thank you?
Since the Lockerbie bombing of a Pan Am 747 aircraft, airlines and airports
have generally tightened their safety procedures. It is standard on both
sides of the Atlantic to X-ray all luggage, whether stowed in the hold or
hand-carried.
But in Britain and the US it often seems to me that security operators are
suffering from terminal boredom and are not as alert as, say, those at Hong
Kong's Kai Tak or Singapore's Changi airports, who use twin multicoloured
screens. The prize, if such it can be called, for the sloppiest procedures
goes to Indian airports.
In spite of demanding check-in three hours before departure, India's X-ray
screens are frequently fuzzy and operators more meticulous in ensuring that
baggage and boarding cards have a proper stamp than in conducting effective
checks.
At New Delhi last year, a disaffected catering worker was able to plant an
incendiary device which was only discovered by accident.
No airline matches El Al's thoroughness either in screening passengers and
their luggage or in securing the aircraft itself. Typically, airlines excuse
themselves by saying that passengers would not put up with the time that El
Al takes - but I would rather be subjected to El Al's professionalism than
put up with the perfunctory, always offhand and frequently rude questioning
of British Airways or Air Canada.
A more tricky aspect is how well-maintained the aircraft is. It is not easy
for a layman, even a frequent traveller, to satisfy himself that the
aircraft hasn't got metal fatigue or has been checked for cracks in the
engine.
Equally tricky is whether the pilots know what they are up to. It is not
exactly confidence-inspiring to hear that airports have installed
breathalysers to check whether pilots are drunk before going on duty.
My acid test is to ask airline captains to which airlines they would entrust
their wives and children. The consensus is that Qantas, Swissair, Lufthansa
and Cathay Pacific come through with flying colours.
An Iraqi airforce major told me years ago that Scottish-trained pilots were
the best in the world 'because when you are up there, you have to keep your
wits about you at all times since you never know what kind of weather is
going to hit you - windsheer, nastily packaged clouds, it's all so
unpredictable over Scotland.'
These days there is the complication of whether the captain can cope with
the aircraft computer. One old-time former Royal Air Force pilot said: 'I
pride myself that I am like a bus driver who is in tune with his craft and
can recognise the engine pitch and whether the aircraft feels alright. But I
do feel a bit adrift when I have to give instructions through the computer
since I have no computer qualifications. Colleagues have told of hairy
moments when the computer went off into its own world and refused to accept
instructions.'
The same captain was able to land his 747-400 safely at Heathrow in
near-zero visibility because the RAF had taught him to fly on his
instruments alone.
The most obvious safety checks are those in the passenger cabin, yet many of
the most lauded beauty competition winners do not take them seriously.
Most US airlines are very good, ensuring that luggage does not block exits
or aisles. British Airways is conscientious in checking luggage and
reassuringly repeats its video insisting that passengers smoke only when
seated in a designated smoking area before and after take-off.
My prize for the airline most meticulous in checking on-board safety goes to
Virgin Atlantic. Crew-members peer at every seat row to make sure hand
luggage is actually under the seat or in the overhead locker. Overhead bins
have been fitted with netting to ensure that luggage won't fall out even if
the locker bursts open. Virgin crews get 3.5 days of emergency refresher
training each year, more than many other airlines. Disappointingly, the same
thoroughness does not apply to the Asian carriers which every year walk away
with airline awards. Singapore Airlines, Thai International and, worst of
all, Cathay Pacific, regularly do only the most routine checks, and do them
inadequately.
It is common on Cathay and Singapore Airlines for passengers to stand and
smoke at the rear of the aircraft, often leaning on the emergency door as
they chat and drink. In Cathay's case, one reason for this behaviour is that
the airline puts its youngest and most inexperienced crew at the back of the
aircraft, girls who may be pretty but are scared to tell a full load of
passengers to obey basic safety rules.
As a hardened European steward travelling as a passenger on an Asian airline
observed disdainfully: 'They may be pretty girls, but how will they cope in
an emergency?'
Tanked up on free liquor, perhaps we never think an emergency will happen,
or, if it does, that there is anything that can be done except pray. Yet we
have seen recently that it is possible to crash and break an aircraft
without losing a single passenger - which ought to make us think.
Kevin Rafferty flew 400,000 kilometres last year to every continent except
Antarctica.
