FT  20 OCT 92 / The Coal Crisis: Eggar to discuss security of pensions
MR TIM EGGAR, the energy minister, has agreed to meet trustees of British
Coal's pension scheme to discuss safeguarding assets under privatisation.
In a letter to trustees of the British Coal Staff Superannuation Scheme late
last week, Mr Eggar said he would meet trustees at the earliest convenient
time. Trustees of both the Staff Scheme, representing 106,000 white collar
and pit supervisory pensioners and staff, and the Mineworkers' Scheme,
representing 589,487 miners, had sought guarantees to protect benefits if
parts of British Coal are sold.
In spite of big surpluses in both schemes and steep improvements in benefits
in recent years, 90,000 former mineworkers - about a third of all pensioners
 -receive pensions of less than Pounds 10 per week. Those employed before
1975 were entitled to flat-rate pensions rather than a pension linked to
final salary.
Over the past two years, trustees of both schemes have amended the trust
deeds to make it more difficult for a future private-sector owner of British
Coal to use pension-fund assets or to reduce benefits to members. The
Mineworkers' Scheme trust deed now says that if the scheme is wound up any
surplus must be used solely to improve benefits and that the trustees must
approve any new owner of the scheme. The staff scheme requires any new plan
sponsor to offer benefits equal to those offered by British Coal.
However, under trust law, those clauses may be difficult to enforce without
government backing and trustees are anxious to see that they are honored.
The combined assets of the two schemes, about Pounds 12bn, are more than
enough to meet projected liabilities. As a result, British Coal is enjoying
a contributions holiday from both schemes ending in 1995 for the staff
scheme and in 2000 for the miners' scheme. In the event of privatisation,
the contributions holiday would be enjoyed by a new employer.
The contributions holidays represent only 30 per cent of the value of the
scheme surpluses. The remaining 70 per cent has been used to improve
benefits by lowering the retirement age to 60, doubling death benefits and
by sharply increasing payments to the oldest pensioners.
