FT  02 JUL 92 / Fresh models for east European privatisation
THE ambitious mass privatisation schemes launched in Czechoslovakia and
Poland are becoming models for other east European countries.
Government officials and western advisers gathered at the weekend in
Versailles to discuss the advantages of distributing state-owned assets to
citizens in the form of vouchers.
Privatisation officials from all eastern European countries, as well as from
Russia, Ukraine and the Baltic republics, placed emphasis on the need to
ensure public support for reforms during their meeting.
Czechoslovakia and Poland, whose mass privatisation programmes are the most
advanced, have been models for Russia, Ukraine, Lithuania and Romania, which
are putting in place their own variations on a voucher privatisation scheme.
Czechoslovakia's privatisation programme cuts across a wide spectrum with
Dollars 9.9bn worth of equity in 1,491 enterprises to be distributed this
summer. Over 8.5m citizens are participating in the scheme, using vouchers
bought for a nominal sum. Two thirds have entrusted their vouchers to one of
the 460 private investment fund set up earlier this year.
The political impact of distributing state-owned assets to the public was
underlined in Czechoslovakia's elections earlier this month. Mr Vaclav
Klaus, the former finance minister who masterminded the programme, saw his
party win an absolute majority in the Czech parliament.
The Czechoslovak scheme came under criticism, however, because the vast and
diffuse mass of shareholders have little potential to influence the
management of enterprises. The Polish scheme, in contrast, aims to secure
management control over enterprises by 'leading funds' which will have block
of shares in their hands.
In Poland, some 400 enterprises, accounting for 8-12 per cent of the
country's industrial output, will be allocated to a limited number of
investment funds, whose shares will then be distributed to citizens free of
charge.
The Polish scheme, which relies on a narrow selection of enterprises
distributed to funds managed by western advisors, aims to create a group of
small shareholders interested in holding long-term stakes in profitable
enterprises.
Officials from former Soviet republics emphasised the need to give
management and employees, rather than investment funds, a stake in the
future. The Russian programme, which remains in its early legislative form,
aims to distribute shares on a preferential basis to employees and
management.
The relative independence of managers from the government was highlighted as
a crucial factor determining a programme's chances for success.
A survey on east European privatisation appears tomorrow.
