FT  26 SEP 92 / Arts: Inside Buddhism - Sacred Tibetan art
MEET YAMA, Lord of Death, who is a blue, buffalo-headed monster. He prances
on the back of Ignorance, symbolised by a bull raping a dying man. Meet
Diamond Sow, a lady naked except for festoons of jewels and skulls. She is
first seen dancing with the pig's head of Delusion projecting from her
cranium. Later we find her clinched in yab-yum (ecstatic Mother-Father
sexual embrace) with her three-eyed consort, Rakta Yamari. Yab-yumming close
by with the Conqueror of the Lord of Death is Diamond Zomby.
That is a pretty crude introduction to the divine beings represented in a
mere half-dozen of the 160 paintings and sculptures displayed in Wisdom and
Compassion: The Sacred Art of Tibet at the Royal Academy. Small wonder that
the Europeans who first came across such images concluded that Tibetans were
devil-worshippers.
Small wonder, moreover, if Western, non-Buddhist visitors to this exhibition
succumb to feelings of bewilderment and intimidation long before getting to
grips with the myriad lamas, arhats, sky-walkers, Eight-Armed Wrathful Green
Tara, and tongue-twisting (ours, in this case) Ushnishasitatapattra. Not
that being able to spot who's who in these works of art really hits the mark
either. To take things more seriously means entering into the states of mind
which Tibetan artists meant their creations to instill.
Wisdom and Compassion is more than the most comprehensive exhibition of
Tibetan art ever seen in the West. It is laid out as a guide to the history
and tenets of Tibetan Buddhism, the faith which for almost 1400 years has
animated an extraordinary and now threatened culture. From first to last the
emphasis is on the sacred import of that art, not whether we westerners find
the images aesthetically appealing.
Judged, then, from a purely pragmatic viewpoint, Wisdom and Compassion
offers any person ordinarily curious about the world a quick and relatively
painless introduction to one of the world's four great religions. But even
so, this is that risky enterprise - an art-show which demands effort from
its visitors.
At which point I will come clean. From my first visit I emerged with
feelings of bewilderment verging on panic. What was I going to say to the
FT's readers? Of course, one can always talk in general terms about the
show, about the fact that it is huge affair with loans from private and
public collections all over Europe, the US, and Russia.
Then again, there are the interesting political undertones, even a Hollywood
touch. The exhibition was originated in the US by groups lobbying for Tibet,
most notably the actor Richard Gere, a practising Buddhist and founder of
Tibet House in New York. At the British Museum in 1985, London's last big
show devoted to expounding Buddhism, Tibet's fate was euphemistically
summarised as 'now secularised . . . an autonomous Region of the People's
Republic of China'.
Seven years on and post-Tiananmen Square, Wisdom and Compassion adopts a
sharper tone. The excellent film made by a Tibetan states baldly enough the
facts of China's invasion of Tibet in 1949. Switch on your Acoustiguide
Walkman, and you will hear at the close of the commentary a tribute to the
faith which sustains Tibetans under persecution, and of their longing for
freedom and the return of the Dalai Lama to Lhasa.
I must admit that it was the Acoustiguide which made the difference to my
understanding, and hence enjoyment of, this exceptional show. How helpful,
for example, to be told that one scholar has compared the many different
paths, sects, and orders of Buddhism with airlines using different routes to
reach the same destinations. This is not to slight the heavy (in both
senses) catalogue, but at Pounds 20 it represents pricey enlightenment.
In a large sculpture Vajrapani looks ferocious, but one point made early on,
and repeated, is that in fact he is not, any more than say, an image of St
Michael spearing a dragon. Vajrapani too is a guardian figure, his dynamic
power a reassurance to believers that he will protect them against perils.
And that, surely, is the kind of simple point which starts subtly to alter
our perception of initially disturbing or revolting images.
On one 17th-century tangka (or wall-hanging, designed to be rolled up) we
see Peden Lama, who is the same as the terrifying Shri Devi, the black
goddess of India who is also a Special Protector of Lhasa. Her mule has a
saddlecloth make of her own son's skin. It is worth remembering that
Christian iconography has its horrible images too, like St Bartholomew
holding up his flayed skin.
Mandalas present visually the least interesting, least penetrable aspect of
the show. In a room painted the most intense deep blue three monks from the
Namygal Monastic University at Dharamsala are creating a sand mandala.
Wordlessly they rasp their metal horns, the grains of coloured sand trickle
into a fantastically complex pattern which each holds in his mind. Another
monk stands close by, beside a fantastic wall-hanging like the most
sumptuous tie-rack you have ever seen. He is there to answer your questions.
This exhibition, too, exists to answer questions. It is a noble enterprise,
and takes its part in the long history of western and eastern scholars
struggling to interpret Buddhism in such a way that occidentals will
understand.
But I promise you, with only a modicum of effort it is possible to take
pleasure and amusement from the tales of Milarepa and his fellow saints, and
then come at the end to delight in painted visions of saints in bliss in the
Pure Land of the celestial Shambhala - better known to the bungalow dwellers
of the English south coast as Shangrila.
Sponsored by Silhouette Eyewear, Vistech Int. Ltd. &amp; Redab (UK) Ltd. in
association with The Times.
