FT  26 SEP 92 / Markets: Flying not so bravely into a new world - London
Markets
THE government's short-term economic strategy is now clear: forward on a
wing and a prayer. It became even clearer this week that the wing will not
be made in Britain.
The mauling of the UK's engineering sector overshadowed the stock market's
cautious adjustment to a changed world, with the pound now drifting outside
the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Having seen the FTSE-100 jump 188.7 points in the immediate aftermath of
last week's devaluation, traders started the week in uneasy mood, unsettled
by thought that they had perhaps been overly optimistic in assuming a two
percentage-point cut in base rates was on the cards.
Nerves were steadied by Tuesday's cut of one percentage point, and the
immediate promise of lower mortgages, and the market advanced further on
Thursday when the prime minister made it clear that there would be no early
return to the disciplines of the ERM.
Yet relief about having escaped from the Bundesbank's straitjacket of high
interest rates was also mixed with concern about the outlook for inflation
and Britain's balance of trade. Last month's deficit on visible goods was
revealed to have been Pounds 1.7bn, worse than expected and the highest
level for two years.
Such concerns found a poignant focus in the plight of British Aerospace, one
of Britain's biggest manufacturing groups, which encompasses commercial amd
military aircraft, weapons, Rover cars and property.
BAe's shares plunged by 86p to 113p after the group announced the loss of
3,000 jobs, the closure of its historic aircraft plant at Hatfield,
Hertfordshire, and a proposed joint venture with Taiwan to manufacture
regional jets. At that level the whole group had a market value of Pounds
426m - less than the Pounds 432m it raised in last year's rights issue.
BAe said it had lost Pounds 129m in the first half and would write off
Pounds 750m on its regional jet operations in the second half. The group
lost Pounds 278m in its commercial aircraft operations in the first half and
Pounds 31m at Rover, wiping out the Pounds 296m it made from defence.
The rescue plan presented by Mr John Cahill, who became BAe's chairman four
months ago, failed to impress the City and revived speculation that the
group could could be bid for by GEC, the defence and electronics group.
Gloom about the state of British engineering increased when Vickers
announced that Rolls-Royce Motor Cars, its loss-making luxury car
subsidiary, would cut 950 jobs, or nearly a third of the workforce, from its
plant at Crewe in Chesire. On the same day Ford, the leading UK car maker,
said to would cut 1,487 jobs at its British plants.
Vickers slashed its interim dividend to preserve cash for the other,
profitable parts of the group - defence, aerospace, marine engineering and
medical equipment. Despite an initial 39p fall, Vickers shares closed 5p
higher at 84p on the day after analysts were assured that the job cuts were
designed to achieve breakeven at Rolls-Royce Motor Cars by the year-end.
Of course, both BAe and Vickers were reporting their performance in an
economic climate which has changed markedly since last's week's devaluation
of sterling turmoil.
Institutional investors continued to show they were happy to get into
equities, given the prospect of lower interest rates and possibly higher
inflation. Yet the tentative nature of this advance is demonstrated by the
way the market rose only on Tuesday and Thursday.
A sector that might be thought as poised to benefit from a drop in lower
interest rates and higher inflation is housing, but even here the signals
were mixed. Tarmac, Britain's biggest housebuilder, said it had to cut the
number of homes it plans to build by up to a fifth after one of the worst
trading periods in its history.
Sir Lawrie Barratt, who became the man most identified with wider home
ownership in the eighties, revealed that he had managed to turn a Pounds
105.9m loss by Barratt Developments into a an Pounds 11.3m pre-tax profit, a
result which boosted the share price by 67p to 57p.
However, Sir Lawrie, who came out of retirement to achieve this turnaround,
still felt it necessary to write to the the prime minister, urging him to
boost the housing market by cutting base rates to 6 per cent, ending stamp
duty and raising the ceiling for mortgage tax relief.
It was a bad week for another symbol of the eighties' property boom, the
Canary Wharf development in east London. Chemical Bank of the US joined
American Express in refusing to move its European headquarters to the
Docklands. Bankers also refused plans to take over the troubled development
which were tabled by a group of US investors formed by Mr Paul Reichmann,
founder of Canary Wharf.
The market closed the week as it had started - in an uneasy mood. Germany
and France seem to have succeeded in fending off a devaluation of the franc,
raising the uncomfortable prospect that they might be prepared to proceed to
a 'fast-track' Europe which excluded the UK. It is one thing to have escaped
the surly bonds of high German interest rates: quite another to be
permanently excluded from a strong D-Mark zone.
One can scarcely criticise the City and industrialists for being uncertain
about the economic outlook, when the government clearly has still to
establish its new economic policy.
So far, the equity market has responded to devaluation by racing ahead in
traditional fashion. However, further advances will depend on further
interest rate reductions, which could be upset by continuing turbulence on
the currency markets.
The pound yesterday touched a new low of DM2.509 before recovering slightly.
If this is a bull market, it is a very timorous beastie.
