FT  27 JAN 92 / Row over EC aid returns to centre of poll campaign
THE European Community's refusal to release funds earmarked for Britain's
depressed regions returned to the centre of the election campaign at the
weekend, with the government accusing the European Commission of political
interference.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, accused Mr Bruce Millan,
the European commissioner with responsibility for regional aid, of 'ganging
up' with Labour to embarrass the government.
Mr Millan, a former Scottish secretary, was nominated to the commission by
Labour. He indicated last week that some Pounds 139m of aid to ease the
impact of pit closures was threatened by the government's refusal to give
satisfactory assurances that such funds would be additional to the
Treasury's own spending. He warned also that a further Pounds 880m in
regional aid might be in jeopardy.
That brought claims from Labour yesterday that the Conservatives were
depriving depressed areas of vital funds so that the money could be directed
elsewhere.
Mr Gerald Kaufman, shadow foreign secretary, said the government should give
the assurances sought by Brussels.
He said: 'All the other 11 European Community countries accept the rules.
Only British Tories are so crooked. The sooner we have an election and a
Labour government, the sooner we will be seen by our European partners as
law-abiding instead of Tory rule-breakers.'
Mr Heseltine has argued privately within the cabinet that it should seek to
avoid a public row with the Commission by offering further assurances that
the money allocated in regional aid would be additional to, rather than a
substitute for, the government's own projects.
The Treasury, however, has refused to change its accounting practices.
Yesterday Mr Heseltine stressed that the system now operating was the same
as the one which applied under Labour governments in the 1970s when Mr
Millan had been a Scottish minister. The commissioner's refusal to release
the funds represented an 'intolerable' interference.
