FT  21 MAR 92 / Arts: Politician from another era - Radio
NEWS AND commentaries on the rival manifestos and so on are properly dealt
with daily on other pages; but Radio 4's The Politics of Choice, presented
by Robin Lustig on Tuesdays and Saturdays, is different. It guarantees that
no active politicians will take part. The idea is to hear from a democratic
sample of voters what matters they think important, then try them out on a
panel of non-political experts. The producer is to banish 'the spokesmen,
the spin-doctors and the sound-bites' altogether, and evaluate each question
on commonsense rather than political conviction, a novel form of election
coverage. Circumstances kept me from Tuesday's debut, but there is over a
fortnight's more campaigning yet.
It was a pleasure last night to turn to a politician of another time and
another country in Radio 3's Malraux - the Man and the Mask. To be Minister
of Culture under de Gaulle may not at this moment seem an outstanding
political fulfilment; but Malraux's promulgation of music and theatre, even
his splendid campaign for the cleaning of public buildings, are achievements
any such minister might be proud of. (If only he could be on a Politics of
Choice panel]) Both in his own original work and in his criticism of
others', he attracted mistrust as well as admiration, but he was a
provocative figure either way, a sort of French blend of Michael Heseltine
with Graham Greene. Richard Maynes's profile, in which he included the
voices of many contemporaries, as well as Malraux's own brisk talk, was as
stimulating as its subject.
'I found Shakespeare extremely easy,' Janet Suzman said to Sue MacGregor in
last week's Conversation Piece (Radio 4, Sunday). 'In Shakespeare you're not
playing sit-com characters, they're much larger than you are.' Miss Suzman,
who graduated from Johannesburg to the RSC, said other, wiser things, and I
hope her feelings for the South African theatre will have survived Tuesday's
vote. But there was better talk about Shakespeare in Radio 3's Replay on
Sunday, an interview with Tyrone Guthrie recorded in 1964. Sir Tyrone went
from memories of Ben Greet to his twelve years at the Old Vic. If I had a
bigger house, I'd have a library of Replay tapes. This week's Conversation
Piece was with a lady Detective Chief Inspector. I wouldn't collect those.
I did not care for Louis McNeice's Columbus play last month, nor did I much
like Craig Warner's A Sense of Things Moving Forward (Radio 4, Sunday),
which covers some of the same ground. Warner's arrogant Colon (Columbus to
us) regards his new lands chiefly as a source of gold, which is in fact
lacking. He sends Queen Isabella a cargo of 500 brown slaves instead; they
die on the trip, he is sacked. But the Pope takes his side - unaware,
perhaps, of his cruel activities in his new territories, such as hanging
Torres, the linguist who could not teach the natives how to conjugate
irregular verbs, and allowing natives to die from their execution
unbaptised. The Queen forgives him on his deathbed. There is a fanciful
element in the writing, that takes in ghosts and dreams. Andy Jordan
directed; he was lucky to have Ben Kingsley as his Colon, and I imagine that
Frances Barber's curious screaming Queen must have been a directorial
emphasis.
Wally K. Daly's The Broken Butterfly (Radio 4, Saturday) was the sequel to
his Butterflies Don't Count, which I mentioned last week, but it didn't make
it clearer. The murderer who had confessed and been refused absolution had
been convicted, then escaped from gaol. Sure that the priest had shopped
him, he resolved to kill him, killing having become part of his political
life. The story, with an IRA background, was rousing, but sometimes too
black-and-white. It did indeed end with a shooting in a confessional, but
not the shooting of the priest. David Hitchinson directed both plays.
