FT  02 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Violent times in Germany
HAVING MADE a unique and exemplary postwar recovery as a land cleaved in
two, Germany is now navigating a unique and less-than-exemplary passage as a
reunited nation. One feature of this passage has been a spate of attacks on
foreigners, culminating in last week's firebomb murder of a Turkish woman
and two young girls in a north German village. The German people, and their
neighbours, are right to be concerned, not least because the thugs behind
the latest outrage signed off their telephone message to the police with the
words 'Heil Hitler'. Germany has a problem which requires a strategy. This
must extend beyond short-term law-and-order measures into a domain to which
Chancellor Helmut Kohl has thus far refrained from according much attention:
an overall policy which aims both at improving controls on immigration and
achieving genuine integration of the 4.5m foreign residents in Germany's
midst.
'This republic is not Weimar,' Mr Kohl declared - rightly - last week.
German security experts have been warning for months that right-wing gangs,
some led by shaven-headed youths mouthing ideologies which everyone hoped
had gone for good in 1945, have been gaining strength in both east and west.
Yet the danger is neither that German democracy will tumble into the abyss,
nor that the country is succumbing to excessive nationalism. Rather, there
are three risks - all of them definable and containable. First, the
perpetrators of the disorder may become branded abroad as epitomes of the
new Germany. This would greatly harm Germany's image and eventually its
economy. Second, the spectre of politicians expressing futile alarm at
extremists' misdeeds will damage the stock of the country's leadership, at a
time when Germany needs effective government. Third, if assaults on
foreigners continue, the spore of insecurity will spread. The left-wing
terrorism which afflicted Germany during the 1970s and 1980s was mainly
aimed at selected establishment targets. The new neo-Nazi groupings are less
discriminating. They seek their victims not behind the portals of bankers'
villas, but on suburban railway stations.
The reasons for resentment against people with dark skins are manifold.
Perceptions that foreigners are responsible for crime, unemployment or
social security fraud have increased with the rise in asylum seekers
entering Germany, and in the strains engendered by unification. Brutality is
not a purely German phenomenon. Germany registered 2,427 'criminal acts
against foreigners' last year, against 246 in 1990. In England and Wales,
the Home Office counted 7,780 'racially motivated attacks' in 1991, against
6,559 in 1990. The German experience is exceptional not simply because of
the acceleration since 1990, but because of the country's history -
including its lack of success in integrating foreigners.
One positive move is that Mr Kohl is now on track for a deal with the
opposition Social Democrats on amending the constitution to prevent abuses
of Germany's liberal asylum law. Although it is unedifying that politicians
act under the pressure of Molotov cocktails, this is a welcome step. But it
will serve little purpose unless more is done elsewhere. Naturalisation
procedures for foreigners need to be made less onerous - crucially,
permitting long-stay Gastarbeiter and their offspring to vote in elections
and become German citizens. These would-be new Germans need full rights
under the law, buttressed by the sort of initiatives which have helped other
societies absorb ethnic minorities. Germany needs a multiracial police
force, and banks and department stores which give jobs mainly to Germans
should hire more German-speaking foreigners. The violence is a challenge not
simply for police and politicians, but for Germany's civil society. If the
policies and determination are there, it will pass the test.
