FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Bickering gets on family's nerves - The
Martins
The Martins, the FT's family of floating voters, give their views on the
second week of the campaign
HEALTH matters trapped the Martin family this week.
By the end of it, Keeley and Westley, the youngsters, had bad throats but
wanted pastilles and sympathy rather than an operation. Lyn started work
again at the Yardley Green complex of East Birmingham Hospital after a
lengthy sick leave and joined the preparations for merging two wards into
one. And, with growing distaste, the family watched Conservative and Labour
politicians wage the War of Jennifer's Ear.
Clearly the politicians and their treatment of the health issue this week
have done little to encourage the Martins - Lyn, Tony and their elder son,
Russell - to come off the fence of their indecision about voting.
'The bickering is getting on everybody's nerves,' said Lyn.
Tony said: 'It's the two parties, but it's not a two-party fight. The Lib
Dems are the only ones who have come out of this with any credit.'
Russell added: 'Diabolical harping on it (the case of Jennifer Bennett) and
Labour keeping on bringing it up as a slur on the Tories. It's like two kids
in the street arguing - 'you done this, you done that'.'
The Martins were moved by the Labour election broadcast, though dubious
about its taste. The aftermath left them cold. 'Where do we put our trust?'
queried Lyn.
Tony replied: 'The only one so far is Paddy Ashdown. They've not led anybody
up the garden path,' he said of the Liberal Democrats.
The Conservatives and Labour have been doing themselves no good, argued
Russell. 'Both parties set out their goals and what they want to achieve.
They're just hindering themselves with this silly bickering.'
In any case, the Martins' perception of the National Health Service, like
that of many others, is coloured more by their own experience than the
political bandying of statistics. Lyn thought the issue of waiting lists had
been blown up out of proportion. 'Three years ago Keeley had tonsillitis.
The out-patients department saw her on January 29, she was in at Easter and
operated on.'
'It was the same with me,' continued Lyn. 'I was referred and seen within
six weeks for a major operation.' That was last year, at Solihull District
General.
'It was the same with the other girls in the ward. One of them had paid a
consultant initially: she didn't get in any quicker.'
'They said 10 to 12 days (to be sent home) and I was out in seven,' Lyn
commented.
'But if you're trying to cut waiting lists, they need the bed,' Tony came
back. 'There always will be a two-tier system. You won't stop people paying
consultants. No government will change that.'
The family agreed that funding the NHS was like pouring money into a
bottomless pit: there never would be enough.
'They've all promised to put money into the NHS, but where's it going to
come from?' Lyn asked.
Tony replied: 'Only one party said you'll have to pay for it.'
'Paddy Ashdown,' chimed Russell. 'He's kept himself aside from this,' he
noted of the Jennifer affair. 'He's said you will pay more and this is what
we're going to do.'
However, at the end of a week when health had overshadowed every other
issue, Tony had a reminder: 'The election is not one issue.'
