FT  31 JUL 92 / Management: A made-to-measure disaster
Fortunately, crises seldom happen. That means a company which has a disaster
plan will generally have no way of knowing how well it works.
Now, however, thanks to software wizardry, it is possible for management to
prepare for a real corporate crisis or public disaster by using a disaster
simulator that can be plugged into an ordinary Pounds 1,000 desktop
computer.
The software, called CriSys, designed and developed by St Albans-based
Psychometric Research &amp; Development (PRD), generates a different customised
imaginary disaster each time it is run - complete with still video pictures,
'live' news broadcasts, hostile press questions and telephone reports from
local company representatives.
For example, in one simulation for the chemical industry a train loaded with
vinyl chloride catches fire and then explodes in a railway tunnel killing
and injuring a number of passengers and leading to the evacuation of 13,000
residents.
The task for any corporate crisis management team is to handle the
aftermath, rather than the disaster itself (which is usually man-aged by the
emergency services), including, for example, deciding when to issue
statements or to hold a press conference.
Frequently, managements fail to recognise a developing crisis, and are slow
to react. Significantly, most studies also show that it is the management of
the aftermath, rather than the disaster itself, that determines the shape in
which a company emerges from a crisis. For example, it is essential to
ensure that, in spite of a disaster, the supply of products to customers is
maintained.
CriSys was initially developed for, and in conjunction with, European Vinyls
Corporation, Europe's largest bulk vinyls producer, where it has been
successfully used to train senior personnel in corporate crisis management.
The system is meant to provide 'hands-on' crisis management experience.
One lesson to emerge from EVC's training sessions was that more secretarial
services were needed. They had also forgotten to arrange sandwiches at
meal-times.
Another painful lesson learned by one of EVC's crisis management teams was
not to call a press conference until the company is able to answer questions
adequately.
What makes CriSys different from paper-based crisis management exercises is
that because every disaster is different, it is re-usable, and the special
effects incorporated into the software, such as simulated TV news coverage
and telexes, make it 'real.'
One EVC team even got angry about 'editorial inaccuracies' in the reports of
an incident, said John Davies, acquisitions and corporate project manager
for EVC.
The software will accept input from the crisis management team, for example
a press release, and incorporate the contents in subsequent news coverage.
Its developers plan to extend the software to other industries. Potential
users include those involved in the production or transportation of
hazardous goods, transport organisations, utilities such as electricity and
gas supply companies, event organisers and the emergency services.
Crisis Management Associates, 0727 44499.
