FT  17 OCT 92 / The Birmingham Summit: Deliberations cut little ice in
Ladywood - David Marsh finds scant interest in the Community among the
people of Birmingham
FOR the people of Ladywood, yesterday's summit might have been taking place
on another planet. The sprawling 1960s council estate lies in the shadow of
the glittering Birmingham International Convention Centre, the summit venue,
and the 5,000 people who live there seemed more concerned about jobs and the
next Giro cheque than the intricacies of the Maastricht treaty.
Mr Richard Tetlow, 50, the vicar of St John's church, said Birmingham city
council had ploughed considerable effort and money into the area since work
started on the Pounds 180m convention centre in the late 1980s.
'The council has now started to take Ladywood seriously. There are all
manner of schemes to help local people improve their situation.' Yet he says
the residents - 90 per cent in council homes, roughly 70 per cent depending
on housing benefit - have a strong sense of living in a divided nation.
The number of people genuinely in need calling at his door has increased in
the last two years. The church runs a fund allowing the vicar to give them
up to Pounds 2 at a time.
While the conference centre has improved Birmingham's image, it also
exemplifies gaps in society, Mr Telow says: 'If people have the sense that
others are doing better, this builds up a feeling of injustice which
destroys a sense of community.'
Mr Rod Parry, headteacher at the local junior school, felt the summit was 'a
bit of a farce'. Governments had to steer between acting for the good of
their own people and co-operating for the benefit of all. However, with
economic times getting tougher, 'they're turning their backs on
co-operation'.
Ms Karen Smythe, who helps run the Ladywood Community Business Centre, says
the spin-off of conference centre jobs for the estate has been small.
Although some residents have found casual work helping with catering and
security at Pounds 3.50 an hour, permanent employment in the centre has been
hard to come by. As for the general feeling of local people, she comments,
'I have not heard favourable responses. Most people say it's a load of
politicians talking a load of rubbish.'
This view is echoed by butcher Mr Michael Gourley. 'It's irrelevant,' he
said. He advises the summiteers to concentrate on achieving a breakthrough
in the Gatt talks 'to get things moving.'
Mrs Brenda Edwards, manageress of an off-licence, said the summit was a
complete waste of time. 'They should get off their backsides and get the
country on its feet.' Despite the recession, alcohol sales were holding up
reasonably well, she said. 'People are drowning their sorrows. They get fed
up being at home all day.'
Shopkeeper Mr John Wainwright said the summit was an irritant. He thinks
Britain should have stuck to the Commonwealth. 'Now we have to turn to
Europe. And I can't see them being very helpful. Whenever there's a
contretemps, they kick you in the teeth. The French have got problems with
farmers and the Germans have got us over a barrel on the money side.'
Business is so bad he says he is thinking of closing down. Just one sign
that, as they echo down to Ladywood, that yesterday's Birmingham
declarations will have a distinctly hollow sound.
