FT  02 JUL 92 / UK Company News: GEC boosted by joint ventures
GEC's results yesterday disclosed how far the company had changed since the
formation in 1989 of its three joint-ventures with Alsthom of France in
power engineering, Siemens of Germany in telecommunication and General
Electric of the US in consumer appliances.
About Pounds 3.3bn of GEC's turnover of Pounds 9.44bn last year came from
the main joint-ventures, which generated 43 per cent of the operating profit
of Pounds 702m. Interest income was virtually unchanged at Pounds 105m,
largely because a Pounds 350m increase in net cash offset the impact of
lower interest rates. Pre-tax profits rose from Pounds 818m to Pounds 829m
on a slight fall in turnover from Pounds 9.48bn to Pounds 9.44bn.
In the past three years GEC's profits from continental Europe have risen by
42 per cent to Pounds 199m, while UK profits have fallen from Pounds 430m to
Pounds 393m as a consequence of the recession.
All the joint-ventures increased their operating-profits.
GEC-Alsthom was mainly responsible for a Pounds 34m increase in the power
system's operating profits to Pounds 157m, on a Pounds 230m increase in
turnover to Pounds 2.76bn. Financial controls at GEC helped to raise
operating margins at GEC-Alsthom from 4.4 per cent to 5.3 last year. The
joint venture's order book grew strongly largely due to sales of equipment
for combined cycle power stations and orders for locomotives and rolling
stock.
Sales of the telecommunications division fell from Pounds 1.25bn to Pounds
1.13bn mainly because of lower orders from British Telecommunications for
the System X exchange made by GPT, the joint-venture with Siemens. However,
the division's operating profits rose by Pounds 2m to Pounds 127m through
cost cutting. GPT was also responsible for much of the Pounds 350m increase
in the net cash GEC generated last year, largely through tighter management
of stocks and debtors.
Despite the severity of the UK recession, which the group believes is far
from over, the consumer goods joint-venture with GE increased profits by
Pounds 3m to Pounds 21m on a Pounds 3m fall in turnover to Pounds 268m.
Further rationalisation of the UK consumer appliance factories is planned
for this year.
The performance of the joint ventures together with the medical equipment
division, which increased profits by Pounds 6m, helped to offset a poorer
performance from several other divisions.
GEC-Marconi, the defence business, did not make provisions for
rationalisation costs should Germany pull out of the EFA programme.
Rationalisation costs of Pounds 20m were largely responsible for a Pounds 9m
fall in Marconi's operating profits to Pounds 260m, on a Pounds 19m increase
in turnover to Pounds 2.78bn.
Elsewhere, profits of the office equipment division, largely accounted for
by AB Dick, the troubled US group, fell by Pounds 9m to Pounds 17m,
industrial apparatus' profits fell by Pounds 9m to Pounds 27m, distribution
and trading turned in profits Pounds 5m down at Pounds 15m, while profits at
electronic metrology, mainly Gilbarco, the US petrol pump maker, and Avery,
the weighing machine maker, fell by Pounds 1m to Pounds 36m.
