FT  12 FEB 92 / UK may face court action if it continues EC passport checks
THE European Commission is set to warn Britain soon that it faces court
action unless after the start of next year it ceases checks on travellers
arriving from other EC states.
If the warning is issued by June, it could coincide with a sensitive UK
general election campaign. If it comes after June the UK will have taken
over the EC presidency.
The Commission's work programme for 1992, which will be presented to the
European Parliament today states the warning will be made 'shortly'.
Mr Martin Bangemann, the internal market commissioner, said this week he
will have ready next month the legal opinion in favour of doing away with
all passport checks on travellers crossing internal EC frontiers.
This legal opinion will be on the implications of the 1986 Single European
Act's definition of the internal market as 'an area without internal
frontiers'.
Most continental EC states (which have themselves formed the Schengen free
travel accord) agree with Brussels that the Act requires abolition of all
intra-EC border controls. But the UK, with some backing from Denmark and
Ireland, contends the act still gives it the right to control non-EC (and
thus in practice EC) citizens and to undertake anti-terrorist and drug
checks at sea and airports.
Most of the Commission's 1992 programme confirms the current change in the
EC executive's role, from architect to manager of the single EC market.
Thus, apart from completing legislation on financial services, public
procurement, corporate tax, data protection, food and drug marketing, much
of the emphasis is on monitoring the application of existing single market
directives. There are, for example, 60 of these affecting agriculture, and
Brussels says it needs a new veterinary agency to implement the animal
health measures.
Accompanying policies to improve and free up telecommunications, energy and
transport networks are also given high priority, while in the
non-legislative field Brussels says it will be gearing up to help bring
monetary and a common foreign policy about.
While the Maastricht treaty has heightened the Commission's ambitions
further, the treaty's clause on 'subsidiarity' or states' rights has
apparently made it wary about how it achieves these ambitions.
The EC executive promises to 'resist over-legislation and intervention' in
policy areas which can be dealt with at national, regional or local levels.
Perhaps fearing a backlash from member states, the Commission even admits
that 'its future existence depends on' it fully complying with the principle
of subsidiarity.
The Commission wants to do nothing to upset ratification of the Maastricht
treaty this year by the 12 national parliaments. It therefore plans to keep
member states better informed of its more sensitive actions. As the 1992
programme says, 'an efficient early-warning system will be particularly
important to avoid ruffling national feathers as a new era dawns for
Europe'.
