FT  27 NOV 92 / Survey of FT Traveller, Paris (16): Delight for shopaholics
 -Paris shops are best known for the sort of self-indulgent items sold at
Chanel. But one of the most appealing aspects of the city is the variety of
small shops in almost every area
THERE was a time in the mid-1980s when so many Japanese tourists flocked
into the Chanel shop on rue Cambon to buy classic quilted leather bags that
Chanel was forced to ration them to no more than three per person. Unabashed
the Japanese lurked outside and bribed passing Parisians to go in and buy
more bags for them.
Those days are over. The Japanese economy is no longer strong enough to
allow its foreign travellers to indulge in conspicuous consumption on quite
so grand a scale and the franc is now so high against other currencies that
even the most ardent shopaholics are a little more abstemious during their
trips to Paris. But shopping is still part and parcel of any visit to the
city as you can tell from the bundles of shiny carrier bags at the Charles
de Gaulle check-in desks.
Paris shops are, of course, best known for the sort of self-indulgent items
sold at Chanel. But one of the most appealing aspects of the city is the
variety of small shops in almost every area. You can find fishmongers,
florists, greengrocers and, of course, patisseries in even the most
expensive quartiers, along the winding streets of the Ile Saint-Louis, or
off the glossy avenue Montaigne.
This is because French property regulations were devised specifically to
ensure that independent shops can stay in business and that every area has a
mix of both residential and commercial property, with enough small
businesses to service the local community.
That said, different quartiers have developed their own specialities over
the years. The tiny rue Pont Louis-Philippe running from the Marais down to
the river is packed with tiny papeteries, selling everything from hand made
pencils, to rough hewn Japanese paper. Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau at the back
of Les Halles is crammed with specialist foie gras sellers. Place Vendome is
the historic home of France's fine jewellers with Mauboussin, Cartier,
Boucheron, Mellerio dits Meller and Van Cleef et Arpels all a stone's throw
away from the Ritz.
Any fashion fiend visiting Paris should head straight for avenue Montaigne
or rue Faubourg Saint-Honore where most of the main designers have their
flagship stores, often beneath the haute couture salons where their very
wealthy clients go for their fittings.
Avenue Montaigne is one of the world's most elegant shopping streets, with
its wide tree-lined pavements and its opulent stores selling the classic
clothes beloved of hauts bourgeois Parisians.
The main Christian Dior store is here - with everything from furs, to
signature tea-towels - as are Louis Vuitton, Yves Saint Laurent (just around
the corner on Avenue Marceau, and the Paris branch of Harry Winston, the
American jeweller where Elizabeth Taylor likes to buy her glitzy
nuckledusters.
Chanel and Christian Lacroix both have 'satellite' shops on avenue
Montaigne, but their flagship stores, and couture salons, are in the
Saint-Honore area. Lacroix, who five years ago set up the first new Paris
couture house for over a decade, drafted in Garouste and Bonetti, two of the
funkiest French interior designers, to deck out his store in vivid pinks and
oranges.
Chanel on rue Cambon favours the more subdued style of its classic black and
white, with a brace of uniformed guards to open and close the doors for you
as you stagger out with your booty. Karl Lagerfeld, the German designer
behind Chanel, has his own shop a little further along rue Saint-Honore with
Chloe, another of his labels, just across the street.
GUCCI, under Dawn Mello its new design director, sells its contemporary
classic fashion and leather on rue Saint-Honore. But, if you are in the mood
for the more opulent side of Italian style, go to gawp at the Disneyesque
baroque that Gianni Versace has brought all the way from Milan to Paris.
The best area for men's fashion is around place des Victoires, where Yohji
Yamamoto, Comme des Garcons, Jean-Paul Gaultier, Claude Montana, Marithe et
Francois Girbaud, Kenzo and Agnes B. all have shops for both sexes. Remember
to look in at A Priori The, a pretty tea room with delicious tartes and
cakes under the glazed roof of the 19th century Galerie Vivienne, just
around the corner from Montana and Gaultier.
It is also worth checking out the shops in the Marais district. Romeo Gigli,
the Italian designer, has a breathtakingly beautiful store in a converted
printshop on rue de Sevigne. The courtyard is lit by scented candles in
terracotta tubs on dark winter afternoons.
Miller et Bertaux sell their own functional clothes, as well as an
idiosyncratic assortment of ethnic and artisanal objects, from their shop on
rue Ferdinand Duval. Meanwhile Azzedine Alaia serves his super-model
clientele from his new store and studio on rue de Moussy.
Anyone interested in seeing the latest looks from the funky, young European
designers should go to L'Eclaireur on rue de Rosiers where Martin Margiela,
Ann Demeulemeester, Vivienne Westwood and Dolce e Gabanna are all on sale.
Then you can sink into one of the shabby chic armchairs, while tucking into
a delicious slab of cake, at Le Loit dans La Theiere, the nearby salon du
the.
Shoe buffs should cross the river to Saint-Germain to scour the streets
around the carrefour de la Croix Rouge. Stephane Kelian sells its
contemporary classic French footwear from rue de Grenelle, as does Michel
Perry with his wittily pretty mules and platforms, a little further along
the street.
Robert Clergerie, another contemporary classic French shoe designer, is on
rue du Cherche Midi, together with Fausto Santini, which is full of funky
urban Italian styles.
But the creme de la creme of French leather goods lies back across the river
on rue Faubourg Saint-Honore. Hermes is the place to buy leather and silk in
Paris.
The Hermes store may be packed with Japanese tourists, but nothing could be
more Parisienne than splashing out on a classic Hermes Kelly bag, which
costs as much as a Chanel suit, takes 20 hours - and a lot of skill - to
make by hand and will last a lifetime.
