FT  10 SEP 92 / Kohl defiant in face of critics: Chancellor calls for united
action on east Germany
GERMAN chancellor Helmut Kohl yesterday shrugged off all speculation about
his political demise, and called on both sides of German industry, the
opposition and the federal states to work out a common programme with the
government to finance economic recovery in the east.
In a belligerent return to the political fray in the Bundestag, Mr Kohl
admitted mistakes in his unification policies and called for agreement on
ways to reduce the high costs of production in both halves of the country.
He put forward no proposals of his own on how to finance the rising costs of
the eastern reconstruction - an issue which has split his coalition - but
put his faith instead in the round table he has summoned to agree on a
'solidarity pact'.
He shrugged off attacks from the opposition Social Democrats about the lack
of precise policies from the government, while admitting that since
unification in 1990, 'we did a lot of things right, but also failed to
achieve many things. We know a lot more of the enormous problems caused by
this extraordinary event than we did two years ago'.
It was essential to maintain the productive capacity of west Germany in
order to finance recovery in the east, he said. Private investment in the
east was still lagging far behind expectations.
He called for measures to provide further encouragement to small and
medium-sized enterprises in the east of the country, and restraint in wage
rises in order to provide a basis for a sustained recovery.
Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader of the Social Democrats, said that a speech 'built
on the motto of faith, hope and charity is no answer to the worries and
needs of the people now. This government is like a ship drifting in heavy
seas without a captain. The crew needs a clear word from the bridge, but the
officers are chatting about the weather'.
Both Mr Engholm and his parliamentary leader, Mr Hans-Ulrich Klose, insisted
that the government had to produce firm proposals and clear forecasts on the
financing needs of east Germany, to make a round-table exercise worthwhile.
They attacked Mr Kohl for his half-hearted condemnation of racist attacks on
foreigners in Germany. Mr Klose said the chancellor gave the critics tacit
encouragement by insisting that the prime cause of the problem was the
number of unjustified applicants for political asylum.
He promised SPD co-operation in finding a solution, as part of a broader
regulation of immigration, provided it preserved the fundamental individual
right to political asylum.
Unions 'favour wage limits in east' Page 2
Captain leads from below deck Page 16
