FT  04 AUG 92 / ANC declares strike a success
LEADERS of South Africa's general strike claimed a 'resounding success' as
millions of workers stayed at home on the first day of a week of protest
called to force President FW de Klerk to agree to majority rule.
Much of the country's business and industry was brought to a halt, or forced
to reduce output, with an estimated 90 per cent of the workforce staying
away in the Johannesburg region, falling to about 50 per cent in Durban,
Natal, where Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom party (IFP)
opposes the strike.
The country's mining sector, however, was less affected, with Anglo American
Corporation reporting that its gold and coal mines were 'operating normally,
with high attendance', ranging from a full turnout in the West Rand and Vaal
Reefs regions, to 40 per cent at Freegold and about 75 per cent in its coal
mines.
The Johannesburg Chamber of Commerce and Industry said members reported a
turnout of less than 50 per cent.
At least 34 people were reported killed in the past two days, though it was
unclear how many of the deaths were directly linked to the strike.
Cape Town townships were effectively no-go areas as barricades, some in
flames, blocked streets.
A 10-member team of United Nations observers is monitoring the violence,
with the assistance of local organisations, in the first exercise of its
kind in South Africa.
At a news conference last night Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, general secretary of the
African National Congress, said: 'South Africa has been plunged into a
national crisis as a direct result of the government's intransigence in
negotiations and its lack of political will to end the violence.'
The real test of the ANC's campaign is yet to come. Past strike calls by the
ANC and its allies, the Communist party and the Congress of South African
Trade Unions (Cosatu), have had comparable success.
This time the alliance is committed to a week of protest, with rallies,
demonstrations and sit-ins due to continue after the strike ends tonight.
If today's level of support, or near it, can be sustained, pressure on Mr de
Klerk may start to tell.
Mr Jay Naidoo, the Cosatu general secretary, said at the same news
conference that the protest would continue until Mr de Klerk gave way. If
there was no positive response to the alliance's call for an early interim
government, elections for a constituent assembly and an end to political
violence, it would 'continue its campaign of rolling mass action until the .
. . demands are met'.
Mr Naidoo said that 4m workers had responded to the strike call. 'Millions
have voted with their feet today.'
The campaign organisers also claimed that school boycotts, opposed by many
parents, ranged from 75 per cent in the western Cape to a total boycott in
the Johannesburg region. The city itself was quiet yesterday.
Parties opposed to the strike, including Inkatha and the Pan Africanist
Congress, as well as employers, claimed that there had been intimidation, a
charge denied by the ANC.
However, with few taxis or buses operating in many parts of the country, it
was impossible for many people to travel to their jobs even if they wanted
to work.
Growth fears, Page 4
Image belies reality, Page 4
Platinum and gold prices fall, Page 24
