FT  09 JAN 92 / Workers show refusal to look back in anger: As the
Ravenscraig plant counts down to closure the community assesses the chances
of new openings - James Buxton and Chris Tighe on the mood of resignation
HUDDLED for protection against driving rain and sleet, the Ravenscraig shop
stewards still managed to look dignified yesterday as they stood before the
vast, doomed steel complex.
'Realistically speaking it's too late to save Ravenscraig,' says Mr George
Quinn, the craft workers' convener. 'We will just keep the plant working to
the best of our abilities up to August and then we'll have to go.'
For Mr Quinn and Mr Willie Twaddle, the senior plant convener, the mood is
resignation rather than anger. For them the time for surprise and dismay at
the behaviour of British Steel is long past. 'There was an inevitability
about it,' Mr Twaddle says, 'even though we were guaranteed to 1994.'
Mr Quinn says: 'It's nothing to do with market conditions and all to do with
politics and British Steel. British Steel's master plan is working out as
the plants in south Wales are getting ready to take over. But I have to say
that relations with management inside the plant have always been good.'
The men, says Mr Twaddle, took the news of the closure calmly. 'They've been
conditioned into believing that we couldn't save the plant after we lost
Gartcosh.'
Many of the steelworkers are young men, he says, since many older men have
already left. At least they are the kind of people who could get jobs in new
inward investment plants, he thinks.
Slightly incongruous in his dog-collar amid a pensive group of Ravenscraig
shop stewards, the Rev John Potter a Melthodist minister and industrial
chaplain for Lanarkshire's vanishing steel industry, pondered the greater
incongruities of the failure of the campaign to keep the plant open.
'There's pride and achievement in a strange way on a day like this - it's
factors beyond the community which have brought the place to an end,' says
Mr Potter who has ministered to Ravenscraig's workers for 19 years.
'Ravenscraig's workers and their leaders had nothing to reproach themselves
for. In that lays the sense of pride,' he says.
'This is the industrial revolution. In a revolution there will be painful
change. But there will be a new day.'
In spite of yesterday's gloomy news and its timing in the middle of a
recession, Mr Potter's long-term confidence for Motherwell's future finds
many supporters.
Even Ravenscraig employees such as blast furnace operator Mr Donald Horne
expressed some belief that the government's promised enterprise zone might
create employment.
But 39-year-old Mr Horne was preoccupied by the immediate future. 'In 7 to
10 years' time when those jobs happen we'll be too old,' he said.
Dr John Reid, one of Motherwell's two Labour MPs, while highly critical of
the government's policy on Ravenscraig was more hopeful for the longer term.
He pointed out that the new Eurofreight channel tunnel depot for Scotland,
to be located at Motherwell, is expected to create up to 8,000 jobs.
For some traders, such as the McGuinness family the closure may spell doom.
Their general shop near the Craig main gate opens from 5am to 10pm to catch
passing steelworkers' trade. It employs Mr Kevin McGuinness, his father
Peter, a former steelworker, and mother Nancy and a full-time employee.
'Everybody has really been expecting this news but it's come a bit quicker
than everybody thought,' Mr Kevin McGuinness said.
In Motherwell town centre other traders dependent on the steel works were
more sanguine. 'The future should be good with the railway depot starting
up,' said Mr Brian Digby, owner of Digby's Delicatessen and a shopkeeper in
Motherwell for 30 years.
Later this month at the Jerviston Social Club, Mr George Younger, the former
Scottish secretary, respected by shop stewards for his attempt to defend the
works, will propose the toast of the Immortal Memory at the Burns Supper.
The immortal memory for many of those attending may be not Robbie Burns but
their workplace.
PROMISES OVER THE YEARS
1959: Tory premier Harold MacMillan describes as 'judgement of Solomon' his
decision to sanction two extra steelworks instead of the one the industry
wants. One to be at Llanwern, Gwent, and the other at Ravenscraig - both
subsidised from public funds.
1983: Thatcher government defends Ravenscraig when European Commission
recommends closure. Mrs Thatcher praises Ravenscraig workforce during
miners' strike in following year.
1985, June: Scottish secretary George Younger reaffirms government's
commitment to save Ravenscraig and threatens to quit cabinet if the works is
closed.
1986, Sept: Younger's successor Malcolm Rifkind says of pounds 30m British
Steel investment at Ravenscraig: 'I regard the package as a splendid
confirmation of Ravenscraig's long-term future .. today's news must put paid
to the pessimistic forecast we have heard from so many quarters'.
1987, Dec: Junior industry minister Kenneth Clarke says if British Steel
ever wants to abandon steelmaking at Ravesncraig it will consider
privat-sector offers as alternative to closure.
1990, June: Trade and Industry secretary Nicholas Ridley claims he is
following bipartisan policy in refusing to intervene in British Steel
closure plan. 'The more I hear about this matter the less I can discover
what the difference is between the government and the Labour party'.
1991, Feb: Scottish secretary Ian Lang denies giving up fight to persuade
British Steel to reverse closure decision; says he will help if there is any
chance of avoiding loss of steel jobs in Scotland.
