FT  02 APR 92 / Arts: Dimitrij - Bavarian State opera, Munich
This was not the triumphant vindication of Dvorak's grand Russian opera for
which many had been hoping and which the work has long deserved. It amounted
to little more than a swift succession of bleeding chunks, hacked from Milan
Pospisil's new edition of the original 1882 score (not credited in the
programme book) and stitched together with a German translation to make just
over two hours of music.
The perpetrator of this crude musical butchery was Gerd Albrecht, who
crippled Tchaikovsky's Maid of Orleans in exactly the same way in Munich two
seasons ago, and then walked out of this Dimitrij production after the first
day of rehearsal because of disagreements with the producer, Tony Palmer.
Albrecht's complete recording with Czech forces has just been released on
Supraphon, and may offer some mitigation.
The opera picks up the story of the Polish Pretender to the Tsarist crown
after the death of Boris Godunov, and nicely complements the Mussorgsky work
in the current Munich repertory.
The Munich production was too fragmented to allow the long melodic arcs and
breathtaking choral tableaux to be heard in their proper context. Too often
one extended scena would come to an abrupt end, only to give way instantly
to another, with no linking material. In the circumstances, the young
Russian stand-in conductor, Nicholas Ulyanov, did a competent job, though
there was not the sense of engagement that comes from long study of a score,
nor the necessary choral attack and variation of orchestral dynamics.
But the production had been well cast. The title role calls for a dramatic
tenor who can sing with Italianate lyricism and agility, and Ben Heppner met
the requirements perfectly. His voice has a Domingo-like fluidity, but it is
tighter, with a cutting edge that pierces the thickest orchestral climaxes.
He knows how to colour the words, and cuts a big, commanding figure without
seeming ungainly - unlike the Marina, Luana DeVol. The other saving grace of
the performance was the poised, pretty Xenia of the Slovak soprano, Livia
Aghova, who is probably the Rusalka of our dreams. The remaining principal
roles - particularly Shuisky (Gottfried Hornik) and Marfa, beautifully sung
from the side of the stage by Pamela Coburn while the indisposed Livia Budai
acted the part - were reduced to a cipher.
About Palmer's broad, emblematic staging, probably the less said the better.
Goran Wassberg's single set conveyed the bleak void of the Kremlin square
and was flanked by a vast array of gold icons, making for some
seductively-lit stage pictures.
But Palmer completely ducked the political issues in the opera - the
relationship between power and legitimacy, the occupation of one country by
another's forces - which are of striking relevance to the Slav nations
today. And he seemed hopelessly tied to operatic conventions in his movement
of chorus and principals.
