FT  24 JUL 92 / Smith's new team has younger image
THE SHADOW cabinet assumes a more youthful image after yesterday's election
of five new faces to serve under Mr John Smith and his deputy Ms Margaret
Beckett on Labour's 18-strong frontbench team.
Four of the five newcomers are in their early forties. The changes reflect
the meritocratic, as opposed to ideological, nature of Labour's 69 new MPs
whose votes played a critical role in the three-month election process.
Two of the newcomers - Ms Harriet Harman and Ms Marjorie Mowlam - were
women, bringing to five the overall female representation on the body. This
is the highest number ever.
Ms Harman, MP for Peckham, and Mr Chris Smith, MP for Islington South and
Finsbury, also bring an injection of southern blood into a party
increasingly identified with Scotland, Wales and the north of England.
The other two newcomers, Mr David Blunkett, a former leader of Sheffield
council, and Mr Tom Clarke, the Scottish junior health spokesman, will prove
popular choices among more traditional Labour supporters.
By contrast, the outgoing shadow cabinet members who contested the poll  -
Mr Barry Jones and Ms Jo Richardson - are widely identified with an
increasingly old-fashioned image of the party.
Top of the poll were Mr Gordon Brown and Mr Tony Blair. Each is expected to
be rewarded with a top job, with Mr Brown thought certain to be named shadow
chancellor and Mr Blair set to be home affairs spokesman.
The full list of shadow cabinet appointments is expected to be published
today.
Senior portfolios are expected to go to Mr Robin Cook, shadow health
secretary and Mr Smith's campaign manager, and Mr Jack Cunningham, until now
campaigns co-ordinator. They are expected to contest the role of shadow
foreign affairs spokesman vacated by Mr Gerald Kaufman.
Welcoming the appointments yesterday, Mr Smith singled out the success of
his cabinet's female members.
'The Labour party now has more women in senior positions than any British
political party in history,' he said.
Other successful candidates pledged to start working immediately towards
ensuring that the party wins the next general election.
'Now we have a new leadership in place, we will be able to roll up our
sleeves and get stuck into the government,' said an ebullient Mr Chris
Smith.
Shadow cabinet line-up, Page 6
