FT  23 MAY 92 / Private View: Palestine's front-line philosopher
WHILE Scud missiles dropped on Tel Aviv, Sari Nusseibeh sat in Ramla jail
reviewing a book on medieval logic.
Locked in a small cell for 23 hours a day, he also studied the Koran and
other texts borrowed from Shi'ite Moslems detained on the same block. He
corrected the proofs of his own book, No Trumpets, No Drums, a manifesto for
a two-state Palestine written with Mark Heller, an Israeli defence expert,
who was at the same moment sheltering at home with his gas mask on.
Nusseibeh is a Palestinian from an old Jerusalem family, a philosophy
professor educated at Oxford and Harvard, and - these days - leading adviser
to the Palestinian negotiators at the Middle East peace talks.
His arrest 12 days after the Gulf War began was due, apparently, to the
interception of a phone call he received from the Iraqi ambassador in Tunis.
The Israeli Press (though not the detention order itself) accused him of
spying.
'The first night they came and took me to a reception centre,' he said.
'They put me in a cell with a lot of criminals, both Arabs and Jews, drug
addicts and so on, who were very excited that I was there.
'Then the radio started saying I was in because I was an Iraqi spy who was
directing the Scud missiles. Of course, I was afraid of them. But the
fantastic thing was their reaction was totally the opposite. It was: 'Look
at all this bullshit they're saying about you.' They didn't believe it. But
of course other, more educated, people in Israel and elsewhere might have
been ready to believe it.'
It was not the first time the mild-mannered logician had been in trouble.
After undergraduate days at Christ Church, Oxford, he had given up politics
to bury his nose in Frege's symbolic logic, which he studied with Quine in
the US, and in the metaphysics of Ibn Sina (Avicenna), the 11th century
interpreter of Aristotle, for a Harvard PhD on Islamic philosophy.
But politics was waiting for him when he came home to teach at Bir Zeit,
best known of the Arab universities set up in the Israeli-occupied West
Bank. (The Israelis closed the university in 1988, reopening it only last
month.) Meanwhile he had married Lucy Austin, daughter of the celebrated
Oxford philosopher JL Austin.
'Having lived in a world of pure ideas, I was suddenly dropped into the
middle of the real world in which, looking around me, I found the problems a
total mystery. I had to go through a new process of learning,' he said.
He fought for academic freedom at Bir Zeit in defiance of Israeli
restrictions on texts, courses and students, and set up a lecturers' union.
For several years he was forbidden to cross into Jordan. The English
language weekly report he started on the intifada, the Arab uprising, was
banned. His East Jerusalem office was closed for three years.
'There was a lot of harassment,' he told me. 'I was brought in for
interrogation on several occasions. Then there was a lot of press talk of my
having been involved with directing the intifada. Some said I had given them
money for various activities.'
Nusseibeh has denied being a member of the Palestine Liberation
Organisation. He is certainly an activist, though regarded as a moderate
both by western diplomats and by PLO militants (who in 1986 beat him up for
it.)
I met him in his mother's house in the Nablus Road, one of the handsome
stone villas built outside the walls of Old Jerusalem, right on the former
partition line. Its reception rooms resembled a Parisian salon. On the wall
was a portrait of Sari's late father, Anwar, a minister in the Jordanian
cabinet, ambassador to London and governor of Jerusalem.
I found the son friendly, donnishly courteous and with an impish air. He has
an ironical way of speaking, and a flinty eye which suggests a gift for
sarcasm.
I asked him whether his philosophical training carried weight with his
comrades. Do they rely on you for a wisdom you don't possess?
'No. In real life everyone is a wise man. In order to make your advice heard
you have to do more than be a wise man. It's not enough to think you know
what should be done, but necessary to be involved enough to make it happen.'
How much are these negotiations for you an exercise in comprehension and
logic, I asked, and how much a matter of emotion? How do you regard the
state of Israel?
'Well, frankly I would have preferred it if there were no Israel and no
Israelis to contend with. Obviously, an all-Arab Palestinian state in all of
Palestine would be for me a preferable option.
'On the other hand you have to contend with reality; therefore you have to
make compromises. You have to learn how to make those compromises in a way
that best protects your interests.'
We discussed the different motivations of Israeli and Palestinian
peace-seekers. Nusseibeh said:' I don't ask myself whether the Jews have the
moral right to be here or not. I don't think it's a necessary question. Nor
do I ask who did what to whom first.'
You don't seek to apportion blame?
'I find this a total waste of time. I think one should begin from here and
see what one can do.'
But in going forward, I said, you have to take some account of where you've
been. Do you think the Palestinian leadership played its hand badly in the
past, that its response to the fact of Israel and subsequent encroachments
was so hostile as to make it incapable - until now - of finding a
compromise?
'I know what you mean. But I think you have to be very careful here. You
could look at it mathematically or logically and say had the Palestinians or
Arabs done this or that in 1947 or whenever then things might have been
different; therefore they were wrong to do what they did. However this is a
very cold, unsympathetic way of looking at things. In a sense it's true, but
in a sense also not realistic.
'Take my parents' generation for instance, who start from the point of view
that this is all theirs, that the Jews have no right here. As far as they
are concerned the Jews came from outer space.'
(Nusseibeh's family believes it came from the Saudi desert at the time of
Caliph Umar who conquered Persia, Syria and Palestine in the seventh century
AD. In the 13th century the family became keyholders of the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre, an office it still performs.)
There were two kinds of equitable settlement, Nusseibeh continued. One was
government of the land equally shared in a single, bi-national, state. The
other was a land divided in two states.
'Both sides seem to find this option preferable, the Israelis because they
want a predominantly Jewish state, the Palestinians because they want to
assert their national self-determination - which you have to address if you
want to be free of nationalism.'
I asked him about Palestinian opposition to the talks and tensions within
the PLO. Is the tension between people in Palestine and those outside?
'This is a general misconception. The distinctions don't break down into
inside and outside. They can be between brother and brother. The
insider-outsider differences are other. Outsiders are wealthier, for
example.'
Or they're at Harvard University?
'Or they're at Harvard, exactly. People are for or against negotiations
regardless of where they happen to be.'
Are you just waiting for a change of government in this country on June 23?
'Well, I believe it is impossible for us to move forward until then. I do
not expect Likud (the right-wing governing party) to change its ideology,
and I do not expect the Americans to put sufficient pressure on it to make
it give up. So the only alternative is a change of government.
'It's now very much up to the Israeli man in the street, the voter, who is
being presented with two kinds of option.' Nusseibeh described the choice as
the chance of a peaceful life, with economic progress and integration, or
perpetual isolation and hardship. It was one of the more crucial decisions
in Israel's history, he added.
So is it for you a matter of negotiating from Israeli weakness rather than
from Arab strength?
'Yes, absolutely. I mean Shimon Peres in the Labour Party has been saying:
'we have won the battle of the past, we have been able to create a state,
but we still have the battle for the future. And to guarantee ourselves a
place in the future we have to give something back. We have to make
compromises with the Palestinians.''
But maybe they are prepared to live indefinitely in a half-world, I said,
neither formally annexing the west bank and Gaza, nor handing them over,
while continuing to build settlements.
'I think they have come to realise, some of them, that if they continue
along this path, very soon it's going to be irreversible. Very soon they
will have to decide: do they want to be an undemocratic state in 'Greater
Israel' or a democratic state in the Land of Israel. That's why this is a
critical juncture.'
