FT  04 APR 92 / Election 92: The strategists fail to locate the majority of
voters - Women's issues have been given little airing in the campaign
WOMEN constitute the biggest minority in British politics. Indeed, they are
actually a majority of the electorate. But whether there is such a thing as
'the women's vote' is another matter.
The fact that women voters outnumber men is duly recognised in the main
parties' manifestos, yet women's issues have been given little airing. The
politicians may dream of capturing the female vote, but their strategists
cannot seem to locate it.
Surveys suggest that women do think differently about political issues at
voting time - and the 'War of Jennifer's Ear' seems to have driven them
towards the Liberal Democrats in recent days.
However, history shows that the difference does not give any party a clear
advantage: psephologically speaking, women's concerns cancel out.
There was a small but visible gender gap 20-30 years ago, according to Dr
Anthony Heath of Nuffield College, Oxford, co-director of the British
Election Survey. 'But I haven't seen much sign of one now.' What was a
pronounced bias in favour of the Conservatives has been dwindling since
1974, and disappears altogether if adjustment is made for the biological
fact of women's longevity.
Dr Heath suggests there may be sub-categories where political choices are
more marked: among young, highly- educated women, for example. But he has
not detected any macro-effect.
When asked by the pollsters to list their priorities, women unfailingly put
'caring' concerns at the top: they want more tax relief for looking after
old people, more investment in the health service, more nursery school
places or subsidised child care, followed by more part-time job
opportunities.
These demands would seem to give Labour or Liberal Democrats the edge; yet
on the other side of the scale weigh issues such as law and order - the
urban woman's fear of attack is hard to overstate - which are natural Tory
territory.
Perhaps this self-correcting bias in the 'women's vote' explains why party
leaders are insouciant about another feature of women's political behaviour
before polling day: the large percentage who are 'don't knows'.
For example, Gallup's first poll of the campaign for the Daily Telegraph
found far more women than men uncommitted on all but three of 45 questions
put.
Professor Anthony King, of Essex University, has suggested that men feel
more bound to express a view. Many men who claim to have opinions may be
'merely showing off'. Mr Heath thinks women may be generally less interested
than men in politics. 'Perhaps men only worry about things they cannot
control while women are the opposite.'
The sex of candidates and ministers makes little difference to the voters,
for all the inter-party rivalry about whose gender record is better.
A recent NOP poll for The Independent found that 83 per cent of women were
indifferent to the sex of their candidates (compared with 90 per cent of
men). A smaller majority - 58 per cent of both sexes - said Britain would be
no better or worse governed if women had half the seats in the House of
Commons and in the cabinet.
The toppling of Mrs Margaret Thatcher as Conservative party leader has,
however, made more of an impression on women than on men. Broadly, they are
happier with Mr John Major.
The Tories are making little of the women's vote. They have a spokesperson
on women's issues - Mrs Angela Rumbold, junior Home Office minister - but
she is not sure there is a women's vote.
'Everybody says that child care is what women want,' she says. 'But for
every woman who asks for child care, there is another who may resent the
idea.'
The Tories think that to offer more than they already have - tax relief on
child-minding provided by an employer - would be expensive and of dubious
electoral benefit among their older female supporters.
Instead, Mrs Rumbold attacks Labour's promise of a statutory minimum wage
(which Labour thinks will be especially popular with women) as a threat to
the part-time jobs that many working wives depend upon.
The Conservatives are trying to convey a positive image while fighting shy
of anything that smacks of tokenism. So they have proposed a 'special unit'
inside the Department of Employment to monitor women's opportunities, while
dismissing Labour's proposed ministry for women as patronising and
unworkable.
Ms Jo Richardson, who would probably become Labour's first minister for
women, agrees that there is 'no such thing as a woman's issue separate from
a man's issue.' But she claims the idea of a separate ministry or reserved
cabinet seat is popular, even with men, in Labour's private polling and has
proved its worth in other countries, such as France, Germany Austria,
Jamaica, Zimbabwe and New Zealand. 'We have had 13 years with no women's
voice in the cabinet and no real woman's voice: I don't count Mrs Thatcher
as a woman's voice,' Ms Richardson says.
Labour says it will persuade local authorities to provide nursery schooling
for three and four-year-olds, and child minding for mothers who want it. Ms
Richardson hopes to steal the Tories' clothes on law and order, too. 'We
want to see more policemen on the beat and better street lighting. We are
very much going down that road.'
The Liberal Democrats' champion is Ms Ray Michie, their sole woman MP, who
represents the farmers and fishermen of Argyll and Bute. The party promises
child care vouchers worth up to Pounds 75 a week and a bigger say for women
at Westminster (and in the proposed Scottish assembly) through proportional
representation. But Ms Michie dismisses a women's ministry as 'almost
tokenistic'.
