FT  01 JUN 92 / Survey of Singapore (9): Mixed trends and fortunes - Hotels
and Property
AMID groans over the Singapore government's intention to release 84 hectares
from 1991 to 1993 for development, the property scene has one group
despairing over a potential glut while another, led by hotels, is finding
profitable niches.
A third group, in line with the international re-awakening over preservation
and the environment, is involved in conservation properties. It is bringing
more colour to its projects and reaping commercial returns.
The glut theory stems from 1m sq ft of commercial space available during the
four years to 1995 against a take-up of 140,000 sq ft annually. In the same
period, there will be a supply of 4,170 apartments a year against demand for
3,000.
This theory was strengthened by a lack of bidders, for the first time since
1987, for a hotel-shopping-office development. And unlike the 1987 example,
the latest case, in February, was a prime property beside the main Orchard
Road shopping thoroughfare, designated to be a 900-room hotel with a
six-storey podium at a reserve price of SDollars 434m.
Knight Frank Cheong Hock Chye &amp; Bailleau, property consultants, said that
rents in Orchard Road shopping complexes had slipped 5-10 per cent last year
while the industrial property market would be healthy until end-1992 when
some 1.6m sq ft of new factory and warehouse space comes on stream.
Richard Ellis, another consultant, noted that the 11 per cent fall in office
rents last year reversed upward spirals of 64 per cent and 16.5 per cent in
1989 and 1990, which explained why the outlook for office space and the
general property market was uncertain. But it added that 'while prospects
may not be as gloomy as what had been projected, short-term problems such as
slower economic growth and a perception of over-supply will prevail.'
However, the consultancy believes there will be a slight downward pressure
on office rents in 1992 as companies will have taken into consideration the
anticipated new supply of space. Tenants can expect indirect discounts such
as long rent-free periods, cash contributions towards fitting-out costs and
12-15 per cent discounts on the signing of longer leases of six years.
Buyers of residential properties are already getting discounts of between 5
per cent and 20 per cent. This has brought prices down to an average
SDollars 400-SDollars 500 per sq ft level. Most observers believe that
residential property prices will fall anywhere from 5 per cent to 30 per
cent over the next few years. However, the trend may be reversed when
discounts and low interest rates draw homebuyers into the market.
This scenario has not dissuaded companies such as the listed First Capital
Corporation, with a war chest of SDollars 250m, from developing a sizeable
share of the residential property development, said a Kay Hian James Capel
residential property review. The broking firm said that more big players
would emerge in this arena in the next few years as the government releases
more land for sale. They could include Hotel Marco Polo, Hotel Properties
(which operates the Hilton and Four Season Hotels), and the Kuok group of
Shangri-la fame.
Tourists have returned to Singapore despite the effects of the Gulf war, the
vanishing Japanese big spenders and a slowing world economy. Arrivals were
up 1.7 per cent to 5.4m last year. Mr N. M. Yeo, the Singapore Tourist
Promotion Board's planning and operations director, forecasts a 6-8 per cent
growth for 1992.
The bulk of Singapore-bound tourists come from within the region rather than
from the west. Also, a global economic slowdown tends to send visitors to
countries closer to home. Another boost is that 1992 is Visit Asean Year.
Judging by the success of individual members' promotional efforts, a
combined push should yield positive results.
Hotels did not benefit from the pick-up in tourist arrivals from mid-1991.
The industry's turnover slid 1.8 per cent to SDollars 1.6bn, the occupancy
rate slipped to 76.8 per cent against 80 per cent in 1990, and
hotel-operated food and beverage outlets saw revenue contracting 3.8 per
cent to SDollars 637.8m.
Brokers Hoare Govette, however, point to positive indicators for 1992. Based
on January statistics, actual room lettings rose 2 per cent; average room
rates were up 5 per cent to SDollars 151.60 from year-ago levels; hotel room
revenues were 6.9 per cent higher while food and beverage revenue increased
10.8 per cent. Gross industry revenue grew 9.1 per cent in January.
Another bright spot is in conservation projects. Such projects have become
worthwhile despite conditions imposed which include preservation and
restoration of facades and restrictions on building upwards. Five years ago,
Singapore embarked on a SDollars 1bn effort to conserve and restore its rich
multicultural history so as to broaden its range of visitor attractions.
Ethnic areas such as Arab Street, Chinatown and Little India were marked for
preservation as were buildings such as Empress Place.
One well-known conservation project was the SDollars 160m facelift of that
Singapore landmark, the Raffles Hotel. It was restored to its 1887 tropical
French colonial design. The all-suite hotel has 8,000 pieces of silver and
china dating back to the days of its founders.
Restoration work in the business district has brought life after office
hours. Tanjong Pagar shophouses have focused on retail and entertainment
while Telok Ayer has become a festival market.
The cleaned-up Singapore River enjoys more night life along its banks. The
warehouses and shophouses that once catered to busy traders now support
entertainment and leisure-related activities.
The SDollars 240m Clarke Quay project is the largest conservation project.
It will convert 21,428 sq m of property beside the river into a vibrant
festival marketplace offering a variety of retail, food and service
establishments, activities and entertainment, said Mr Richard Helfer of
managing agent Raffles International.
There will be outdoor cafes, art galleries, restaurants, gift shops and the
Clarke Quay Adventure, billed as an exciting voyage blending fantasy with
reality taking the visitor through Singapore's history.
