FT  23 JUL 92 / Technology: More oil on the wheels - Financial pressures
have forced Japan's auto makers to build in flexibility
Nissan Motor's kitchen-clean car assembly plant on Japan's southern Kyushu
Island could easily pass for an exhibition of state-of-the-art robotics and
computer-controlled manufacturing.
Giant mechanical arms hoist seven stamped, steel panels into position and,
amid a shower of sparks caused by 64 simultaneous welds, the main body of a
car is created. Sixteen robots then go to work on the body, performing 600
spot welds in rapid succession in two stages.
Today, production on the line is just getting going, but eventually the
robots will handle up to four different model styles, in eight different
variations, all of it controlled by computer.
Production at the body assembly stage is 100 per cent automated. But more
important than the automation itself is that Nissan has managed to build in
flexibility, albeit at considerable cost.
As Japanese car makers face a labour shortage that is forcing them to
replace human versatility with far less adaptable machines, flexibility in
manufacturing - or rather lack of it - has become a critical issue. Machines
are not easily programmed to install different components for different cars
coming down the line, and they still lack the dexterity of men.
Market trends have also heightened this need. While the Japanese
manufacturers increased sales sharply in the late 1980s, all but Toyota did
this by selling more models in smaller production runs. Being able to
assemble multiple models on a single line increases the utilisation rate of
expensive equipment. Today, with consumer tastes shifting rapidly, some
production lines are running flat out, unable to meet demand, while others
making less popular models go underutilised.
'Our focus in production engineering is to enhance flexibility,' says
Ryuichi Tsukamoto, executive vice president at Honda Engineering, a
subsidiary of Honda Motor. 'Enhancing flexibility is the best way to get
efficient production.'
Tsukamoto's strategy involves two broad approaches: one stresses the
localisation of parts supply for an industry that has in a decade become
global, and a second involves increasing the use of standardised parts and
rethinking the design process for cars to allow standardised robots to
install functionally different components.
Tsukamoto describes the idealised 'lean' Japanese manufacturing process as
direct production, which is essentially similar to the production system
pioneered by Toyota Motor in the 1950s. Tsukamoto tries to match production
capacity for parts and components suppliers precisely with the needs of the
assembly line, with suppliers located near the assembly factory and thus
able to respond quickly to demands from the factory floor.
Honda more or less achieved this in the 1970s at its two main assembly
plants in Japan, in Sayama and Suzuka. However, the start of production in
the US in the early 1980s, followed by a period of hectic growth, led Honda
far from the ideal, as the US plants were dependent on a long umbilical cord
to Japanese suppliers. 'Year by year we have been trying to localise parts
supply and create direct production in the US,' he says.
The US operation is still 20 to 30 per cent dependent on Japan for parts
supply. Honda intends to carry the process further, and has recently
established separate overseas operating divisions aimed at decentralising
the international management in order to enhance local flexibility. Honda is
the most advanced in giving a long leash to its overseas operations, but all
the Japanese companies are heading in the same direction.
The redesign of parts and components themselves has recently become
something of a hot topic in Japan, and Yoshifumi Tsuji, president of Nissan,
has been most vocal about the need to reduce the complexity of cars, to use
fewer parts, and to use more common parts in different models, thus allowing
for greater economies of scale in manufacture. Companies like Nissan and
Honda competed in recent years by bringing out new models, which were
designed from scratch with little thought about economising on parts supply.
Honda's experience with the 1990 Accord, its bread-and-butter mid-sized car,
however, caused the company to rethink the design process. The car was
loaded with new technology, but was panned by the Japanese press for being
old hat, mainly on styling grounds, and it flopped with consumers. This
begged the question: if consumers were unable to appreciate innovative
engineering throughout the car, was it all necessary? Might not the use of
more standardised parts in different models produce a car of equal appeal
and quality?
Tsukamoto is now leading a campaign within Honda to improve what he calls
'commonality of design'. The idea is not just to put identical parts into
different models, but to set standards for installation, for example,
putting mounting holes in the same place on different models. The aim is to
allow a relatively inflexible robot to install a wide variety of parts.
Flexibility in this case comes not from the production line itself, but from
the design process.
How far the process can be taken, however, remains an open question,
particularly at a time when automobile technology is changing rapidly in
response to tightening environmental and safety standards around the world.
New technology means changing parts designs that will stand in the way of
standardisation.
Shoichiro Toyoda, president of Toyota Motor, is sceptical. 'We have been
trying to use common parts for a long time, but have not been able to do it
very well,' he admits. Toyoda says that while the concept of using common
parts is attractive, in practice it is difficult to achieve without
compromising the quality of different models of cars, where the engineering
requirements are subtly different.
To some extent, Toyoda's scepticism reflects the relative efficiency of
Toyota's engineering and manufacturing process, which has for years set the
standard for the industry. There may simply be less room for improvement at
Toyota.
Toyota has a double advantage because the scale of its operations is
considerably bigger than the other companies, already allowing for greater
economies of scale. And Toyota's habit of adopting a cautious, gradualist
approach to new technology, in order to avoid making expensive errors, has
served it well over the years.
For the rest of the industry, however, the financial pressure to reinvent
the engineering process is intense. With the bloom having come off the car
market, there is less to be gained from dazzling consumers with fancy new
models. Car makers have little choice but to try to match Toyota's
efficiency - and to better it if they can.
A previous article on Japanese engineering for flexibility appeared on the
Technology Page on July 16.
