FT  14 FEB 92 / Militants in Kashmir are thwarted on both sides
INDIAN police yesterday used teargas in Srinagar, summer capital of the
Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir, to disperse several thousand Kashmiri
militants. The militants were defying a curfew to support a pro-independence
march from the Pakistani side of the disputed Himalayan kingdom.
Earlier this week Pakistani troops had thwarted volunteers of the Jammu and
Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) from crossing from the Pakistan-ruled part
of Kashmir into the region controlled by India.
Police in India said some 4,000 demonstrators stoned security forces trying
to enforce the indefinite curfew, imposed on Monday before the march
started.
In Muzaffarabad, Pakistan, Mr Amanullah Khan, the JKLF leader, said he had
called off the march to avoid further loss of life. At least three people
were killed in police shooting on Wednesday amid pitched battles between
militants and Pakistani security forces.
Pakistan banned the march because it feared an incursion along the United
Nations-monitored ceasefire line could lead to another conflict with India,
which ordered troops guarding the line to let no one across and mined likely
crossing points.
The line which the militants attempted to cross is known officially as the
'line of actual control', drawn at positions held at the end of the 1971
India-Pakistan war over Bangladesh. The two armies still face each other
across the line.
The demarcation line was set by the Simla agreement of 1972, which laid down
the process of normalisation of relations between the two countries. The
accord stipulated a step-by-step approach with Kashmir as the last issue to
be settled.
However, the two countries have failed to take steps to encourage
confidence-building measures despite repeated bilateral meetings. India
refuses to take part in substantial discussions on Kashmir, accusing
Pakistan of trying to internationalise the dispute.
New Delhi regards the area east of the 'line of actual control' as an
integral part of India whose accession to the union is not up for
discussion. But the current tension bears testimony to the fact that three
years of effort by New Delhi has failed to wean the population from
supporting the militants.
If anything, the liberation movement has gained strength in the valley, the
heart of Kashmir, whose population is kept under control by armed troops.
Pakistan strongly supports the 'freedom fighters' but denies charges it is
directly arming and training them.
