FT  24 APR 92 / Letter: Engineers' status in UK now seen in 'quite a new
light'
Sir, There were points in Mr Ledger's letter (April 18) on the status of
engineers which call for comment.
Much to our delight, recent independent research has shown that young people
from all backgrounds are starting to see engineers in quite a new light.
'They travel the world and earn lots of money . . .'; 'They work with three
dimensional computer imaging . . .'; 'Engineers are like doctors, lawyers
and accountants . . .'; 'There's glamour in being an engineer. You have a
lot of freedom, you invent things, you try out new ideas . . .'; 'I fancy
the travelling, designing and building machinery, and using computers to
help you design . . .'
These are just some of the spontaneous replies young people gave when asked
what they thought about engineers by researchers evaluating our
Neighbourhood Engineers scheme. The scheme sends engineers and technicians
to secondary schools to work in teams with teachers giving friendly,
informal advice across the national curriculum. More than 6,000 engineers
and technicians are already involved with 1,600 secondary schools.
Further evidence of a change in attitude among teenagers is the increased
number of young people applying for places in higher education to study
engineering.
Another myth which still persists is that 'many British engineering
graduates go into the financial sector'. Not true. Seventy-eight per cent of
engineering graduates take up jobs in industry. Twelve per cent go into
finance or commerce and the remaining 10 per cent go into other fields. We
are quite happy with 12 per cent going into finance; we need analysts and
others in the City who understand engineering.
Salaries? Over the last few years, engineers have seen their average
earnings move up well above the Retail Prices Index, according to
Remuneration Economics. Some examples: 1988, increase in earnings of 9.5 per
cent (RPI 4.8 per cent); 1989, 12.1 (8.2); 1990, 14.5 (9.8); and 1991, 10.0
(5.5).
And status? Margaret Thatcher told the 1985 Engineering Assembly that it had
to be earned. But a few months ago, at the national final of our Young
Engineers for Britain competition, John Major, the prime minister, said it
is his aim to change the culture of Great Britain 'so that the British
engineer enjoys the same status as the German engineer'.
Ron Kirby,
director of public affairs,
The Engineering Council,
10 Maltravers Street,
London WC2R 3ER
