FT  27 APR 92 / Management: An opportunity not to be missed - The campaign
to promote women is slowly starting to deliver the goods
When Opportunity 2000 was launched last October, some people scoffed, saying
that this new campaign to help working women was mere window dressing.
Others applauded, arguing that it proved employers had at last accepted that
women faced problems at work, and had decided it would be in their best
interests to do something about it.
John Major, who launched the scheme with such razzamatazz six months ago
tomorrow, may feel he has done his bit by picking two women for his new
cabinet. But what have the 61 companies who joined the scheme achieved?
The Financial Times has interviewed more than a quarter of the campaign
members, chosen at random, to discover whether they are living up to the
promises they made in October. The interviews reveal a great variety of
approach, but suggest equal opportunities is being taken increasingly
seriously.
Very broadly, the companies divide into two groups. In the first are
organisations which have already done a great deal for their female
employees. The foundations for cultural change have been in place for some
time: over the last six months, these companies have been developing,
extending and adding to existing policies. This group includes the Wellcome
Foundation, the Metropolitan Police, BT, J Sainsbury, Barclays Bank, British
Rail, IBM and Littlewoods.
The second group have had more fundamental work to do in building their
policies. These companies include Digital, Rank Xerox, Lucas, Grand
Metropolitan, ICI, the National Health Service, Glaxo and British Airways.
All of this second group have looked at their existing equal opportunities
policies and decided to go back to basics. This has meant devising new
strategies, establishing where women are in their organisations and
discovering what impedes their progress. It has also meant making sure that
line managers are committed to cultural change, and setting up monitoring
systems to track results.
Digital, for example, has put in place an Opportunity 2000 steering team
whose first job is to understand where the barriers to women lie. Rank Xerox
has introduced a new, 'positive' equal opportunities policy, developed with
the help of employees. It is currently building equal opportunities into
performance and business appraisal. ICI, meanwhile, has been developing a
monitoring system to track the changes in the female workforce by function,
grade and division.
At Lucas and GrandMet, the most important area of work has been to make sure
that middle managers are commited to change. Both are taking great care to
impress the business reasons for change on their managers; GrandMet is
organising awareness workshops for its top 250 managers worldwide.
A quite different line has been taken by another decentralised, global
company, Glaxo. Equal opportunity is one of Glaxo's corporate values, but it
is left to each business, acting in 'enlightened self-interest', to
implement it. The problem is that change is not consistent throughout the
group, and some parts have proved slow on the up-take. Glaxo has therefore
decided to monitor the initiatives centrally to see if a more co-ordinated
approach might be better.
Meanwhile, all the companies interviewed have been working on policies to
break down the barriers to recruitment and promotion of women, and to make
it easier for them - and for some men  - to combine a career with a family.
In the first category, BT is examining ways of training women to increase
their chances of becoming managers. British Rail is setting new recruitment
targets to increase the number of women in a male-dominated company;
Barclays is reviewing its selection of high-flying employees, and women's
access to training generally. GrandMet is insisting that headhunters include
the name of at least one high-calibre woman on all short-lists.
As for career and family, all companies interviewed have tried to address
the issue, with many introducing or extending flexible working arrangements.
Most companies see this as the most economical answer to the childcare
issue. At British Airways, flexible working makes it easier to serve
customers outside the normal nine-to-five day, while ICI reports pleasing
results from job-sharing, saying it has made its workers more committed and
has been cost effective.
Flexible working seems to be what women themselves want, as it keeps up
their confidence and skills. A number of companies have started offering
career breaks to part-timers and Rank Xerox guarantees part-time work to
women returning from maternity leave.
Littlewoods is the only company with firm plans to open a workplace nursery
while Barclays is offering a 'responsibility break' allowing men and women
caring for sick, old or disabled people to take up to six months off work.
It is also trying to upgrade the status of part-time work, by giving its
part-timers the same benefits - on a pro rata basis - as full-time
employees.
The very existance of these changes does not prove that Opportunity 2000 is
working. Indeed companies could simply be making changes to their policies
that they would have made anyway.
But all those interviewed said the campaign had given a new focus to their
plans and increased their awareness of the issues. Those directly
responsible for equal opportunities said the campaign had made their jobs
easier, helping them get through to the board and line management.
Most companies also thought the campaign had helped develop a more strategic
approach and had taught them more about best practice in other
organisations.
A few went further and pointed to the beginnings of cultural change in their
companies. ICI, for example, said men who turned down overseas jobs for
family reasons were no longer ridiculed, while Lucas said women were
becoming more assertive in asking for the working arrangements they wanted.
BT says that women are slowly stopping behaving like surrogate men.
These are early days for Opportunity 2000. Although the first signs are
encouraging, it will be some time before the long-term success can be
measured. One test will be whether the women themselves feel more valued. So
far, only a few companies are planning to measure their policies this way.
The second test is in the numbers - how many women are actually making it to
more senior jobs?
To measure this, many campaign members are relying on existing monitoring
mechanisms. However, the problem with monitoring is that it will only tell
you if there are, say, more female middle managers in finance. It will not
say whether the increase is good, bad or indifferent.
A better approach, adopted by seven of the organisations interviewed -
including the NHS, British Airways and Littlewoods - is to estimate in
advance the degree of progress. These companies argue that such goals are
important for bringing about, as well as measuring, change.
Other companies fear that employees may mistake goals or estimates for
quotas. GrandMet, ICI and Digital say that goals are irrelevant in a
recession, as recruitment has come to a standstill. However a further group
of companies is considering setting goals for the future.
Whether the companies set goals for internal use, most Opportunity 2000
members are presenting a vague face to the public. Most of the goal
statements issued at the launch lacked rigour and detail.
It seems that companies may be ready to start changing their policy. Whether
they are ready to do so under full public scrutiny is another matter.
