FT  16 JAN 92 / Wakeham intervenes in British Gas row
THE GOVERNMENT stepped into the row between British Gas and its regulators
yesterday, heading off a far-reaching investigation by the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission that had threatened to cast a shadow over the industry
for most of this year.
The intervention by Mr John Wakeham, energy secretary, in the row between
British Gas, its regulator Ofgas and the Office of Fair Trading preserves
his ambition of encouraging more competition in gas supply without causing
upheaval in the industry.
Mr Robert Evans, British Gas chairman, appealed to Mr Wakeham after failing
to get assurances he wanted from Of-gas on the company's room for manoeuvre
on domestic prices. The government's action enabled British Gas to climb
down from conditions it had attached to its agreement with the OFT to halve
its share of the industrial gas market and hive off its pipeline division.
Mr Wakeham assured British Gas that, in light of those changes to its
industrial business, Ofgas would review a tough new pricing formula for
domestic customers which is due to come into force in April.
'I am very pleased that the secretary of state will effectively use his good
offices with the regulator,' Mr Evans said yesterday. He said this meant the
company could appeal to the government if Ofgas failed to make the required
adjustments to the pricing formula.
However, Ofgas said yesterday that 'there can be no question of prices in
the tariff (domestic) sector increasing as a result of developments in the
industrial market'.
In talks leading up to yesterday's agreement's British Gas displayed its
distrust of Sir James McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, by asking for the
MMC to arbitrate in any dispute over pricing between them. The company says
Mr Wakeham's assurances now make this unnecessary.
Ofgas objects to what it sees as British Gas's aim to raise customer prices
to offset losses resulting from cuts in its industrial business.
The OFT had threatened to refer the company to the MMC unless it dropped the
conditions attached to its agreement on cutting its industrial market share
by today.
The details of British Gas's undertakings with the OFT must now be worked
out. As part of its agreement, British Gas must auction off large amounts of
gas to competitors and separate its pipeline system into a different
com-pany.
Electricity warning, Page 12
