FT  30 APR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Producers optimistic ahead of
rubber talks
MAJOR RUBBER producers are guardedly optimistic that consumer countries will
agree to amend the International Natural Rubber Agreement to make it more
effective for boosting weak prices of the commodity, reports Reuter from
Chiangmai, Thailand.
A ministerial meeting of the Association of Natural Rubber Producing
Countries, started here yesterday with delegates saying they hoped
consumers, led by the US, would respond positively to their demand for more
active market intervention to lift rubber prices. But consumers have not yet
given any such indications.
'It is not in the long-term interest of consumers and producers to leave
prices at their current lows,' said Mr Soedradjad Djiwandono, the Indonesian
junior trade minister.
Rubber prices have been declining for the past two years, falling to their
lowest since 1986 in December. They have recovered only slightly since.
Producers have sought to negotiate with consumers a new pact to replace the
International Natural Rubber Agreement before it expires in December 1993.
Inra is administered by the International Natural Rubber Organisation, which
groups major producers with 20 consumers. The UN-sponsored agreement will be
extended automatically for two years if its members failed to agree on a new
pact.
Producers, led by Malaysia, have complained that the five-year agreement has
succeeded only in stabilising prices at levels that were unremunerative to
them.
They say the Inro buffer stock manager, given broad discretionary power, has
not been sufficiently active in his buying intervention to shore up prices.
The two-day ANRPC meeting is being held here ahead of an Inro session
starting in Kuala Lumpur on May 19 at which producers hope they can persuade
consumers to agree to open talks on pact improvements.
The ANRPC groups Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Sri Lanka, Singapore
and Thailand, which between them account for about 82 per cent of world
supply of natural rubber.
Mr Warothai Pinyasart, the Thai deputy agriculture minister, said Thailand
supported an ANRPC resolution last year that called on four of its members
to prepare for activating their 1976 agreement to stabilise prices through
supply rationalisation if consumers refused to start negotiations by next
month.
But the Indonesian junior trade minister said both producers and consumers
should go to the negotiating table in a non-confrontational spirit.
