FT  22 MAY 92 / Tories shrug off backbench revolt on Maastricht
THE LEGISLATION to ratify the Maastricht Treaty on European union passed its
most important parliamentary hurdle last night as the government shrugged
off a rebellion by anti-federalist Conservative MPs.
The House of Commons voted by an overwhelming majority of 336 to 92 to
endorse the deal negotiated by Mr John Major on closer European integration.
Some 22 Conservative rebels opposed ratification of the treaties on European
and Monetary Union, arguing that they represented a further step along the
road to federalism and a handful of others abstained. Mr John Biffen, a
former cabinet minister, was among those refusing to back Mr Major.
But the government's discomfort was matched by acute embarrassment among the
Labour leadership after 61 of the party's Euro-sceptic MPs rejected
instructions to abstain and instead voted against ratification. A Labour
amendment calling on the government to opt-in to the social policies adopted
by the other 11 EC countries was defeated by 360 to 261 votes.
The backing for the government at the end of the two-day debate followed a
strong defence of the Maastricht accord by Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign
secretary. He argued that it had produced a treaty which 'more closely
mirrors British priorities than any of its predecessors'.
Emphasising that the intergovernmental structure of the agreement had halted
the march towards more centralised decision-making, Mr Hurd said Britain now
had 'a real chance' to shape the EC's institutions.
He stressed that the prospective enlargement of the Community to include
northern European states would not force Britain to concede further changes
in those institutions before the proposed review in 1996.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, meanwhile sought to reassure Conservative
MPs that the staged process of monetary union did not threaten the
government's rights to decide independently Britain's tax and spending
levels.
Sir Edward Heath, the former prime minister, enlivened the debate with a
stinging if thinly-veiled attack on the views of his successor in Downing
Street, Mrs Margaret Thatcher. But he combined criticism of 'bigoted' and
'xenophobic' attacks on Germany with criticism of Mr Major for not going far
enough to embrace closer integration.
The Tory rebels indicated that they intended to continue to harry the
legislation when it moves to its detailed committee stage early next month.
A group of five Tory MPs last night tabled a series of amendments designed
to stall progress.
One amendment calls for an advisory referendum before Maastricht is enacted
while another aims to limit severely the government's ability to strike
deals in Brussels without the consent of parliament.
Parliament, Page 10
