FT  23 JUL 92 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (4): Ideals or eyewash? - The EC
single market
IDEALISTIC rhetoric about the completion of the internal market for
pharmaceuticals does not seduce the European Court of Justice.
Only a few weeks ago it overruled the pleas of the EC Commission - and set
aside more than 25 years of Community harmonisation - by ruling that 'It is
up to the national authorities. . . to decide whether each product is a
medicine or not'. By one of those ironies that occasionally enliven EC
wrangles, the product in question was an eyewash.
The case is another demonstration that despite impressive progress -
particularly in harmonised requirements on testing, production and product
information, and in increased patent protection - there are still important
gaps in the single market programme for pharmaceuticals.
The priorities now, the Commission admits internally, are the creation of 'a
better European authorisation system' and action 'in the areas of pricing
and social security coverage of medicines'.
Medicine manufacturers agree: the Association of the British Pharmaceutical
Industry says its members' prosperity and research capacity depend on
getting European agreements on a new authorisation system and on 'an
appropriate means of ensuring a fair price is paid for innovative
medicines'.
Last month, a marketing authorisation solution came closer, with a political
agreement among the member states to set up a new European Medicines Agency
which will make binding European decisions. One of the most significant
remaining impediments to free circulation could disappear as from 1994.
But on pricing and reimbursement, the outlook is more confused - largely
because of the distinct objectives of each of the different players. Member
states focus mainly on their health budget, within which the drug bill is
merely one element in a complex national balance of many political factors.
The research-based industry wants free market conditions that, it says, will
allow it to compete with its US and Japanese rivals: intervention of all
types is denounced as 'leading inevitably to market distortions' by Mr
Alberto Aleotti, Menarini's chief executive officer.
Generic medicine manufacturers, stung by patent term extension, are calling
for 'compensatory measures to ensure a significant presence of generic
medicines on the European market'. European consumer representatives such as
Mr Luc Joossens complain that EC legislation on pharmaceuticals has already
excessively favoured the industry (he terms the recent patent term extension
measure 'a catastrophe'), while on consumers' long-standing criticisms of
companies' pricing policies, he says: 'Nothing has been resolved'.
When the Commission rolls out its pricing proposals this autumn, it will
probably stop well short of interventionism - now out of fashion in
subsidiarity-sensitive Brussels. It is likely, instead, to update the
existing EC 'transparency' requirements which are designed to prevent abuses
by making member states come clean on the mechanisms they use to control
prices, profits and reimbursement - but which leave the industry with much
of the onus for policing.
Most industry voices favour such a 'hands-off' EC approach, on the basis
that the wrong sort of EC pressure for convergence could make things worse
everywhere in the Community and flatten revenues overall. But the approach
still carries risks for industry: the EC Commission's non-interventionism
was loudly acclaimed by the German drug industry on a ceremonial visit to
the European Parliament's June plenary session in Strasbourg. Only days
later, the German government announced its decision to impose severe cuts on
pharmaceutical spending as from the beginning of the year.
In any event, the internal market for pharmaceuticals is not going to
introduce predestination to pharmaceutical provision; the Commission is
giving greater emphasis to the market in its public pronouncements. The
continuing diversity of national health care systems and habits will put a
premium on initiative, adaptability and resilience, says Mr Igor Landau, who
heads France's biggest drug company, Rhone-Poulenc Sante:
'Better prices for new products can be won, even in traditionally
lower-priced countries', he says, 'But firms will have to keep up the
pressure with demonstrations of product cost-effectiveness.'
Each operator will have to develop his own strengths to maximise his single
market benefits: Glaxo says it 'derives some general advantage from being
established in virtually every EC member State'.
Mr Didier Wold, a Paris-based consultant to the industry, predicts that the
European pharmaceutical market will still be a maze after 1993 and that
finding the right paths through it is going to become more important than
ever.
The US drug industry association has had an office in Brussels for three
years now and Mr Michael Calingaert, its European director, believes
American companies have the advantage that they are already 'comfortable in
a single market context'.
Even mainline wholesalers, catalysed by the prospects for the single market,
are now internationalising; their objective is to become 'big enough to
drive better bargains than in the past with multinational manufacturers',
warns Mr Mike Watts of the British Association of Pharmaceutical
Wholesalers. And the non-prescription medicines sector sees new
opportunities from what it calls the validation of its products by single
market rules on advertising, product category and information, according to
Dr Hubertus Kranz of AESGP.
Parallel importers too, flourishing in their new respectability among
economy-conscious governments, are looking forward to sustained growth and
continued official support - despite the outrage of manufacturers such as Mr
David Godfrey of Wellcome, who observes that 'there could not be a market
situation more distorted than this' and that the EC Commission 'should not
countenance it'.
He says that parallel imported products account for about one in five of all
branded NHS prescriptions dispensed by retail pharmacists - up to a third in
the past year - and: 'The winner is the trader who can best exploit the
system by shopping in the member state with the most repressive pricing
system'.
Mr Paul de Souter, chairman of the Belgian drug industry association, AGIM,
says gloomily that if the single market brings increased parallel importing,
tougher wholesaling deals and generic substitution: 'This could prove to be
too high a price for some small additional patent protection and a possible
drug registration agency'.
The EC Commission's Mr Fernand Sauer, one of the chief architects of EC drug
regulation, dismisses industry concerns over parallel importing as 'a
problem of the past'. He says that it amounts to no more than 2 per cent of
the total EC medicines market, and 'companies have already learnt how to
deal with it'.
Instead, Mr Sauer emphasises the opportunities he sees for companies to
build their future: free circulation will allow companies to rationalise
their EC operations; harmonisation of drug testing requirements will permit
reduced development costs; increased transparency will disclose abusive
member state practices on pricing and reimbursement.
But he insists that it is up to each player to decide whether and how to use
the opportunities. 'There is certainly going to be a single market', he
says, 'and there will be firms and subsectors that benefit from it. But at
the same time, those who get it wrong could be victims of it'.
The internal market will be more successful for Europe as a whole if it is
free from eyewash, but it is certain that clarity of vision will be a vital
determinant of each player's ability to see its own ideals achieved.
