FT  30 MAY 92 / The revival of the species: The rebirth of the extinct
quagga
or at least it was, until a team of international scientists began trying to
resurrect this zebra-like creature, native to the arid vastness of South
Africa's Karoo.
Coloured rich brown to blend in with the red dust of the Karoo - a huge,
infertile, sparsely populated area of the Cape - the quagga looked like a
zebra with less than half the normal stripes. Karoo farmers saw it as an
unwelcome competitor for grazing, and set out to exterminate it. The last
specimen died more than a hundred years ago in an Amsterdam zoo.
Now scientists believe they can bring back the quagga, named by the original
Hottentot inhabitants of the Karoo for the distinctive sound it made. At a
nature reserve 200 kilometres north-east of Cape Town, they have begun
selectively breeding plains zebras (the striped animals most familiar to
Europeans), hoping to restore the distinctive colouration of the quagga.
If they succeed, there is a chance that other long-dead animals could be
saved from extinction - but only if they are closely related to an extant
species which can be used as a breeding base. The dinosaur and the
brontosaurus will remain in oblivion; but scientists might, for example, be
able to recreate the extinct blue antelope.
In fact, the only hope for resurrecting the quagga is that it is not truly
'extinct'. Genetic research has shown that it was a sub-species of the
plains zebra; scientists believe its colouration may simply be diluted in
the extant population of such zebras, where isolated individuals (darker in
colour and faintly striped) already slightly resemble quaggas.
This resemblance is borne out by genetic evidence: DNA extracted from dried
tissue and blood of stuffed quaggas matches that of the plains Zebra,
proving that the quagga is a sub-species.
'If a species is gone, nothing can be done about it because the entire gene
pool is gone,' says Reinhold Rau, head of taxidermy at the South African
museum in Cape Town, and the father of the quagga project. But the gene pool
of the plains zebra is still available for re-breeding the quagga, by a
process similar to selective breeding of livestock.
Baby Reina, one of six foals who form the first generation of the quagga
breeding project, demonstrates how it is done. She was born of parents
specially selected in the wild for their faint striping, and her stripes are
fainter still. But scientists were not so lucky with the other foals: one
has distinctly more prominent stripes than either parent, and the others
show little progress toward quagga colouration. Scientists hope to see firm
results in 10 years - but it could take longer.
Some wildlife experts dispute the validity of the project: 'We can breed a
zebra which will look like a quagga but it will never, ever be a quagga. All
we know about the quagga was what it looked like and where it was found. We
know nothing about its behaviour, its habitat . . . ' says Zane Erasmus,
ranger at the Vrolijkheid Nature Reserve where the breeding is being done.
Scientists were not able to get a full genetic fingerprint of the quagga,
because none of the crucial 'nuclear DNA' survived in the stuffed specimens;
so they will never know whether a re-bred quagga is just a man-made
lookalike or a truly genetic recreation.
And after several generations in captivity the quagga may no longer be able
to survive in the wild. But if they can be released into Karoo nature
reserves, where there are no major predators, it would be a small step
towards rectifying the damage done by man to Africa's wildlife.
