FT  13 JUN 92 / Finance &amp; The Family: Dividend growth withers in recession's
cold wind - Scheherazade Daneshkhu reports that investors are finding it
increasingly hard to maintain good returns from traditional high yield
stocks
MANY shareholders rely on dividends for income, but the recession is taking
its toll on company profits and, in turn, on dividend growth. On Thursday,
Pilkington announced a cut in its final dividend, the first since it went
public in 1970. Blue chip companies such as Trafalgar House, Asda, Vickers,
Lonrho and British Aerospace have all been forced to cut their dividends and
other companies are under pressure to do the same. There is even a question
aboutthe ability of British Steel, a stock traditionally held for income, to
maintain its final dividend when it reports its results later this month.
Unit trust income funds have managed very small rises over the past few
years; the average income fund has risen in value by only 0.4 per cent over
the year to June, and by 7.5 per cent over three years. And it is becoming
harder for investors to maintain a high return from traditional high yield
stocks. High yielding stocks are now perceived to be the ones in potential
trouble and at greatest risk of cutting dividends or keeping them static.
'Yield has become more a measure of risk relative to return,' says Bill
Smith, head of UK research at BZW.
The yield of a share is the dividend expressed as a percentage of a share
price. If share prices fall while dividends are constant, the yield will
rise. So, if a stock is high yielding stock with a low price its share price
hasalmost certainly declined. Unusually, the market prices have not risen in
line with dividends and the yield is now higher than the rate of inflation.
This suggests that the market does not expect dividend growth to be high
enough to protect investors against inflation.
The latest figures for dividend growth are not encouraging. During the
second half of the 1980s, annual growth was between 15 to 20 per cent,
averaging 8 per cent in real terms. It has now dropped to below 2 per cent
year on year. 'This has come as a surprise,' says Nick Train, investment
director of GT unit managers. 'The consensus view was that it would be more
like 5 to 7 per cent. We have now come to the end of a remarkable period for
dividend growth in the UK stock market.'
That growth was stimulated in the 1980s by the rise in company profits and
the takeover boom, which encouraged companies to raise their dividends to
maintain shareholders' loyalty. Large dividend payouts in the 1980s also
helped to drive up share prices - some analysts would argue that, with
investors chasing income, British companies were overdistributing.
It is, therefore, no coincidence that there has also been a sharp rundown to
historically low levels of dividend cover - the margin of safety between
company earnings and the amount it pays out. The long-term dividend cover
has been 2.5 times but it is now 1.75 times and probably still going down,
according to Train. By paying out, instead of conserving their cash,
companies with low cover are taking the risk of 'mortgaging their future,'
he believes.
Companies have continued to pay dividends in spite of the recession, fearing
a drop in the share price which could follow a cut. This has been in spite
of a warning last November from Robin Leigh Pemberton, governor of the Bank
of England, that it would be irresponsible of companies to maintain
dividends by dipping into reserves. But many, such as Barclays Bank and
Commercial Union, held - or even increased - their dividends in spite of
large drops in profit.
'Companies held their dividends because they thought they could sustain them
until the economic upturn came by,' says Leonard Klahr, of Capel-Cure Myers
Asset Management. But the recession has lasted longer than expected, and
analysts expect some companies that struggled to maintain dividends in March
to cut them in the next set of results.
The historically low level of dividend cover means that when there is an
upturn in the economy, many companies may prefer to invest in the business
rather than increase payments. This indicates depressed prospects for
dividend growth, a conclusion reached also by BZW equity strategists in this
month's Equity Strategy: 'Given the painfully low level of cover, we only
expect a recovery (of dividend growth) to around 4 per cent later this year.
There is no prospect of the same strong real growth in dividends that
accompanied the earnings upturn from 1984.'
Another reason why growth is likely to be slow is that analysts do not
expect profits to be as high as in the 1990s. Mark Cliffe, chief economist
at Nomura in London, argues that corporate profits in the 1980s benefited
from sterling's depreciation. As the pound fell in value, overseas
competition was reduced and profit margins for UK companies increased. But
now sterling is in the ERM, it is no longer free to fall, blocking the
'depreciation route' as a way to sustain corporate profitability.
While the overall picture for dividend growth is expected to be flat, there
is considerable variation in the market. 'People who want dividend growth
have to look at areas like the utilities where there is good profitability
and good cover,' says Klahr. 'Growth in dividends is expected to be 9 per
cent among the utility companies, which represents 4-5 per cent real
growth.'
Another promising area is pharmaceuticals. Bob Semple, of County NatWest,
expects dividend growth of 20 per cent for the sector this year and 15 per
cent next year. The catch for income investors, however is that
pharmaceutical companies with high dividend cover, such as Glaxo, tend to
have low yields which make them unattractive for the income-seeking
investor. At the other end of the scale, many property companies are on a
high yield and have been paying out dividends uncovered by earnings.
For the future, Semple expects dividend growth of 5 to 6 per cent in the
next few years against a background of 4 per cent inflation. Other analysts
see little or no growth in dividends over the next few years. But a note of
optimism is struck by Chris Rodgers, fund manager of the Schroder Income
fund, who believes the worst is over. 'It should take a couple of years for
companies to build up cover but, after that, we should see a return to real
dividend growth,' he predicts.
