FT  17 SEP 92 / The ERM and Britain: More shop closures and job losses
feared - Retailing
RETAILERS yesterday were praying that the higher level of interest rates
would be short-lived. They said that if mortgage rates had to rise then
consumer confidence, already at a low ebb, would be damaged further.
The sector is one of the first to suffer when consumer confidence falters.
Recession has been restraining retail sales for some years, the first signs
appearing after the stock market crash in October 1987.
Many smaller retailers have already been forced to close. Retail leaders
said yesterday that continued high interest rates would bring more
unemployment and shop closures.
Share prices fell sharply yesterday, although the stock market as a whole
closed higher. Prices of retailers of big-ticket items or housing-related
goods fell. Dixons, the electrical retailer, fell from 202p to 187p, a 7.4
per cent drop. The MFI furniture group saw its shares fall 10p to 91p.
Directors of stores groups were shocked by the two rate rises yesterday. One
said he was 'gobsmacked' when the second increase was announced. Another
said: 'I am sitting here, the sun is shining, and I am looking at my screen
wondering, 'Does anyone know what the hell they are doing?' It's bloody
chaos.'
Mr James May, director general of the British Retail Consortium, a retail
trade group, said that if the higher rate persisted for a couple of months,
retailers 'will face a bleak run-up to Christmas'. Many retailers make a
large proportion of their annual profits in November and December.
He said shops had already cut costs and there was 'not much fat in the
retail industry'.
Mr Nigel Whittaker of Kingfisher, the Woolworth, Superdrug, Comet and B&amp;Q
group, said the rate rise was 'frustrating'. The publication yesterday
morning of retail sales figures for August, which showed a rise in the
volume of sales of 1.8 per cent compared with August last year, had been
'almost the light at the end of the tunnel' he said.
At WH Smith, Sir Malcolm Field, the managing director, said: 'The question
is, how long does it go on for?'
Even food retailers, whose sales have held up relatively well, have been
under pressure in recent months. Mr David Webster, deputy chairman of
Argyll, the supermarket group, said yesterday: 'Food volumes are clearly
under some pressure and this can only be regarded as unhelpful.'
