FT  07 APR 92 / UK Company News: Sage - the getting of wisdom in the US -
Alan Cane on the risks and rewards behind the DacEasy purchase
NEATLY BOXED and sharply priced software from DacEasy, a Dallas-based
pioneer in low-cost accounting packages, is once again jostling for
attention on the well-stocked shelves of US computer superstores.
But the company's most distinctive feature is invisible to the thronging
customers. DacEasy, a quintessentially entrepreneurial US company, is owned
by a UK software house, the Sage Group of Newcastle, which bought it at the
beginning of last year for an initial Dollars 18m (Pounds 10.4m).
The sale was prompted by the insolvency of Insilco, DacEasy's former parent,
an embarrassment compounded by software development delays at DacEasy which
forced it to take its most important product off the market for some months.
Now that the US company is up and running again, some questions remain, for
Sage has to decide whether DacEasy was a good buy and whether it can make a
success of managing it.
The history of British software and computing services in the US leaves few
reasons for optimism over the latter question. While US-packaged software
suppliers, such as Microsoft, Lotus and Borland, dominate the European
market, the US has proved a graveyard for UK computing services companies.
Logica's recent results, for example, have been depressed by losses at Data
Architects, its US acquisition. An exception is Micro Focus, which offers
software aids to writing programs in Cobol, the computer language, which
dominate its sector of the US market.
Sage and DacEasy are strikingly similar. Both claim to be pioneers in
cutting the price of personal computer accounting software for small
businesses. Sterling, Sage's principal product, was launched at Pounds 375
in the early 1980s when its main competition was selling for more than
Pounds 1,000.
DacEasy's Accounting was launched in 1985 at about Dollars 50. At the time,
conventional minicomputer accounting suites from companies such as
Peachtree, DacEasy's chief competitor, sold for Dollars 5,000.
Sage and DacEasy both convert one-time software sales into recurrent
revenues by a combination of regular software upgrades and sales of computer
stationery. They charge separately for support and are both marketing,
rather than technology, led.
Sage used to spend up to 40 per cent of its budget on advertising; now it
spends 12 per cent, three times its research and development bill.
Established in 1980, Sage went public in 1989 and has a solid record of
growth in sales and profits.
Last year its revenues were boosted more than 50 per cent by the DacEasy
acquisition to reach Pounds 20m, with pre-tax profits of Pounds 6.6m, up
from Pounds 4.7m. This was against a background of a decline of up to a
third in the market for packaged accounting software.
This year, analysts are suggesting pre-tax profits of Pounds 8.3m. Since
1986, the company's operating margin has never dropped below 29 per cent.
Its Sterling package has 74 per cent of the UK market for integrated
accounting packages. Including Sovereign, a more sophisticated modular
package, it has a 43 per cent share of the overall small business accounting
market.
Sage's UK profitability has not been repeated overseas, however. MainLan,
its US company, established to exploit low-cost networking systems for small
businesses, contributes some 7.6 per cent to group sales but lost Pounds
357,000 last year through a tough trading environment and a disadvantageous
exchange rate.
The purchase of DacEasy was, for Sage, pure opportunism. Established in
1983, the US company recorded software sales of Dollars 3.7m in its first
year, mostly due to low pricing. It was sold in 1987 for Dollars 18m
together with a sales royalty arrangement to Insilco, a large US
conglomerate which was itself the subject of a leveraged buy-out in 1988.
By 1990, burdened with debt, Insilco filed for bankruptcy and put DacEasy up
for sale.
There were a number of suitors, including Sage and a management group lead
by Mr Kevin Howe, the chief executive, a former Insilco executive. Insilco
wanted its Dollars 18m back and was prepared to give Mr Howe latitude about
where DacEasy should be placed. Careful of the debt implications of a
leveraged buy-out, he settled for Sage.
Both Mr Howe and Mr David Goldman, Sage's chairman, think DacEasy was a
bargain. The total price Sage will pay, inclusive of the final stages of the
royalty arrangement, will be Dollars 24m. It is a large sum for a company,
with pre-DacEasy revenues of only Pounds 13.4m. Some Pounds 6m was accrued
from a rights issue, Pounds 3.5m from the group's own cash resources and the
rest will be paid out of operating income. Until the end of the royalty
agreement this year, DacEasy is essentially cash neutral.
Mr Howe believes that without the uncertainty caused by Insilco's insolvency
and the software delays, the company would be turning over Dollars 100m a
year rather than the Dollars 17m recorded in 1991.
By dollar value it has about 35 per cent of the US market for the simplest
level of professional accounting software, roughly the same as Peachtree.
There seems to be powerful synergies with Sage. The two companies are
working to develop a US version of Sage's Sovereign accounting system to be
called Flagship. DacEasy's distribution expertise, moreover, could give a
boost to MainLan.
Sage would seem to have bought a company with considerable recovery
potential. Indeed, DacEasy has the potential to become larger than its
parent. Some 800,000 small businesses, each with a need for an accounting
system, were started in the US in 1990.
