FT  19 SEP 92 / Chinese company seeks US listing
CHINA dramatically underlined its economic reform policies yesterday when a
state-owned business announced plans to become the first Chinese company to
sell shares in the US and to list on the New York Stock Exchange.
Brilliance China Automotive, a Bermuda-based company with a majority stake
in mini-bus manufacturer Shenyang Automotive, plans to raise only Dollars
70m to Dollars 80m through an initial public share offer. But the move is an
important test, designed to establish a precedent for equity fund-raising by
state-owned Chinese businesses in the leading western capital markets.
The Chinese could have chosen easier equity-raising routes, for example, a
private placement with large US institutional investors, but sought a full
public offering as the best means to test the western market. First Boston,
the US investment bank lead managing the offering, is also planning to offer
part of the issue in London and Zurich.
The accounting firm of Arthur Andersen has restated the company's entire
Chinese accounts to conform with US Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles, in an effort to satisfy the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The SEC demands that foreign companies state their accounts in a way which
allows US investors to readily compare their performance with similar US
businesses. This has involved it in a heated dispute with the New York Stock
Exchange, which is keen to attract new foreign listings and would prefer
less onerous regulations.
Brilliance still requires SEC approval for its share offering, but the NYSE
said yesterday it that had already approved the company for a listing.
The offering consists of 5m shares in Brilliance, expected to be priced
between Dollars 14 and Dollars 16 a share.
Brilliance is owned by a Chinese government agency and is domiciled in
Bermuda for tax, legal and other reasons. The offering represents a stake of
about 14.5 per cent in Shenyang Automotive, which has an extensive
relationship with Toyota.
Its US accounts show 1991 net income of Dollars 8.4m on sales of Dollars
114.4m. It will use the proceeds for new equipment and to increase the
domestic content of its vehicles.
After the offering, Brilliance intends to apply for a listing of its shares
on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, where some other Chinese companies are
already quoted.
