FT  25 NOV 92 / Strangers in the land of unification: FT writers examine
western Europe's rising tide of neo-Nazi violence
AT FIRST Mr Huseyn Ozdemir did not want to give his name. 'Times have
changed. We are not liked any more,' he said, sipping his tea and smoking
Turkish cigarettes, writes Judy Dempsey in Berlin.
Mr Ozdemir is a former chairman of the Turkish Cultural Centre of Berlin in
the working class district of Wedding in what was West Berlin. After
Kreuzberg, it has the second largest Turkish community in the capital.
The community has been deeply shaken by the killing of three Turks in a
firebombing attack in Molln, near Hamburg, on Sunday night.
'I came here 30 years ago,' he said in halting German. 'The German
government invited us here because there was a labour shortage. But what can
I show for it? We have no political rights. It is almost impossible to
obtain German citizenship. And in any case, it's what the Germans feel in
their heart that matters. It's the colour of your hair and the shape of your
face which they look at. Once a foreigner, always a foreigner.' he said.
A Turkish television channel was humming away in the background of the
large, cold room, home to the cultural centre set up 17 years ago to provide
Berlin's 150,000-strong Turkish community with access to Turkish literature,
music and newspapers.
Over the past year, the centre has served as a legal advice forum for Turks
who say they have suffered intimidation.
On a table were scores of letters, many accompanied by police or court
summonses. 'The people who write these letters all speak about
discrimination, racism, a sense of uncertainty,' explained Mr Selim
Inceismail, chairman of the centre. 'Everything has changed since the
collapse of the Berlin Wall,' he said.
The seven young Turkish men in the centre - only one had German citizenship
 -said the Turks in Germany were paying the price for German unification.
'Because of growing unemployment in eastern Germany, we are blamed for
taking jobs,' said Rusmir, a 32-year-old gardener, who has been out of work
for the past three years.
'This is ridiculous because in the past it was the Turks who did all the
menial jobs. Don't tell me that the Germans wanted to do all that dirty
work.
'Yet now, when we apply for jobs, we are turned down. It's hard to say if
it's because of our nationality. But it's hard not to believe it,' he said.
His colleagues believe that growing unemployment is fuelling right-wing
extremism, even among the police. 'This attack on the Turkish family near
Hamburg is not an isolated incident,' said Mr Ozdemir. Since the beginning
of the year, 14 people have died following attacks on foreigners.
'My friend was attacked last week,' said Mr Ozdemir. 'We tell the police,
sometimes. They say they will take action. But they are not tough enough
with the neo-Nazis.'
One of his friends interrupted: 'Sometimes I think they sympathise with
them. Sometimes I think they want us to go home. I will live here as long as
I feel safe. But this feeling decreases every day,' he said.
The sense of pessimism is not as deep, but it certainly exists in some of
the small, smoke-filled cafes in the colourful district of Kreuzberg, which
until 1989, skirted the western side of the Berlin Wall.
'I cannot say it's OK for us here now,' said Dugan, a computer engineer and
fluent German speaker who set up his own business five years ago. He says he
is worried about his four young children, who speak German and attend a
German school, because they are being intimidated by older German students.
'I think it has something to do with unification. The East Germans had no
experience of foreigners in the past. Now they are baiting us.'
But when it was pointed out that official figures show most of the attacks
on foreigners have taken place in the wealthy western Lander, he shrugged.
'Unification has reawakened German nationalism. It frightens me. It would
help if the politicians openly condemned xenophobia and racism. But they
always react too slowly,' he said.
On Monday, however, the killings in Molln jolted the political establishment
into virtually unanimous outrage.
Many Turks insist they want to remain in Germany, despite the attacks.
'I have German citizenship, but I feel Turkish. It is my identity. I cannot
deny that. But that does not mean I cannot contribute to life here in
Germany. There is a third generation of Turks who were born here, yet they
have no automatic right to citizenship. They are strangers in this land,'
said Dugan, who is 31 years old.
Strangers or not, many young Berliners are disgusted with the rise of the
far-right, and the growing attacks on foreigners.
'What happened in Molln was really awful,' said Tomas, a 19-year-old student
who lives near the cultural centre. 'Have we learned nothing about our
past?'
