FT  25 SEP 92 / Senate overrides family bill veto
THE Democrats in the US Senate, with some Republican help, yesterday
overrode President George Bush's veto of the family leave bill, the latest
in a growing line of election-year confrontations between the legislature
and the executive.
The 68:31 vote, just over the required two-thirds majority, may not be
sustained in the House of Representatives, which had passed the bill by 27
votes, less than necessary to negate the veto. During his term, Mr Bush has
used the veto 31 times without rebuff.
The bill itself would require companies with more than 50 employees to give
up to 12 weeks' leave for home care in the event of childbirth or other
family need. Mr Bush, who vetoed the bill late on Tuesday to minimise
publicity, has countered with a proposal to give companies tax credits to
meet such eventualities.
The Republican emphasis on family values, though less of a feature of the
election campaign now, was an open invitation to the Democrats to find an
issue which could be turned to electoral advantage. Mr Bush had vetoed an
earlier family leave bill in 1990.
Sensing a shift in the prevailing mood, Mr Bush has now been obliged to
support the concept of mandated family leave, but has argued that the bill
would place unnecessary financial and regulatory burdens on companies.
This is not the only popular issue by which the Democrats are trying to put
the president on the defensive in the six weeks before the election. The
Senate has already passed, by a margin large enough to override a veto, a
bill designed to stop price gouging in the cable television industry. Mr
Bush has already indicated he will try to kill it.
Clauses to allow abortions for poor women have also been written by
Democrats into at least two other bills, again inviting a veto, as exercised
in the past by a president now more than ever intent to shore up his
conservative base.
In the defence bill, individual senators and congress members are moving
might and main to keep military installations in their districts from the
budgetary axe. Mr Bush may attack this as quintessential pork-barrel
politics, but has himself engaged in the same by showering federal largesse
on the defence industry and farmers.
