FT  14 AUG 92 / Orders issued against 2.6m poll tax defaulters
MORE THAN one in 10 adults in England and Wales have been subject to legal
action this year alone for non-payment of the poll tax, according to figures
released yesterday.
The Lord Chancellor's Department reported that 2.6m liability orders were
issued against defaulters in the first six months of this year.
Leaders of local authorities warned that the high level of defaulting could
significantly increase the first council tax bills next year.
Individual authorities reported a similar number of summonses this year to
last year, and the poll tax set by most authorities already makes allowance
for a significant non-payment rate.
The amount of outstanding tax will make it difficult for councils to wind up
their poll-tax collection operations, and is likely to lead to a short-term
increase in administrative costs as they struggle with both tax systems at
the same time.
The Labour-dominated Association of Metropolitan Authorities said that
councils would be dealing with the poll tax 'until the year 2000'.
It criticised the government's decision not to exempt from the tax those
with little or no income. A disproportionately large proportion of summonses
have been issued against individuals eligible to pay only 20 per cent of the
tax - mostly students and people receiving income support.
In many of those cases the legal costs of summonsing, as well as the
administrative cost of collecting the tax, exceeds the amount due.
Meanwhile, almost a fifth of the poll tax due to be paid in Scotland since
its launch in 1988 remains unpaid, according to the Convention of Scottish
Local Authorities. It estimates that the amount outstanding has increased
with each year of the tax - up from Pounds 118m in the first year to Pounds
214m last year. It said there was evidence of a continuing trend of
non-payment this year.
The government is taking steps to keep appeals against the valuation of
properties for the council tax to a minimum, David Owen writes.
The Department of the Environment said yesterday that those wanting early
notification of which band their property had been assigned to, in advance
of receiving their first bill, would be required to visit local authority
offices to inspect banding lists.
It also confirmed that only those who had already paid the council tax would
be permitted to appeal against their banding.
The Department of the Environment said that banding lists would be available
for inspection from the end of December, with bills sent in March next year.
The admission is likely to fuel concern that the system of property
valuation for the levy, which will replace the poll tax, may provoke public
resentment and a perception that it is unfair on the grounds that the tax
will be based on two-year-old valuations which make no allowance for the
decline in property prices.
The department defended the decision to restrict appeals to those who had
already paid the tax on the grounds that such a principal was 'true of any
appeal system'.
It also emerged that the government is making last-minute changes to its
council tax publicity leaflets in an attempt to dispel confusion over the
system of valuing properties for the levy.
According to Local Government Chronicle magazine the department is making
the changes before the leaflets go to the printers this month.
The department said it was concerned that the document should explain the
tax 'as accurately as possible'.
