FT  01 APR 92 / Management: In sickness and in health - Britain's hospitals
have been undergoing radical reform. Alan Pike assesses whether the medicine
is working
The National Health Service reforms are one year old today; a decision on
whether to blow out the birthday cake candle will be taken by the electorate
on April 9.
Next week's election will determine whether the changes introduced by the
government last year are to become the pattern of NHS management for the
rest of the century, or whether the service faces further restructuring.
NHS managers have spent 12 painful and exhausting months introducing changes
which many believe should have been better planned and tested before
implementation. But an incoming government committed to unpicking the
reforms - as both Labour and the Liberal Democrats are - would find those
same managers opposed to a return to the NHS structure in which they worked
only a year ago.
Separating managerial judgments from political ones is near impossible in
the NHS, where managers are walled-in between Whitehall guidance notes and
questions in Parliament. The judgment on whether the reforms are good or bad
for health care in Britain is ultimately political. But to the extent that
the reforms can be assessed on their managerial merits, they have rapidly
achieved a high degree of backing from within the service.
There is one particular reason for this - a separation of management
functions which has become known as the purchaser-provider split. Since last
April, individual managers have been responsible for either providing
services - running hospitals, community or ambulance services - or bying
them.
Purchasers, with finite budgets, must not only seek value-for-money from
providers but plan spending priorities. They must decide whether, for
example, more resources should be devoted to reducing a district's
relatively high death rate from heart disease. And if so, what services will
go down the list of priorities as a result?
There is a widely-held view among managers that the purchaser-provider split
is helping to reshape the NHS into natural component parts, focusing
individual managers' attention on distinct functions rather than a canvas so
vast that the picture must inevitably be obscure.
'I cannot now find a manager who says that the purchaser-provider split is
not the way to achieve change and improve efficiency,' says Pamela
Charlwood, director of the Institute of Health Services Management.
The existing contracts between purchasers and providers are not likely to
survive a Conservative defeat. Labour would retain the separation of
managerial functions but scrap the symbol of the provider's independence,
the self-governing trust hospital.
A case can be made for this - the split already operates in management terms
in districts which do not have trust hospitals. Many managers would not
complain if trusts lost some powers, like the ability to sell assets. But
the IHSM believes the relatively independent status of trusts is necessary
to run the purchaser-provider split effectively.
'The umbilical cord between the purchasing and providing functions is still
in place in those districts where health authorities manage hospitals
directly,' says Charlwood. 'Managers are drawn too much into day-to-day
operational rather than strategic decision-making, and I think there is a
risk of their carrying on with existing patterns of service provision rather
than examining alternatives.'
Although managers of the first self-governing trusts have spent much of the
past year struggling to break-even under a still highly-confined financial
regime, there has been room for innovation as well.
When Central Middlesex hospital in west London became a trust last April, it
announced plans to restructure its services according to what the patient
wants. This approach, being pioneered in a few US hospitals, involves
replaces the old institutional structure of a hospital with
multi-disciplinary teams working in a series of medical, surgical and other
specialist centres. The aim is to transform the hospital from a centralised
institution into a delivery system for a range of services which are closer
to patients' actual needs.
One year on, Central Middlesex has set up its own in-house team to train
staff and will start introducing patient-focused techniques in two
departments in August.
The changes will transform working practices. Andy Black, the Central
Middlesex's chief executive, is convinced they are happening only because
trust status has enabled all planning to take place locally between
managers, doctors and nurses who have an equal stake in the scheme's
success.
Central Middlesex is a typical London local hospital, little known outside
the area it serves. St Thomas', in central London, is world-famous for its
clinical services but until recently also enjoyed a reputation within the
NHS for financial problems and the highly-politicised nature of its health
authority meetings. A new management team has brought St Thomas' into
financial surplus and just published its first corporate business plan.
This sets a series of central objectives for 1992-93 - to secure contracts
which at least maintain present treatment numbers; reduce costs by 5 per
cent; meet new quality standards; shift the provision of care towards more
cost-effective day and out-patient work with local general practitioners and
offer an improved range of services.
'In the past, managers had to say to doctors that we didn't want them to
work more efficiently - we wanted them to save money, and this usually
involved reducing the amount of work they could do,' says Tim Matthews, St
Thomas' chief executive.
'Now we have a management structure which involves medical staff in
budgeting and decision-making, and this is producing ideas for reducing unit
costs and generating income rather than just squeezing cash out of the
system.'
Matthews and John Pelly, his finance director, hope that rather than
resorting to the NHS's usual recipe for achieving 5 per cent savings - ward
closures - they will be able to raise a good deal from income generation
instead.
They plan to market occupational health services, an area of activity which
the NHS has largely left to the private sector.
St Thomas' currently has contracts with the Foreign Office and the London
Fire Brigade and will seek more.
Consultants will be encouraged to treat private patients at St Thomas'
rather than in surrounding independent hospitals. The hospital's central
London car park has been identified as a significant source of income.
The notion of hospitals having to sell services to outside customers may be
too commercial for purist tastes but, say managers, it is being done to help
maintain services which in the old bureaucratic days would simply have been
closed down.
A change of government would see an end to the commercial language which has
entered the NHS vocabulary in the past three years, and probably to some of
the fringe commercial activity.
But the challenge for a new government would be to ensure that the sharper
managerial thinking which has begun growing in the service did not disappear
as well.
Andy Black, reflecting on the changes which have taken place at Central
Middlesex since the hospital became a trust last year, remarks that he has
bought a bigger waste paper basket.
'If I didn't ignore vast amounts of central guidance, I wouldn't get the job
of running the hospital done.'
Whatever the fate of the health reforms after April 9, NHS managers hope
that the small flame of independence and accountability evidenced in that
brave remark will not be extinguished.
