FT  26 JUN 92 / The Lisbon Summit: Brittan acts toughover competition
SIR Leon Brittan, the EC competition commissioner, yesterday made clear that
Brussels would be giving up none of its current powers over competition to
satisfy calls for lighter Commission involvement in member states' affairs.
In a speech in Bonn, Sir Leon held up Commission competition policy as a
prime example of subsidiarity in action.
His speech follows hard on the heels of comments by Mr Jacques Delors, the
Commission president, on Wednesday which suggested that the principle could
be applied more widely to 'competition and state aids rules'.
Sir Leon underlined that existing Commission practice when dealing with
state aid, mergers, cartels and alleged abuses of a dominant position
already provided for national action where appropriate.
He reminded his audience that the Commission had recently devolved to member
states the responsibility for investigating many subsidies to small and
medium-sized companies. He said he was planning to clarify the role of
national courts in applying EC competition law.
But he was adamant about which authority should examine state aid which
might distort competition across the Community. 'No country can police
itself, and yet policing is clearly essential if a true common market is to
exist,' he said. 'The way to apply the principle of subsidiarity in this
area is not for the Commission to absolve itself from its responsibility.'
'It is true that the thresholds (above which mergers are automatically
examined in Brussels) are too high at present to include in the Community's
jurisdiction all concentrations having Community-wide effects,' he said.
Competition officials are examining whether the threshold level should be
lowered when it comes up for review next year.
Sir Leon also repeated his view that anti-competitive mergers with an effect
on the world market should be covered by new rules under the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt).
'Just as a single member state may not always be able to deal effectively
with competition-distorting practices, the Community itself is sometimes too
small to do so,' he said.
