FT  21 MAY 92 / Threat to maternity-benefits plan
A VOTE by the European parliament to give women throughout the EC at least
14 weeks maternity leave at 80 per cent of pay is likely to be overturned by
European social affairs ministers next month, Mrs Gillian Shephard,
employment secretary, indicated yesterday
The UK objects to the scale of the maternity benefits voted for by the
European parliament earlier this month. The government is prepared, however,
to accept reduced maternity payments equivalent to the level of sick pay.
In theory, the social affairs council of ministers may attempt to push
through the higher level of benefits on a qualified majority vote. To do so
might, however, jeopardise a compromise Mrs Shephard is offering on measures
to curb the working week.
The European Commission's working-time directive would mean a maximum
48-hour week - a ceiling unacceptable to the UK. Mrs Shephard says she would
now accept amendments enabling workers to choose to work more than 48 hours
if they want to. The issue is also due to be discussed by the social affairs
council next month.
On the maternity benefits proposals, Mrs Shephard said she had met Mr Jose
da Silva Peneda, president of the EC social affairs council, in London on
Tuesday. He had given his backing to the UK's position on the level of
benefits, she said.
Long negotiations on levels of maternity benefits were concluded at the end
of last year at the social affairs council. A delicate compromise of 14
weeks benefit at sick-pay levels was finally agreed, although the UK
abstained because it objected to the issue's being treated as a health and
safety matter and therefore subject to qualified majority voting. That
compromise has now been upset by the higher level of benefit voted for by
the European parliament.
Present UK maternity benefits provide for six weeks pay at 90 per cent of
earnings plus 12 weeks at sick pay rates of about Pounds 45 a week. However,
the only women to qualify for those full rates are those who have worked for
the same employer for at least two years by the 15th week before the birth.
The EC rules would cut the qualifying period to 12 months.
