FT  14 AUG 92 / Slim pickings for the hungry bear: The depth of Russia's
economic crisis raises the question of whether western aid is adequate
A year after Boris Yeltsin stood on a tank and faced down a coup in Moscow,
Russia's economic outlook seems bleak.
Instead of striding into a bright capitalist future, people are complaining
that life has never been so tough. In the short run, the reforms of acting
prime minister Mr Yegor Gaidar appear to have ravaged industry and left the
country on the brink of hyper-inflation. With the economy in chaos,
political power seems to be draining away from market-oriented liberals and
towards industrialists far less well disposed towards the west.
The plight of Russia and other former Soviet republics raises an
uncomfortable question: have the western democracies done enough to
lubricate the passage of economic reforms? Will future historians regard
1992 as the year when myopic leaders, preoccupied with domestic problems,
failed to rise to one of the great economic challenges of the 20th century?
Russia's economic trauma is worse than anything seen in eastern Europe and
unimaginable to most in the west. Mr Yukon Huang, a senior Russia specialist
at the World Bank, estimates that Russian imports have dropped by about 70
per cent in the past year or so, partly as result of the collapse of trade
with both eastern Europe and the other republics. Production has already
fallen by between 25 per cent and 30 per cent and may fall by a further 10
per cent to 15 per cent before the economy begins to stabilise. This is
about twice as severe as the Great Depression that shattered US economic
confidence in the early 1930s. Mr Huang reckons inflation could rise to an
annual rate of 2,000 per cent this year.
Given the political imperative of preserving stability in what is still a
nuclear superpower, the scale of western assistance looks puny. Last week,
the International Monetary Fund - chosen to spearhead the western aid effort
 -finally approved its first loan, a Dollars 1bn credit line for the
remaining five months of this year. The World Bank followed with its first
offering - Dollars 600m for the purchase of essential imports. The US House
of Representatives, meanwhile, has belatedly followed the Senate in
approving Dollars 1.2bn in US bilateral aid for Russia.
These dribbles of support are part of the much-vaunted Dollars 24bn
financial aid package announced in April by President George Bush and other
western leaders. Even if the Dollars 24bn had been made available
immediately, it would not have been nearly enough to offset the vicious
compression of Russian imports. In practice the Dollars 24bn has proved
illusory. Up to Dollars 10bn represents debt relief, while a further Dollars
6bn is earmarked for a rouble stabilisation fund that the IMF is not
prepared to activate until Russia has made much greater progress towards
macroeconomic stability. Much of the remaining Dollars 8bn reflects a
continuation of export credits provided for the past several years.
The delays in approving even small loans for Russia have prompted strong
criticism from independent analysts. In a New York Times column, Mr Stanley
Fischer, an MIT professor and former chief economist at the World Bank,
claimed that western aid was so meagre as to have become 'politically
invisible' in Moscow. The west's policy of slow, diffuse support, hedged
with conditions, had played into the hands of President Yeltsin's
reactionary opponents. And in an implicit criticism of the IMF's role as a
monitor of economic reforms, he said the Group of Seven countries should
take direct charge of western efforts to help Russia.
A former IMF official who closely follows the Russian reforms is equally
critical. 'I believe the IMF could have been more courageous in mobilising
western support for Russia,' he says. He also criticises the scale of the
IMF's own effort, arguing that a team of seven economists, flying in and out
of Moscow on short visits, is wholly inadequate. 'There is only one
specialist working on Russian monetary policy when the problems are some of
the most complex seen this century.' He says the shortage of manpower
prevents the IMF getting to grips with some of the thorniest problems, such
as the monetary implications of the build-up of huge debts between
enterprises.
Mr Fischer and other analysts fear that Russia will fail to qualify for
further IMF loans (beyond the Dollars 1bn approved last week) because the
financial targets set by the fund are unattainable. In a briefing last week,
Mr Michel Camdessus, the IMF's managing director, again stressed that it was
'absolutely essential' that Russia reduce its budget deficit to 5 per cent
of gross domestic product in the second half of this year. On present trends
Russia is heading for a deficit of 15 per cent or more of output. The IMF
also wants Russia to reduce its monthly inflation rate to about 9 per cent;
this target is also widely seen as out of reach.
Critics of western support for Russia should perhaps direct most of their
fire at the G7 leaders rather than the IMF, which remains very much their
instrument. With worldwide commitments, Mr Camdessus cannot conjure either
staff or cash out of thin air: it was only this month that the US Congress
finally approved America's share of a long-overdue capital increase for the
fund. Nor can the IMF be expected to abandon financial disciplines honed
over decades: if it gave cash without strings to Russia, it would receive
similar demands from indebted third world countries.
The IMF has already bent its own rules. The Dollars 1bn credit was rushed
through within nine weeks of Russia's membership (rather than a more normal
nine months) and, unusually, was justified on the basis of past reforms
rather than future commitments. The concessions were made to trigger the
release of other loans (such as the World Bank credit) and to open the door
to debt rescheduling by the Paris Club of creditor nations.
So what could western governments have done differently? In theory, one
option would have been to accept that the transition from communism to
capitalism is a unique long-term development challenge. The IMF's expertise
lies primarily in the macroeconomic task of helping market economies adjust
to short-run balance of payments imbalances, not in the microeconomic task
of creating markets and capitalist institutions from scratch. The G7 could
thus have created a new organisation dedicated solely to assisting the
formerly communist countries and destined for oblivion once its historic
task was complete.
Properly funded and staffed, such an agency could have made larger loans
more rapidly than the IMF. It could have offered Russia more help during the
crucial early months when confidence in Mr Gaidar's team was high, without
setting dangerous precedents for other countries. Uninhibited by rules
invented to meet the contingencies of previous decades, it could have
improvised freely in response to crises.
The G7 may argue that a new agency was not necessary because it would have
ended up advocating similar policies to those of the IMF, while lacking the
fund's practical experience. There is some substance to this objection. IMF
policies are not invented by some mysterious alchemy at its Washington
headquarters. The main elements of its package for former communist
countries - as rapid progress as possible towards balanced budgets, tight
credit, liberalised prices, exchange rate convertibility, privatisation and
a social safety net - reflect the consensus wisdom of finance ministries,
central banks and many top academic economists.
A central plank of conventional wisdom, moreover, is that the first step
towards free markets must involve macroeconomic stabilisation - tight
budgets and money - which is the IMF's speciality. The present intention is
that other agencies with microeconomic expertise, such as the World Bank,
will step up assistance on privatisation and structural reforms as and when
the fund completes its macro task.
Some conservative economists doubt that any effort by foreign public sector
agencies could achieve much in Russia. The prospect of transfers from the
west is merely 'sand in the gears' of economic change, argues Mr Steve
Hanke, an economics professor at Johns Hopkins university and a former
member of President Ronald Reagan's council of economic advisers.
Mr Hanke points to Chile and to Guangdong province in southern China as
examples of radical economic transformations achieved with practically no
foreign aid. In Guangdong, internal moves to restructure enterprises and
liberate markets have won the confidence of foreign private investors who
have poured cash into the province. The results are spectacular: industrial
output rose 27 per cent last year, having grown at an average annual rate of
20 per cent for the previous decade. Parts of the region could be mistaken
for Hong Kong.
Economic progress in the region began with grassroots liberalisation rather
than the unpopular austerity of a top-down macro 'stabilisation' programme.
Once foreign investors were convinced the Chinese meant business, they were
only too keen to get a slice of the action. Yet the relevance of southern
China for Russia is limited. Russia is no longer an autocratic state capable
of embarking on a closely controlled, gradualist programme of economic
reform. Indeed, in a freshly democratised nation, one of Mr Gaidar's
principal headaches is the ability of the industrial lobby to block the
restructuring of state enterprises and sabotage monetary policy.
Ultimately, the west's reluctance to create institutions or back Russian
reforms with large amounts of cash reflects the disarray in its own economic
backyard, rather than a rational appraisal of the alternatives. If the US
had ended the 1980s boom with budget surpluses rather than chronic deficits,
it is safe to bet that it would have ploughed far more money into Russia. It
would certainly have made a greater effort to supply the technical manpower
urgently needed to help devise and implement structural reforms.
In spite of the formidable obstacles, Mr Camdessus seems quietly confident
that Russia will hold to its reform path, despite its present pain, and that
more ambitious IMF and World Bank programmes will be approved in due course.
If Mr Gaidar loses power, the IMF will work with his successors in an effort
to keep its show on the road. Having decided that big economic sacrifices on
behalf of the formerly centrally planned economies are neither possible nor
necessary (except in the special case of Germany), western leaders can only
pray that their point man's optimism eventually proves justified.
