FT  04 JUN 92 / Brazil transforms itself from villain into hero
THE surprising star of Earth Summit proceedings so far is Brazil, which has
transformed itself from the villain of the environmental world to playing
one of most constructive roles in negotiations to forge a North-South
consensus.
Mr Celso Lafer, Brazil's foreign minister, says 'we consider that as host
country our efforts should be to transcend specific positions and try to
work out ways countries can find common ground on issues. We're capable of
doing this because our own experience makes us aware of conflicts between
North and south as we have both problems of poverty and industrialisation
within Brazil.'
Not only has the conference organisation been impressive for a country in
economic crisis, but Brazilian diplomacy was instrumental in achieving
agreement on a convention on climate change and its negotiators are
currently working hard to obtain a consensus on the biodiversity treaty.
It is hard to recognise the country that only three years ago remained
defiant and defensive in the face of worldwide censure for its blatant
encouragement (and financial incentives) for the burning down of its forests
in the name of development.
Part of Brazil's new role as defender of the environment emanates from its
desire as host country to be seen as successful and its hope of being
rewarded with the seat of one of the new commissions which may be created as
a result of the summit.
As the fifth largest country in the world it is also eager to make its
presence more felt on the world stage.
This has involved Brazil making compromises over the conference treaties
which officials admit would not otherwise have been considered. Its past
sensitivity on environmental issues, particularly as the home of the world's
largest rainforest and biggest trove of biodiversity, could have easily led
it instead to play a position as hardline as that taken by Malaysia, which
trumpets its unfettered right to dipose of its resources as it sees fit.
Despite Brazil's considerable poverty (40m people live below the poverty
line) President Fernando Collor has made environment a priority issue since
taking office two years ago and fully endorses the concept of sustainable
development. In his opening speech yesterday he said: 'I belong to the
generation that launched the first cry of warning against a mode of growth
that was leading blindly to the extinction of life on Earth.'
It is not just rhetoric. Partly by abolishing subsidies Brazil has reduced
annual deforestation by half since 1989, causing a 1 per cent reduction in
global emissions. Mr Jose Goldemberg, the environment minister, boasts:
'This is the only effective action taken anywhere in world to cut down
emissions'.
Mr Collor is talking of environmental and economic zoning of the Amazon to
protect threatened species, and has demarcated large areas as Indian
reservations, including one the size of Portugal for the 9,000 remaining
Yanomamis.
It is still easy to criticise Brazil for widescale logging and informal
goldmining occurring in the Amazon, but its efforts to make the summit a
success should certainly help it restore some green credentials.
