FT  17 NOV 92 / Survey of Energy Efficiency (13): Answer to a miner's prayer
 -Coal still has some tricks up its sleeve
GOVERNMENTS, power engineering manufacturers and coal companies are spending
more than Dollars 1bn a year between them on a worldwide research and
development effort, intended to transform dirty coal into a fuel that can
match the cleanness and efficiency of natural gas.
One demonstration of what can be achieved is AES Shady Point, a 320MW
cogeneration plant in Oklahoma, which has low emissions not only of sulphur
and nitrogen oxides but even of carbon dioxide. Two hundred tonnes a day of
CO are extracted chemically from the flue gases (using a solution of
monoethanolamine) and, after purification, sold for carbonating soft drinks.
The new coal-burning technologies - fluidised bed combustion (FBC) and
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) - can bring sulphur and
nitrogen pollution levels down almost to the levels achieved with natural
gas.
But their net efficiency (40 to 43 per cent) is still well below the 52 per
cent of the best natural gas combined cycle (NGCC) plants. And even if their
efficiency matched natural gas, they would still contribute more to the
greenhouse effect. When burned, coal inevitably produces more CO than gas,
which contains far more hydrogen combined with the carbon.
The idea of large-scale removal of CO from power station flue gases was
generally regarded until a couple of years ago as too fantastic to
contemplate - and some experts believe it is still a fantasy. Although it is
possible to extract CO, as AES Shady Point demonstrates, the costs of the
process and the billions of tonnes per year of CO added to the atmosphere
through fossil fuel burning seem prohibitive.
Recent studies under the International Energy Agency's Greenhouse Gas R&amp;D
Programme suggest, however, that CO capture and long-term disposal may after
all be technically feasible, environmentally acceptable and economically
bearable.
Industrial users (in chemicals, oil recovery and food and drink
manufacturing) could consume only very small amounts of recovered CO.
Somewhat larger quantities could be pumped into old mines or oil and gas
fields, but in the long term the only option for disposal is pumping liquid
CO into the ocean depths.
Preliminary estimates suggest that CO scrubbing and disposal in a North Sea
gas field would add about 40 per cent to the cost of electricity generated
by a IGCC plant - a huge burden but not totally prohibitive if the
greenhouse effect turns out to be a more serious global threat than most
scientists believe today.
For the next decade, however, the priority will be to make the coal
combustion process itself as clean and efficient as possible.
There is 'a ferment of innovation' in coal burning, says Walter Patterson,
energy analyst and author of a recent FT Management Report on coal
technology.* 'The world's engineering companies and their enlightened
clients are spending very large sums indeed, in a hectic race to expand the
range of advanced coal use technologies, improve their efficiency and
enhance their environmental performance,' he says. 'What is more, they are
succeeding.'
Thirty-eight clean coal plants are operating in the US, where coal's share
of the electricity generating market is increasing and the federal
government and industry are jointly funding a Dollars 5bn clean coal
programme over five years.
In Europe and Asia too, scores of advanced coal burning plants are being
planned and built. But in the UK, where much of the original research into
clean coal technology was carried out, the level of activity is now very low
compared with other countries with substantial coal industries.
British Coal's clean coal test facility at Grimethorpe in Yorkshire closed
down earlier this year, though work is continuing at the Coal Research
Establishment at Stoke Orchard, Gloucestershire. But CRE's future after the
planned cuts and privatisation of British Coal is also uncertain.
All the main generating equipment manufacturers are involved to a greater or
lesser extent in developing FBC and IGCC systems.
Most of the clean coal power stations developed so far use fluidised bed
combustion (FBC). This involves burning powdered coal in a bed of pulverised
limestone, which acts as a chemical trap for any sulphur emitted from the
fuel. An upward flow of air keeps the bed in constant motion like a boiling
kettle. One turbine is driven by steam produced in boiler tubes in the
fluidised bed and a second by the hot exhaust gases.
The main variants are circulating fluidised bed combustion (CFBC), in which
the air flows so fast that the bed loses its top surface and fills the
combustion chamber with a swirling cloud of fine particles, and pressurised
fluidised bed combustion (PFBC), in which the whole chamber operates at
between five to 20 atmospheres pressure.
Integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) plants have a gasifier in
which coal reacts with steam and oxygen to produce a raw fuel gas containing
carbon monoxide, hydrogen and methane. This gas is cleaned chemically to
remove pollutants before firing in a gas turbine to generate electricity.
The hot exhaust then produces steam to power another turbine.
FBC plants are particularly well suited for burning coal of low or variable
quality and for cogeneration (producing both electricity and heat). IGCC
plants offer better performance when good quality coal is available, though
the technology is less well developed than FBC. The next important
development will be the opening, scheduled for 1993, of a 285MW IGCC
demonstration plant designed by Shell at Buggenum in the Netherlands.
Further improvements may be possible through combining the best features of
IGCC and FBC. One hybrid is British Coal's proposed topping cycle
technology.
British Coal has formed a consortium with PowerGen, the electricity
generator, and GEC Alsthom, the Anglo-French generating equipment
manufacturer, to develop the topping cycle. Chris Buck of GEC Alsthom says
the group is 'enthusiastic' about building an experimental 75MW plant to
demonstrate the technology, which would have export potential. But it cannot
go ahead until uncertainties about support for the project and the future of
British Coal are resolved.
Dawes accepts that no clean coal plant built in the UK today can generate
electricity as cheaply as a new natural gas plant, because the latter is
technically so much simpler that its capital costs and non-fuel operating
expenses are inevitably lower. Early in the next century, however, lower
fuel costs for coal could tip the balance against gas.
Advocates of coal gasification point out that the technology offers
utilities a flexible approach to building new power stations. They can start
by installing a turbine generator burning natural gas, then add a coal
gasifier when the price of natural gas rises high enough to switch to coal
and finally fit a steam turbine - completing the integrated combined cycle -
when extra capacity is required.
*Coal-Use Technology In a Changing Environment, Financial Times Management
Reports, Pounds 215.
