FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (14): On human growth -
Industry
ALTERNATIVE ECONOMIC INDICATORS by Victor Anderson Routledge Pounds
30/Pounds 8.99, 106 pages
THE TAIL-END of a lingering UK recession and world economic slowdown is
perhaps not the best time to publish a book arguing that mainstream
economics has put too much emphasis on the importance of economic growth.
The current slowdown has spurned a rash of alternative economic indicators
of growth, claiming to spot the recovery before it shows up in official
government statistics. But Victor Anderson's book instead provides a number
of alternatives to economic growth as measures of economic well-being.
Yet Anderson, a researcher at the New Economics Foundation, has not produced
another green growth-bashing tract. Instead he argues for a middle ground
between maximising growth and abandoning it as a goal altogether.
His thesis is that by pursuing the maximisation of the monetary value of
physical production, 20th century economic analysis has neglected the
intrinsic value of human beings and their interaction, and the need to
protect and preserve the natural world. 'Narrowly financial criteria have
ruled economic policy-making for too long. It is time to bring human and
environmental realities back into economics.'
His initial objective, Anderson admits, had been to find a single statistic
'which could dethrone and replace the rate of growth of gross national
product as the principal indicator.' But this mega-statistic proved elusive.
Instead the book details 14 indicators which he argues could be considered
alongside economic growth in evaluating economic outcomes. The tables cover
the seven largest industrialised countries and the seven most populous
non-industrialised countries. The alternative indicators include: primary
school enrolment, literacy, calorie intake, telephones per person, carbon
dioxide emission and operable nuclear reactors.
Not all these objectives can be met simultaneously. Indeed, the book
provides few answers, except to make the rather obvious point that both the
'anti-growthists' and the 'pro-growthists' take too partial a view. But the
tables are interesting.
