FT  04 MAR 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment, Portugal (10):
Ready to increase offshore business
A SMALL group of islands off the west coast of Africa, almost 900 kilometres
from Europe and where almost everything has to be imported, was an unusual
choice of location for a new international business centre.
But after three years, Madeira has nearly 500 companies registered to
operate either in its offshore financial centre or in its free trade zone.
This is few by comparison with other centres, but officials believe growth
will accelerate now that most of the legislation has been ironed out and the
infrastructure improved.
They say that Madeira offers competitive incentives and that, though it is
distant from continental Europe, it is an autonomous region of Portugal
anchored in the European Community, as well as a convenient stop-off point
between Europe and north and south America.
'We had to develop infrastructures, we are building a deep sea harbour, and
all this takes a long time, but the prospects are very good,'says Francisco
Costa, chairman of the Madeira Development Company (SDM), which is
responsible for developing offshore activities.
Nineteen banks and one insurance company are operating offshore. Most are
branches of Portuguese institutions, with a few international banks,
including Manufacturers Hanover, Lloyds Bank Fund Management (Channel
Islands), Credit Lyonnais, and Deutsche Bank. Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, the
Spanish banking group, is awaiting a licence to open a branch.
Bankers say the offshore business has been exceptionally good. David
Caldeira, general manager of the offshore branch of Caixa Geral de Depositos
(CGD), the biggest Portuguese bank, says business has grown faster than
expected, increasing more than tenfold between 1990 and 1991.
Investors have come mainly from Europe, and from South America where
interest has been surprisingly strong, with clients transferring their
deposits to Madeira.
Mr Caldeira. believes that the language and Madeira's image as being clean
and safe are important factors for South American investors; while European
clients are more interested in Portuguese bonds and securities and taking
advantage of the tax breaks.
Lino Bento, operations executive at the offshore branch of Banco Espirito
Santo e Comercial de Lisboa (BESCL), Portugal's third largest bank, says
security is a big preoccupation among non-European clients. 'Many are not
particularly concerned about interest rates. The main thing for them is to
know that their funds are safe.'
Spanish investors see Madeira as an alternative to Gibraltar; and farther
afield, an increasing number of clients are coming from South Africa and the
Far East.
Fernando Couto, manager of New Madeira Investment Servicos, a management and
registration company, notices increased interest from Hong Kong. So far it
has been mainly in the financial sector, but he expects more companies to
come to the free zone.
The free zone, where manufacturing is concentrated, is on a 120-hectare site
on the main island's eastern coast, 8km from the airport and 30km from
Funchal, the island's main town. The first phase of development is well
advanced. The hilly landscape has been levelled, and new factories are
springing up. Work has also begun on enlarging the tunnel on the access road
between the free zone and Canical, a nearby town from where many new
factories recruit their workers.
A new deep-sea harbour, which will allow goods to be shipped directly in and
out of the free zone, is due to be completed by October.
Ten companies are manufacturing in the free zone, with two more awaiting a
licence and several others (including one from the Far East which could
create up to 1,000 jobs) under discussion. They include manufacturers of
high-tech optical instruments, textiles, household appliances, food, marble
and jewellery, and have come from as far apart as Brazil, Hong Kong,
Lebanon, Ireland and Portugal.
Bradley Clarke, general manager of Optronique, which makes precision optical
instruments, says the worst problem was bureaucracy. It had been difficult
to obtain residence permits, and there were long delays over customs
clearance for goods; but most of these problems had been overcome.
Mr Clarke came to Madeira from South Africa, because it was close to the
company's export markets in Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, and to
its sources of materials. It offered good financial conditions and a
politically stable environment.
Stanley Lam, of Sheenotto Industries of Hong Kong, manager of a clothes
factory, says good incentives, low labour costs, and Madeira's location
between Europe and the US were deciding factors. 'It takes 21 days to ship
goods from Hong Kong to the US, but from here it can take as little as 11
days.'
Edgar Rodrigues de Aguiar, of Amaplast, a Brazilian plastics manufacturer,
emigrated from Madeira to Brazil 16 years ago. He says there were
sentimental reasons for coming back to Madeira, but 'you don't make an
investment just for sentimental reasons'. The 2,000 square metres factory,
which makes plastic bags, is capital-intensive and employs 62 workers on
continuous production. At the moment, goods have to be sent by road to
Funchal for shipping, but the new deep-sea port will reduce transport costs
and save time.
A new international shipping register was established, to complete the range
of facilities available, but this proved troublesome. Portuguese social
security legislation and restrictive clauses covering crews had to be
changed.
Registered ships sail under the Portuguese flag, and according to Portugal's
laws, the captain and at least 50 per cent of crews had to be Portuguese,
making the register unattractive for most ship-owners. The law has been
amended, abolishing the nationality requirement for crews, except for ships
that call regularly at Portuguese ports, which must have 50 per cent EC
crews. The new law comes into force this month.
