FT  15 JUN 92 / The Earth Summit: Forests set fire to world passions
NO ISSUE divided north and south more intensely or highlighted the conflict
between environment and development more vividly than forests.
Considered by many ecologists to be among the world's most pressing
environmental problems, no commitment to halt deforestation resulted from
Rio - only 15 non-binding principles on management and conservation.
No-one seemed entirely happy with the outcome, which Mr Charles de Haes,
head of the World Wildlife Fund, called 'a bitter disappointment'. But after
marathon negotiations, which often seemed on the verge of complete
breakdown, there was general relief that something had been agreed, even
without a guarantee that the principles will halt or even slow the
deforestation of tropical forests, currently disappearing at a rate of 17m
hectares a year.
'The crucial thing is that for the first time we have laid the foundations
for global co-operation on forests,' said Mr Jag Maini, the Canadian
negotiator. 'Finally we'll be starting to define what is good forestry.'
Through the most tempestuous moments of the talks it was only the
persistence of Mr Klaus Topfer, the German environment minister, that saved
the day with intentionally ambiguous wording allowing face-saving on both
sides.
The single most contentious issue was over the preamble. Industrialised
nations wished it to contain a commitment to an enforceable future forest
convention.
In Rio it was India which was most vocal, refusing to sign anything which
even mentioned the word convention and insisting that the principles be
implemented first to see how they worked. As a compromise the final wording
leaves open the possibility by talking of 'appropriate internationally
agreed arrangements to promote international co-operation'.
The US caused another impasse with its refusal to accept the words 'right to
develop', claiming that this could have human rights implications. A
compromise was finally reached through the wording 'right to socio-economic
development on a sustainable basis'.
Sovereignty was another critical issue particularly for those countries with
large forests such as India, Malaysia, Indonesia and Brazil. India resisted
all language referring to the 'global' importance of forests, fearing
internationally imposed targets, as well as insisting on the pre-eminence of
national policies, partly because of its own community-based approach.
Finally this was resolved by stating that forests are 'essential to the
economy as a whole'.
Malaysia managed to include its 'greening of the world' concept which asks
all countries to make efforts towards afforestation.
The developing world also succeeded in a 'ban on bans' by outlawing
unilateral boycotts on 'unsustainable' forest products partly because this
goes against Gatt rules, and partly because of difficulties defining
sustainable forest products. However, the possibility is left open for
ecolabelling on goods within countries.
The Forestry Principles carry no legal commitment but as signed by heads of
state may carry a moral obligation. As a first attempt to set down some
worldwide 'Dos and Don'ts' of forestry they are not bad. Whether they will
help halt deforestation remains to be seen. 'Deforestation won't end until
people want trees more than they want land,' said a British official.
