FT  09 JAN 92 / Management: Rules posted for the junk mail merchants - Gary
Mead investigates a new code of practice which aims to bring the cowboys to
heel
The UK Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) has extended its reach into one
of the fastest growing areas of advertising, that of direct marketing, one
of the industry's most important, most heavily criticised and least
understood areas.
Advertising expenditure on direct mail - the cornerstone of direct marketing
 -grew by 29 per cent in 1990, reaching some Pounds 979m (out of a total of
about Pounds 1.86bn on all forms of direct marketing in the UK), a year when
other forms of advertising were static. According to Mintel, the research
organisation, the turnover of the UK's top 35 direct mail agencies grew by a
healthy 17 per cent in 1990.
But in the UK, direct mail has acquired a poor image thanks to a few
unscrupulous operators, particularly in holiday timeshares. Now the ASA has
the power to offer redress against direct mail scams. It formally launches
its new code of practice covering the industry, including list and database
management,* on January 28; the code came into force on January 1. The new
rules have a scale of sanctions against infringements, ranging from loss of
the volume discount offered by the Royal Mail to referral to the Office of
Fair Trading.
The new regulations, devised by the direct mail committee of the Advertising
Association, have the backing of the UK Direct Marketing Association (UKDMA)
 -umbrella organisation for the leading companies in the industry - and the
Royal Mail.
Alan Bigg, chairman of Brann Direct, one of the UK's six largest direct mail
agencies, believes that 'taking direct marketing under the wing of the ASA
will be excellent for both the industry and the consumer. All the consumer
research shows that people are happy to receive information from companies
when they either know the company or how the company obtained their details.
What annoys them is mail which spuriously claims an intimacy.'
Consumers who do not wish to receive direct mail are best advised to have
themselves listed on the Mailing Preference Service, which should ensure
they are removed from the commercially available database lists.
The average UK household annually receives some 40 pieces of direct mail
through its letterbox - against a US average of more than 500 items - but
less than 10 per cent of that is requested by the customer. Nevertheless,
once it has arrived, 61 per cent of it is opened and read.
Yet despite its pejorative connotations - junk mail - in 1991 more than 60
per cent of the UK population either bought goods through direct mail or
replied to a direct response advertisement.
That score rate, say direct marketeers, means that direct mail can claim to
be effective beyond other forms of advertising. They love to quote - in
their favour - Lord Leverhulme's remark that 'I know that half of my
advertising budget is wasted. The only trouble is I don't know which half'.
He should have used the mail.
But while the UK adopts greater self-regulation of the direct marketing
industry, the EC is moving in the opposite direction. According to Tony Coad
of NDL, the UK database company, and public affairs spokesman for the
Brussels-based European Direct Marketing Association, the current draft on
data protection might cripple the industry in the UK and other member
states.
Coad says that until mid-1990, the European Commission appeared to be
following a pragmatic line on harmonisation of legislation concerning direct
marketing. DG-13, the directorate responsible for communications, had been
preparing a draft law based on the relatively relaxed recommendation adopted
by the Council of Europe in October, 1985, concerning the protection of
personal data used for the purposes of direct marketing.
'Then DG-3, the directorate concerned with the single market, took over,'
says Coad. An all-German team in DG-3 drafted legislation closely resembling
that prevailing in Germany, restricting the compilation of any personal data
to that available from public sources such as electoral rolls. Were that to
become EC law, manufacturers, financial services companies, charities,
airlines and political parties could all find themselves hamstrung in their
contact with the public.
Coad sees the muddle partly as a result of cultural and historical
differences between EC member states. 'Understandably, German society, which
spends most on direct mail in Europe, is very concerned about data
protection. The Stasi used to advertise for male penfriends in the west,
simply to collect data. Yet Italy, the number two spender, seems to have no
public demand for a data protection act. Different cultures need different
forms of protection.'
'Chris Patten, the Conservative party chairman, wrote to me asking for
financial support. He would not be able to do that if the current EC data
protection draft becomes law, as he would not even be able to approach me to
ask if he could solicit my support,' says Coad. He adds that 'DG-13 now
seems to be back in the frame and unscrambling the mess', but that it now
looks unlikely that the draft will be ready for the European parliament's
approval before the end of 1992.
*Rules for direct marketing; available free from the ASA, 12 Brook House,
2-16 Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HN.
