FT  17 AUG 92 / Market for mail order rises 3%
MAIL ORDER sales grew by 3 per cent to Pounds 4bn last year as the home
shopping market proved marginally more resistant to recession than
high-street department stores and clothing retailers.
Though most of the sales increase was due to higher VAT rates, the sector's
performance showed an improvement on the two previous years during which it
lost ground to the high street.
A market survey by Verdict Research, the retail consultancy, suggests that
mail order companies - led by Great Universal Stores, Littlewoods, Freemans
and Grattan - benefited from the high percentage of older consumers and
lower socio-economic groups among their customers.
Older consumers had more money to spend than younger people, and many home
shoppers felt more comfortable using mail order credit facilities than
credit cards or other options available in the high street, Verdict says.
Mail order companies raised their share of new retail credit granted during
1991 from 15.3 per cent to 16.5 per cent.
In spite of last year's growth, however, mail order's share of total retail
sales has fallen to less than 3 per cent.
'Home shopping is suffering from its own form of overcapacity,' the report
says. 'There are too many catalogues serving a sales base which is declining
in real terms.' With lower spending in many retail sectors, competition with
high-street and out-of-town retailers has become fiercer. Yet some of the
mail order companies still see their main competition as one another rather
than the high street, Verdict adds.
Competition between mail order companies to recruit agents serving a wide
circle of friends, neighbours and relatives had been largely
counter-productive. It had shuffled market shares without stimulating sales
growth.
Though agents accounted for 83 per cent of sales, they increasingly shopped
only for themselves and their immediate families, switching from one
catalogue to another and treating the commission as a form of discount.
Future success in the sector would depend on the ability of companies to
move from the agency system to direct sales, using their customer databases
to target segmented groups of shoppers with different ranges of products,
Verdict concludes.
Home Shopping, Verdict Research Ltd, 112 High Holborn, London WC1V 6JS.
Pounds 650.
