FT  28 JAN 92 / Industry told gas shortage may cut supply
BRITISH GAS said yesterday that it faces a severe gas shortage by the mid
1990s that may force it to cut supplies to some big customers which take
large amounts of cheap gas.
'It is inevitable that we will have to withdraw significantly from the
interruptible market by 1994-95,' Mr Cedric Brown, senior managing director,
said. Interruptible customers pay almost 10p a therm less than other
industrial consumers, which pay 30p a therm. Interruptible customers are
those which agree to be cut off at four hours' notice during peak supply
times.
The looming gas shortfall may cost companies such as Imperial Chemical
Industries and British Steel several million pounds extra in fuel bills a
year, as they will have to turn to alternative sources such as heavy fuel
oil or gas oil.
Mr Brown said the shortage would arise partly from the amount of gas being
sold to new power stations. The power generation market has grown over three
years to equal half the size of British Gas's entire industrial market of
about 10bn therms a year.
'We have been voicing our concerns about the scale of growth in this market
and its impact on the rest of the market to the Department of Energy for
quite some time,' Mr Brown said. British Gas expects a shortage of 1.5bn to
2bn therms a year by 1994.
As part of British Gas's deal with its regulators to aid the development of
competition in the industrial market, the company has agreed not to buy any
new gas for the next three years. At the same time, it will release part of
its existing supply to rivals.
Even if British Gas could contract to buy new supplies, Mr Brown is
sceptical that imports from Norway could fill the gap.
Norway will have little new gas available before the second half of the
1990s and that will be more expensive than UK gas.
Mr Brown foresees a substantial rise in price for industrial customers as
supplies become tight. At the same time, the company has warned that
domestic customers may face price rises when British Gas hives off its
transport division into a separate company.
That is required under its agreement on competition with the regulators.
