FT  19 NOV 92 / The winter of discontent: The three Baltic states are
struggling with economic hardships and the problem of Russian minorities
The first Soviet republics to achieve independence - Latvia, Lithuania and
Estonia - have also been among the first to experience the harsher side of
freedom. Half their population of some 8m live in poverty; heating and
lighting are minimal. The leaders of the three Baltic states are concerned
about surviving the winter - rightly, since the Lithuanians have just
rejected the government of the Sajudis nationalist movement in general
elections.
The three states assume that, when winter is over, the worst will be behind
them. But the worst could be to come. Unemployment is starting to rise
sharply; prices, which have risen steeply in recent months, are expected to
increase further, albeit at a slower rate; and the big state-owned
enterprises have yet to be restructured or privatised.
The difficulties facing the Baltic states are manifold: their economies are
in decline; their criteria for citizenship are undefined or controversial;
government institutions are embryonic.
Lithuania's nationalist government, headed by Mr Vytautas Landsbergis, was
rejected because of the country's privation. The weakness of the country's
political institutions has now provoked a dogfight over the transfer of
power to the Democratic Labour party of Mr Algirdas Brazauskas, the former
Communist leader. The Estonian and Latvian leaderships fear unemployment -
most of all among their large Russian minorities, which they have not yet
granted full citizenship, and which could rebel against the building of
states of which they are not yet members.
Yet these are societies in transition. They have formal statehood, political
plurality, constitutions in place, membership of the main international
organisations, embassies at home and abroad. They have flags, anthems,
national guards, sports teams, media and airlines. All have re-established
the independence they enjoyed until 1940.
There is no present danger that these states will collapse back into a
Russian embrace. At stake, rather, is whether they will for years be plagued
with instability and poverty, or instead achieve a modest but productive
place in the north-eastern corner of Europe.
First, their successes. All have introduced a currency - though only the
Estonian kroon is hard, backed by gold returned to the republic from the
Bank of England and pegged at 8 kroon to the D-Mark. The link with the
German currency has helped bring inflation down from 24 per cent a month in
July to 7 per cent in September. The Latvian rublis has remained more or
less stable against the hard currencies - now about 160 to the US dollar -
but is backed 'mainly by faith', according to Mr Uldis Klauss, a central
bank adviser. The Lithuanian talonas is less stable, with a market price of
200-plus to the dollar, and fluctuates widely.
All the Baltic countries have begun privatisation: Lithuania claims to have
privatised more than 50 per cent of state-owned dwellings; all have at least
begun the sale of shops and small businesses. On Tuesday, the Estonian
Privatisation Agency announced an international tender to privatise 38
state-owned companies. Mr Andres Bergman, the agency's head, said the aim
was to tempt foreign investors to become 'part of a manufacturing centre for
northern Europe'. The first list of Latvian companies to be privatised had
to submit their plans yesterday - both foreigners and Latvians can bid for
shares.
But to most Balts the price they are paying for the transition to
independence still seems high. The International Monetary Fund, of which all
three are members, has laid down a standard programme of monetary and fiscal
discipline and rapid movement towards convertible currencies and privatised
property.
'We are sticking to the IMF plan, absolutely, 100 per cent,' says Mr Ivars
Godmanis, the Latvian prime minister. 'But it's very hard: how our old
people will live this winter I don't know.' Mr Teet Rajasalu, of Estonia's
Institute of Economics, reckons purchasing power has dropped by more than
half since the currency was introduced earlier this year because of the
steep rise in the price of imports, including energy. 'By early next year
our prices might reach world market levels - but not our wages.'
Only Estonia, under President Lennart Meri and Premier Mart Laar, is
unambiguously pro-market. One deputy from the ruling Fatherland bloc of
parliamentary parties spoke of the ethical nature of sex shops (now opening
in Tallinn) because they efficiently match demand with supply. Mr Ivar Raig,
head of the parliament's budget committee, calls for a 'real privatisation
of land and companies, not the timid steps we have so far taken. This is the
basic mission of our government.'
The other two states, while seeing no alternative to market reform,
hesitate. The Latvian premier, Mr Godmanis, heads a fissiparous coalition.
To make his ambitious privatisation plans work he will need a more coherent
government to be elected next spring. The central bank under Mr Eynart
Repshe has a tight control of the money supply - so much so that Latvia's
credit-starved enterprises are threatening strikes. Lithuania's state
companies are still receiving credit from the central bank but production
has tumbled and productivity has halved over the past year.
Lithuania, where a new left-of-centre government is now being formed, is the
first to suffer a backlash against market policies, though all agree that
the attempts to break up and sell off the state farms in the country were
badly handled. 'There could be real hunger this winter,' warns Mr
Brazauskas, although he insists the country will not 'in principle' deviate
from the IMF's narrow path.
For the politicians and the people throughout the region, economic problems
dwarf the crises of the state and of citizenship. The fall of Mr Landsbergis
is a warning that patriotism - and the hatred of the Soviet past which saw
hundreds of thousands of Balts slaughtered or sluiced through the gulag a
mere four decades ago - are not enough to keep voters' support. Yet in
Estonia and Latvia, where most Baltic Russians live, there is no question
that the state's policy of withholding citizenship is popular with the
ethnic majority.
Mr Meri, urbane in his presidential mansion, is inclined to dismiss Russian
protests against unequal treatment of the minority. He regards the threat by
Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, to delay the withdrawal of troops
from the Baltics as no more than posturing for the nationalists in his own
country.
After talks with Mr Vitaly Churkin, the Russian deputy foreign minister, Mr
Meri said: 'We have agreed a kind of truce. Mr Churkin said that the
impression given that troop withdrawals were linked to human rights here is
wrong.' In practice, said Mr Meri, laws demanding two-year residence and
command of the language will be relaxed to allow more non-ethnic Estonians
to become citizens.
Both Estonia and Latvia have returned to the independent status they enjoyed
in 1940 and based citizenship on those people, and their descendants, who
were citizens before the Soviet annexation. This excludes nearly all
Russians, since the Soviet immigration was of workers, bureaucrats, soldiers
and secret policemen. It means, as Mr Meri cheerfully explains, that the
Russians are 'not second-class citizens, they are non-citizens'. Mr Godmanis
says he is content to see Russians become Latvian citizens, though less
relaxed about the presence of 40,000 Russian troops, the largest presence in
the Baltic states. He says that 'the citizenship question will have to be
defined by the next parliament' - though since most Russians presently
cannot vote, it will not represent them.
A UN human rights commission, invited into Latvia by Mr Godmanis, is now
preparing a report on the civil rights of non-ethnic Latvians. Mr Godmanis
rejects any suggestion that the state is discriminatory. His - and the
Estonians' - overriding need is to re-establish the state on the basis of
its ethnic majority, and to ensure thereafter that the admission of others
to citizenship is done on an individual basis.
Mr Churkin said on a flight back to Moscow that he was sure that the
pull-out of his country's troops by next August would go ahead as agreed. Mr
Brazauskas, who does not have this problem, believes the Russian threat in
the Baltics no longer exists. He dismisses the possibility of a reactionary
takeover in Moscow followed by a renewed thrust to the north on the pretext
of protecting ethnic Russians. Neither Mr Meri nor Mr Godmanis share that
insouciance. Mr Godmanis makes the point that 'until the people see their
government control the army, they will not feel that they have a real
government'. But none of the new crop of western ambassadors in the Baltic
states believes that there is a serious Russian threat.
The last crisis, that of the state itself, can only be solved with time. It
is first a matter of people; none of the new politicians were in the habit
of making decisions, and thus they tend not to.
Some ministers are learning. Mr Godmanis in Latvia is determined and tough;
Mr Laar and Ms Lia Henne, Estonian deputy prime minister for economic
reform, appear intelligent and quick; in Lithuania, Mr Vytenis Aleshkaitis,
the economic reform minister, has won glowing reviews from the little circle
of foreign advisers and may stay in the new 'technocratic' government
promised by Mr Brazauskas.
But the ministries they run are still rudimentary. One minister spent a day
adjudicating on where to put a photocopier donated by a foreign government.
In all the Baltic ministries, groups of men and women sit gossiping just
like in the old Soviet days when it did not matter if they worked or not.
It is on the streets where the real money is being made - much of it
illegal. The Baltics have become conduits for metals traders - men who make
unwritten contracts for the supply of lead, copper, zinc and aluminium and
ship it across lightly guarded borders and ports. Bribery is not uncommon.
They are the nouveaux riches of the cities, flashing about in Mercedes cars
and frequenting the hard-currency bars, where they are tolerated for the
business they bring.
And the old reflexes of cheating the state live on. Yet there are also men
and women, young and old, who will remain in cold offices late into the
night, trying to master the new demands. This will be a hard time, but the
three states on the Baltic are still moving westwards.
 ----------------------------------------------
 THE BALTIC STATES: COLD COMFORTS OF FREEDOM
 ----------------------------------------------
ESTONIA
 ----------------------------------------------
Capital:                            Tallinn
Population:                            1.6m
Russian-speaking
population:                            *35%
Inflation October:                    **10%
Minimum wage:          *Dollars 2 per month
Currency &amp; rate:      Kroon 12.7: Dollars 1
 ----------------------------------------------
LATVIA
 ----------------------------------------------
Capital:                               Riga
Population:                            2.7m
Russian-speaking
population:                       *over 40%
Inflation October:                    **25%
Minimum wage:         *Dollars 10 per month
Currency &amp; rate:      rubils 160: Dollars 1
 ----------------------------------------------
LITHUANIA
 ----------------------------------------------
Capital:                            Vilnius
Population:                            3.7m
Russian-speaking
population:                             *9%
Inflation October:                    **27%
Minimum wage:         *Dollars 10 per month
Currency &amp; rate:    talonas: 200+ Dollars 1
 ----------------------------------------------
