FT  01 JUN 92 / Letter: Deregulation the culprit for parlous state of US
airline industry
Sir, Reading Nikki Tait's piece on the financial wreck that is the US
airline industry ('Spectre of losses dogs US carriers', May 28) I was struck
again by the almost universal inability to draw what should be an obvious
conclusion: our 14-year experiment with deregulation has been a total
disaster.
American Airlines chairman, Bob Crandall, says his industry 'is going down
the tubes'. One-fifth of domestic airline passengers are now being carried
by bankrupt airlines. Venerable names have either disappeared (Pan Am,
Eastern) or are at risk of disappearing (TWA).
How can this be? Unions have been broken and real wages cut. Oil prices,
despite recent increases, have been well behaved for years and, in real
dollars, are well below what they were when the industry was deregulated. On
domestic routes, there's no such thing as foreign competition. The surviving
airlines, Crandall's prominent among them, are models of tight management.
The answer has to be deregulation; what else is there?
Partisans of deregulation point to lower fares as the strategy's triumph.
Yes, real fares per seat mile have declined since 1978 - but at pretty much
the same pace as they did in the prior 20 years. And here's a fact that
deregulators never confront: the air fare component of the consumer price
index has risen at twice the pace of general inflation since fare-setting
was turned over to the invisible hand. The culprits, of course, are the
hidden price increases of longer flights (thanks to the hub-and-spoke
system) and tighter purchase restrictions.
The volatility of the airline business is a function of several things,
among them high costs of entry and a huge overhang of empty seats. That
leads to contradictory pressures of oligopoly and price warfare. Regulation
aimed to stabilise these pressures; deregulation has exposed them in rich
detail.
Europeans should know this as they move to deregulate their own skies.
Unfortunately, these truths are rarely expressed in our own press, much less
yours.
Doug Henwood,
editor/publisher,
Left Business Observer,
250W 85 Street,
New York,
NY 10024, US
