FT  18 DEC 92 / Popular movement urged to meet the needs of children
THE United Nations Children's Fund yesterday called for a worldwide popular
movement - 'the basic needs movement' - to raise Dollars 25bn (Pounds
16.4bn) a year to meet children's needs for food, clean water and basic
health care.
Reaching this target would lower birth rates, and save the lives of more
than 4m children a year, Unicef said in its annual 'State of the World's
Children' report. This would create a breakthrough against 'the last great
obscenity - the needless malnutrition, disease, and illiteracy that still
casts a shadow over the lives, and the futures of the poorest quarter of the
world's children'.
'The time has come to banish in shame the notion that the world cannot
afford to meet the most obvious and basic needs of all its children,' said
Mr James Grant, executive director of Unicef, pointing out that Dollars 25bn
amounted to less than Europeans spend on wine each year, Americans on beer,
and Japanese on business entertaining. This contrasts with about Dollars
750bn spent every year on the military. He added that progress depends not
just on cash, but on sustained commitment and managerial competence by
governments.
'It is an unacceptable disgrace to humanity for millions of children to be
dying every year from diseases that can demonstrably be prevented and
treated at almost negligible cost,' the report says.
Unicef calls for two thirds of the Dollars 25bn needed to come from
developing countries themselves. This could be achieved if governments spent
20 per cent of their budgets on basics such as food, water, sanitation,
health care and family planning, the report says. It complains that at
present, more is spent on the military, and on debt servicing than on health
and education.
The rest could be met out of aid funds if donor countries raised to 20 per
cent the proportion of aid devoted to basic needs. At present, less than 10
per cent of the total Dollars 40bn provided as bilateral aid every year is
targeted in this way.
'The problem today is not that overcoming the worst aspects of world poverty
is too vast or too expensive a task: it is that it has not been seriously
tried,' the report says. It says that a combination of new technologies,
falling costs, and community-based strategies, is making it possible today
to tackle aspects of poverty that historically have been the most stubborn -
such as nutrition, clean water and basic education. For example, providing
clean water in Africa today costs about Dollars 20 per person per year, half
the cost of just six years ago.
Unicef calls for a worldwide popular movement because of concern that the
threat to children is a 'silent emergency' that passes unnoticed alongside
more dramatic crises such as those in Somalia or Yugoslavia: 'No famine, no
flood, no earthquake, no war, has ever claimed the lives of 250,000 children
in a single week,' said Mr Grant: 'Yet malnutrition and diseases claim that
number of child victims every week.'
The report points out that 60 per cent of the 13m child deaths every year
are caused by three diseases - pneumonia, diarrhoea and measles - all of
which can be treated at low cost. Treatment for vitamin A deficiency, which
can cause blindness and early death, can be controlled at a cost of about 10
cents per child per year, while iodine deficiency, which causes mental
retardation, could be eliminated at a total cost of Dollars 100m.
It is nevertheless encouraged by shifts away from military government,
singling out Ethiopia, where military spending fell last year from 60 per
cent to 30 per cent of the total spending, with health and education
spending rising from 12 per cent to 20 per cent.
A final critical concern is the 'financial famine' facing developing
countries because of high levels of debt, low inward investment, and limited
access to export markets. Developing country debt now totals Dollars
1,300bn, the report says, with capital and interest charges of Dollars 143bn
falling due each year - three times the total of aid received from all
sources.
State of the World's Children. Unicef, Unicef House, 3 UN Plaza, New York NY
10017 or Oxford University Press, Walton Street, Oxford OX2 6DP.
