FT  05 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Wounded Stakis keeps to doctor's orders -
Disposals and cutbacks have brought some relief to the leisure and nursing
group, but its problems are not over
AN OUTPATIENT, says Mr David Michels, chief executive of the Stakis Group,
is still, technically, in hospital. Stakis, he says, is an outpatient: but
it moved out of intensive care some time ago and has since left the ward.
Stakis is the hotels, nursing homes and casinos group that got into severe
trouble early last year. Sir Lewis Robertson, the company doctor, came in as
chairman, replacing Sir Reo Stakis, the Cyprus-born founder who became
president.
In June 1991 Sir Lewis fired Mr Andros Stakis, Sir Reo's son, who was chief
executive, made Pounds 44m of write-offs and provisions, agreed a standstill
on debt repayment with the banks and began a programme of disposals. But
further revival had to wait until Mr Michels had arrived from Hilton
International.
Mr Michels, a sparky 45-year-old Londoner, confronted a group that was
overmanned and living, in some places, on illusions. One of his early moves
was to 'get rid of almost everybody who was stopping us making a profit'.
The seven divisional headquarters, all in the Glasgow area, were merged into
one and headquarters staff was cut from 350 to 150. The hotels division has
cut 700 jobs, including part-time staff, and the group now employs about
7,000 people.
'And yet we feel a lot better for it,' says Mr Michels. 'The operators we've
got left in the business are bloody good.' Stakis, he says, also benefits
from the fact that past managers had a gift for choosing good sites for its
outlets.
On December 21 Stakis will produce its results for the year to September 30
 -last year it lost Pounds 47m on sales of Pounds 171m. It may then indicate
what it intends to do about its Pounds 198m of debt, owed to 21 banks, some
foreign. Until then Mr Michels is unable to give figures.
The hotels division, operating 30 properties all over the UK and accounting
for nearly two thirds of the group's assets, has faced the greatest change.
'Some of it didn't appear to be run for profit,' says Mr Michels, who also
noted that many of the hotels were charging as if they had an extra star
rating.
Mr Michels has repositioned many of the hotels and 'put them where the
customer knew they ought to have been in the first place'. All-night room
service has been withdrawn in some. Stakis' new Country Court chain of six
hotels has been merged with the rest. Earlier this year, Mr Michels
remarked: 'It's difficult enough to establish a brand with 30 hotels; with
six it's impossible.'
Gross operating margin in the hotels has reached 28 per cent in the past
five months - 'a good operator would expect 35 per cent in good times' - and
occupancy has averaged 64.7 per cent across the chain - 'not brilliant, but
acceptable'.
Stakis had hoped to sell its 19 casinos and raise Pounds 100m, but had to
abandon the idea last year when it realised it could not get a good price in
the recession. Instead, the casinos have been redecorated after a gap of two
years, new managers have been installed at some of them and the division is
trading profitably.
The group's third arm, health care, which operates 18 nursing homes under
the Ashbourne name, has improved in the past year. Nursing homes, says Mr
Michels, take between nine to 18 months to fill up with patients, but once
old people have moved in they tend to stay, largely unaffected by economic
circumstances and paying, in upmarket Ashbourne's case, Pounds 470 per week.
Occupancy rates reached 93 per cent across all the homes in the last
financial year and will go higher as the remaining homes fill up.
'The downside is that we have 21 sites for new nursing homes, 19 with
planning permission. They are running up interest charges but we can't
afford to develop them,' says Mr Michels. Some Pounds 50m is needed to
complete the homes.
It comes back to the question of the debt. The company could try to make
another standstill agreement with its banks next March and trade out of its
debt with positive cashflow; it could raise new capital with a rights issue,
for which stock market conditions are not favourable; or sell off a
division.
Stakis has already tried, unsuccessfully, to sell the casinos, and it would
not contemplate selling its hotels. That leaves the nursing homes. 'It's no
secret that we've been looking for a partner to develop the nursing homes
with us,' says Mr Michels. Other possibilities would be an outright sale to
another company, or a separate flotation of Ashbourne.
Rumours that Ashbourne was to be floated (denied by Stakis) caused the
company's shares to jump 5 1/2 p to 32 1/2 p late October, but they have
since fallen back to 30p.
The company may reveal its intentions when it announces its results next
month. Mr Bruce James, an analyst with Smith New Court, says Stakis has
'stopped the rot' and forecasts a net loss of about Pounds 500,000.
