FT  21 FEB 92 / Parliament and Politics: Labour to stress stark differences
 -Tax policy
THE LABOUR leadership is to press home to voters the stark choice between
Tory tax cuts and better public services following Mr John Major's
disclosure that he is ready to authorise increased public borrowing.
Party campaign strategists were also delighted yesterday that Mr Norman
Lamont, the chancellor, had refused to be drawn by questions at a morning
news conference asking why extra spending was legitimate to finance tax cuts
but not for public services.
Party organisers believe that Mr Major's public support for 'prudent'
increases in borrowing now offer them a better opportunity to highlight the
differences between the two parties. They claim that poll evidence has
repeatedly shown a preference among voters for better services over tax
cuts.
Mr Neil Kinnock, Labour leader, used the launch of his party's health policy
to stress his commitment to reverse any reduction in the 25p basic rate of
income tax. He said tax reductions were not a stimulus to the economy. Such
a move would only encourage a growth in imports: 'It won't bring recovery,
it won't advantage the nation.'
Party officials were careful to emphasise, however, that Labour would not
use an increase in the public sector borrowing requirement to promote
consumption, but only to finance investment or capital expenditure. If the
government did use more borrowing to cut the base rate of income tax, Labour
would revoke the measure and use the resources for its public services
programme.
The importance of better services was at the centre of a speech yesterday by
Mr John Smith, shadow chancellor, to Manchester Business School.
Spelling out 'the positive case for the public sector', he said advocates of
laissez-faire were losing ground against those arguing for a more pragmatic
assessment of the 'best mix' of public and private intervention in a modern
mixed economy.
He pointed out that government spending now amounted to about 40 per cent of
gross domestic product against an average of 48 per cent in the European
Community. He said even prudent institutions such as the Geneva-based Bank
for International Settlements had recently expressed concern that low public
investment in core infrastructure could hinder UK economic growth.
