FT  17 JUL 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Currencies shrug off rate rise
CURRENCIES in the European Monetary System managed to shrug off the
Bundesbank's  3/4 percentage-point rise in its discount rate yesterday, but
some operators expressed fears that Germany will tighten monetary policy
further, writes James Blitz.
The Bundesbank's decision to raise its discount rate to 8.75 per cent did
not cause the feared run on EMS currencies, partly because the expected
tightening of German monetary policy had been priced into the market in the
earlier part of this week.
However, the Bank of Italy was forced to raise its discount rate yet again
to protect the lira in the aftermath of the Bundesbank's move. The lira had
dropped to L761 to the D-Mark at the start of the day but finished stronger
at L758.7, after the discount rate went up to 13.75 per cent. A more modest
policy tightening by the Dutch and Belgian authorities was due to the
traditionally close ties both countries have with Bundesbank policy.
Sterling ended one pfennig higher at DM2.8550, in spite of the Bank of
England's determination not to tighten policy. Relief that the Lombard rate
was untouched was the cause for bullishness, but scepticism remains as to
whether the pound can hold at these levels.
Mr Mark Austin, chief economist at Hongkong and Shanghai Banking in London,
said: 'The markets are still looking for proof that the British government
will defend the pound if the going gets tough.' Mr Neil MacKinnon, of
Yamaichi International, agreed: 'Sterling will be under pressure in the next
few days. The Bank of Italy has raised rates by 1.75 percentage points in
the last 10 days, and the markets want to see whether the Bank of England
will defend its place in the ERM with that kind of action.'
There are also fears that the Bundesbank will raise the more
market-sensitive Lombard rate soon. Arguably, the more important news
yesterday was not the rate rise but the Bundesbank's decision to leave the
criteria by which it judges M3 money supply unchanged.
As the OECD stated recently, German reunification has brought in its train
certain phenomena that make the M3 targets misleading. This year's 3 1/2 to
5 1/2 per cent M3 growth target may be impossible to meet in any event.
The US dollar quickly lost two pfennigs after the rate rise, plagued by the
6.75 percentage points differential in German and US short-term interest
rates. Yesterday's discount rate rise may not have widened the gap, but
shows that an easing in the differential is a long way off. The US unit
rallied later after Mr Ross Perot withdrew from the US presidential race,
closing at DM1.4745, down from DM1.4775. It ended firmer in New York at
DM1.4787.
