FT  27 JUN 92 / Books: Mistrustful influence of evil - Fiction
BLACK DOGS
by Ian McEwan
Jonathan Cape Pounds 13.99, 176 pages
ULVERTON
by Adam Thorpe
Secker &amp; Warburg Pounds 14.99, 384 pages
THERE'S something deeply troubling about Ian McEwan's fiction. Not simply in
the stories themselves, though their plotting and careful quota of shocks
certainly find their targets, but in the selection of the subject matter,
the means imported to achieve those contrived discomfitures. McEwan may be
attacked by feminists for what they perceive as the misogyny deep-rooted in
his books, but such use and misuse of women is just one element in his
personal pantheon of disgust, alongside the mistrust of family, sex,
relationships, political beliefs.
That there is a strong suspicion McEwan is not really like that, and all the
misanthropy is thoroughly feigned, only intensifies the mistrust generated
by his fictions. What still seems the most heartfelt and genuinely affecting
of his published prose is the lengthy preface he wrote to his libretto for
Michael Berkeley's anti-nuclear oratorio Or Shall We Die? There nothing had
to be feigned; the fear that he evoked was genuine, and the images in which
it was couched and through which it was related to the writer's own life,
were truthful, telling ones. Without being expected to assume a fictional
mask McEwan could expiate his own terrors with a humanity that gave depth
and potency.
Perhaps though McEwan really does hate dogs, especially big black ones, and
can detect in them the potential that provides the central image of evil in
his new novel. To give its details away, even in as coy and vaguely
lubricious way as McEwan eventually does, would destroy the final point of
reading Black Dogs. Or, just perhaps, he hit upon the idea of the horrifying
revelation as a means of giving point and dramatic focus to a tale that
would otherwise come across as a tired, commonplace dissection of a failed
marriage.
June and Bernard Tremaine are former communists whose loss of faith
immediately after the Second World War took their lives in entirely opposite
directions. He settles into cosy radicalism, writes a biography of Nasser,
makes a career as a television pundit and ends up as a Labour MP. She,
entirely as a result of her encounter with the evil of the black dogs,
embraces God and the truth of mystical experience, goes to live in Provence,
and becomes a recognised authority on matters spiritual.
Their twin stories are relayed through a son-in-law, who offers a brief
cameo of his own predictably troubled upbringing in a preface. The events of
the marriage emerge in a series of episodes moving back and forth through 40
years and finding their biggest set pieces in newly liberated France and the
breaching of the Berlin Wall in 1990. Even when the big evils - Fascism,
Communism - are conquered, it seems to say, the black dogs stay with us,
whether lodged in the German skinheads of West Berlin or in a father
viciously beating his child. But if McEwan's grip on those thematic threads
falters it is largely because his main axis, the Tremaine marriage, is so
schematically portrayed.
The artfulness of Adam Thorpe's novel - his first, after two much praised
volumes of poetry - is paraded very obviously on its surface: Ulverton seems
to be designer fiction of the most egregious kind, Thomas Hardy recast for
the post-modern sensibility. Its vignettes span four centuries in a small
community in deepest Wessex, from the Civil War to the bright, brittle world
of 1988. There is much self-conscious pastiche - of Zummerzet dialogue,
18th-century epistolary style, 19th-century stream of consciousness,
20th-century television script.
Beneath all the posturing, however, the prose seems totally inert; an
anodyne rural idyll with little narrative content is tricked out with a few
convolutions and inversions. Well before the end one longs for an excess of
McEwan-style wickedness to save the whole contraption from itself.
