FT  25 SEP 92 / UK Company News: Spring Ram jumps to Pounds 18.4m - Results
lifted by strong growth in kitchens where sales rose 19%
A STRONG performance from its kitchens division helped Spring Ram
Corporation increase first-half pre-tax profit by 13 per cent, from Pounds
16.3m to Pounds 18.4m, against the trend in the building and home
improvements market.
The share price gained 10p to close at 143p, continuing the recovery from
104p earlier this month. Doubts about the group's momentum had punctured the
May peak of 181p.
Turnover rose by 17 per cent to Pounds 101.5m (Pounds 86.9m). Earnings per
share advanced to 3.5p (3p), assisted by a lower tax charge. The interim
dividend goes up 20 per cent to 0.103p (0.086p).
Mr Stuart Greenwood, financial director, said sales rose by 19 per cent in
the kitchens division. The driving force for the profit growth was the
500,000 sq ft Scunthorpe factory. After breaking into profit for the first
time last year, the performance was improving rapidly through greater
utilisation of capacity.
The bathroom division pushed up sales by 13 per cent and increased market
share. But margins were eroded in a contracting market.
Special products, a smaller part of the group, showed a 40 per cent sales
increase. Exports were up by 48 per cent and now accounted for 9 per cent of
group turnover compared with 7 per cent a year ago.
Spring Ram is approaching the mid point of a Pounds 102m capital spending
programme, with outlay at a peak of Pounds 40m this year compared with
Pounds 15m last year and Pounds 30m next year.
The recession was enabling the group to build and equip more cheaply and
about Pounds 10m might be saved, although this was partly being taken up by
other projects.
Government grants of Pounds 8m were being taken through the profit and loss
account over four to five years.
This year the credit was Pounds 2m (Pounds 400,000) to offset some of the
start-up costs at the Regency doors factory, near Barnsley, and a new tile
factory near Bradford.
Mr Greenwood said the amount of cash held by the group was expected to fall
from Pounds 45m at the end of last year to Pounds 25m this December, with
the half-way figure about Pounds 7m. Interest received in the first half
amounted to Pounds 1.1m (Pounds 1m).
COMMENT
y, Spring Ram showed 150 analysts, fund managers and journalists around its
two new factories to inspire confidence in its growth prospects. The
practice of building low-cost lines on green field sites has borne fruit so
far - witness Scunthorpe. It will aim to repeat the trick with doors and
tiles, pushing against imports and weak points in the UK competition. The
group looks on course to increase full-year pre-tax profits by 14 per cent
to Pounds 43m. The prospective multiple of more than 17 gives it a deserved
premium to the market, but no longer offers the buying opportunity that
followed the recent faltering in the share price. As the company gets
bigger, the scrutiny of its accounts gets tougher - on depreciation, grants,
the high level of stock and the low stock turn. Price volatility may persist
as Spring Ram may now be prone to alternate doubt and hype.
