FT  12 JUN 92 / Southern discomfort: The industrialised and developing
worlds have failed again to find a basis for co-operation
The Earth Summit, now drawing to its close, has a definite whiff of the
1970s about it. That, no doubt, is why the US is so visibly uncomfortable
there.
The 1970s was not a good decade for America. East-west issues became fuzzy
and north-south issues became sharp, with the US repeatedly cast as the
villain in the UN, while its European allies tended to criticise American
policy and suck up to Arab oil producers.
In the 1980s, America did much better, at least in its own eyes. First, the
east-west conflict resumed centre stage, with the US inevitably leading the
western side. Then the west emerged as clear victor. The glory of this
achievement carried over into the early 1990s. The Gulf war established the
US as incontestably the world's leading military power, and the driving
force of a revived United Nations. Some American commentators proclaimed the
arrival of a 'unipolar moment', in which international order would be
assured by the projection of American power.
That triumphalism has proved shortlived. Few Americans today seem to feel
that their country is uniquely successful or powerful. They are much more
preoccupied with economic, social and financial problems at home, and above
all with a perceived failure of their political leaders and the system that
produces them. How else can one explain the extraordinary popularity of Mr
Ross Perot, a man who deliberately eschews political platforms and bases his
appeal precisely on being unconnected with the established system?
But, as in the 1970s, their anxiety about their own failures and apparent
decline coincides with a reaction against their influence in the rest of the
world, and especially among the governments of the south who feel their
fragile sovereignty threatened by the combination of American power with the
appeal of America's individualist ideology. Even those with reasonable
democratic credentials, such as India, Malaysia and most Latin American
countries, feel distinctly nervous at the suggestion, widely canvassed in
the US and Europe since the end of the Gulf war, that humanitarian or human
rights considerations can override national sovereignty.
Few of today's southern regimes feel any ideological affinity with
communism. But many do regret the demise of the Soviet bloc which at least,
from their point of view, provided an element of balance in the
international system: a check on the otherwise unchallenged power of the US.
That, of course, is the biggest difference between the 1970s and the 1990s.
In the 1970s southern resentment against the US was egged on and supported
by the Soviet bloc. Today the south feels that it is on its own.
Not that 'the south' is a homogeneous political bloc, such as 'the east'
used to be. It has no common ideology beyond, at most, a general sense of
grievance about its inequality with the north. Nor are southern states
linked by any effective system of alliances. Many of them regard each other,
rather than the north, as their most dangerous adversaries. Even in its
heyday the Non-aligned Movement was never very cohesive, and today it is
rendered meaningless by the fact that there is no longer any alignment to
repudiate.
The Group of 77, which in the 1970s formulated the demands collectively
known as the 'new international economic order', was rather more successful;
and its reappearance is what gives the Earth Summit such a marked 1970s
flavour. Yet it no longer has the same impact, because the etatiste approach
with which it is associated has largely gone out of fashion, even within the
south. Almost all southern governments are now trying to apply 'northern'
economic policies on the domestic level, and many of them openly aspire to
join the north rather than beat it (although one should not forget that in
the 1970s Iran, for one, had precisely that ambition).
Above all, most southern states now accept that the global balance of power
offers them little or no hope of extracting significant concessions from the
north through confrontation. In the 1970s the oil crisis gave Third World
governments an increase in borrowing and bargaining power. It was widely
imagined that the cartel tactics of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting
Countries could be imitated by producers of other raw materials. But today
oil is as cheap in real terms as it has ever been, and other raw materials
have followed it more closely on the way down than on the way up.
Can the north's new-found interest in the global environment, and especially
in the preservation of natural resources such as the tropical rain forests
located in the south, provide an alternative basis for a bargain? That, in
essence, was the idea behind the Earth Summit, as its full title, UN
Conference on Environment and Development, suggests. Northern governments
accepted that the south could not be expected to take ecological demands
seriously unless its own agenda of economic development was addressed.
Tropical countries thought at last they had got something the north wanted,
and would be willing to pay for. As the Malaysian primary industries
minister, Lim Keng Yaik, says: 'I'm poor and need my forests to get on in
life, so if you want them you must pay - and give me technology and
investment.'
Yet it is clear now that no real bargain has been struck in Rio. Tropical
countries are not prepared to accept a legally binding forest convention,
seeing it as too great a sacrifice of sovereignty; and northern countries
are not prepared to pay anything much. Partly this is because of divisions
within each side. European countries, unlike the US, have signed the treaty
on biodiversity and have made it clear that they favour tougher limits on CO
emissions than the US is willing to accept. On the southern side oil
producers are sharply divided from other developing countries on the
proposed carbon tax and reduction of CO emissions.
Perhaps, if in the next few years the evidence for rapid global warming gets
more conclusive, the north will become more willing to pay for environmental
protection and a bargain will after all become possible. Yet it seems more
likely that the notion of a north-south bargain is in itself (to borrow a
phrase from US President George Bush) 'fundamentally flawed'. A bargain
implies a relationship of equality: each side has something to offer, and
something to expect. But the essence of the north-south relationship is
inequality. What differentiates the south from the north, in so far as the
categories mean anything, is precisely its lack of bargaining power.
Apart from oil and forests, what other assets might give the south the
leverage it needs to drive a bargain? Or, to put it another way, what else
about the south worries the north? The list is not difficult to compile:
weapons proliferation, terrorism, drugs, humanitarianism and sheer numbers.
The north worries that a southern state may acquire and use a nuclear
weapon, or fire a long-range missile at a northern country. It fears its
airliners may be blown up, or its citizens taken hostage. The north worries
about the cultivation and export of narcotic substances and dislikes the
thought of large numbers of human beings dying of hunger or being tortured,
massacred and driven from their homes. And the north also worries at the
thought that by 2025 industrialised countries will contain only 15 per cent
of a world population of 8bn people (whereas in 1950 they were 20 per cent
of 2.5bn).
'This growth,' according to former German chancellor Mr Helmut Schmidt,
'will inevitably lead to enormous mass migrations and therefore it will lead
to armed conflicts and it will lead to wars.' Exactly how this would happen
is not clear, but the spectre of ever more hungry faces pressed against the
window of the industrial world and looking in clearly disturbs the repose of
the privileged few who are looking out.
The trouble with all these issues, from the south's point of view, is that
they are problems for the south itself before they hit the north. Weapons
acquired by southern states are most likely to be used against other
southern states. Terrorism and narco-violence are already endemic in many
southern countries. Obviously famine, torture and massacre in the south are
worse for those directly affected than for those only troubled in their
distant consciences. And it is in the south that the burden of
overpopulation and mass migration, combined with and perpetuated by poverty,
is chiefly felt. If southern countries seek to frighten the north by
aggravating or refusing to solve these problems they are effectively
threatening to commit suicide.
Moreover, as they see it, most of these problems are the north's fault. The
north long ago destroyed its own deciduous forests. The north consumes far
more than its share of non-renewable resources, and is the main source of
industrial pollution. If southern farmers grow narcotic crops, and southern
cartels grow rich and powerful by exporting them, it is because the north
provides a ready market for those products while erecting barriers against
so many others. The north is also the main supplier of weapons and weapons
technology, whether conventional or unconventional. Northern colonialism can
even be blamed for some of the conflicts in the south which fuel both the
arms race and terrorism.
And the more southern countries seek to escalate these issues in the hope of
driving a bargain, the greater the risk that northern countries, and
especially the US, will resort to military action in an attempt to impose
solutions. Panama and the Gulf war could be prototypes for a series of
police actions to deal with Third World proliferators, drug barons and other
trouble-makers. Although no one really gains from such conflicts, it is
clear that the southern states on the receiving end are the ones that suffer
most.
If more constructive action is eventually taken to deal with these
north-south issues, it is unlikely to result from any crude bargain, but
only from each side deciding it is in its own interest to do something about
them, rather than sit back and blame the other for not doing enough. Of the
two, the north should be better placed to reach a set of conscious policy
choices, being by definition the richer, stronger and more sophisticated,
and also the more culturally homogeneous. Yet, looking at the present mood
of the US, one would hardly think so.
