FT  12 DEC 92 / Food: Take some festive tips from the chefs - Six of the
best tell Nicholas Lander the culinary secrets they have discovered in 1992
VARIOUS epithets have been heaped on professional chefs over the past few
years but one of their most endearing qualities usually is ignored: as
inspiring teachers to other chefs, interested amateurs and inquisitive
customers.
Chefs learn from each other either at the table (they are, invariably, the
first customers in any newly-opened restaurant), over a late-night beer or,
increasingly, from travel abroad. Here, in time for the festive season, five
of Britain's top restaurant chefs and one television chef pass on some of
the culinary secrets they have learnt during 1992.
FRANCO TARUSCHIO, chef/proprietor of the Walnut Tree Inn, Llandewi Skirrid,
NP7 8AW, Wales. Tel: 0873-852-797.
Lounging half-awake on a beach on the Marche Adriatic this summer, I
overheard a group of women nearby. They had obviously come from different
parts of Italy and were discussing meals they had enjoyed during their
holiday.
I picked up first of all lasagne di Melanzane, using aubergines instead of
pasta. Slices of aubergine are cooked on a griddle and layered with meat
ragu, bechamel sauce and parmesan before being baked.
Then they moved on to pasticcio of polenta, layers of polenta layered with a
sauce made from onions and milk. Fry finely-chopped onion gently in butter
until golden. Season with salt, freshly-ground black pepper and a pinch of
nutmeg. Add the milk and cook over a low heat for 30 minutes.
Place a thin layer of polenta in a gratin dish, then the onion sauce, then a
layer of ricotta. Carry on layering, finishing with the onion sauce and a
generous sprinkling of parmesan. Bake until the top is golden.
This dish - which I now offer vegetarians - was described by a lady fom the
Valtellina area of Italy and was a revelation to me. We Italians tend to be
very regional with our recipes.
The third recipe was for aubergines in carrozza. Bake a 'sandwich' of two
slices of aubergine, cooked on the griddle, filled with a slice of
mozzarella and either a sliver or two of sun-dried tomatoes and a sprinkling
of oregano or an anchovy and oregano.
Dip the 'sandwiches' in egg and breadcrumbs and deep fry. This is a modern
version of mozzarella in carrozza, replacing the bread with aubergines.
Without the anchovies it is another dish for vegetarians - simple but
delicious.
There might have been more recipes to be overheard. Unfortunately, I fell
asleep.
SALLY CLARKE, chef/proprietor of Clarke's, 124 Kensington Church Street,
London W8 4BH. Tel: 071-221-9225.
I began grilling food professionally 15 years ago in California. Now, this
style of cooking in my restaurant attracts kitchen staff from some of the
best restaurants in England. Yet, whatever their qualifications, their first
day always begins with a discourse on grilling:
1. Get rid of all the debris on the grill with a stiff wire brush, making
sure the bars are nice and smooth. Do not rub the bars with oil.
2. Light the grill well before required.
3. Run your hand 6-9 inches above the grill to discover the hot and warm
spots,
4. Make sure the foods are of an even individual thickness. Meat generally
is easier to grill if trimmed of bone and excess fat.
5. Damp or wet foods - big white fish such as cod or halibut - will stick.
Use kitchen paper to remove excess water.
6. Foods lacking in natural oils - venison, fillet steak and some vegetables
 -must be marinated in a little oil a few seconds before grilling.
Marinating oily fish such as red mullet or sardines will be disastrous.
7. Turn the food on the grill as little as possible. Unnecessary turning
makes the food look messy.
Then, there is the final factor: how to hold the tongs correctly. Gently,
not too firmly, and with a lot of tender, loving care.
SHAUN HILL, chef, Gidleigh Park, Chagford Devon TQ13 8HH. Tel: 0647-432-367;
fax 0647-432-574.
The assimilation of ideas and techniques from other cooks and restaurants is
permanent and ongoing, something almost sub-conscious. That is how we keep
our minds fresh. After all, most cooks work with basically the same raw
materials. Certain combinations of flavour and texture appeal, others do
not.
A personal example is this. I have for years worked on a pasta dish
flavoured with chicken livers, lemon, garlic and cheese. The combination can
work perfectly, producing something which is balanced and neither too
cloying nor too sharp. But getting the right balance can be difficult. Too
much lemon, for instance, and the livers taste sour.
At a meal at L'Amphycles in Paris (tel: 40.68.01.01), I was served a
scallops' starter topped with deep-fried lemon zest. Deep-fried zest sounds
an absurd garnish, a needless frippery that gives haute cuisine a bad name.
In fact, it was sensational.
The technique was drafted instantly into my own pasta dish. It was improved
dramatically when, eventually, I worked out that the stuff needs to macerate
in lemon juice for a few hours before frying.
(Actually, when I say 'my' pasta dish, I should mention that the original
idea came from an Elizabeth David recipe which also called for Parma ham.
She evidently collected it from an Italian girl called Giovanna in a remote
Tuscan village. Who knows where Giovanna got it from?)
KEN HOM, writer and television cookery presenter.
I have spent most of the past year directing my version of East-West cuisine
in some of the best hotel restaurants around the world. What I have learnt
ranges from how to deal with the sublime lemon grass to the more mundane
potato.
First, from fellow chefs in Thailand, how best to extract the flavours of
lemon grass, a herb that imparts to Thai and Vietnamese dishes a compelling,
balm-like flavour. The trick is to crush the stalks and allow them to remain
in the simmering broth or sauce for at least one hour. The stalks may not be
edible but they are storehouses of flavour and fragrance.
From Serge Danserau, executive chef of the Regent in Sydney, I learnt a new
technique for preparing lamb loin fillets, a favourite main course that
works as well at home as in an hotel. His trick is to cook them in the oven
at a very low temperature for three hours. Before serving, the loin is
re-heated quickly, sliced, and served piping hot.
With the lamb, a new potato recipe from Anthony Marshall at the Langham
Hilton, London. Steam or bake jacket potatoes. Slice them and then, with a
two-inch round cutter, press out pieces which you saute to golden brown in
goose fat, oil or clarified butter. Season as you saute and, finally, drain
them on kitchen paper to remove any excess fat.
DAVID WILSON, chef/proprietor, Peat Inn, Cupar, Fife, Scotland KY15. Tel:
033-484-206; fax 033-484-530.
What I have been trying to achieve in my cooking is lightness and natural
flavours. The primary advantage is that the food tastes as it should, but it
also ensures that my customers enjoy healthier eating. Saucing has become
much lighter, and this can actually simplify things for the home cook
provided they know what they are doing.
In fish, shellfish or vegetable cooking, try using a sauce made with good
virgin olive oil, cut perhaps with a flavoured vinegar and/or fresh herbs.
This should be served warm. Never boil the sauce.
Meat or game dishes, particularly slow-cooked stews or casseroles, should
have a sauce made with nothing but stock (from the bones). Thickening can be
done by liquidising a tablespoon or so of the vegetables cooked with the
dish. There is no need to use flour or butter.
Desserts can also benefit from this. A sauce made with fruit juices -
grapefruit, orange, passion fruit or a combination, perhaps with some
finely-diced fruits through it - not only tastes wonderful but is so much
lighter and healthier than creams or custards.
PIERRE KOFFMANN, chef/proprietor, La Tante Claire, 68-9 Royal Hospital Road,
London SW3 4HP. Tel: 071-352-6045.
By nature I am conservative and, therefore, against new methods of cooking
or preparing food because I feel it goes against my craftmanship. In 1963,
when I was 15, I enrolled at Le college d'enseignement technique Reffye, a
catering college in Tarbes in the south-west of France, close to where I was
born. For the past 30 years, I have been refining what I learnt there.
Therefore, I prefer tradition to adventure.
The only novel way I cook fish is salmon fillets in goose fat. Heat the fat
(enough to cover the fish) in a deep saucepan to 50`C (no hotter or the
salmon will dry out). Cook the fillets in the fat for 7-10 minutes
(depending on their thickness). The salmon is ready when you can pierce it
with a needle without any resistance.
But when I say that this method is novel, I must add that I got it from my
grandmother, who made the goose fat herself on her farm in Gascony, and used
salmon caught in the river nearby.
