FT  05 OCT 92 / A testing of Spanish mettle: The EMS crisis has shaken
confidence in Felipe Gonzalez's economic policies
Mr Felipe Gonzalez, Spain's ever youthful prime minister, has the intense,
concentrated air these days of a man who has just stepped back from a
precipice after peering over the edge and contemplating the destruction of
everything he holds dear.
As he prepares to mark the 10th anniversary of his Socialist government
later this month, the prime minister is fighting a desperate battle to
re-establish economic confidence in the face of the crisis in the European
Community. At home, he has to contend with a currency still under pressure
and with financial markets in a state of shock following the 5 per cent
devaluation of the peseta within the European Monetary System three weeks
ago and the Spanish central bank's reintroduction of capital controls. And
in Europe, he is struggling to preserve Spain's position at the heart of the
Community, the foundation stone of the country's efforts to modernise its
economy and consolidate democracy since it joined the EC in 1986.
Mr Gonzalez knows in his heart that the two battles are inextricably linked.
For unless he and his trusted finance minister, Mr Carlos Solchaga, can
restore the battered credibility of their domestic economic policies, the
peseta will remain vulnerable. And so long as the peseta is under pressure,
doubts will grow about Spanish policy.
Will Spain be able to meet the exacting standards required for full
participation in the move towards European economic and monetary union? Will
it be consigned to the slow lane of a two-speed Europe? Or will it, along
with Italy and Britain, simply be blown out of the European mainstream by
the markets, with all the debilitating uncertainties which that implies?
Spain, of course, is not Italy. Its economy is much smaller, and its budget
deficit and debts are nowhere near as large. Spain also has the advantage
that Italy does not of a stable, single-party government under a charismatic
leader who, while his party continues to slide in the polls, still commands
strong personal support.
There is just one more problem. A general election is due by October 1993,
and the campaign has already begun. Mr Gonzalez must fight for re-election
at a time of slower economic growth than at any time since the mid-1980s,
with the highest unemployment rate (17-plus per cent) of any EMS member, and
with painful constraints on the public purse.
Doubts persist in some quarters as to whether he has the stomach for it.
When they spoke at length to the Financial Times at the end of last week, Mr
Gonzalez and Mr Solchaga were thus at pains to do several things: reassure
the markets that they intend to resume the path of economic and financial
liberalisation as soon as conditions allow; reaffirm their determination to
keep a tight grip on government spending and inflation in order to bring
Spain's economy up to the mark for European monetary union (Emu); and warn
their EC partners of the dire consequences for Europe and for Spain of any
move to create a multi-speed Community.
'It is a very serious thing to do to begin talking about different speeds of
European integration simply because we are feeling crushed now by the market
turmoil,' says Mr Gonzalez with feeling. 'One has to think about it with
tranquility. I would recommend not voicing opinions that might have to be
changed within three or six months. The sense of insecurity being introduced
into the European Community and the international community day after day
with questions about whether we can take the Maastricht treaty forward is
becoming intolerably expensive politically. What we are doing is
irresponsible.'
The prime minister's frustration is understandable. In the 10 days between
now and the EC emergency summit in Birmingham, Madrid has a fight on its
hands simply to stay in the EMS - the one relatively sure anchor of Spanish
economic policy, notwithstanding the effective 11 per cent devaluation the
peseta has suffered since July. On the one hand, Mr Gonzalez and Mr Solchaga
are anxious that the Bank of Spain move within the next few days to ease its
capital controls, which they fear are severely damaging investor confidence.
If it is to do so without triggering a run on the peseta, it may have to
raise official interest rates - currently 13 per cent.
On the other hand, the government knows it cannot rely solely on the
interest rate weapon. Mr Solchaga is looking urgently for other ways in
which the Community might act to restore confidence in the EMS before the
Birmingham meeting. He wants his EC colleagues to consider a further
realignment of currencies and the pooling of EC central banks' foreign
exchange reserves. But with relations between EC finance ministers and
central banks poisoned by recent events, he is not all that confident of
success.
'In the last few weeks, normal relations among the Community's monetary
authorities, among the ministers, have been lost,' he says despondently. 'It
has become more and more difficult to exchange views frankly.'
Even if EC countries do begin to improve their co-ordination, it may not
fully defuse the attack on the peseta. Rightly or wrongly, the markets are
now also questioning the government's ability to control its own budget,
prompting the Moody's debt rating agency last week, with cruel timing, to
put Madrid's foreign bonds on credit watch.
Neither the prime minister nor Mr Solchaga denies the government has a
serious credibility problem. In the last two years, as Spain's long period
of economic expansion has tailed off, it has badly overshot its spending
targets, disrupting the effort to combat inflation - currently running at
more than 6 per cent a year - and reduce interest rates. To make matters
worse, there was a perception earlier this year that with trade union unrest
increasing over the government's austerity plans, Mr Gonzalez was under
pressure to cut and run, either by calling early elections or by staging an
inflationary pre-election boomlet.
Hence the importance of the 1993 budget, which Mr Solchaga presented last
Tuesday. Mr Gonzalez says it is designed to squash such talk and demonstrate
his absolute resolve to reduce the public sector deficit.
'I remain to be convinced that there is any electoral advantage to be gained
in hiding the truth and not doing what is necessary,' he says. 'If this was
not the case, I would not have presented this budget; I would have called an
election. There is always a credibility problem when a government decides to
control costs. I am not asking for blind faith. What has to be done is to
demonstrate that one is making progress in controlling the deficits, and we
are going to do that rigorously and soon and efficiently.'
To this end, assuming real growth in gross domestic product of just 0.7 per
cent next year after 1.6 per cent this year, the budget aims for a public
sector budget deficit equivalent to around 3.6 per cent of GDP, compared
with an expected outturn of about 4.5 per cent in 1992. Mr Gonzalez insists
that steep cuts this year in unemployment benefit and the health service -
the two main sources of overspending in 1991 and 1992 - mean this target is
achievable. The trouble for Spain, as Mr Gonzalez admits, is that confidence
can not be established overnight.
'It will be harder for the Germans to correct their deficits than for
Spain,' he argues. 'But Germany has a reserve of decades of credibility
while Spain has to fight for its credibility every month and every year.'
Thus far, the best weapon in that fight has been Spain's determination to
keep up with its stronger EC partners through the process of economic and
monetary union. What makes this moment so particularly worrying for Mr
Gonzalez, long a passionate advocate of European integration, is the fact
that this process itself appears to be fragmenting, and that Spain is being
lumped with the laggards rather than the leaders.
There is an unspoken conviction at all levels of government in Madrid that a
two-speed Europe - with a hard core of currencies grouped around the D-Mark
proceeding more rapidly towards Emu - would be a catastrophe not just for
Spain but for the Community. Ministers fear that currencies left out of the
inner circle would have to be protected by a wall of exchange controls and
trade barriers, thus throwing the whole European integration process into
reverse.
Mr Gonzalez's one powerful hope is that this crisis will act as a catalyst
for change. Already the country's combative trade unions, which had been
threatening a general strike this month to protest against unemployment
benefit cuts, are drawing back from confrontation. While the prime minister
insists he is not trying to engineer a formal incomes policy, he would be
delighted if the unions and employers were to find common ground on pay and
productivity for next year.
'In moments of crisis in Spain, the unions have always behaved more
responsibly and not just in the interests of their own members,' he says.
Industrial peace may not be easy to secure in view of the government's
decision to freeze public sector pay next year, but it will be critical to
the effort to prove Spain is capable of putting its house in order. It would
also enable Mr Solchaga to forge ahead with the much-needed structural
reforms he promised in April. The finance minister insists he will bring
bills to parliament in the next few months initiating deregulation of the
labour market, telecommunications, transport, energy and the professions.
None of these reforms, however, will be possible without Mr Gonzalez's
commanding and committed presence at the head of both the government and the
Socialist party. There is no alternative leader at present, within or
outside the Socialist party, but without him all bets on Spain's economy
would be off. Will he stay to fight for re-election next year? His answer is
less equivocal than on some recent occasions.
'People who know me say I respond better to difficult situations than to
easy ones. How do we translate this into politics now? Look, I do not
usually give up when things get tough.'
Mr Gonzalez is wiser, and Spain is much richer, since they last stood
together on a precipice during the industrial crisis which engulfed the
country in 1983. At least on this occasion, with the European Community as a
whole in ferment, he has the consolation of knowing that this not Spain's
crisis alone.
