FT  12 SEP 92 / Travel: By the light of Mrs Full Moon - David Pilling is
conducted through southern India by a most unusual guide
A 17-year-old girl called Indumathi from Madras was about to change her name
as well as her address. As is the way for most Indian women, she was - in
accordance with the wishes of her parents - to marry a man she had barely
met and to live in a city, Bangalore, she did not know.
The marriage, as it turned out, proved a happy one. True love, Indumathi
explained, grows from mutual understanding and is not something experienced
by the likes of starry-eyed teenagers.
There had, she acknowledged, been a hitch. For all the diligent preparations
undertaken by her parents, for all the dowry calculations, all the
interviews with families of prospective grooms, for all the consultations
with astrologers, gossiping with neighbours and discussions with marriage
brokers, one detail had been overlooked.
Indumathi, which means 'Full Moon,' was to be married to a Mr Chander
Shekar, or 'Mr Crescent Moon.' She was to become irrevocably wedded to the
name Mrs Full Moon Crescent Moon.
Nearly 20 years later, Indumathi was still not entirely reconciled with her
bilunar name, which even now causes her to wince and chuckle deeply. The
moon, however, has smiled on her. Since her marriage she had become a
successful tourist guide based in Bangalore and had taken many well-known
people around the country, including the late film producer Sir David Lean,
during the making of A Passage To India.
Mrs Full Moon Crescent Moon was to guide our Bales group through southern
India, a region often overlooked by the hurried traveller. Our tour got
underway in Madras, India's fourth largest city and the place of Indumathi's
birth.
Madras, where the British East India Company got its first clawhold on the
subcontinent, is reputedly more sedate than the cities of the north, but
there was little evidence of this in the mayhem of its streets.
Ten centuries of transport co-exist on the Madras roads, a burden that often
proves too much judging by the twisted hulks of lorries littering the
wayside. Each stretch of pock-marked tarmac carries swaying bullock carts as
well as Morris Oxfords, creaking rickshaws as well as thundering buses,
zipping motor scooters as well as human ants meandering under the weight of
overlarge bundles.
Navigation is not a visual affair. Most vehicles have dispensed with
mirrors, which are seen as unnecessary appendages, rather as humans have
dispensed with their tails. Instead, motorists manoeuvre by reference to
sound, slowing and swerving as dictated by the cacophony of horns, bells and
hooters. A hint of regulation is provided courtesy of the cream coloured
cows - the so called 'break inspectors' - which wander nonchalantly across
even the busiest intersection.
At night, the only visual aids are the trees flanking the roadside, painted
with white rings to reflect headlight beams. Mrs Full Moon Crescent Moon was
amused by my alarm at the traffic and crowds. She thought it funny to read
in the British press of a 'large crowd' - say 30,000 - attending a sporting
event.
She could produce this many people by ploughing her car into the back of a
rickshaw. That is how many onlookers would instantly gather around. I asked
her not to demonstrate.
Next stop on the Full Moon tour was Bangalore, Indumathi's new home and, by
all accounts, India's pleasantest conurbation. The airport welcomed arrivals
to the 'garden city,' a booming centre for high technology, cosmopolitan
culture and Indian yuppies. Bangalore has boulevards, working traffic
lights, passably uncrowded streets and even a botanical garden. It also has
pubs.
That night in Pub World, a plasticy Wild West theme bar, Bangalore's
swinging set were seated on mock logs, pressing their often substantial
bellies against the bar-top. They drank over-priced bottles of beer and
smoked long cigarettes. There were mixed couples, rare in India, and western
music, rarer still.
The PA system struck up with Bachelor Boy by Cliff Richard. A middle-aged
gentleman with a drooping moustache and a turmeric-stained kipper tie
shouted out the lyrics to his male companion in animated fashion. In a Peter
Sellers-type rasp he enunciated the words 'Happ-ee to be a bach-elor boy
un-til my dy-ing day,' winking and breaking into tremendous laughter at the
wit of the lyrics.
Such salacious behaviour was not in evidence in Kerela, the first state in
the world freely to elect a communist government and our last stop on the
Full Moon itinerary. Kerela has the highest literacy rate in India, the most
equitable distribution of land, the highest suicide rate and the greatest
incidence of death from marauding elephants.
The south-western state, communism notwithstanding, adheres to the system of
arranged marriages predominant in the rest of the country. Engels would not
have approved, but Mr N B Manju, an effusive and good-natured Kerelan, saw
no drawbacks to a system that had delivered him a skinny wife and a fat
dowry.
He explained how things worked in Cochin, Kerela's chief port. Parents with
a daughter of marriagable age, he said, employ the services of a marriage
broker whom they furnish with information on the girl's status, caste, job,
horoscope, appearance and size of dowry on offer.
The broker matches these details with similar data relating to eligible
young men. A meeting between boy and girl is arranged. Parents, uncles,
aunts, nephews, friends, grandparents and assorted human flotsam gather for
the five-minute interview.
Manju noted that such visits are so perfunctory that a well-organised family
can fit in three or four sessions in an afternoon. A decision is then made -
by the young man and his parents - as to which courtship to pursue. The
girl, too, Manju assured me, could call a halt to events.
More romantic visits ensue, with perhaps only 10 relatives in attendance.
Eventually the families agree on marriage arrangements, but not before
employing the services of an astrologer to evaluate the match. A thumbs-down
from him can put the kibosh on everything. If you were really keen on the
girl, though, most astrologers had their price.
It is hard to imagine, during the to-ing and fro-ing of such a saga, how the
parents of Indumathi could have neglected to inquire about the surname of
the prospective groom.
David Pilling travelled c/o Bales Tours (Bales House, Junction Road,
Dorking, Surrey, RH4 3HB; reservation, tel: 0306-885991). Accommodation was
with Taj Hotels. Bales organises 10-day escorted tours of southern India
starting at Pounds 1,195. The 18-day escorted tour (from Pounds 1,795)
includes stops in Madras, Bangalore and Cochin.
