FT  26 FEB 92 / Report warns of pressures on charitable trusts
GROWING CONCERN about pressures facing Britain's charitable sector is shown
in research published by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation yesterday.
The report said grant-making charitable trusts - which distribute about
Pounds 650m a year - faced increased demands for funding which might
previously have come from the state.
This, combined with changes in the definition of the proper boundaries of
statutory responsibilities, had led trusts to 'question the relevance and
adequacy of defining their role in terms of doing what the state does not'.
It said the lack of certainty that statutory authorities would provide
continuing funds for projects had led grant-making trusts to question the
wisdom of their traditional roles of pump-priming and encouraging
innovation.
The report listed a range of government policies and related developments
which it said were affecting grant-making trusts. These included forthcoming
changes in the care of the elderly and handicapped in the community;
withdrawal of social security benefits from most of those aged 16 and 17;
the sale of council houses; the introduction of local management of schools;
contracting in the National Health Service; the removal of restrictions on
hospital fund-raising and the shortage of new money for medical research.
The report said trusts would have to redefine their role in a new mixed
economy and examine relationships with the statutory, voluntary and private
sectors.
The managerial consequences of the community care reforms which come into
full effect next year have not been fully understood in local and health
authorities, the Audit Commission said in a report today.
It said any one of the package of changes, aimed at caring for people in the
community rather than in institutions, would 'tax the ingenuity of most
managers'. Taken together, the proposed changes presented a daunting
challenge. There would have to be heavy emphasis on agencies working
together and a considerable investment in training at all levels.
Trusts in Transition. Joseph Rowntree Foundation. Pounds 7.50
Community Care: Managing the Cascade of Change, Audit Commission. HMSO.
Pounds 8.50
