FT  22 SEP 92 / Survey of Belize (2): Dependence on agriculture - Many
factors outside the country's control influence the economy
BELIZE faces an array of formidable short-term economic challenges.
Presenting this year's budget to parliament, Mr George Price, the prime
minister and finance minister, said: 'Not only is Belize a much more
developing nation today, but we have started the process of preparing for
the challenges of the 21st Century.'
Many of the factors influencing the economy are outside the country's
control. However, the country appears much more capable than many of its
neighbours of dealing with the uncertainties of economic change.
The foreign debt of Belize, for example, is comparatively light. The per
capita debt of Dollars 750 is less than half that of Jamaica to the east.
And Guatemala, to the west, carries a ratio of debt service to exports of 25
per cent, against Belize's 8 per cent.
Businessmen credit the present government and its predecessors with managing
the economy in an enlightened way.
Some aspects of economic policy have aroused trenchant debate, but there has
been remarkable consistency in spite of changes of administration.
Greater efficiency and economic expansion appear to be the common
objectives. The economy is narrowly based on agriculture and tourism.
Expansion in both sectors last year led to overall growth of 4.2 per cent.
Inflation was 5.6 per cent against three per cent in 1990.
Last year, the economy grew at only half the average rate of the previous
three years. Officials feel that this is preferable to the risk of
overheating by over-rapid growth or of the inflationary tendencies in
neighbouring countries.
The economy's biggest weakness is its lopsidedness, being dangerously
dependent on agriculture which accounts for a fifth of the gross domestic
product and three quarters of the country's export earnings.
Agriculture has three main supports - cane sugar, bananas and citrus - with
seafood emerging as a fourth pillar. This is the focus of the uncertainty of
which Mr Price speaks.
Belize depends on preferential access to food markets, all of which are
subject to the globalisation of international trade. It sells sugar under
quota to the European Community and the US. There is no immediate threat to
its EC sugar market, but the emergence of the North American Free Trade Area
has raised questions about continued access to the US being thwarted by
Mexico.
Belize's citrus concentrate market, mainly in Florida, has been developed
within the protection of a trade programme under which the US allows
countries in the Caribbean Basin to ship a range of products duty free.
Belizeans officials fear Mexican citrus will kill their market - the same
fear they express for the small garment sector.
There is even more uncertainty over Belize's sales of bananas in Europe
following the creation in January of the EC's single market. Belize, and the
other traditional suppliers in the Caribbean Basin, are trying to maintain
preferential access in the face of demands from Latin American exporters
that there should be open trading in the fruit.
Higher wages and other costs make Belizean bananas more expensive, and less
able to compete with cheaper Latin fruit. Mr Ralph Fonseca, the junior
finance minister, says that while Belize is worried about the impact of free
trade on its export markets, it is not against the principle of free trade.
'Belize can respond to the changes, but we need time,' says Mr Fonseca.
'There must be a gradualist approach to all of this or small countries such
as ours will not be able to survive.'
The dangers were illustrated last year when poor weather depressed citrus
and bananas, and the global recession cut the number tourists, contributing
to the slowdown in economic growth.
Efforts are being made to widen the base of the economy. However, this is
impeded by some fundamental infrastructural deficiencies such as lack of
energy. High energy costs, for example, are an obstacle to an expansion of
agro-industry and commerce. A Dollars 180m hydro-power station is under
construction which, it is hoped, will provide more power more reliably, and
eventually at cheaper rates.
This, with expansion of the new offshore financial services sector, plans
for attracting foreign investment in information services and data
processing, and Belize's potential for being an entrepot for Central America
with the coming end of the territorial dispute with Guatemala, promise some
relief from the often fickle traditional sectors of the economy.
There is also a controversial trend towards privatisation of state
enterprises. The government has sold off the public telecommunications
company, and also plans to privatise the electricity utility.
There is even a possibility the main port in Belize City will go on sale,
followed, at some stage, by the country's international airport.
Mr Price talks of a 'dynamic partnership' between government and the private
sector, in which the private sector gains a bigger role and the government
concentrates on managing those things which it has to do.
'Privatisation is part of a gradual move to liberalise the economy in
keeping with what is happening in the rest of the world,' says Mr Fonseca.
However, his enthusiasm is not shared by Mr Manuel Esquivel, the opposition
leader. 'People who see what the government is doing have realised that this
is not a genuine privatisation,' he says. 'The government appears to be
making these decisions without regard to the consequences and to public
opinion. The government has not yet brought itself to say publicly that
privatisation is the result of a correct policy to which it is committed.'
Much of the debate over privatisation centres on Mr Michael Ashcroft,
chairman of the UK/Bermuda ADT Group, and whose Belize Holdings ,registered
as an offshore company, is a large investor in the telecommunications
industry.
Businessmen say they would not be surprised if Belize Holdings also took a
significant share in the power company. 'Privatisation so far is a compact
between the government and one individual, Mr Ashcroft,' claims Mr Esquivel.
This is denied by Mr Fonseca who says: 'It was Mr Esquivel's administration
which invited Mr Ashcroft to invest in Belize.'
Deregulation is also evident in parts of the foreign exchange market where
commercial banks are allowed to settle some current payments. No such
latitude is being allowed over more fundamental matters such as the exchange
rate which has been fixed at BDollars 2 to the US dollar since 1976.
However, there are also danger signals. The deficit on visible earnings has
been widening and last year there was an overall balance of payments deficit
for the first time in seven years.
There is also concern at trends in the fiscal accounts. 'We are concerned
over revenue and expenditure,' says Mr Keith Arnold, governor of the Central
Bank. 'Revenue growth is not improving but there is expansion in
expenditure, especially for wages and salaries and capital expenditure.'
Yet even these indicators cause little overt alarm. The general feeling is
that Belize is doing well.
'Economically, we are not running, but we are crawling,' says Mr Barry
Bowen, a leading businessman. 'We are babies and we are just beginning to
learn how to move.'
