FT  11 JUN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Racal strong on results
LONG-STANDING worries that Racal Electronics would not reach the profits
forecast of Pounds 50m, made at the time of the failed bid by Williams
Holdings, were shot to pieces as the group posted profits of Pounds 55.6m,
compared with a previous year's loss of Pounds 21.8m.
The profits were well in excess of the most optimistic forecasts which
ranged up to Pounds 52m and were accompanied by the expected details of the
demerger of the Chubb security business, likely to be floated in October.
Racal shares powered ahead in exceptionally heavy trading, eventually
closing a net 5 1/4 higher at 69 1/4 p. Turnover reached 57m shares,
continuing the recent spate of big turnover in the stock.
Smith New Court, Racal's broker, upped its expectation for this year to
Pounds 110m and for next year to Pounds 140m.
Regalian blow
Results from Regalian Properties were regarded as a horror story by the
market, with one analyst at a leading investment bank calling the figures
'breathtakingly bad'. He added that the subsequent meeting with management
was 'quite aggressive' and that although the company still has some worth,
it will have to raise as much cash as possible in the next 12 months to
placate its creditors. On Monday Regalian announced it had sold its 10 per
cent stake in Frogmore Estates at a loss of around Pounds 4m, in order to
raise Pounds 10.57m and reduce borrowings.
Shares in Regalian lost 7 to 15p after the company reported an annual loss
of Pounds 26.8m, against a profit of Pounds 11.12m, with the auditors
qualifying the accounts on the basis that further property provisions may be
needed. The company has already made an exceptional provision of Pounds
32.91m on property losses, which was much higher than most expectations.
Frogmore showed signs of recovery, after Regalian's 3.9m share placing on
Monday, rising 13 to 281p.
Asda active
Turnover in food group Asda was a hefty 10m shares, but the price was
unchanged at 33 1/2 p. Activity was boosted by encouraging news from
furniture retailer MFI, which will unveil plans today to re-launch the
company via a stock market flotation.
Asda retained 25 per cent of MFI when the company was acquired from the
combined group though a management buy-out in 1987. It is estimated that the
flotation will raise between Pounds 650m and Pounds 850m, but that Asda will
not be a long-term shareholder in MFI because of its need to reduce
borrowings.
Lasmo wanted
Lasmo outperformed the rest of an otherwise subdued oil sector, responding
to a series of positive news.
These included shareholder approval at Lasmo's EGM of the sale of Ultramar
assets, encouraging news from the group's drilling operations on Block
16/12a in the North Sea and news that Lasmo shares will be listed on the
Montreal and Toronto Stock Exchanges as from June 11.
The shares shares ended the session a net 3 firmer at 197p on turnover of
826,000. They were also helped by a positive note from Hoare Govett, the
company's stockbroker. Hoare, which increased its oil price estimate from
Dollars 18 to Dollars 20 a barrel earlier this week, said the market's
current rating for Lasmo is 'unduly pessimistic and does not take into
account its gearing to higher oil prices'. Hoare goes on to say that the
market ignores the upside potential that could be realised from the
rationalisation and integration of Ultramar's upstream assets.
Standard Chartered, 11 higher at 471p, and Royal Bank of Scotland, 3 1/2
firmer at 197 1/2 p were prominent in an otherwise quiet banking arena, the
former responding to hopes that no further provisons will need to be made
against its Indian operations and the latter to lingering takeover
speculation.
First National Finance shares plunged 11 to 64p, responding to publicity
given to a bearish note issued by BZW.
London &amp; Manchester's shift in accounting policy triggeredanother strong
rise by life stocks. Refuge were 23 higher at 728p; the Stock Exchange
announced late yesterday that a reported trade of 5.5m shares carried out at
705p, printed on the Seaq ticker on Tuesday, was incorrect and should have
read as 5,500 shares.
A flurry of switching out of BP and into British Gas left the former 1 1/2
off at 273p and the latter the same amount firmer at 252p. Turnover in BP
was showing signs of expanding sharply after Moody's, the US debt rating
agency confirmed, it had downgraded its rating of BP debt.
Shares in Dowty Group, moved swiftly forward after the aerospace and
information technology company finally succumbed to the hostile bid from
specialist engineering group TI.
The shares jumped 12 to close at 187p, the level of the paper offer from TI
as turnover rose to a hefty 6.4m after several investors took the view that
buying Dowty was the cheap way into TI.
It was announced after the market close that the aggressor had obtained a
total of 60.23 per cent acceptances, a closer finish to the contest than
many city analysts had predicted. Last week SG Warburg swept into the market
to pick up around 10 per cent of Dowty's shares.
The new group will be the second largest engineering concern in the market,
behind British Aerospace and is likely to become a FT-SE constituent in the
near future. TI edged a penny forward to 353p.
Sears was the worst performing Footsie stock, losing 5 1/2 to 86p, as 8.8m
shares changed hands. Suggestions that UBS Phillips and Drew had trimmed its
dividend and profits forecast hit the price, with stores analysts noting
increased doubts about the maintenance of the dividend since publication of
Sears results on May 7.
Northern Foods fulfilled the markets hopes, turning in slightly better than
expected profits of Pounds 126.2m, against Pounds 105.4m previously. Mr Tim
Potter at Smith New Court described it as a good, if well anticipated,
performance, with the proposal of a one-for-one scrip issue as an additional
sweetener.
The shares rose 14 to 605p on above average turnover of 1.7m shares.
In transports, a squeeze sent BAA forward to add 19 to 695p. Broker Williams
de Broe favours the stock and Mr Andy Darke at the broker said: 'The stock
is still cheap relative to the market. This is the core holding in the
transport sector.' Fears of tougher competition on the north Atlantic route
left British Airways 8 lighter at 269p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (40).
BRITISH FUNDS (1) Treas 2pc IL '94, BREWERS (1) Mansfield, BUSINESS SERVS
(3) Penna, Reed Executive, Warner Howard, CONGLOMERATES (1) Jardine, CONTG &amp;
CONSTRCN (3) Ball (AH), Boot (H), Rubicon, ELECTRICALS (1) Ericsson,
ELECTRONICS (3) Admiral, Gresham Telecomputing, Racal, ENG AERO (1) Dowty,
ENG GEN (3) Hill &amp; Smith, Plasmec, Vosper, FOOD MANUF (2) Booker, Goodman
Fielder Wattie, HEALTH &amp; HSEHOLD (1) Amersham Intl, INSCE LIFE (3)
Britannic, Refuge, Utd Friendly B, INV TRUSTS (2) Grahams Rintoul,
Throgmorton USM, MEDIA (1) Aegis 9 3/4 pc Pf, MISC (4) Airsprung Furniture,
Danka, Faber Prest, Stag Furniture, MOTORS (1) Quicks, OTHER FINCL (1)
Jardine Strategic, PACKG, PAPER &amp; PRINTG (1) Usher-Walker, STORES (1)
Oriflame Intl, TEXTS (1) Celestion, TRANSPORT (3) BAA, Dawsongroup, P &amp; O 5
1/2 pc Pfd, WATER (1) Mid Kent, MINES (1) Melinga.
NEW LOWS (59).
OTHER FIXED INTEREST (1) Ireland Cap 8 1/2 Ln 2010, AMERICANS (3) Gillette,
Merrill Lynch, Morris (Philip), CANADIANS (3) BCE, Hawker Siddeley, Royal
Bank Canada, BANKS (2) Mitsui T &amp; B, Westpac, BLDG MATLS (1) Explaura, CHEMS
(1) Schering, ELECTRICALS (1) Molynx, ENG GEN (2) Haden MacLellan, Kvaerner,
FOOD MANUF (1) Perkins, HEALTH &amp; HSEHOLD (3) Hospital Corp, Huntingdon,
Wellcome, INSCE COMPOSITE (4) Baltica, Hafnia, Skandia, Topdanmark, INV
TRUSTS (8) Abtrust Pfd Inc, Drayton Korea, F &amp; C German Wts, Fleming Intl
High Inc, Kleinwort O'seas, Overseas, Selective Assets, Sphere, MEDIA (2)
Sunset &amp; Vine, Trilion, MISC (3) Bullers, Dudley Jenkins, Lionheart, OIL &amp;
GAS (3) Conroy, Global Natural Res, Intl Petroleum, OTHER FINCL (2) Bancaire
Cie, Mitsubishi, PROP (4) Bolton, Chesterfield, Frogmore Ests, Regalian,
STORES (4) Austin Reed, French Connection, Ratners, Sears, TEXTS (1) Pepe,
TRANSPORT (2) Cons Freightways, Ocean, MINES (8) Central Pacific, ERGO,
Ivernia West, Kells Mins, PosGold, Precious Metals Australia, Southvaal,
Western Areas.
Other market statistics, Page 31.
