FT  28 JUL 92 / Government Bonds: Japanese bonds lose early gains on
profit-taking
JAPANESE government bonds rallied after the Bank of Japan cut the official
discount rate by half a percentage point to 3.25 per cent yesterday morning,
with the futures contract reaching its highest level since October 1989.
However, both the cash and the futures markets slipped later, to close
slightly lower on the day as investors took profits.
Dealers expressed some disappointment that the Bank of Japan had not
announced a larger cut in the official discount rate (ODR).
'The bond market had already discounted a 75 basis point cut in the ODR,'
said one dealer, adding that the market expected to see a further easing in
interest rates, possibly around the time of the autumn supplementary budget
or possibly even sooner.
Mr Gerard Lyons, chief economist at DKB International, warned that in spite
of yesterday's interest rate cut the Japanese economy was likely to remain
weak, leading to pressure for a further easing in interest rates. 'The
combination of the weakness of the economy and the prospect of a further
interest rate cut means yields on Japanese government bonds should fall
further,' he said.
The yield on the benchmark No 129 JGB, which opened at 4.97 per cent, moved
to 4.96 per cent after the interest rate cut. However, the benchmark bond
ended the day yielding 4.985 per cent, corresponding to a lower price on the
day but still higher than Friday's closing price. The September yen bond
futures ended the session at 104.60, up from Friday's close of 104.45, but
shy of the day's high of 104.70.
Short-term money market rates fell back sharply yesterday with the call rate
dropping to 4 1/8 per cent from Friday's level of 4 19/32 per cent. The rate
on three-month certificates of deposit fell from 4.31 per cent to 4.04 per
cent.
US Treasury prices firmed at the long end yesterday, but business was slight
ahead of today's Dollars 15bn auction of two-year notes and tomorrow's sale
of Dollars 20.5bn in five-year notes.
In late trading, the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond was  5/8 higher at
105 19/32 , yielding 7.518 per cent. Shorter-dated maturities, failed to
match those gains, with the two-year issue  1/16 lower at 101 3/8 , for a
yield of 4.229 per cent.
Treasuries firmed initially on news of the Japanese discount rate cut this
weekend, and the 2.9 per cent decline in US home sales for June that was
reported yesterday. All the gains were concentrated on the intermediate to
long end of the market, while the shorter-dated maturities languished amid a
feeling that they have been overbought in recent weeks.
Aside from the economic news, the market's attention was focused on the new
supply, and a good deal of yesterday's business was related to positioning
of portfolios ahead of the week's auctions.
GERMAN government bond prices nudged higher in dull trade with the bund
market paying little heed to favourable inflation figures.
The market shrugged off news that inflation in the state of Bavaria was
unchanged in the month to mid-July, giving a year-on-year rise of 3.8 per
cent against 4.7 per cent in June. Bavaria is the last of the four states to
report favourable inflation figures, leading to expectations of a sharply
lower inflation figure for Germany.
'The market is not responding to the inflation data - it is waiting for news
on money supply now,' said one dealer. The Liffe bund futures contract
opened at 87.27 and edged up to 87.38 by late afternoon.
UK government bonds ended the day mixed with longer-dated issues closing
lower while short-dated gilts were barely changed.
Volumes in the futures market were well below average at around 10,000
contracts. The 11 3/4 per cent gilt due 2003-07 opened at 116 7/8 and
slipped to 116 by late afternoon.
