FT  04 JUL 92 / Slovaks block Havel's re-election
CZECHOSLOVAKIA'S President Vaclav Havel failed yesterday to win re-election
to the federal presidency, as Slovak parliamentarians blocked his candidacy
in the federal assembly.
The popular playwright-turned-president, whose election to the federal
presidency after the 1989 revolution moved enthusiastic crowds to tears, was
quietly eclipsed by a handful of Slovak members of parliament who failed to
give him the required majority of votes in the Slovak side of the federal
assembly.
According to an amendment to the 1968 constitution, a presidential candidate
must receive a majority of votes in both the lower chamber of the federal
assembly and in the upper chamber, where Czech and Slovak parliamentarians
vote separately and have equal weight.
This constitutional set-up, which Mr Havel once described as 'a Swiss cheese
full of holes', gave a virtual power of veto to the members of the Movement
for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), the nationalist group led by Mr Vladimir
Meciar which won 37.2 per cent of the vote in Slovakia in last June's
elections.
Mr Meciar had pledged to block the re-election of Mr Havel because the later
called on voters not to support candidates with 'dictatorial tendencies' - a
thinly veiled reference to the Slovak politician.
Mr Havel will stay in office until October 5 unless another presidential
candidate is elected by then. A second round of voting is planned for July
16 and potential alternative candidates have until then to come forward. In
theory, Mr Havel could run again in subsequent rounds if no other candidate
has yet been elected.
Members of the Civic Democratic party (ODS), the Czech party led by Mr
Vaclav Klaus, the Czech premier, will equally be able to block another
candidate, however. Mr Klaus has repeatedly said that he will not support
another candidate for the federal presidency.
Failure to elect a president will plunge the fragile Czechoslovak federation
deeper into a post-electoral crisis which threatens to pull the Czech and
Slovak republics apart. According to a recent agreement between ODS and
HZDS, the Czech and Slovak parliaments have until September 30 to decide on
the future of the federation.
The political life of Mr Havel, who enjoys the loyal support of most Czechs,
may not be completely over. The new Czech parliament, meeting for the first
time last week, promptly said it would prepare a Czech constitution
providing for a president. Mr Havel, refusing to allow for a quick burial of
the 74-year-old federation, has refused to comment on the possibility that
he may eventually become president of an independent Czech republic.
