FT  15 FEB 92 / Heaven and Hell: Hatred, hunger and a world within - Rabbi
Lionel Blue always knew where purgatory was. Paradise proved more elusive
AS A CHILD, I knew where Hell was. It was a concentration camp in Germany. I
also knew why it was Hell. It was not the hunger but the hatred in it. I had
already realised that suffering and Hell are not the same.
Heaven was more difficult to locate. I learnt a poem of Henry Vaughan:
My soul there is a country,
far beyond the stars.'
It ended:
If thou canst get but thither
there grows the flower of peace,
the rose that cannot wither
thy fortress and thy ease.
A tempting prospect but, unlike Hell, it did not figure on any map.
For practical purposes, my childhood Heaven was a cinema and bliss was
watching the flashing titles of Top Hat or Snow White, assured of that happy
ending I already knew 'real' life could never provide.
These certainties of childhood dissolved into the puzzles of adolescence. I
was now an atheist who no longer believed in sin or Hell, although I still
tried to convince myself of a workers' paradise in Russia. Fortunately, I
failed.
I turned to religion because I became convinced that home was not here and
that I was a stranger in this world. I remember Oxford parties when, while
making conversation, I stepped out of my body and watched myself from
somewhere near the ceiling. It is a common experience. And, sometimes, when
people asked me the way, I replied: 'I'm a stranger here, too' - and knew
suddenly that I had said something significant. But, if I was not altogether
here, where was I?
Now, I liked poring over maps and I chanced upon some metaphysical ones.
There were the road maps of Bunyan's Pilgrim that charted his Progress past
Doubting Castle and the House Beautiful to the Celestial City. I also bought
a pious print which showed what awaited you if you entered 'the narrow gate'
or 'the broad way.' The latter led past a lottery, Sunday trains and a
sedate dance hall to damnation. The former (frequented mainly by women,
children and dogs) led past hermit huts and wayside shrines to peaceful
lawns, like those that surround crematoria. (The Hells constructed by human
beings are more convincing than their Heavens).
I knew now that Heaven was home, and that is where I wanted to go. I was
pulled towards it by an invisible gravity which altered the logic of my
life. My parents had wanted me to be a solicitor. I had intended to become a
revolutionary, or study revolutions safely in a university, but the
tantalising fragrance of the 'rose that cannot wither' pulled me - indeed,
seduced me - into the ministry and has kept me there for 40 years.
Such goodness exits somewhere; so many see it, know it and love it, although
only hints and glimpses of it are afforded to us in the world around us.
I became curious about other people's Heavens. Could I identify them with
mine? Some were more witty than helpful. The Rev. Sidney Smith's Heaven, for
example, was foie gras eaten to the sound of trumpets (which reminded me of
London's pre-war Corner Houses - a childhood paradise).
Three sources helped me in my investigations. The first was Abelard, whose
Quantia Zualia provides the only convincing hedonist Heaven. It is where you
get everything you have ever wanted and, when you get it, it turns out to be
as lovely as you expected.
The second was Teresa of Avila in her Interior Castle. While reading it, I
realised that Heaven was not in the outside world, nor even in another
dimension. It was within, and I was carrying it about with me.
What I could not accept was the orderly progress she described by which you
got there. My own was jerky and bewildering. Sometimes, I was within hailing
distance of the 'inner room' and the next minute I was flat on my face,
miles outside the moat.
The third source were those parables of the kingdom of Heaven in Rabbinic
literature and the gospels, where its inner location is explicit: 'The
Kingdom of Heaven is within you.' Although I could not digest the miracles
or marvels of the gospels, the parables seemed accurate and familiar.
Because Heaven appears as small, humdrum and over-familiar, like the lost
penny or grain of sand, we do not see it.
I also began to realise that you do not have to wait for Heaven - you can
make it happen now. Whenever you invite it into your life and testify to it
with an act of generosity, you step into it. This, too, is a common
experience, confirmed by letters from radio listeners.
It is this experience of Heaven which renews my personal religion; not
theology or official pieties. Heaven and Hell are connected intimately. They
are the same place, two sides of the same coin. It is what we project on to
them that divides them.
In this article I have been more concerned with Heaven than Hell, for the
latter does not figure seriously in present Jewish theology. It surfaces
only in Jewish jokes. A loving God and Father does not consign his creation
to such a place.
There is a tradition that, in Talmudic times, the rabbis debated the
existence of Hell. They decided (by majority) that it did not exist but, if
it did, this world was it.
Well, if this world is Hell, or an extreme type of purgatory, it requires no
further description from me. We already know it well enough  - we are in it.
