FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (7): Facing up to
deregulation - Oil industry
THE Japanese oil industry, which has survived under the umbrella of
stringent government control during the past 30 years, is attempting to face
up to the realities of a deregulated environment.
Several companies have made tentative steps towards creating more
competitive financial bases but the sector as a whole is waiting cautiously,
braced for a period of restructuring in the wake of reduced direct
government interference.
'This industry has been regulated for so long the companies know what is
expected of them,' says Mr Martin Roth, analyst at Kleinwort Benson's Tokyo
office. 'They are like birds that have been freed but just do not want to
leave home.'
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) strategy to
establish a less fragmented, more profitable industry is the subject of
intense speculation.
Miti's tight grip on the industry was justified on the grounds of national
security. Since the 1960s, the government was free to dictate which
companies could sell and refine, how much oil could be refined and how much
of each product could be produced. It set pricing levels and determined how
many service stations could be built and where.
From January 1986, in a series of measures - the last of which was taken in
April - the government repealed most of these restrictions although the
guiding hand of Miti is still present. Miti says its rules are now 'more
transparent.' Only oil refiners can import oil products and an oil refinery
must run at more than 80 per cent capacity for three years before agreement
will be granted to raise capacity.
Because Japan is almost totally dependent on crude oil imports - which
service 58 per cent of its energy requirements - the government felt it was
vital to control the industry and thus ensure stable supplies of an
essential ingredient to industrial and economic stability. To ensure
supplies, the government allowed oil companies to proliferate. The oil
crises of the 1970s and the Gulf war reinforced concern about the country's
vulnerability to an interruption to supplies.
Today, in a country of 120m people, some 26 companies refine oil; seven
companies refine and wholesale, four companies wholesale only and a further
19 refine only. There are 20,000 petrol retail companies and 10,000 petrol
dealer companies. No companies control supply from the well-head to the
petrol pump as is the case in the west.
By allowing this highly protective environment to continue for so long, the
government encouraged the development of an inefficient oil industry which
survives on thinly-sliced profit margins.
The industry's net profits-to-sales rate last year was 1.83 per cent
compared with an average in the manufacturing sector of 5.4 per cent,
according to a Tokyo oil analyst who says the sector has a
'most-favoured-baby status.' This is a fraction of the figure achieved by
international groups, although their upstream activities distort comparison.
The low profitability was justified and tolerated on the grounds that oil
companies were essential to economic well-being and a steep rise in return
would have created a political backlash. Illustrating the splintered nature
of the business, Nippon Oil, the largest petroleum refiner, has only 16.2
per cent of primary refining capacity. The top three companies control 43
per cent.
The need for large-scale capital expenditure to raise environmental
standards, renew equipment and boost output will put a severe strain on many
companies. This problem has been compounded by the tightening of borrowing
conditions in Japan in the aftermath of the property market's slump.
It is argued that only larger, financially more sound oil companies can be
assured of meeting these capital renewal plans into the next century.
Japan has a petroleum refining capacity of 4.7m barrels a day and production
is running at 75-80 per cent at the moment, which after allowing for
down-time and anticipated demand growth, leaves the way open for expansion
of the industry into the next century.
Miti has regularly expressed its desire to see rationalisation through
mergers. Several Tokyo analysts believe that Miti expected the first
liberalisation moves to force the weakest groups into mergers as their
profit bases weakened without government protection. However, the general
economic growth of the past decade ensured their survival and underpinned
relative strength across the industry.
There has been only one merger in the industry this year. Nippon Mining
bought out the 53 per cent it did not own in Kyodo Oil but this scarely
altered the face of the industry.
The most likely course of rationalisation is through the merger of groups
with either large refining or oil product distribution operations. For this
reason, Cosmo Oil and Mitsubishi Oil are often linked as possible merger
partners.
Mr Akihiko Nomiyama, managing director of Nippon Mining, believes that
mergers will be slow to occur. 'Mergers may be difficult. They will only
occur when a company fails. It would be rare for strong companies to merge.'
Mr Hitoshi Itoh, deputy director of Miti's oil refining division, is aware
of possible mergers. 'The government can do nothing about mergers. But the
government is willing to support and help mergers. We could act as a match
maker,' he says. By deregulating, Miti was also attempting to encourage the
establishment of companies financially capable of going upstream, through
joint ventures, to secure oil supplies.
Discussions are underway about the biggest joint venture with a foreign oil
producer, which could act as a catalyst for other ties-ups. Nippon Mining,
Nippon Oil and Caltex are talking with the Saudi Arabian government about
the creation of a joint venture which would give the country access to the
Japanese market and Japan a more secure grip on supplies. The intention is
for Nippon Oil and Nippon Mining to push two of their existing refineries
into the venture as well as establish a third in southern Honshu. Combined,
they would have a capacity of 450,000 b/d.
Existing ties between Japanese companies and Middle Eastern producers,
through similar links, are expected to strengthen. Although deals such as
these hold the promise of change in the industry it may mean Miti has to
become more actively involved if the industry is going to seize the
opportunities offered by self-regulation.
A senior executive at a leading company said: 'At the moment we are all in a
warm Japanese bath. We are all worried that if one of us moves we may all
get cold.'
