FT  30 SEP 92 / Bank warns on fall in pound: Leigh-Pemberton urges
government not to loosen fiscal policy
MR ROBIN Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, yesterday warned
the government against letting the pound slip too far and loosening fiscal
policy in an attempt to speed recovery.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton spoke as it became clear that the UK government was still
a long way from finalising its domestic and European economic policies,
including any plans it might have for the European exchange rate mechanism.
According to Treasury officials, the UK has yet to draw up detailed
proposals for reforming the ERM. A similar gap exists in the case of
monetary policy, where the government has given itself until Mr Norman
Lamont's Mansion House speech on October 29 to flesh out the details of the
British monetary policy which the chancellor outlined in Washington 10 days
ago.
Mr John Major yesterday insisted that there would be reform of the ERM,
despite the apparent rejection of the idea by European Community finance
ministers in Brussels on Monday.
Speaking in London, the prime minister underlined that the 'faultlines' in
the mechanism would have to be corrected before the UK would consider
re-joining the ERM. It was not simply the UK that had experienced the
problems of the ERM, but Spain, Italy, Ireland and France too.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton's carefully veiled remarks came in a speech on
international monetary co-operation to the British-American Chamber of
Commerce in London. They helped lift the pound to DM2.52 at the London close
as financial markets interpreted his remarks as a warning against further
sharp interest rate cuts in the UK. Sterling had earlier threatened to slip
below DM2.50. In New York it fell back just below DM2.52 but against a weak
dollar it gained more than 2 1/2 cents to Dollars 1.7865.
More explicitly, Mr Leigh-Pemberton hinted that Germany should cut interest
rates to help growth in Europe. However, a council member of the Bundesbank,
Mr Lothar Muller, yesterday said Germany might be able to cut its interest
rates in about six months but there could be no immediate reduction.
Speaking in London, Mr Muller said German interest rates had to be kept high
for the time being because of wage and inflation pressures.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton's comments that the UK could not afford to ignore the
exchange rate highlighted the need for the government to clarify its
economic policies.
The need to find some way through the apparent impasse on ERM reform is
likely to dominate Mr Major's round of discussions with other EC heads of
government today and in the run up to the emergency summit of EC leaders on
October 16. Today he sees President Francois Mitterrand in Paris before
talks in London with Mr Poul Schluter, the Danish prime minister.
Yesterday Mr Major was still hopeful that Britain's EC partners would back
his call for ERM reform. 'Those faultlines need to be addressed,' he said.
'I know that, our European partners know that, and they will acknowledge
that and work will need to be done on that.'
But Treasury officials admitted Monday's meeting of EC finance ministers
'had not got down to specifics' and played down suggestions that the planned
Birmingham summit would be the occasion for significant decisions on the
future of the ERM.
Financial markets are still unclear about how Mr Lamont will set monetary
policy. In Washington, he promised a tight policy that would 'give weight to
a number of financial indicators', including narrow and broad money growth,
asset prices and the exchange rate.
Although sterling and the London stock market gained yesterday, foreign
exchange dealers and City analysts were reluctant to predict continuing
stability in the absence of more detailed statements from the government
before the end of October. The prime minister's priority yesterday was to
play down the split in the Tory party over Europe. He dismissed the
divisions as 'froth and bubble' which he would not allow to distract him.
But the split was given fresh impetus by Lord Tebbit, the former cabinet
minister, who in yesterday's Daily Mail said Mr Major had been wrongfooted
in his efforts to take Britain to the heart of Europe.
Tory Euro-sceptics also attacked Mr Lamont for what they called the
'humiliation' of his qualified apology to Germany over remarks in the UK
press about the Bundesbank's role in the recent sterling crisis.
The chancellor faces two potentially difficult days at the Tory party
conference next week. He is expected to explain his views about Europe at a
fringe meeting the evening before addressing the conference in the economic
debate on Thursday.
THE ERM AND BRITAIN
Lamont's stock tumbles after heady political ride, Page 2
Leigh-Pemberton aims for pound target, Page 2
Business failures rise, Page 9
From delusion to devaluation: the collapse of UK economic policy,
Page 20
Make-your-mind-up time, Page 21
Smith attacks Major, Page 22
Kohl rejects 'two-speed' Europe, Page 22
Lex, Page 22; Currencies, Page 33; World stocks, Page 39; London stocks,
Page 42
