FT  29 SEP 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (16): In pursuit of Captain
Crunch
APPROACHING ZERO: DATA CRIME AND THE COMPUTER UNDERWORLD by Bryan Clough and
Paul Mungo Faber Pounds 14.99, 242 pages
COMPUTER FRAUD is estimated to cost UK and US banks and companies more than
Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.1bn) annually, yet 85 per cent of incidents are never
reported. Approaching Zero tracks the origins of computer 'hacking', from
its birth in the American sub-culture of the 1970s to a worldwide phenomenon
that recognises no national boundaries and, some believe, threatens the
high-tech foundations of modern society.
Written in a lively style by accountant and computer security expert Bryan
Clough and journalist Paul Mungo, the book explores the shadowy world of the
'programmers and technobrats' who use their skills and the telephone system
to circumvent computer access codes and passwords, sometimes just to leave
behind computer 'viruses' which can destroy data and can wreak havoc with
computer systems. The text is peppered with the colourful 'handles' or
aliases of hackers, many of which are straight out of the world of comic
books - men like Captain Crunch, widely acknowledged as the father of
hacking, Phiber Optik, and sinister gangs such as the Legion of Doom whose
members are committed to destroying computer system.
John Draper, alias Captain Crunch, once described hackers as the Silicon
Brotherhood. Membership of the Brotherhood is fluid - you are a member when
you know you are - and today probably comprises about 2,000 of the smartest,
most obsessive computer 'freaks' worldwide. In spite of sophisticated
security systems it seems that no computers are safe. As is well documented,
teenage hackers using cheap home computers have penetrated even the most
'secure' systems including those at NASA, NATO and the Pentagon.
The book provides an insight into what motivates these mostly young
high-tech outlaws. In some cases it is profit, sometimes it appears to be
the sheer excitement of digital vandalism, but more often than not the
hackers simply enjoy outwitting the computer security experts, usually
managing to stay just one step ahead of the law.
For some readers the narrative may appear too flippant. But there is a
serious underlying point to the book. Zero is when a computer system is
devoid of data, memory or function, and the authors suggest we are
'approaching zero' because the technology and means to wipe out computer
systems do indeed exist.
