FT  30 DEC 92 / Germany faces business gloom
ONLY two sectors in the entire German economy - power engineering and waste
disposal - are more optimistic about the prospects for 1993 than they were
one year ago.
There has been a dramatic worsening in the mood in export-oriented sectors,
including mechanical and electrical engineering, motor manufacturing and
electronics.
More than half the leading sectors of trade and industry expect a drop in
production or turnover during the year, and 29 out of 41 sectors expect to
reduce their labour forces.
Those are the main conclusions of the annual year-end survey of business
opinion carried out by the Institute for the German economy (IW) in Cologne,
the economic research arm of the German industry federation (BDI).
They coincide with a grim warning by the German employers' association that
the number of fully or partially unemployed people in the united Germany
could reach 5.5m by the end of 1993, without a drastic change in the wage
demands of trade unions.
The same message comes from the German chambers of trade and industry
(DIHT), which say the real crisis for the economy is high domestic costs,
not lack of demand.
The IW survey of 41 sectors of trade and industry singles out the
traditional export sectors of the economy as the gloomiest, both because of
their declining price-competitiveness, and the weak level of investment
spending in the rest of the world.
It concludes that 22 of the 41 sectors expect a fall in turnover, with just
nine expecting a rise. The only sector expecting a 'significant' rise is
waste disposal, due to new stricter waste disposal regulations.
The power engineering industry is expecting some improvement thanks to
orders from eastern Germany, and the other sectors are mostly affected by
the relative buoyancy of the construction industry - again thanks to
publicly-financed orders from the east.
The other exceptions to a totally gloomy economic outlook are the insurance
and tourism industries.
German author Gunther Grass yesterday resigned from the opposition Social
Democrats (SPD) in protest at their co-operation with the government in
limiting political asylum rights for foreigners.
The 65-year-old author of 'The Tin Drum' has accused the SPD of 'hypocrisy
and viciousness' for bowing to government demands for strict limits to
liberal asylum rights in the constitution.
