FT  20 JUL 92 / Rover aims for less bark and more bite: The group's new car
plant at Cowley
ROVER is not noted these days for shouting about things, 'at least not until
they've been completed,' says Mr John Towers, group managing director,
employing understatement with calm deliberation.
Today the production line at the Rover Group's old-established North Works
at Cowley will fall silent. On the other side of Oxford's ring road, Mr
Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, will formally open a new,
highly flexible Pounds 200m manufacturing facility.
Although it is Rover's biggest single production investment since
privatisation in 1988, the investment programme has been undertaken with a
marked absence of the self-congratulatory fanfares that marked so many of
the activities of what, before privatisation, was BL.
At an informal tour of the new plant last week, long-serving executives with
experience of both regimes recalled with embarrassment the old BL
trumpetings such as 'A Miracle is Born' at the launch of the Maestro, or
customers of the early Montego Turbo being told the problem was not the
model's wayward handling but their inability to drive properly.
Construction of the centre, which includes a large assembly hall and new
robotic systems to make car bodies, dispels years of speculation that
Rover's long-term intention was to close the sprawling Cowley operation with
the loss of its remaining jobs. The 220-acre site employs more than 3,000
people.
As part of the rationalisation of the four sites, the North and South Works
are to be redeveloped as a commercial and industrial park by Arlington
Securities, the property subsidiary of Rover Group's 80 per cent owner,
British Aerospace - the other 20 per cent is held by Honda.
The new plant, capable of producing 110,000 cars a year on two shifts, is
already producing the latest versions of Rover's 800-series executive car
range.
The new facility is not expected to add significantly to Rover's output. Mr
Towers said the company expected combined production from Cowley and its
Birmingham plants not to exceed 550,000 a year for the foreseeable future.
Rover had no intention of seeking to regain its former status as a volume
manufacturer.
The entire facility is within the 112-acre Cowley Body Plant, which will
also continue to manufacture bodies for Rolls-Royce, among other pressings.
The overall effect is to maintain all Cowley's previously existing
activities but within a site less than half the original size.
The flexibility of the 360,000 sq ft assembly hall which is the core of the
investment is designed to match the new-found flexibility of the
3,000-strong Cowley workforce. The employees have accepted Japanese-style
working practices, under what Rover describes as its 'new deal' which
elevates all of them to staff status.
Mr Towers says the most significant aspect was giving people the space to
realise their full potential. He adds: 'Eastern success is not so much
processes as letting people contribute.'
While more sophisticated robotics have been introduced where felt to be
necessary in the body welding and pressing plants, 'this has been done only
in areas where they have been felt critical for flow and quality'.
Western manufacturers which have tried to automate themselves into
competitiveness with the Japanese car industry have been misguided, he
insists.
'Seeking a one-off improvement of 1,000 per cent is the wrong approach. What
you need, and what we are pursuing, is 1,000 improvements each of 1 per
cent', the approach embodied in Japanese 'lean' production.
Mr Towers claims that the plant's flexibility and the adoption of other
Japanese-inspired techniques such as simultaneous engineering will take
Rover to 'world-class' levels of efficiency within the next two years.
