FT  18 NOV 92 / Lang's mind 'open' on Scots water sale
MR IAN LANG, the Scottish secretary, yesterday rejected Labour claims that
he had made up his mind to privatise the Scottish water industry through a
public flotation and insisted he had an open mind.
Mr Lang was introducing a consultative green paper setting out options for
the Scottish water and sewerage industry, which is in the hands of the nine
regional councils and three islands authorities.
The document said there were advantages to bringing the private sector into
the water industry but did not reject continued public sector control.
It said a public sell-off of Scottish water services would be feasible, but
proposed a solution which would bring in the private sector through
franchising arrangements.
It is understood that between 12 and 14 companies have expressed an interest
in becoming involved with the Scottish water industry. Two are believed to
be French.
There is considerable opposition in Scotland to water privatisation. The
government says Scottish water and sewerage services will have to be
restructured because the regional councils which provide them in mainland
Scotland will disappear when local government is reorganised in the mid
1990s.
The paper says larger units will be needed to provide water services, partly
because of the scale of investment needed in the next 10 to 15 years to
comply with EC directives on drinking water and pollution. This could cost
Pounds 5bn, suggesting annual capital spending at least 50 per cent higher
than the Pounds 218m being spent in 1992-93.
The consultation paper outlines several ways local authorities could run
water services and suggests local or national water authorities separate
from councils.
However, it points out that any structure which 'opens up opportunities for
private sector investment to replace public expenditure' could 'maximise
investment potential'. Such a structure would also release resources for
services such as health and education for which there is no viable
alternative to public provision.
The paper says higher water charges will be needed, whether the public
sector or the private sector is involved.
Under the privatisation option between one and three water companies could
be set up covering the whole of mainland Scotland and floated on the stock
exchange, as happened in England and Wales in 1989. As they would be near
monopolies they would be subject to a regulator. The government would keep a
'golden share' to guard against unsuitable takeovers.
The paper says the Scottish Office, which took advice from Quayle Munro, the
Edinburgh merchant bank, has been advised that a sale 'could be successfully
achieved'. Alternatively, the companies could be sold to a single purchaser
in a trade sale, or bought out by their managers.
Another solution would be franchising - setting up non-profit companies
limited by guarantee which would own water and sewerage assets and finance
capital expenditure from borrowing. These companies would franchise the
running of services to private-sector companies, which would be subject to a
regulator.
An alternative form of franchising would involve the franchisee companies
taking responsibility for capital investment. The franchisee would in this
case need to be a substantial company.
Water and Sewerage in Scotland: Investing For Our Future. Scottish Office
Water Restructuring Division, 27 Perth Street, Edinburgh EH3 5RB. Free.
