FT  06 OCT 92 / Survey on Cable and Satellite Broadcasting (1): The
providers are beaming - New technology is beginning to deliver the choice
for television viewers that has long been forecast. If the global village
has not yet arrived in its entirety, it is becoming a reality for many
millions in the US, Asia and Europe
NEXT month Britain will get a new general entertainment satellite television
channel, UK Gold, from the BBC and Thames television, and backed by Cox
Enterprises of the US.
Around the same time Deutsche Welle, the international German broadcaster,
starts a German language television service beamed in by satellite for north
and Latin America.
BBC World Service Television, already available in Asia and Africa, has just
achieved its first North American landfall in a deal with the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation.
A few weeks later, two Hong Kong businessmen, Mr TT Tsui and Mr David Pang,
will launch a business and factual channel aimed at Europeans interested in
news of greater China - China, Taiwan and Hong Kong. The broadcasts will be
in English but there will be programme repeats in Mandarin and Cantonese.
A few examples from the list of new television developments planned for this
autumn suggests that after many delays, false starts and false promises the
new media of satellite and cable television technology are beginning to
deliver the choice that has long been forecast. If the global village
predicted by Marshall McLuhan has not arrived in its entirety, it is
becoming a reality for many millions.
The growth of 24-hours-a-day international television news services offered
by organisations such as Mr Ted Turner's Cable News Network (CNN), or the
BBC, is being matched by imaginative ventures to offer consumers an
unprecedented choice of entertainment.
The US media giant, Time Warner, has launched a 150-channel cable network in
New York with many of the extra channels given over to the staggered showing
of hit films on a pay-per-view basis. Subscribers are never more than 30
minutes away from the start of a film they want to see.
In Los Angeles, Hughes Communications are at work on a high power satellite
system capable of delivering 150 channels, using digital compression
techniques, to all of the US. Apart from broadcasting 20 channels to rural
areas with limited television choice, carrying big sports events not being
transmitted by the national networks, the project, DirectTv, will also
specialise in pay-per-view film box office with a selection of films
starting every 30 minutes.
Many ventures in the new media of communication are speculative and
loss-making, or require vast investment and equal faith, but there are now
enough success stories in many parts of the world to suggest that, in spite
of all the damaging hype, multi-channel television in all its forms is a
significant industry which will in time change the pattern of
communications.
Last year, according to CIT research, the London-based market research group
specialising in communications, satellite carriers such as Intersal,
Eutelsat and private groups such as SES, owners of the Astra satellite
system, earned around Dollars 600m, more than 55 per cent of it from
broadcast television. By 2001, CIT estimates the figure will have grown to
Dollars 3bn, although the proportion from television will probably drop.
Sale of satellite dishes is now the single most important product line for
Amstrad Consumer Electronics - a business worth around Pounds 150m a year to
the company. Amstrad claims a dominant position in the UK market with a
share of about 70 per cent, with Pace number two with more than 20 per cent.
Amstrad also claims leadership of the German market with a 35 per cent
share.
But it is Amstrad's third most important market which is more surprising. It
is Poland where the overall market is taking more than 250,000 satellite
dishes a year in spite of the country's financial problems.
One-metre satellite dishes adorn the balconies of Warsaw flats and it is a
very poor hotel that does not have Sky News, or CNN, plus channels such as
MTV, the pop music channel, Screen Sport or German language channels such as
RTL Plus.
According to a recent study by Carat, the international media buying
organisation, and Continental Research, the market research group, 39.2m
television households in western Europe will be able to receive channels
from the Astra satellite system, or 25 per cent of the total.
The two Astra satellites already in operation can broadcast 32 channels and
a third satellite with a further 16-channel capacity is due to be launched
next year. The main language groups on Astra are English and German,
although the organisation has recently signed a two-channel deal with Spain
with an option for two further channels.
Carat/Continental predict that by 2000 the number of homes capable of
receiving Astra channels will have risen to 72.6m out of the total of 152m
television homes - 65 per cent of them via cable network the rest using
satellite dishes.
The UK and Germany are at the moment the main markets for satellite
television in Europe. In Germany it is projected that no less than 83 per
cent of homes will be able to receive Astra channels.
In the UK satellite television continues to make progress. British Sky
Broadcasting, a consortium in which Pearson, owners of the Financial Times,
has a stake, says it is now available in around 2.5m homes - although some
estimates are lower - and around 1.5m subscribe to at least one of the two
premium movie channels. BSkyB recently caused controversy by outbidding ITV
for exclusive live rights to the new Premier football league in the UK. At
the beginning of this month the venture launched a third film channel, based
on films of the last 30 years, which will be available free to those who
subscribe to the two premium channels.
Modern multi-channel cable has been slow to develop in the UK but the number
of homes passed by the new networks and the number of subscribers continues
to grow. At the beginning of July - the most recent statistics - subscribers
to modern broadband systems rose to 330,630, a net increase of 13.5 per cent
over the previous three months, and a 72.5 per cent rise in the past year.
Cable building is pushing ahead in spite of the recession because of the
continued support of large North American players such as US West, TCI,
Southwestern Bell, Videotron and Bell Canada.
All of them increasingly see cable as not just a method of delivering extra
channels of television but at the same time offering telephone services.
The number of consumers who have signed up for telephones from their cable
companies, working mainly in association with Mercury Communications, is
still small in absolute terms. But the growth rates are starting to look
dramatic. In January 1991 in the UK there was a total of 2,224 cable
telephone lines. By this July the number had risen to 47,902 lines.
In spite of the growing number of satellite channels, cable has the
potential for much greater channel capacity and can target its services to
particular areas.
In cosmopolitan areas of cities cable operators can tailor their services
appropriately. Thus, Videotron, in its London franchises, is offering
multi-cultural programming at the weekends in the space left vacant when the
parliamentary channel closes down on Friday. The five segments will cover
programmes for London's Asian, Greek, Afro-Caribbean, Turkish and
Farsi-speaking population.
As conventional satellite and cable television channels are establishing
themselves, new kinds of interactive - or two-way television - are also on
the way.
Apart from pay-per-view and game shows where viewers can participate
directly, interactive television includes two-way video teleconferencing and
other forms of educational and business television.
Consultants, Frost &amp; Sullivan, believe that interactive television will be a
Dollars 1.65bn market in the US by 1996. 'Virtually every large company that
is involved in the fields of consumer electronics, television production,
television broadcasting, cable TV, professional video equipment,
telecommunications or computers - a high confluence of industries - see
interactive TV as the key to its future growth,' Frost &amp; Sullivan argues.
