FT  23 OCT 92 / Bingham Report - Investigation into the BCCI scandal:
Accountants back extra legal duties
ACCOUNTANCY bodies in the UK last night supported the recommendation by Lord
Justice Bingham that auditors should have a legal duty to report to the Bank
of England in certain circumstances outlined in the 1987 Banking Act.
The Bingham conclusions on auditors were greeted with little surprise by the
accountancy firms, which had been widely expecting the move. The accountancy
bodies said they would expect to be consulted before the duty to report
became law.
In a joint statement they said: 'The particular circumstances when a legal
duty is to be imposed will need to be considered with great care to ensure
the obligation is effective, without either encouraging over-reporting by
accountants or auditors or imposing a needless formality into the
preparation of the reports, which may cause delay in their issue to the Bank
of England.'
Mr Robert Charlesworth, secretary of the Auditing Practices Board, the
standard setting body for auditors in the UK, said: 'If the auditor's
position in law is to be changed from a right to a duty then I think there
will be a need for some considerable care given to deciding in what
circumstances the law requires him to make such reports.'
Mr John Tattersall, a partner at Coopers and Lybrand, said he believed the
legal duty 'might well clarify the statutory duty' of auditors.
In the body of Lord Bingham's report he focused on the Bank's relationship
with Price Waterhouse, BCCI auditors. His report said the Bank came to rely
too heavily on the auditors.
The report picked out three prime areas of criticism referring to Price
Waterhouse. All covered failure to communicate crucial information which
might have heightened concerns at earlier dates.
After the auditors discovered substantial unrecorded deposits and other
irregularities at BCCI in December 1990 and the following January, Lord
Bingham concluded that it was 'unfortunate that the opportunity was not
taken to put the Bank as fully in the picture as the known and suspected
facts then permitted'.
The report also highlighted an interview conducted by two PW partners with
Mr Swaleh Naqvi, former chief executive of BCCI, on January 19 1991 which
Lord Bingham said were regarded by the auditors as 'a fairly comprehensive
account of fraud at the Bank'. The conversation was not reported to the
Bank. 'Again I find this puzzling and think the omission was very
unfortunate,' said Lord Bingham.
At a later date, the auditors failed to pass on further accounts of frauds
and malpractices to the Bank of England.
Lord Bingham said there had been no conscious decision by PW to withhold the
information, much of which had already been passed to the Bank. Nonetheless,
he said, 'probably the last opportunity for a clear and comprehensive
understanding to be reached by the bank with the majority shareholders on
the future of the bank' was lost.
The section 41 report would not have come as the 'devastating surprise' as
it did, said Lord Bingham, had Price Waterhouse more plainly and
comprehensively brought elements of fraud to the attention of the Bank.
The report cleared Price Waterhouse of much of the criticism by the Abu
Dhabi majority shareholders surrounding the role of the auditors in the
Section 41 report.
Last night Price Waterhouse welcomed the report and singled out Lord
Bingham's remark that 'the problems came to light in large measure through
the work of PW and the investigating team'.
