FT  15 OCT 92 / Survey of The Nuclear Industry (3): Fuelling controversy -
BNFL's new reprocessing plant
EARLY next year British Nuclear Fuels, the state-owned manufacturer and
reprocessor of nuclear fuel, will pass an important milestone with the
commissioning of its new Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant (Thorp) at
Sellafield in Cumbria.
Although the project is years behind schedule and above its original budget,
the plant will ensure BNFL retains its position as one of the world's
leading nuclear fuel operators.
Costing Pounds 1.85bn, Thorp has the capacity to reprocess 1,200 tonnes a
year of spent fuel, separate the uranium and plutonium, and transform the
rest into a manageable form of waste. From the UK taxpayer's point of view,
the project is a good one in so far as Thorp has been financed with upfront
fees from its (mainly overseas) clients, and its earnings should make a
healthy contribution to the balance of payments. Its order books are full
for the next 14 years.
But the project has also been launched into controversy about the merits of
reprocessing when alternatives such as long-term storage of spent fuel have
attractions of their own.
Until now, BNFL's reprocessing capacity has focused almost exclusively on
Magnox fuels from the first generation of UK nuclear power stations, many of
which are reaching the end of their useful lives. Thorp will enable BNFL to
reprocess the oxide fuels which are used by newer generations of power
stations, including the pressurised water reactors. This will enable it to
hold its own against its only principal competitor, Cogema of France.
The decision to go ahead with Thorp reflects the UK government view that
reprocessing is a worthwhile market niche even though many of the original
assumptions underlying it have since changed. The world is no longer short
of either uranium or plutonium. Rather the opposite: there is now concern
that they are both in dangerous abundance. The military need for plutonium
has also receded.
This reduces the case for Thorp to the environmental one of whether
reprocessing is a cleaner way of dealing with spent fuel than simply storing
it, and the commercial one of whether it makes business sense.
In support of reprocessing, BNFL has made much of the two large contracts it
recently signed with Nuclear Electric, the operator of 12 power stations in
England and Wales, and Scottish Nuclear its counterpart north of the border
with two stations. Sir Christopher Harding, its outgoing chairman, said at
the time: 'Our future income is largely secured.'
But while this seemed like a convincing endorsement, both nuclear operators
made clear the contracts covered only existing commitments. The future was a
different matter. Scottish Nuclear said it prefers long-term storage, and
has lodged an application to build a store. Nuclear Electric has decided to
store fuel from its newest reactor, Sizewell B.
Both companies are concerned about the cost of reprocessing. The combined
cost of their contracts is Pounds 17bn over 15 years, though a portion of
this includes fuel manufacture. Nuclear energy remains an expensive source
of power, so anything that can be done to reduce costs will strengthen its
long-term prospects - and storage, so Scottish Nuclear's chairman James Hann
argues, is cheaper than reprocessing.
BNFL is sensitive to criticisms about cost, which it blames on past
management's practice of insisting on cost-plus contracts which gave it no
incentive to perform efficiently. The company is now going over to the
stronger discipline of fixed price contracts where profit is commensurate
with holding down own costs.
From the environmental standpoint there are worries about the risks in
transporting spent fuel to the reprocessing site and the actual reprocessing
itself. At the end of the day, reprocessing still leaves waste to be
disposed of, albeit in a treated form.
Mr John Guinness, the new chairman of BNFL, maintains that the trend towards
storage does not affect the fundamentals of his business. 'This is a
postponement of a decision rather than a final one,' he says.
Not that the doubts about reprocessing will have any immediate effect on
BNFL's business. With its order books full and many foreign nuclear
operators under pressure to ship out their untreated waste, BNFL need not
fear any drop in custom. Furthermore, the world's reprocessing capacity is
equivalent to only half the amount of spent fuel discharged each year by
nuclear power stations. This imbalance will be redressed slightly early in
the next century when Japan completes a new plant of its own.
Mr Guinness's task will be to ensure that BNFL can preserve its
profitability in a tougher environment. In its latest financial year, it
earned Pounds 161m, up Pounds 5m on the year before, and paid a Pounds 52m
dividend to the government. Its export sales rose 50 per cent to Pounds
268m.
