FT  28 MAY 92 / International Capital Markets: Gilts inch towards a yield
spread link with bunds
LOWER bond yields are a notable feature of the UK financial markets since
sterling entered the European exchange rate mechanism in October 1990.
Since the UK currency was pegged to the D-Mark at a central rate of DM2.95,
government bond yields have fallen from around 11.5 per cent to under 9 per
cent at the 10-year maturity.
However, ERM membership has also led to subtle changes in the behaviour of
the gilts market participants.
Investors increasingly watch the relationship between gilts and other
European government bond markets, rather than just the absolute level of
gilts yields.
The most important relationship is the relative yield of 10-year gilts and
German government bunds - the yield spread between the two markets.
Direct comparison is complicated by the fact that gilts carry semi-annual
interest payments, whereas bunds pay annually. Hence gilt yields must be
annualised to give an accurate measure.
On this adjusted basis, the yield spread last week narrowed to around 1.2
per cent, the lowest for many years - probably since the 1960s.
The narrowing of the gilt-bund yield spread since the end of 1990 is an
established trend.
By the autumn of last year, the spread had narrowed to 1.25 per cent, from
more than 2 per cent at the point of ERM entry.
In the run-up to the UK general election on April 9 the yield spread
ballooned to 2.25 per cent, but has since resumed the trend towards
narrowing.
Now analysts are asking whether the yield spread can narrow below the
psychologically important level of 1 per cent and, if so, when.
Among the more bullish firms, Credit Lyonnais forecast that the gilt-bund
yield spread could breach the 1 per cent level in the next month.
In contrast, UBS Phillips &amp; Drew predicted a spread around the current level
of 1.2 per cent by the year end.
However, most analysts agree that the spread should be established between
0.75 per cent and 1 per cent sometime during the next year.
If a tighter, less volatile yield spread is established, gilts prices will
be tied more closely to the performance of the bund market.
Other ERM markets have already passed through this process. For example,
following a rapid fall in bond yields during 1990, 10-year French government
bonds now trade firmly within a 0.50 to 0.75 per cent yield spread over
bunds.
If German bund yields rise, French bond yields tend to follow.
Once the market is convinced a spread has been established, it tends to be
self-supporting. Investors and dealers trade yield spreads; for example,
buying French bonds if the yield spread with Germany widens beyond the
established range.
This does not mean domestic economic fundamentals are ignored. Economic
shocks or political uncertainty can still send French bond prices lower,
regardless of events in Germany.
But the belief of investors in the established yield spread tends to
moderate wild, unilateral swings in bond prices.
