FT  12 JUN 92 / The appliance of science in New York and London:
Disenchantment with the biotechnology sector has not stopped UK companies
coming to market
The first in a wave of British biotechnology companies are trying to
transform their success in science to success in the stock market. Cantab
Pharmaceuticals of Cambridge and British Biotechnology of Oxford are now
under the investors' microscope, with traditional 'road shows' ahead of
their flotation.
Cantab has chosen a US quotation on Nasdaq, the over-the-counter share
market on which many American biotech stocks are traded. British Biotech is
hedging its bets with an international share offer, involving a listing on
the London Stock Exchange and on Nasdaq.
The whole UK biotech sector - comprising about 70 unquoted companies founded
over the past decade or so - is watching to see whether the pair can succeed
in spite of Wall Street's current disenchantment with biotechnology.
Investors in the US have grown impatient with the sector, as promised
returns from start-up companies have not yet materialised.
At least a dozen UK biotech companies will need to raise money through
public share offerings over the next two years, says Mr Louis Da Gama,
executive director of the UK BioIndustry Association. The fear is that they
may have missed the fund-raising opportunity taken by about 40 American
biotech companies, which have made initial public offerings over the past 18
months.
At the beginning of this year Cantab would have had little trouble
convincing US investors to put Dollars 20m into the company, which is
developing drugs to treat human immune system disorders. But having digested
an estimated Dollars 3bn in new shares from biotech companies over the past
year and absorbed unexpected bad news from some star performers, investors
are rapidly becoming disillusioned.
Since January, biotech stocks have fallen sharply relative to the market as
confidence has fallen. All new issues planned for this summer have been
shelved - except Cantab and British Biotech. Cantab put its sale on hold for
three weeks and then decided to go ahead, counting on its novelty value and
the strengths of its scientific links with Cambridge University to make the
flotation a success.
Dr Paul Haycock, Cantab chief executive, says the potential investors whom
he met in New York 'are interested in our access to a pool of excellence in
British science which is relatively unexploited compared to the US academic
world'.
British Biotech does not share this undiluted optimism, and has responded to
Wall Street's change of mood by 'shifting the emphasis more towards London
and away from the US', says Mr James Noble, finance director. The company
expects to raise at least Pounds 30m from the flotation.
Mr Noble points out that British Biotech, which has already raised Pounds
73m from four private share placements since 1986, has a longer track record
than most US biotechnology companies. It already has two drugs undergoing
early clinical trials and a third due to begin clinical testing in August.
'If we had been a US company we would probably have floated three years
ago,' he says.
The main reason why biotech companies need to go public is that they can
raise more money - for research and development - than is normally possible
with private placements. There is also pressure from the venture capital
funds, which finance companies in their early stages and want some of their
investment back.
'We eventually have to look for a position where liquidity is available,'
says Mr Jeremy Curnock Cook, director of Rothschild Asset Management, who
advises Biotechnology Investments Limited, the largest UK-based fund.
London Stock Exchange rules do not make it easy for biotech companies to
come to market. None can fulfil the requirement that a company seeking a
full quotation must have five years in profit.
The exchange does allow for exceptions. Eurotunnel, for example, not only
had no profits record but there was no prospect of profits until 2000. The
exchange invoked a rule that allows a flotation if it is satisfied that
potential investors have enough information on which to base a decision.
Although this arrangement has been applied to British Biotech and could be
applied to others, stock exchange officials are drawing up special rules to
make it easier for a biotech company to come to market. They are concerned
that UK companies such as Xenova, Agricultural Genetics and Pharmaceutical
Proteins will follow Cantab across the Atlantic when they need funds. Even
if biotech is out of fashion in New York, the Vancouver, Toronto and
Montreal exchanges in Canada are interested in listing UK companies, says Mr
Da Gama.
There are precedents for special listing rules in property and mineral
exploration, both of which require heavy investment before a return is
likely. However, it will take many months, maybe years, for London's new
biotech rules to come into effect. In the interim individual companies will
have to go through the laborious process of convincing the exchange of their
soundness.
Exchange rules are not the only reason why biotech has been absent from
London. Dr Haycock of Cantab says 'at the moment the US offers a vibrant,
dynamic market for biotechnology companies. It is an experienced market, for
example in terms of the number of analysts following the sector.' Cantab
will list in London 'when the market is more receptive to companies like
ours'.
US investors have been dazzled by the range of biotech companies on offer, a
few of which have become startling successes. Most notable is Amgen, which
will see sales this year close to Dollars 1bn, a 50-fold growth in seven
years.
There have also been some serious disappointments, such as the announcement
in April that the US Food and Drug Administration was not after all ready to
approve Centocor's much publicised antibody treatment for bacterial sepsis.
That setback not only demolished Centocor shares (now trading at Dollars 14
compared with a high of Dollars 59.75 in January) but also accelerated the
decline in the whole biotech sector.
While US investors have ridden a roller-coaster, UK biotech companies have
been conspicuous by their failure to generate excitement. Celltech, for
instance, the oldest and largest UK biotechnology company, made impressive
technical achievements during the 1980s - particularly in the large-scale
production of antibodies - but its commercial development was poorly
focused. As an uninspiring flagship for the UK industry, Celltech educated
fund managers out of the sector.
However, a restructuring in 1990-91, accompanied by new management, has
transformed Celltech's prospects. It is now a research-oriented
bio-pharmaceutical company, concentrating on three areas: immunity,
inflammation and oncology (cancer).
Celltech is burning cash more slowly than most other biotech companies -
partly because it has an income of Pounds 12m a year from manufacturing
antibodies for the pharmaceutical industry. Dr Peter Fellner, chief
executive, says it does not expect to float on the London stock exchange
until late 1993. It will then be looking to raise some Pounds 50m.
By then biotech could be fashionable in London. 'Things are going to change
suddenly after British Biotechnology,' said an industry observer. 'It will
place biotechnology in the spotlight in the UK.'
