FT  19 SEP 92 / Finance and the Family (Currencies in Crisis): Balance is
the key - Serious Money
WHAT ON earth is going on? That must be the understandable reaction of
savers in a week when the pound has plummeted, share prices have soared, and
interest rates have done both.
Early in the week, newspaper headlines proclaimed that mortgage rates were
about to fall; on Thursday morning, the press pronounced that rates were
sure to rise. In fact, they have yet to move one jot.
Faced with this turmoil, the temptation must be for the investor to see the
markets as an incomprehensible casino, and to retreat into the apparent
safety of the building society.
For those who depend on their savings for income, that might prove a
dangerous strategy.
So much has happened that no-one can be confident about what the government
will do next. There is the remote chance that the government, like a
punchdrunk boxer, will climb back into the ERM ring for another battering
from the markets.
Political pressures, however, would suggest that the government will make
the best of the crisis. Norman Lamont seemed to hint as much yesterday when
he essentially said that Britain would only rejoin the ERM when the Germans
got their act together.
The recession was prolonged because interest rates were kept high to defend
the pound; now that the currency battle has been lost, why not cut rates and
revive the economy?
The cynic might suspect that base rates will be cut as a morale-booster
before the Tory conference. Such a policy change will probably be highly
popular.
For most people, the benefits of ERM membership were somewhat theoretical;
15 per cent interest rates would not have been a 'price worth paying' for
small businessmen or homeowners.
With inflation at 3.6 per cent, a base rate cut to 8 per cent would still
leave real rates at historically high levels; and it is always possible that
rates could fall to 6 or 7 per cent. That would be very good news for anyone
with a variable rate mortgage.
Savers should recognise that we could be seeing a return to traditional
British values; a falling pound, higher inflation and isolation from Europe.
Traditional investment strategies are, thus, likely to be successful once
more. The prospect of the low-growth, low-inflation decade has been
postponed. The cult of the equity might not be over.
Shares have traditionally been the best performing financial asset over the
longer term; far better than gilts or building society deposits.
The rally in equities on Thursday and Friday highlights the hopes that the
conditions of 1982-3 might be repeated; a falling pound helping British
companies to escape from recession and improve profits.
However, the surge in the market also means that the investor might be
better placed investing in shares via a savings scheme than jumping into the
market on Monday.
If the pound continues to fall, then investors should also benefit from
overseas investments; from buying the bonds of those countries which
continue to track the anti-inflationary D-mark or, if you believe in the
resurging dollar, US Treasuries.
The more adventurous might look at overseas equities. This week GT, the fund
management group, held an emerging markets conference which highlighted the
attractions of shares in areas such as Asia and Latin America; and Fund
Research launched a new guide to the funds which specialise in those areas.
The recession may limit inflation in the short term. But its probable long
term resurgence highlights the need for investors to hold assets such as
index-linked gilts and National Savings, which currently offer very
attractive real yields.
What about conventional gilts? Prices could rise in the short term. Yields,
at 9 per cent, are well above inflation; and short-dated prices should rise
as interest rates fall.
But, in the long term, higher inflation would be bad news for gilts; and
devaluation will make foreign investors wary of buying our bonds.
Furthermore, the government still has plenty of gilts to issue, because of
the growing budget deficit.
The greatest problems will be faced by those who have been relying on high
building society rates for their income. They face the dual squeeze of
falling interest rates and a rising inflation rate.
Of course, devaluation is not really an easy option. It is the same policy
that Britain has followed consistently since the second world war, and it
has led to the ruin of many generations of savers.
This week's events have re-emphasised that savers cannot survive on deposits
alone; they need a balanced portfolio, including equities and index-linked,
to protect them from inflation.
