FT  17 JAN 92 / Technology: Operation Amazon - Christina Lamb describes
plans to put satellite images of the Brazilian rainforest on computer
Name the remotest part of the Amazon rainforest to Diogenes Sales Alves and
with the flick of a few switches on his computer he can tell you how much if
any deforestation the area has suffered, when and how it happened, whether
it contains any Indian settlements, any mining or agricultural activity.
Alves is head of a research project at the Brazilian Aerospace Institute
(INPE) to compile from satellite images the first comprehensive analysis of
the world's largest rainforest. The project, detailing everything down to
the last nut gatherer, is expected to be completed by April. It is planned
to be one of the highlights of the UN Environment Conference, or Earth
Summit as it is known, which will be held in Rio de Janeiro in June.
Not only will the study enable examination of geological, hydrological and
botanical features (and changes caused by human activity) in the 5.2m sq km
of jungle, including areas which have never been penetrated, it will also
provide valuable information for some of today's most controversial
environmental debates such as whether forest burning is more detrimental to
climate change than automobile emissions.
In recognition of its work in using satellites to analyse the effect of
human development of the Amazon, INPE has been chosen to co-ordinate a study
of the world's forests for the Space Agencies Forum. The results will be
presented at the Earth Summit.
Surprisingly, INPE has only been studying the Amazon for three years. 'In
1988 when global warming became a general preoccupation the world started
wanting accurate information about the rate of Amazonian deforestation, so
we were asked by the Brazilian government to do a study,' explains Paulo
Serra, head of terrestrial observations.
Beginning in April 1989 INPE devised a method using computer algorithms to
calculate yearly deforestation from remote sensing satellite images taken by
the American Landsat 5. Since 1984 the satellite has passed over the same
point every 16 days from a 710km high orbit. This means that it always
photographs Brazilian territory in the morning when cloud cover is still
extensive so it is not ideal.
The satellite images are received in Cuiaba in the west of Brazil and
transmitted 1,400km to an INPE station at Cachoeira where they are processed
to generate photos. Landsat captures light reflected from the earth's
surface, producing an image on a scale of 1:250,000 in varying tones of
grey. The photographs are given artificial colours - green for forest,
darkening according to the density, pink for barren areas, grey for smoke
from burnings and blue for rivers and dams.
The best 229 photos in terms of clarity of those produced each year are
selected, each covering 185 sq km. Examination of these photographs was used
in 1989, 1990 and 1991 to calculate the yearly rate of deforestation. But,
says Serra: 'We realised this was an enormous amount of work just to get one
number - so we decided to analyse the photos so that we can say when, where
and how an area was deforested.'
To do this INPE has developed its own geographic information system.
According to Serra: 'It is not very complicated - really just a matter of
common language on what is deforestation - there is a lot of area in the
Amazon which is neither rainforest nor deforestation.'
Now when the satellite photographs are taken to INPE headquarters at Sao
Jose dos Campos to be interpreted, the images are colour coded to represent
deforestation of different years. The resulting maps are fed into the
computer and can then be used not only to evaluate more accurately the rate
of deforestation but also to study its effect on carbon- and hydro-cycles.
Some 334 maps will be created to cover the whole area.
'Rather than simply having photos in archives, we can call up any area on
computer from which we can make 1,000 observations,' Serra explains. 'I can
pick a piece of land near Manaus and say that it suffered X amount of
deforestation in 1988 because of this, nothing in 1989 and Y amount in 1990
because of something else. I can see what was deforested for agriculture,
for hydroelectric dams, for garimpagem (informal mining) or simply
disappeared, each of which has a different impact on the greenhouse effect.'
Other uses for the computerised maps include looking at areas inhabited by
Yanomami Indians and other indigenous tribes to see where their settlements
are and to follow their movements and discover where there have been
encroachments by garimpeiros or even cocaine smugglers building illegal
airstrips. The maps will be used for the zoning of the 9.4m hectares
recently declared a reserve for the Yanomamis.
Serra says the maps will also enable the study of the dynamics of forest
nutrients, in terms of soil, gases and the waterboard. It will look at how
deforestation has affected drainage and where streams have dried up because
of silt produced by mining or reduction of forest protection.
They should also end ambiguities in, for example, how much of the forest has
been destroyed and the efficacy of Brazilian government attempts to outlaw
burnings. The government environment agency claims that burnings were down
last year on the 14,000 sq km deforested in 1989-90, but ecologists say they
are back at 1988-89 levels of 23,800 sq km.
The INPE team does not underestimate the importance of the project. 'Not
only are we creating the first ever Amazonian database which can be used by
the whole world but we may also resolve some long- running debates in
Brazil's favour,' Serra claims.
With a sly smile, he adds: 'Imagine the enormous effect if we could show
through this that Amazon burning has much less impact on the carbon cycle
and thus climate change than burning fossil fuels or running cars?'
