FT  29 SEP 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (9): The horrors of health
DISEASE-MONGERS by Lynn Payer John Wiley Dollars 22.95, 292 pages
AND YOU thought the NHS was bad. Here is a chilling new book from the US
which reveals a conspiracy by the money-grubbing health care industry to
convince basically healthy folks that they are ill, and slightly ill people
that they are at death's door. Lynn Payer, the former medical correspondent
for the International Herald Tribune, has written what is sure to be a
controversial best-seller. It is mandatory reading for Americans, but there
are some lessons for Europeans, too.
Ms. Payer's thesis is that the public is being over-diagnosed,
over-medicated, and over-operated upon, because tests, drugs, and surgical
procedures are big business. Since the demand for 'health' is infinite, the
industry (doctors, hospitals, pharmaceutical companies) can sell ever more
drugs and services, whether or not they are really needed. But to do this,
people must be frightened into believing they are not healthy (or could be
healthier). Ms. Payer calls this 'disease-mongering'.
The book cites a plethora of examples, including 'Lyme' Disease, Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome, chronic candidiasis, depression and 'stress tests'. In
each case, she documents how the problem has been hyped and exaggerated out
of proportion. Healthy people become unwell just by worrying whether their
tiredness is 'Chronic Fatigue Syndrome', which is itself simply a fancy name
for being tired. And doctors order huge numbers of tests and then prescribe
drugs for problems which could, in most cases, be cured by the body's own
processes.
Ms. Payer criticises the 'medicalisation' of normal events, such as
menopause and short height. As a result of huge media hype, Premarin (a
female hormone replacement drug) is the fourth most prescribed medicine in
the US. This drug may reduce the risk of osteoporosis and heart attacks, but
it also may increase the risk of cancer.
Women are being told they are crazy to refuse hormone replacement, even
though many would rather die of heart attacks than of breast cancer. And
similar panic has caused many children of below-average height to be treated
with growth hormones. But there is no evidence that these treatments produce
a taller adult; and some of those treated before 1985 developed terrible
side effects later in life.
The book also blasts the 'diseasing' of risk factors, such as high
cholesterol and blood pressure. As Ms. Payer points out, these conditions
are not diseases but indications of risks for heart disease. People with
slightly high cholesterol and no other risk factors may suffer more from
taking cholesterol-lowering drugs than they would from eating bacon. Another
scam: promoting mammography as a cure-all for breast cancer when it does not
even detect cancer in young women's' dense breast tissue.
Why is disease-mongering so successful? Ms. Payer offers several reasons.
Too many doctors (44 per cent more than in 1980) are competing for too few
insured patients. Doctors and hospitals are reimbursed for procedures, not
for outcomes. Fear of malpractice lawsuits encourages doctors to prescribe
too many diagnostic tests. The pharmaceutical industry has incentives to
develop and promote more drugs, especially for chronic and marginal
ailments. US advertising law permits drug companies to market products
directly to consumers. Popular health magazines hype risks with headlines
such as '80 per cent of US males at risk for premature death', and rely on
drug companies for advertising revenues.
According to the author, disease-mongering is responsible for much of
America's rocketing health care costs. Medical testing is a definite
villain. 'The only two mammals to remove blood regularly from other mammals
are vampire bats and humans,' says the book: the US spends Dollars 27bn
(Pounds 15.70bn) per year on 5bn to 10bn medical tests.
Even more troubling is the human cost of unnecessary treatment. Ms Payer
describes numerous cases in which perfectly healthy people fell ill and died
as a result of the side-effects of medical tests or inappropriate
medication.
This book will compel any reader to see that common sense, and the old
'ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure' philosophy, is right - most
of the time. It should also arouse a healthy scepticism of the health care
industry and the unholy alliance of interests in America. However, the book
suggests that the core problem is due to the health care system being too
business-like.
I would argue quite the opposite: if this were a business, the focus would
be on catering to the patient-as-customer. Which would produce better and
more affordable care, prompt treatment and a more humane system.
