FT  04 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Italian business fears loss of
resolve
THE ITALIAN business community yesterday voiced fears the result of the
Danish referendum would undermine Italy's resolve to comply with the tough
conditions of convergence laid down at the EC's Maastricht summit last
December. These fears were immediately reflected in a weakening of the lira.
Official reactions were more muted and there was no suggestion of an Italian
referendum, even though it is the Community country most used to
referendums. The Maastricht treaty has yet to be ratified in parliament.
The government being only a caretaker, Mr Gianni de Michelis, the outgoing
foreign minister, was obliged to speak in a personal capacity, insisting
that the Maastricht treaty was irreversible and so Europe had to go ahead as
'the eleven'.
The Danish rejection of Maastricht comes as Italian politicians are just
beginning to recognise that big economic and fiscal adjustments are
necessary to bring Italy into line with its main EC partners.
A tough speech at the weekend by Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, governor of the
Bank of Italy, warned that the country risked being an obstacle to European
integration unless the politicians urgently introduced an austerity package
and important reforms.
This speech was widely seen as the agenda for the next government. It is
this agenda that is now at risk, according to Mr Innocenzo Cippoletta,
director-general of Confindustria, the industrialists' confederation.
'It would be a tragedy if this episode were to be used by Italy as an excuse
not to implement the economic policies required by convergence,' he said
yesterday. It would be all too easy to conclude that Italy did not have to
respect all the rules, he added.
The lira yesterday weakened against the D-Mark, moving from L753.4 to above
755. This is the upper limit acceptable to the Bank of Italy; the latter is
understood to have intervened by selling D-Marks. The last time the lira
touched such levels was in the aftermath of the general election on April 5.
Mr de Michelis said 'the path towards integration as eleven' would not
preclude Denmark from re-entering, but only on the basis of its acceptance
of the Community as it was.
He added that he agreed with France and Germany that negotiations with new
prospective members should be accelerated.
