FT  11 JAN 92 / House prices fall 3.5% says Halifax
HOUSE PRICES fell 3.5 per cent last year and the market continues to display
few signs of recovery, Halifax Building Society reported yesterday.
A 1.3 per cent fall in prices in December, which is traditionally a quiet
month for the housing market, helped produce the first annual decline since
the Halifax House Price Index began in 1983.
The December fall was 0.8 per cent on a seasonally adjusted basis and
followed a revised fall of 0.4 per cent in November.
The figures come a day after the announcement of a small rise in November
housing starts, which was seen by the government as evidence that recovery
in the housing market is beginning.
House price rises tend to lag changes in housing starts by as much as a
year. Halifax, Britain's biggest building society, said confidence would
improve as signs of more general economic recovery became more obvious,
leading to increased housing market activity.
This trend would be more apparent in the second half of this year and would
have little impact on house prices until next year. As a result, although
house prices should show some growth this year the increases would be
marginal.
A regional breakdown shows that prices fell slightly throughout the country
in the fourth quarter of last year except in the far north of England and in
Northern Ireland.
The sharpest regional decline in October to December last year was in the
south-east. Prices fell 2.4 per cent, bringing the annual fall to 7.5 per
cent. This was the region's steepest annual rate of decline since the summer
quarter of 1990.
Throughout the south of England house prices have slipped by about 2 per
cent in each of the past two quarters. Halifax said it was difficult to see
this pattern being reversed before there was evidence of increased demand
for homes.
On a brighter note, the quarterly falls of more than 5 per cent that
affected the south in 1989 have ended.
Halifax said the temporary abolition of stamp duty on purchases of houses
costing less than Pounds 250,000 should help the market. Transactions
already being negotiated had been helped along.
