FT  25 JUL 92 / Finance &amp; The Family: Women's pension woe - Why mothers need
a pension panacea
MOST WOMEN confront a basic difficulty whensaving for a pension If they are
unable to pay premiums constantly throughout a working career, the size of
the pension entitlements will be reduced.
For women who intend to be in full time work and remain childless throughout
their working life, this is not a problem. But for the majority who take
career breaks, the size of their final pension will be smaller than a
working man's, whether the pension is paid by the state, their employer, or
an insurance company.
The number of working women has been increasing. Last year 71 per cent of
women were economically active and although most of them were in full-time
employment, a large minority - 43 per cent - were in part-time work, where
the right to an occupational pension scheme if a company has one, became law
only in 1986.
When most pension schemes evolved, women were seen as dependent on their
husbands. However one in three marriages now ends in divorce in the UK. In
such cases, a woman's right to her husband's pension is usually relinquished
(see the accompanying article).
Yet, arguably, women need larger pension provisions than men since they live
on average four years longer.
State pension. Social security in the UK provides a pension equivalent to
only 18 per cent of average earnings, according to Noble Lowndes. For many
women, this is the pension on which they rely in old age.
The full state pension is Pounds 54.15 per week for the 1992/93 tax year.
The full basic state pension is dependent on the number of years over which
National Insurance Contributions are paid.
Serps, the state earnings-related pension scheme, which tops up the basic
pension, is available only to employees and, as its name suggests, is
related to the level of earnings.
Private plans. These have become more flexible. Insurance companies, keen to
find new markets for their products, have targeted women and highlighted
shortfalls in both occupational and state pensions to push their own
products.
But personal pensions, while more flexible than most occupational schemes,
are not the panacea to a woman's pension problems. This flexibility boils
down to the ability to stop contributions and restart them at a future date
without having to incur new start-up charges.
However these pensions, with high fixed charges, are not cheap. 'An
appropriate personal pension on its own will not give very different benefit
from SERPS, and so is unlikely to be adequate on its own to give a
comfortable retirement,' says the Equal Opportunities Commission.
Even with a 'flexible' pension, a woman cannot avoid the basic fact that
when she stops contributing to the plan, her final pension entitlements will
be reduced. The longer she takes off to bring up children, the worse the
effect on her pension.
London Life estimates that a 30-year-old woman starting a personal pension
with monthly payments of Pounds 100 gross would accumulate a fund at
retirement at 55 years of Pounds 167,100. This assumes a yield of 13.5 per
cent. If she takes a five-year break between 35 and 40 years, the size of
the fund is reduced by 29 per cent to Pounds 119,000.
The EOC found one of the most severe drawbacks of personal pensions to be
their inflexibility in terms of 'filling gaps in paid employment'.
'Contributions can only be paid for from earnings and although there is
scope for forms of insurance, the only real answer is to save even more
money while at work. For women who experience substantial gaps in
employment, whatever the reason, the shortfall becomes impossible to
bridge.'
Women should also beware of unsuitable policies. In the 1988/89 tax year,
the department of social security said that 63,000 women with no earnings
had been sold personal pensions while the EOC concluded that 250,000 women
were sold personal pensions when they would have been better off in Serps.
Occupational schemes
A good occupational scheme is arguably one of the best pension schemes
available. It can give the employee death and disability benefits with
contributions from both employer and employee attracting tax relief.
A scheme that gives two-thirds of final earnings after a working lifetime
can provide a comfortable pension but again, this will be affected by career
breaks. Not all employers operate pension schemes.
The 1989 General Household Survey of the Office of Population Censuses and
Surveys showed that 40 per cent of women part-time workers were with
employers who did not have a pension scheme and only 11 per cent of
part-time women were members of a scheme when their employers had one.
Women can supplement their occupational scheme with an additional voluntary
contribution. Rob Gaines, of NM Financial Management, advises checking the
contract allows for contribution holidays and that there is no double
charging or penalties for stopping and restarting.
One improvement is on the way. From January 1993, it will become compulsory
for employers operating a contributory pension scheme to make maternity
leave pensionable.
In spite of the flexibility hype, pensions for women are still inadequate.
The conclusion of the EOC report was that the best way of reducing poverty
for women in old age is to increase the level of state basic pension, since
it is not linked to an earnings record. Since there is little likelihood of
this happening, for the meantime, the best alternative for women is to lobby
for greater flexibility in occupational schemes.
Employers sweeten pensions, page V.
