FT  26 OCT 92 / Leading Article: London's health
THE PUBLICATION of Sir Bernard Tomlinson's official report on the future of
London's health services has led to another burst of campaigning on behalf
of well-known hospitals in the firing line for closure or merger. A
government already badly shaken by the reaction to its plans for
rationalising the coal industry will need to keep its nerve if it is not to
succumb to misconceived pressure from those seeking to defend these
much-loved institutions.
Sir Bernard and his colleagues have produced a convincing case for action.
London's health service is overburdened with hospitals, carrying hefty
overheads and duplicating specialist services. Great though their reputation
is, they consume 50 per cent more resources per head of population than
hospitals in other cities. They also rely on a flow of patients from outside
their local areas which is drying up as the internal market in the health
service encourages doctors to refer their patients to local hospitals which
are cheaper.
At least as important as closing costly excess hospital capacity is the need
to improve London's community health services. Too many Londoners are served
by over-stretched, single-handed family doctors working from poor-quality
lock-up premises. London GPs employ fewer practice support staff, do less
health screening and have bigger patients' lists than their colleagues
elsewhere.
Yet family doctors are playing an increasing role in healthcare nationally.
Many operations which previously needed hospital facilities are now carried
out by day surgery which can be provided locally in health centres. Although
these are both cheaper than hospitals and more convenient for patients,
London lags well behind in the provision of such facilities.
Tomlinson says that a shift from hospitals to primary health care could be
self-financing, with the cost of enhanced community services balanced by
savings on hospitals.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health secretary, will have to fight for extra
resources to ease the transition, however, if the improvements in primary
health care are to be apparent before the hospital rationalisation begins.
Her initial response - promising consultation with the staff and hospitals
and consideration for the needs of health service staff - shows that one
lesson has been learnt from the debacle over pit closures.
