FT  11 FEB 92 / Airlift to Russia under way in earnest: Food and medical aid
supplies reach new areas
THE WESTERN airlift of food and medical aid to the former Soviet Union
reached a new tempo yesterday with aircraft landing in locations which have
so far received little or no direct foreign help.
'Operation Provide Hope', aimed at airlifting about 18,000 tonnes of
supplies, has been discounted by some western politicians and officials as
merely symbolic.
It was announced by President George Bush two weeks ago during a Washington
conference on aid, and provoked other countries - with some reluctance - to
join an operation which many believe to be irrelevant to the real needs of a
country which is not starving, but urgently requires help for its economic
transformation.
Speaking at a brief opening ceremony at the Rhein-Main air base near
Frankfurt, Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, stressed the airlift was
not charity but 'investment in security - the west's security and global
security and stability for decades to come'.
Mr Baker also said that money to support the rouble and to provide
substantial imports would not be forthcoming until credible economic
policies were in place.
Mr Baker's comments suggest that the US - supported at least by Japan - does
not believe that such policies are secured, in spite of the efforts of the
Russian government's economic team, led by Mr Yegor Gaidar, the deputy prime
minister.
That team began negotiations yesterday with officials from the International
Monetary Fund to thrash out an application for Russian membership.
Acceptance of the application would go far to persuade foreign countries to
lend money to support economic reform - funds which, according to Mr Boris
Yeltsin, the Russian president, last week should be no less than Dollars
17bn (Pounds 9.3bn).
Yesterday's aid shipments included US supplies left over from the Gulf war.
In addition Japan delivered 12 tonnes of food and medicine to Khabarovsk in
the Far East, while the Germans - the big aid donors over the past two years
 -flew in another 100 tonnes of supplies to Moscow. Britain shrewdly
directed its aid to Ekaterinburg,the birthplace of Mr Yeltsin.
At the weekend five German trucks carrying food aid for schoolchildren were
held up from Friday to Sunday in Chelyabinsk, in western Russia.
EC finance ministers decided yesterday to redirect the problem-fraught
Ecu500m (Pounds 356.5m) credit from the Deutsche Bank consortium, which the
Community is guaranteeing, to Russia, and to compensate other ex-Soviet
republics by lending them more out of a bigger, Ecu1.25bn EC food credit,
David Buchan reports from Brussels. EC ministers also agreed to back
membership of the IMF for all ex-Soviet republics.
