FT  22 JAN 92 / Arts: All My Sons - Young Vic Theatre
Arthur Miller's All My Sons was his first success. In an introduction to the
published text, he wrote later: 'The audience sat in silence before the
unwinding and gasped when they should have, and I tasted that power which is
reserved, I imagine, for playwrights, which is to know that by one's
invention a mass of strangers has been publicly transfixed.'
Over 40 years later the power must still be working. The audience at the
Young Vic last night was transfixed throughout, and no wonder. All My Sons
remains a marvellously constructed play. Although it is about the aftermath
of the second world war in middle America, it could just as easily have been
written about the aftermath of Vietnam. In fact, neither the period nor the
place much matter. It could be anywhere, any time.
Since the plot contains a strong element of suspense and surprise, I shall
not go into detail. Suffice it to say that the wrong man has been blamed for
knowingly supplying defective parts to aircraft which led to the deaths of
21 pilots. The airman son of the engineer who really is guilty was reported
missing in action. The play is about retribution catching up.
Miller's mastery lies primarily in the way he presents a small community and
in the simplicity of the language. The Keller family is remarkable for its
sheer American middle class ordinariness: well-off, comfortable but in no
way pretentious. Joe Keller, the self-made father, has diversified out of
armaments into consumer goods. His wife Kate is somewhat superstitious, but
otherwise a model American mother. Son Chris is educated, but happy. The
neighbours respect them, even regard them as 'the holy family'. Then the
plot unfolds.
The play starts deliberately slowly - that is part of the skill. Indeed it
is still building up when it comes to the climax. You will note, however,
that there is never a line out of place. Every word, every movement,
contributes to the whole. The comparisons that were made with Ibsen after
the first performance, and which Miller acknowledged, are entirely
appropriate.
Yet there is great deal more than plot and characterisation. Miller uses the
sparest of language. Some of the most powerful lines seem to be made up
almost solely of monosyllables. For example: 'You had two sons, but you've
only got one of them now.' And towards the end Chris says to his father: 'I
know you're no worse than most men, but I thought you were better.' The
result is a writing style that is completely unselfconscious. Nothing jars.
David Thacker's production in the round of the Young Vic brings out the
shine and the detail in even the smallest parts. Of the larger ones, Matthew
Marsh's slightly hunched Chris is unforgettable. So is the sometimes
neurotic, sometimes confident Marjorie Yates as his mother. Ian Bannen plays
Joe Keller as a very big, but ultimately broken man. This is a well-written,
well-made, well-acted play par excellence.
