FT  02 SEP 92 / Arts: Fringe notes
SANDRA Bernhard is best known in the UK as the up-front gay who formed a
two-girl ratpack with Madonna. Yet this footnote to history was enough to
fill the 3,000 seater Playhouse twice in a night, and to persuade me that
Madonna was probably running hard to keep up with the feisty Bernhard.
She wanders on stage like a stoned-out freak and is guided by one of her
four-strong band to the mike where she performs her own version of 'Fever',
a long bitch about virtually everyone who inhabits Vanity Fair and Versace.
Poor old Joni Mitchell is quickly dismissed as a 'hippy freak'. You realise
that as a development of the 'sex and shopping' novel Bernhard has perfected
the 'sex and shopping and song' show.
What makes it thoroughly enjoyable is that Bernhard seems a genuine free
spirit - no discreet costume changes for her, but a full frontal thrust into
a succession of bizarre dresses - and more surprisingly, owns a rich and
full ranging voice. So you are caught by an accomplished raconteur, with
some informed insights into a twilight world, who then slides into some
evocative songs. Her version of 'Woodstock' was quite tingly.
Bernhard calls her show 'Giving Till It Hurts', which is pretty
self-indulgent. Beneath the bravado, there is something vulnerable about
Bernhard - the body is held defensively; the songs seem therapeutic; the
calls for the gays in the audience to come out slightly desperate.
This is a peep into a world where fantasies are forced into realities; where
ambition is no more than a six-page spread in Vogue; where dreams come true
only on stage when the audience applauds. Bernhard is odd and talented,
perfect late night diversion.
Women are big in this year's Fringe. The huge Jo Brand won a Perrier
nomination; the simply gigantic Thea Vidale deflates criticism with her foul
mouthed and funny polemic on what women want, like, and need; and the slim
and demure Louise Rennison was my personal favourite with her reminiscences
of girlhood in Leeds, New Zealand and London in the 1960s.
Rennison's delivery is completely natural, almost conversational asides
which makes her general immersion into sex and drugs and rock'n'roll seem
charming, funny, even innocent. She survived a car ride with Led Zeppelin: a
back-stage disaster with Pink Floyd: and, in the title of her show at the
Assembly Rooms, 'Stevie Wonder felt my face'. If only all lives of
experimentation and over-indulgence proceeded so sweetly.
