FT  19 MAY 92 / Technology (Technically Speaking): The mistakes of three
blind mice
RESEARCH on Alzheimer's disease, the most frequent form of senile dementia,
has suffered a serious setback. Scientific error - and possibly fraud - have
cast doubt on the validity of animal models used to investigate the disease.
This is unwelcome news for the biotechnology and drug companies which have
raised hundreds of millions of dollars to develop new treatments for
Alzheimer's and other neurological disorders.
Alzheimer's, which affects as many as 20 per cent of Americans over the age
of 70, has a severe, degenerative effect on the nervous system. It results
in a debilitating loss of memory, judgment and emotional stability.
What is the cause of Alzheimer's? Observations in the 1970s suggested that
environmental factors - and aluminium in particular - might be responsible.
This trail originated from data relating to a small group of kidney dialysis
patients who had acquired temporary dementia. Although their brains
contained unusually high levels of aluminium, this is now known to have been
caused by concentrated aluminium salts in the dialysis fluid.
Instead, the immediate physical cause of Alzheimer's has been tracked down
to a protein called beta-amyloid which accumulates in the patient's brain.
Brain biopsies taken from Alzheimer's patients show characteristic
accumulations of amyloid protein, known as plaques. Evidence that these are
associated with Alzheimer's comes from experiments in which laboratory
animals lost learning ability after injection with synthetic protein.
Amyloid - a protein whose normal function is not known - accumulates slowly
in most human brains as they get older. But why does it build up in some
individuals to such a degree as to cause Alzheimer's? Inherited genetic
characteristics are one likely explanation.
Genetic mapping shows that, for some families, the gene responsible is on
chromosome 21. Last year a family with inherited Alzheimer's was found to be
carrying a mutation in the gene for beta-amyloid protein, providing evidence
for a direct correlation between the gene and Alzheimer's.
This discovery led to the development of three animal models for
Alzheimer's, in which the normal human gene for amyloid protein is inserted
into mice. The animals then accumulate plaque proteins in the brain and
ultimately develop Alzheimer's symptoms. Unfortunately it now appears that
two models are no longer valid, despite their initial promise.
A US group from Miles Research in Connecticut first reported transgenic mice
showing Alzheimer's pathology. However, this report has now been withdrawn
as an honest scientific error.
Then a second US group reported that over-expression of the amyloid gene
gave rise to plaques similar to those in Alzheimer's patients. But this
report has been retracted because the results cannot be reproduced. There is
also doubt over whether the brain sections shown in the paper are from the
model mice.
From the three transgenic models, only one still seems to stand up. This is
a model produced by California Biotechnology and Daiichi Pharmaceutical of
Japan, in which amyloid deposits have been observed in 10 different animals
from three different genetic lines. However, it is too early to say whether
or not these mice develop age-dependent symptoms and other features
characteristic of human Alzheimer's disease.
The controversy highlights the essential role played by mouse models in
developing and testing compounds to treat Alzheimer's. The studies cannot be
done on Alzheimer's patients themselves, and monkeys are too scarce to use
routinely for this research.
Despite the competitive pressures, however, researchers must be less hasty
in publishing their results. Premature publication damages the reputation of
those responsible and leads other scientists in the field to waste an
incalculable amount of time and effort.
The authors work at the University of Sussex.
