FT  06 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Outokumpu in Karelian metals
deal
OUTOKUMPU, the state-owned Finnish mining and metals group, is joining
forces with four organisations in the Karelian republic, formerly part of
the Soviet Union, to develop the republic's base metals resources.
The first targets are copper-nickel deposits in the Kivijarvi area,
north-east of Aanisjarvi. Present estimates show these deposits have about
10m tonnes of ore containing 1 per cent nickel.
Mr Jyrki Juusela, Outokumpu's chairman, said recently he was optimistic
about the potential for his group to do more business in the Commonwealth of
Independent States. 'They are finding a way to sell raw materials and so
need technology to produce them in an economic way. Outokumpu can provide
the technology and equipment to help.'
He said that Outokumpu could also help by providing barter opportunities,
taking materials for sale through its own trading organisation.
'We have a head start over other western companies in dealing with the CIS
countries because we have had a long-term relationship. We at Outokumpu have
visited the CIS plants for many years, not just gone to the ministries in
Moscow. We know the plants and the people there know us. And the people at
the plants are making more of their own decisions,' he added.
While for the next five years most of Outokumpu's operations would be in the
OECD countries, 'we will gradually increase our activities in the CIS,' Mr
Juusela said.
Outokumpu Mining said yesterday that for two years it had been making
studies, mainly geological and ore dressing studies, at the Kivijarvi
deposits in co-operation with the Karelian Geological Expedition. The
establishment of a new joint company, Kivijarvi Oy, 'reflects the more
concrete co-operation between Outokumpu and the Karelian Republic. It also
provides the latter access to a vast mining expertise.'
The Kivijarvi joint company would mine the deposits if that proved
economically viable - studies should be completed by the begining of 1993 -
and at a later stage it would be involved in other base metal ores in the
republic.
Outokumpu is particularly keen to build up its nickel and copper resources.
Most of its current capital expenditure is going towards nickel projects in
Australia and copper projects in Chile.
