FT  01 APR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Property news alarms equity market
MORE alarming news on the UK property front proved a considerable drain on
the equity market's confidence and triggered a widespread decline in share
prices yesterday. The FT-SE 100-share index closed a net 12.8 down at
2,440.1.
News of a sharply increased Labour lead over the Tories in the latest
opinion polls only emerged during the early evening and therefore had no
impact on the UK market, but these are expected to cause considerable unease
this morning. There was no real response to the poll news on the big UK
stocks traded in New York.
Another steep slide for Lonrho shares, after one of its joint brokers, UBS
Phillips &amp; Drew, withdrew from representing the company, was another reason
cited for the market's lacklustre showing.
The session commenced with prices being marked modestly higher, partly
because of the lack of any substantial poll news and partly because of
underlying support for the Footsie future ahead of its expiry in
mid-morning. However, news that Speyhawk, the property development group,
had incurred a heavy Pounds 216m loss, passed the final dividend, and
restructured its debts after talks with bankers and backers, prompted a
sharp about turn in sentiment.
Coming so soon after worries about Olympia &amp; York, developers of London's
Canary Wharf, and problems at Heron International, the news was very badly
received. Bank shares, especially, were given a thorough mauling as
investors backed off from expected big provisions associated with Speyhawk.
The expiry of the March futures contract coincided with the downturn in the
cash market. Turnover in the futures was much higher than in recent sessions
but petered out after the expiry.
Opening 6.5 higher, the Footsie improved rapidly to reach a day's best of
12.7 points ahead, before commencing a slide which saw the index down 13.1
at 2,439.8 at its worst.
The withdrawal of UBS Phillips &amp; Drew as broker to Lonrho and persistent
fears that Fidelity, of the US, may sell its near 10 per cent stake into the
market were behind the latest slide in Lonrho, which from today will be
dropped from the FT-SE 100-share index.
Other companies being removed from the index also lost ground, including
Royal Insurance and Tarmac. Their replacements, on the other hand, attracted
considerable support, notably ECC Group.
Turnover in equities was 475.1m shares, well ahead of Monday's 402.7m, and
boosted by at least four small-scale trading programmes.
Equity strategists are increasingly wary of the market as the general
election campaign moves into its final phase. Mr Nick Knight, at Nomura, the
Japanese-owned securities house and a long-time bear of the market,
published a note yesterday highlighting a rise in the public sector
borrowing requirement.
He said: 'The speed and scale of deterioration in the government's finances
is of truly mind-blowing proportions; such progression carries extremely
negative implications for equities and bonds.'
