FT  26 OCT 92 / Monday Interview: Voice of high-tech challenge - George
Fisher, chairman of Motorola, talks to Tony Jackson and Michiyo Nakamoto
I spend a certain amount of my time,' says Mr George Fisher of Motorola,
'worrying about US competitiveness.'
It seems a curious admission from the chairman of one of the world's great
electronics companies, a competitor par excellence against the industrial
might of Japan. But Mr Fisher has his reasons. His other preoccupations
include US defence spending, the US infrastructure and the need for the US
to develop certain critical technologies. These are all matters in which
Motorola has an interest. Thus, what is good for the US is good for
Motorola.
And, presumably, vice versa, which is why Mr Fisher spends part of his time
on Vice-President Dan Quayle's Council on Competitiveness. This puts him
squarely in the debate on the role of government in industry, which in the
US is delicate ground. In most other countries, industrial policy is a
legitimate topic for discussion. In the US, the phrase has distinctly
left-wing overtones.
'Basically, I think taxpayers' money is appropriately involved in developing
pre-competitive technologies or the infrastructure. There is a limit to how
much taxpayers' money should be spent, because you do get into the subject
of industrial policy, which generally we are not favourable to.'
In Germany, he argues, 3.7 per cent of GDP is spent on infrastructure. In
Japan, the figure is about 5.6 per cent; in the US about 1 per cent. In the
early 1900s, he says, the US was more in line with what Japan does today.
'The US has to do a better job.
'And maybe I'm myopic, but when I look at infrastructure investment in
computing and communications, that is very much driven by some pretty
fundamental technology in semiconductors. That is a legitimate concern of
the country. Japan recognises that; Germany recognises that. And when we
look at who we compete with in the world, it's largely Japan and Germany.'
Given that Motorola's business is in semiconductors and communications, Mr
Fisher naturally has strong views on this. A couple of years ago Michael
Borkin, chairman of President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers, said he
saw no economic difference between semiconductor chips and potato chips.
'I'll argue that to the death,' Mr Fisher says. 'It's insanity. You only
believe that if you want your country to go down the drain.
'It is absolutely clear in my mind that you have to have economic priorities
in a country, and that some things are more important than others to future
economic growth. High-tech industries tend to be among the economic drivers,
and we're competing with countries which recognise that.
'The US doesn't have a comprehensive strategy because it isn't popular in
many segments of the US political population to say that computer chips are
more important to the economic survival of the US than potato chips.
Somebody has to be willing to make those decisions. Just who is a real
question, and as you get further into industrial policy the more problematic
the question becomes. But I don't think we're even close to that.'
And after all, he argues, the US makes these decisions every day. 'There are
agricultural subsidies, there are protectionist tariffs in the US. People
are making those judgments. They need to be made in an organised way, rather
than in a de facto political way.'
Take the 760-odd laboratories which are supported by government funds. 'They
spend about Dollars 20bn a year, mostly on defence-oriented projects. There
need to be agreed priorities on what these laboratories spend their money
on, and how they are allowed to interact with private industry. I think the
government needs to worry a lot more about the transition from a military
foreign policy posture to an economic and commercial posture.'
High on the list of priorities is deciding which are the critical
technologies that the US needs to develop. But how are these to be defined?
'If I were a country, I would look at which industries were the real growth
drivers. I'd look at pharmaceuticals, high-tech electronics, biotechnology,
aircraft, design tools, whatever. I'd then ask the experts in those fields
what the technologies are which are really fundamental to those industries.
Then I'd look across and compile a list of which technologies are generic to
many industries. That's basically what Miti (Ministry of International Trade
and Industry) did in Japan, or the US Defence Department, or Germany.
'If you've established that these technologies are common, that avoids the
whole question of industrial policy and favouring one industry over another.
That's why you don't come up with 'Wow, let's go build a high definition TV
factory.' '
So what kind of technologies are we talking about here? Take flat screen
displays, he says, as used in computers and other electronic hardware. 'In
flat screens we have virtually no big companies except IBM, which is working
with Toshiba in Japan.
'But for reasons of national security and commercial competitiveness, the US
 -and the European Community, for that matter - should have indigenous
suppliers of flat screen displays.' It is not so many years, he recalls,
since the world suffered a shortage of standard micro-chips. This conferred
a huge advantage on electronics companies who made their own.
Similarly, he says, 'the western world's computer industry could be put out
of business as we evolve more and more to flat screen display, unless there
is a capability in the US and Europe to develop flat screen displays. That's
not necessarily because of any devious motive. The world runs out of
capacity from time to time, and guess what - the people who have the
capacity are going to be supplied first.'
One cannot help remarking that Fisher's attitudes to industrial policy must
be coloured by the fact that whatever technologies are picked, Motorola is
likely to benefit. Yes indeed, he says cheerfully. 'I may have been born on
a farm, but I wasn't born yesterday.'
But look at it this way, he says. 'If more of the money that used to go on
defence is spent on Aids research, that's probably a good use of taxpayers'
money. That also helps some pharmaceutical companies make a lot of money,
and I don't feel bad about that as a taxpayer. Likewise, if some of that
money is redeployed from heat-seeking missiles to the fundamentals of new
display technology, and a company like Motorola benefits, I don't feel bad
about that either.'
Given that so much of the conversation has been about politics, a final
question inevitably suggests itself. On the eve of the US presidential
election, who does he - or Motorola - want to win?
'I think it's mixed,' he says cautiously. 'Much of what the Bush
administration has been doing has been fine. They have tried very hard to
open markets around the world for us, and Motorola has certainly benefited
from that.
'On the other hand, Clinton would have the advantage of working with a
sympathetic Congress. Right now, the good things the president would want to
do are stopped by Congress, and the good things Congress would want to do
are stopped by veto.'
What good things does he have in mind? 'We were talking about some of them
earlier. Right now, the current in the administration is much more towards
letting market forces prevail: 'let's not interfere; government will only
screw it up.' Way over on the other side is government involvement in
virtually everything, social or industrial. But what you see in this
election is interesting. Clinton has some advisers way over at that extreme,
but he himself is much closer to the middle. Bush is coming closer to the
middle, but he's got some advisers way over at the other extreme.
'The healthy thing is those guys understand the need for the Republicans to
come more to the middle socially and the Democrats to come more to the
middle economically. So either Bush or Clinton will be fine. I'm going to
vote for Bush, probably, but I'm not pessimistic either way.'
PERSONAL FILE
1940 Born in Anna, Illinois. Educated at University of Illinois (BS,
engineering) and Brown University (MS, engineering; PhD, applied
mathematics)
1966 Bell Telephone Laboratories, research and development.
1976 Joined Motorola's communications products division.
1983 Appointed corporate vice-president.
1988 Named president and chief executive officer, Motorola Inc.
1990 elected chairman of the board.
1990 Elected chairman of US Council on Competitiveness.
