FT  19 FEB 92 / Straining at Prague's leash: The Slovaks' growing discontent
When Mr Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, arrives in Czechoslovakia at the
end of this month, he will sign a treaty of friendship aimed at healing
wounds that have festered since German forces divided the country during the
Second World War.
But the timing is ironic. New political forces arising from the collapse of
the Soviet bloc, together with the deep-rooted Slovak nationalism, are
threatening to split the country again into its Czech and Slovak components.
In the two years since the collapse of the communist government in Prague,
the Czech and Slovak republics have been unable to agree a political basis
for their future coexistence in one country. General elections in June are
likely to see advocates of greater autonomy win a majority in the Slovakian
parliament, further increasing pressure on the country's fragile federal
structure.
As in the republics of the former Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, the lifting
of communist rule has shown up latent divisions. The federal government in
Prague will be hoping that it can reach agreement on a new federal structure
without the upheavals suffered elsewhere in eastern Europe.
Tension has been exacerbated by growing nationalism in Slovakia, the smaller
and poorer republic, which is home to a third of the country's 15m
population. A powerful faction within the Christian Democrats, the biggest
party in the republic's coalition government, is calling for greater
autonomy, as is the opposition Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, led by
the demagogic Mr Vladimir Meciar.
Such calls are resisted by the Czech-dominated federal government. While
Czech politicians and the federal government have accepted the need for
negotiations on the country's political structure, they resist a weakening
in the existing powers of the central government.
For the federal government and for pro-federation politicians in Slovakia,
Mr Meciar poses a growing threat. Recent polls indicate that 27 per cent of
Slovak voters support him; he is expected to win the most votes in June.
While stopping short of demanding independence, he is seeking increased
powers for the Slovak parliament. He also wants the federal government to
slow the pace of its economic reform.
Slovakian nationalists such as Mr Meciar are capitalising on a revived sense
of Slovak identity. Or, as Ms Zuzana Weberova, a young factory worker in
central Slovakia, puts it: 'He makes us feel like we are born again, like we
can suddenly speak out again.'
Slovakia has always felt like a poor relation of the Czech republic.
'Besides a short spell when a pro-Nazi regime declared its independence
during the Second World War, it has never exorcised its 19th-century dream
of nationhood,' says Mr Jan Morovic, a university professor in Bratislava,
the Slovak capital.
Aspirations to nationhood are echoed by Mr Milan Knazko, an adviser to Mr
Meciar. 'We must recreate a democratic nation, incorporate it with the
Czechs, and then into the European Community.'
Such ideas are heard frequently across the political spectrum in Slovakia.
Mr Jan Carnogursky, the Slovak prime minister and leader of the Christian
Democrats, has thrown doubt on his party's commitment to the Czechoslovak
federation. He speaks of Slovakia's future star on the European Community
flag.
Emerging Slovak nationalism has been fuelled by economic difficulties. The
collapse of the Soviet market, which represented the principal source of
demand for Slovakian industrial production, has prompted a fall in output
and a loss of jobs. The republic's unemployment rate had climbed to 11.8 per
cent by the end of 1991, twice the level in the Czech republic. In some
Slovak regions, especially those which rely upon the defence industry,
unemployment has passed 20 per cent.
Prospects for recovery are gloomy. In particular, the preponderance of
inefficient Soviet plant and equipment has hampered adjustment to a more
market-based system. Slovakia has attracted a mere 4 per cent of the
estimated Dollars 800m of foreign investment which has flowed into
Czechoslovakia in the past two years.
Slovak politicians believe the federal government does not have the
republic's economic interests at heart. They have criticised the decision to
wind down and eventually phase out the country's production of arms, the
bulk of which is made in Slovakia.
Mr Meciar, who promises to maintain the republic's defence industry, also
wants state subsidies to be kept in place for ailing enterprises, as well as
softer loans for industry. The problem with the nationalists' ill-defined
economic programme is that it would run against the radical reforms, backed
by the International Monetary Fund, which were drawn up last year and are
being implemented across the country. The reforms include privatisation and
anti-inflationary measures such as a tight monetary policy and restrictions
on government expenditure.
The danger for the federal government in Prague is that it will no longer be
able to implement such policies in a more independence-minded Slovakia. As
the two republics pursue their diverging paths, pressures for a complete
break will become harder to control.
