FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of The Earth Summit (4): Dismay over the lack of
agreement - Land and rain forest protection
A central aim of the Rio conference will be to halt the over-exploitation of
the Earth's land surface which has accelerated to meet the needs of industry
and growing populations, writes John Hunt.
Forests have been felled, mineral extraction has scarred the earth and soil
has been poisoned by domestic and toxic waste. Soil erosion and and the
spread of desert conditions - 'desertification' - have been caused by
intensive agriculture and primitive farming and overgrazing.
With the growth of environmental awareness in recent years, tougher national
legislation and international agreements have started to get to grips with
these problems.
It was hoped that the Rio summit would re-inforce this by drawing up an
international set of principles in the Earth Charter and a programme for
action for the next century, in Agenda 21.
But progress has been slow in the preparatory meetings for the summit and
environmental pressure groups have expressed their dismay at the lack of
agreement so far.
They are particularly disappointed at the lack of tough proposals for
protecting the rain forest. This is a central issue in the climate change
debate as forests act as 'sinks' to absorb carbon dioxide, the main
greenhouse gas contributing to global warming. They also protect the genetic
diversity of plant and animal life and provide a home for indigenous
peoples.
It is estimated that half the Earth's original tropical forest has been
destroyed over the centuries and that 11.4m hectares are still felled each
year.
Intensive logging has been the the main cause of deforestation but has been
overtaken by the destruction caused by the 'slash and burn' cultivation
carried out by landless people. Originally it was intended that Rio should
produce a binding international agreement on forest protection but this has
been abandoned in the face of disagreements.
It is now hoped to draw up a set of principles on forestry but here again
there are disagreements. So far, at least six different versions of the
principles have been mulled over and there are still many areas of
controversy. The United States, the European Community and other
industrialised countries still want Rio to be the start of a process for
eventually developing a legally binding convention on forests. But the G77
group of developing countries are cool towards this and see it as a move to
strengthen the influence of northern countries over the south.
There are, however, some concrete proposals in Agenda 21. It urges
co-operation between countries to provide expertise, funds, research and
technology for improved management and sustainable development of the
rainforest. Annual funding for this would be in the region of Dollars 2.5bn
between 1993 and 2000. But industrialised countries would be reluctant to
meet such a huge bill.
Tony Juniper, rainforest campaigner for Friends of the Earth, finds this
depressing. He sees it as no advance on existing international schemes which
have failed to protect destruction of the rainforest.
The problem of waste and its impact on soil is another area of concern. The
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) says its
members (US, Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Japan and Western European
countries) produce 9bn tonnes of waste a year. This includes 2.5bn tonnes of
industrial waste of which 300m tonnes are hazardous. Much of this is
disposed of in landfill sites where it can lead to build up of methane gas
and pollution of the water supply. Urgent action is required to control the
rapidly growing volume of industrial waste, household garbage and sewage
according to the draft for Agenda 21.
It estimates that the amount of municipal waste worldwide will double by the
end of the century and double again before the year 2025.
Agenda 21 suggests that industrialised countries should have programmes in
place to stabilise or reduce waste and increase recycling by the year 2000.
Developing countries should work towards that goal so long as it does not
jeopardise their development prospects, it says.
An important topic will be desertification and the famine and disease which
it brings. Dry areas covering a third of the Earth's land surface are being
degraded by this process, which is caused by lack of rain, overcultivation,
deforestation and mismanagement of croplands.
Most publicity has concentrated on the Sahel region of West Africa where
drought killed over 50,000 people and millions of heads of cattle in the
1970s. But there are also threatened areas in other parts of Africa, the
Middle East, India, Pakistan, China, Australia, the Russian Federation,
theUS and Latin America.
Agenda 21 proposes that by the year 2010 environmentally sustainable
techniques should be used in agriculture and grazing in dry areas. There
should be better management of water resources, protection of vegetation and
extensive planning of new forests. It wants a system of contingency crop
planning linked to weather forecasts and strategies for importing, storing
and transporting food in emergencies.
The question of sustainable agricultural methods throughout the world and
the means of phasing out intensive and harmful farming and over-grazing will
be considered.
Lester Brown, president of the Worldwatch Institute, the Washington-based
environmental research organisation, says that in the coming decade the
world's farmers face the task of feeding 93m more people every year while
millions of tons of top-soil are being eroded annually. He says that either
loss of top-soil from cropland will have to be checked by effective
conservation or the growth in population will be checked by hunger and
starvation.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England wants a commitment from Rio
to phase out price support and other agricultural incentives which encourage
overfarming.
'Agricultural policy should re-inforce rather than contradict environmental
objectives,' it says.
About 11 per cent of the earth's ice-free land is cultivated, of which 24
per cent is pasture and 31 per cent woodland or forest. Around ten per cent
of the world's population live in mountain regions which have been under
pressure from excessive tourism, soil deterioration and over-cultivation of
marginal lands. Rio will look at ways or preserving the ecological balance
of these areas by the year 2000 by encouraging crop diversification and
village industries. Mining and extraction are regarded by environmentalists
as typically dirty industries. Environmentalists are pressing for an end to
'tax breaks' which encourage mining in the US, Japan and France, but for
more recycling to reduce the amount of minerals that have to be extracted.
