FT  13 OCT 92 / Technology: Living life beyond the limit - Why scientists
and pharmaceuticals companies are searching for the secret of eternal youth
Humans have long been fascinated by the idea of eternally preserving
youthful vitality. Much of Florida was mapped out by the Spanish explorer
Ponce de Leon in his search for the fountain of youth. A few years ago,
Hollywood made a small fortune by exploring the idea of eternal life in the
film Cocoon.
Only in the last few years, however, has the search for youth made the leap
from myth and dreams into scientists' laboratories. After years of
concentrating on specific diseases like heart disease and cancer, some
researchers are turning their attention to an increasingly common cause of
death: old age.
Research on ageing is becoming a hot area for scientists. Human growth
factor, nerve growth factor, DHEA hormone and deprenyl are just a few of the
drugs that have been shown to have an impact on some processes involved in
ageing. But none has been shown to extend life reliably.
The basic mechanisms underlying the process of ageing are still poorly
understood. Researchers do not even agree on such fundamental questions as
whether there is a irreversible biological limit to the human life span. If
there is, it might still be possible to extend the lives of those who die
'prematurely' - before the age of about 85 - but there would be no hope of
keeping significant numbers of people alive beyond 115.
'One reason for the lack of definite progress so far is that ageing offers
not too few, but too many, lines of investigation,' says Tom Kirkwood of the
National Institute for Medical Research in London.
'As we grow older, almost everything in our bodies undergoes some change.
Not only is it difficult therefore to sort out which changes are causes
rather than consequences, but it is not even clear what kinds of causes we
should be looking for,' he says.
Some scientists are searching for genes which may bring about ageing in a
controlled way, like the ones that govern growth from embryo to adulthood.
Some are concentrating on the proteins which maintain the normal working of
cells and which lose their normal patterns of activity in old people. And
some are trying to sort out the myriad of agents, both internal and
external, which damage cells over the course of a lifetime.
Kirkwood rejects the popular idea that 'ageing is good for the species and
that we die as an evolutionary adaptation to make way for new generations'.
Unfortunately, there is no specific life-terminating genetic programme which
scientists might in principle be able to identify and switch off, he says.
Instead, we age because of an accumulation of errors in many cellular repair
mechanisms.
The US National Institute on Ageing (NIA) is funding some of the most
exciting research projects in the field. In one study, Daniel Rudman of the
Medical College of Wisconsin discovered that human growth hormone,
administered to 50 men in a nursing home, seemed temporarily to turn back
the biological clock, improving bone and organ strength and making the men
more physically active.
At one time, human growth hormone was an extremely rare substance, used
exclusively for correcting the dwarf syndrome. Advances in biotechnology
have recently made it possible to make the hormone synthetically. Eli Lilly
and Genentech, two manufacturers of the substance, participated in Rudman's
research.
Although human growth hormone is more plentiful than it once was, it is
still expensive. Rudman's patients would have to pay about Dollars 14,000
(Pounds 7,900) a year for the drug if they were to purchase it individually.
In an attempt to pare down the costs and increase the efficiency of the
treatment, Mitchell Harman of the NIA has taken Rudman's research one step
further. He has created the 'growth hormone releasing hormone', a substance
which stimulates human beings to produce more growth hormone in their own
bodies.
Another drug that has come under scrutiny for its anti-ageing effects is
DHEA, which according to some studies can make faltering immune systems come
alive again. DHEA is a natural hormone which decreases in the body with age.
Experiments with the substance helped spawn the 'morning after' pill, which
contains some DHEA. Today, DHEA is manufactured by several companies,
although it has not been approved for use against ageing in the US.
Scientists also hope that genetic manipulation may help extend life spans.
Geron Corporation in California, for instance, has been studying genes that
may trigger ageing, as well as compounds that may reverse these effects.
Researchers have bred strains of fruit flies that live twice as long as
normal and are identifying the genes responsible. One gene produces an
enzyme, superoxide dismutase (SOD), which mops up highly reactive chemicals
called free radicals that damage biological tissues. However, scientists
have not yet developed a protective drug that could deliver SOD to the cells
where it is needed.
Oxygen free radicals, in particular, may well be an important factor in
ageing and some doctors believe that anti-oxidants such as vitamins C and E
can help prolong life. If so, the traditional advice for children to eat up
their green vegetables might help them to live longer.
Indeed, eating a controlled diet is still the only method widely believed by
scientists to have a significant impact on lifespan. 'Diet is the only known
way of extending life,' says George Roth of the NIA.
He points to experiments with a range of animals including insects, rats and
monkeys. 'We limit their food intake and give them vitamin supplements. So
we aim for under-nutrition without malnutrition.'
The results from the experiments are astounding. In all cases, a low-caloric
intake was shown to extend the organism's life by about 40 to 50 per cent.
The method has already won over some believers. Roy Walford, who launched
the well-known Biosphere project, is currently experimenting with
under-nutrition on himself.
According to Roth, however, under-nutrition may not be necessary. 'The idea
is to come up with a drug which would have the same impact on the body as
low-caloric intake,' he explained.
Despite progress in the field, many observers believe it will be a long time
before a trip to the local pharmacy includes a stop at the life-extension
counter. Many companies have little incentive to spend money on ageing
research, since many of the substances are naturally-occurring and are
therefore difficult to patent. Another problem is that regulatory
authorities may not be keen to approve the drugs for market.
Anti-ageing drugs may also have serious side effects, the most dangerous of
which could be cancer. Since cancer, or the over-growth of cells, is in some
ways the opposite of ageing, or the under-growth of cells, medical
manipulation may push the body over the edge to malignancy.
Scientists are also concerned about the ethical and financial implications
of anti-ageing drugs. Increasing life span without increasing health span,
for instance, could do more harm than good.
'If we add on years to human life but do nothing to make them more active
during those years, what we are doing is adding to human misery,' says Roth.
'We have to think hard about these questions, or we may end up with 150
year-olds who spent the last 60 years of their life in a nursing home. That
would be a disaster.'
